"We have two lives, and the second begins when we realize we only have
one." ---Confucius 3 charts that will inspire you to make the most of
your 90 years:

I recently came across an blog post by Tim Urban called, "The Tail End."
It's a legendary essay on his blog, "Wait But Why." A quick read. But a
profound wakeup call. Here's the breakdown...

Tim visually charts a 90-year human life in units of weeks. It Ô¨Åts on a
single page.

He was 34 at the time, so imagine more than a third of those weeks
"crossed out." But rather than measuring the rest of his life in units
of weeks... he charts it in activities. For example, he says "I have a
little under 60 winters left."

or "I read about Ô¨Åve books a year, so even though it feels like I'll
read an endless number of books in the future, I actually have only 300
left." or "I tend to limit myself to around one ocean swim a year. So as
weird as it seems, I might only go in the ocean 60 more times."

But here's the profound part--- Some activities decrease dramatically as
you get older (rather than being evenly spaced out). Such as... days
spent with parents. Let's say you see your parents 6 weekends per year
(12 days). But before college, you saw them pretty much every day.

Assuming they live healthily into their 90s, 12 days per year x 30 years
= 360 more days together... total. Now, compare that to your Ô¨Årst 18
years of seeing them \~every day. The time you spent with them before
college (7k days) was 95% of your total time with them over the course
of your life...

You're now enjoying the last 5% of total in-person time with your
parents. This is the tail end.

As Tim says, "despite not being at the end of your life, you may very
well be nearing the end of your time with some of the most important
people in your life." So what do we do with that information?

Here are the 3 takeaways: 1). Try to live close to the people you love.
We probably see the people who live in the same city 10x as often as we
see the people who live a Ô¨Çight away.

2). Don't leave time together up to chance. If it's not in the calendar,
it won't happen. Schedule when you'll see the most important people in
your life throughout 2023. Do it now, so your calendar doesn't
accidentally become too busy to see them.

3). Be mindful of how little time you have left together. If you're in
your last 10% of time with someone you love, make every hour with them
count. And tell them how you feel about them (to an embarrassingly
frequent extent). Life's too short for things to go left unsaid.

Thanks for reading. If you found this useful, follow me for more posts
on personal growth & social intelligence. P.S. You can Ô¨Ånd the original
article by Tim Urban at waitbutwhy.com I hope you enjoy the illustration
of how many dumplings he has left to eat in his lifetime. ü•ü


