About the Author Maggie Brookes is an ex-journalist and BBC TV
historical documentary producer, turned novelist and poet. She relishes
uncovering stories about the strength of women and the power of
friendship and love in the most terrible of circumstances. Acts of Love
and War is about love and courage in the brutal Spanish civil war. The
Prisoner's Wife -- based on an extraordinary true story of WW2 -- was
published around the world in 2020. Maggie taught Creative Writing at
Middlesex University for thirty years and has had six poetry collections
published under the name Maggie Butt.

OceanofPDF.com

Also by Maggie Brookes

The Prisoner's Wife OceanofPDF.com

Maggie Brookes A C T S O F L O V E A N D WA R

OceanofPDF.com

VIKING an imprint of Penguin Canada, a division of Penguin Random House
Canada Limited Canada • USA • UK • Ireland • Australia • New Zealand •
India • South Africa • China First published in hardcover in Great
Britain in 2022 by Century, an imprint of Penguin Random House UK
Published in Viking paperback by Penguin Canada, 2022 Copyright © 2022
by Avington Books Ltd Maps copyright © Darren Bennett, 2022 All rights
reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no
part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into
a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without
the prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the above
publisher of this book. www.penguinrandomhouse.ca

Publisher's note: This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters,
places and incidents either are the product of the author's imagination
or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons living
or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental. LIBRARY AND
ARCHIVES CANADA CATALOGUING IN PUBLICATION Title: Acts of love and war /
Maggie Brookes. Names: Brookes, Maggie, author. Identifiers: Canadiana
(print) 2022014026X \| Canadiana (ebook) 20220140308 \| ISBN
9780735246072 (softcover) \| ISBN 9780735246089 (EPUB) Classification:
LCC PR6102.U874 A78 2022 \| DDC 823/.92---dc23 Cover design by Emma Grey
Gelder Cover images: (balcony) © Lee Avison, (village) © Arcangel
Vintage Collection, both Arcangel Images; (woman) © Mark Owen /
Trevillion

btb\_\_140784825_c0_r1

OceanofPDF.com

Contents 1. Cover 2. About the Author 3. By the Same Author 4. Title
Page 5. Copyright 6. Dedication 7. Epigraph 8. Historical Note 9.
Prologue 10. HERTFORDSHIRE: October 1936 1. Chapter 1 2. Chapter 2 3.
Chapter 3 4. Chapter 4 5. Chapter 5 6. Chapter 6 11. BARCELONA: January
1937 1. Chapter 7 2. Chapter 8 3. Chapter 9 12. MURCIA: April 1937 1.
Chapter 10 2. Chapter 11 3. Chapter 12 4. Chapter 13 5. Chapter 14 13.
BENIDORM: August 1937 1. Chapter 15

2. Chapter 16 3. Chapter 17 4. Chapter 18 5. Chapter 19 6. Chapter 20
14. BARCELONA AND PUIGCERDÀ: March 1938 1. Chapter 21 2. Chapter 22 3.
Chapter 23 4. Chapter 24 5. Chapter 25 6. Chapter 26 15. Author's Note
16. Acknowledgements

OceanofPDF.com

For the brave people who give humanitarian aid all over our troubled
world. And for Matilda, Katie, Amy and Tim -- everlove. OceanofPDF.com

Let us then try what Love can do. William Penn (Prominent Quaker,
founder of Pennsylvania, 14 October 1644--30 July 1718) OceanofPDF.com

Historical Note The Spanish Civil War (1936--1939) divided a nation and
set family members against each other as they took violently opposing
views about religion, class, democracy and Fascism. Those on the left
believed that the landowners and Catholic Church had kept the country in
medieval poverty and ignorance. Those on the right feared that Spain
would become communist and atheist. In 1936 a left-wing Republican
coalition was elected and the right-wing military immediately moved to
stage a coup. This sparked fury among mobs who went on the rampage,
murdering clergy, burning churches and seizing land and property. The
right wing gathered behind the Fascist General Franco and the conflict
quickly descended into a war between the democratically elected
Republicans and the Fascists who strove to overthrow them. Despite an
international non-intervention pact, Hitler and Mussolini came to
Franco's aid with massed troops, bombers and fighter planes. In support
of democracy and in fear of the spread of Fascism, about fifty thousand
left-wing men and women travelled from all around the world to join the
Republican 'International Brigades' and Stalin sent them weapons. Franco
expected his military coup to be quick, but a raggle-taggle Popular Army
of peasants, factory workers, trade unionists and the International
Brigades held him at bay.

OceanofPDF.com

Prologue Hertfordshire, England, 1921 Lucy was sitting in her favourite
place, halfway up the mahogany staircase, with a doll laid across her
lap. From here she could see all the comings and goings of the house.
She watched as her father opened the front door and light flooded into
the panelled hall, fixing that morning in her memory forever, as if that
was the day someone wound the clockwork and her life began. Her father
ushered Mrs Murray inside and took her to the drawing room. Behind her
came two boys, silhouetted in the doorway against the bright day beyond:
a bigger boy holding tight to the hand of his little brother. Jamie and
Tom stood still for a moment, on the threshold of Lucy's life, and then
moved cautiously forward into the unknown hall. As they walked towards
her their dark outlines blushed into colour and rounded into flesh. Lucy
thought one of them looked a little older than her and one a bit
younger, perhaps seven and four. The bigger boy, Jamie, wore a school
uniform with blazer, tie and short trousers. The small boy who gripped
his hand was dressed in a sailor suit. As light fell on to their faces
from the landing window behind her, Lucy saw Jamie's lips were clenched
hard between his teeth in the effort not to show his feelings, while Tom
gazed all about in a mixture of fear and curiosity. They were as unalike
as two brothers ever could be. Jamie had his mother's blue eyes, sandy
hair and

freckled skin, while Tom's eyes were brown as his hair; Jamie was
skinny, as if he'd grown too fast, while Tom was square and solid; Jamie
was pale as a china doll, whereas Tom was all aglow. Lucy knew these
were the boys who were coming to live in the little cottage next door.
The boys with the dead father. She turned over the thought in her mind
like a shiny new penny and imprinted on its reverse side she found the
fact of her own dead mother. She watched as the boys became accustomed
to the relative darkness of the wide hallway and caught sight of her on
the stairs above them. When their gaze met hers, something seemed to
catch in her throat and an unfamiliar shiver ran through her. She set
aside her doll and stood up. Later they told her that rays of sun from
the landing window illuminated the blonde curls which encircled her
head. But all she would remember was the way they stopped and stared as
though she was a vision, as though she could become the fixed point in
the turmoil of their lives. As though she would save them.

OceanofPDF.com

HERTFORDSHIRE October 1936 OceanofPDF.com

1

Lucy was chopping the top off her boiled egg when Tom burst into the
dining room through the French windows. His hair was standing on end as
if he'd just sprung out of bed, and he was waving a newspaper in his
hand. Lucy laid down her spoon and glanced nervously at her father,
Captain Nicholson. He wouldn't like this interruption to his breakfast.
'It's come,' yelled Tom. 'The call has come.' Lucy's father looked up
from deboning his kipper, and wiped his moustache. 'Good morning,
Thomas,' he said drily. Tom stopped momentarily on his dash round to
Lucy's side of the table, and seemed to notice Captain Nicholson for the
first time. 'Oh yes, good morning, sir.' He knelt by Lucy's chair,
stabbing the newspaper with his forefinger. 'Look, look, the call has
come at last. I'm going.' Lucy pulled the Daily Worker from his grasp to
keep it still enough to read the call for volunteers to fight for the
Spanish Republic. The headline made her insides lurch with fear. She
turned to him, taking in his conker-brown eyes, bright with excitement,
and his whole face alight with joy. How could something which gave him
such pleasure feel like a stone in her stomach?

'Going where?' asked Captain Nicholson, giving up on his kipper. Lucy
laid a warning hand on Tom's sleeve, but he shrugged her off and leapt
to his feet, pacing around the room, unable to keep still. 'To Spain.
I'm going to Spain.' 'Oh no you aren't!' Captain Nicholson snapped.
'Ridiculous boy! Sit down.' His eyes flashed to Lucy, who was moving to
Tom's defence. 'And you. Be quiet.' Lucy subsided, biting back her words
for now, biding her time to intervene on her friend's behalf as Tom
slowly pulled out a chair and sat on it, laying the paper on the table
in front of him. Lucy saw her father disapproving his unshaven chin,
unbrushed hair, untucked shirt and sweater awry. Tom had obviously
hastily yanked on some clothes and run round from next door to tell her
the news as soon as the paper had been delivered. She loved his
impulsiveness, but wished he'd checked to see if she was alone. Captain
Nicholson laid down his cutlery. 'Now then, what's all this nonsense?'
Tom leaned forwards. 'It's not nonsense. It's really not. This is my
chance to do something to help. It's what I've been waiting for.' Lucy
could see her father's face starting to redden as he struggled to
maintain control. 'I'm not certain I get your drift.' Tom brandished his
copy of the Daily Worker again. 'It's a call to go and join the
International Brigades, to fight Franco. I've got to go.' Admiration ran
through Lucy, turning almost immediately to a twinge of sickness at the
thought of Tom hurling himself into such danger. Captain Nicholson
jabbed the table with his finger to emphasise each word. 'You. Will. Do.
No. Such. Thing.' Tom ran his hand up through his unruly hair and Lucy
could see he was making an effort to sound reasonable.

'But with respect, sir. I am going. I have to.' Lucy's father rose to
his feet. 'You are nineteen years old, Thomas Murray. You have no idea
what a war is like. You will stay here and finish your degree and that's
an end of it.' Tom stood up too, shoving his chair back so hard that it
fell over. 'I know I don't know anything about war, but I have to go. I
can't just sit around and do nothing.' Lucy waved a hand, and tried to
cut in. 'Calm down, both of you!' But neither of them was listening. Her
chest churned with divided feelings -- the urge to support Tom against
her father wrestled with horror at the thought of him going to Spain and
getting killed, but she knew there was no chance of being heard anyway
when Captain Nicholson was in full flow. 'That's precisely what you have
to do,' he yelled. 'Go back to that LSE place and finish your degree.
You are not going to fight for those damned Reds. It's not your war.'
Tom paced the room, fists at his sides. 'Yes it is. If we don't stop the
Fascists in Spain they'll be everywhere.' Lucy's father reached across
the table and grabbed Tom's Daily Worker. Before Tom or Lucy could stop
him, he ripped the paper in two. Tom leapt across the room and snatched
it back. They stood glaring at each other, an upper-cut length apart.
They were about the same height, but Tom was young and muscular, while
Captain Nicholson was overweight and middle-aged. There was little doubt
who would come off worse. Lucy jumped up to stand between them, holding
tight to Tom's right arm. They'd never come to blows before, despite
plenty of arguments, but maybe this would be the first time. 'I'm
going!' shouted Tom. Captain Nicholson drew himself up taller. 'I forbid
it!' Before he could think, Tom spat back. 'You aren't my father!'

The words fell like a pebble into a pond, sending out ripples of shock
and Lucy looked anxiously at her father. Emotions chased across his face
and his jowls wobbled as he struggled to find the right reply. 'Go on,'
she silently urged him, 'tell him what you really feel. Say -- I know
I'm not, but ever since I brought you and Jamie and your mother to live
in the cottage next door, you have been like a son to me -- so please
don't go and get yourself killed.' She watched as her father opened his
mouth to speak, then closed it again. His Adam's apple lifted and sank,
and he swallowed twice, as if gulping down all the things he might have
said. Then he tugged at his moustache and blinked hard, and those two
gestures turned on his mask of self-control. He picked up a fork and
stabbed at his kipper. 'I don't know what your brother will say about
you going to fight for those priest-murdering savages.' Lucy and Tom's
eyes met. They both knew exactly what Jamie would say. 'Maybe he'll talk
some sense into you.' Lucy raised her eyebrows. Surely her father knew
that whatever Jamie suggested would immediately make Tom rush out and do
the opposite. If anyone was to prevent Tom going and getting himself
killed, it would have to be her and Tom's mother. She thought of the
furious arguments which had ripped apart the air in the Murrays' kitchen
ever since news of the Spanish Republic began to appear in the papers.
Lucy and Mrs Murray had been interested in the rights for women and the
push for education which the Republic espoused. Tom had provocatively
said England should be a Republic and religion should be banned. Jamie
had yelled at all of them. How could they not see that the Republic was
against God?

'What does your mum think?' asked Lucy, pulling Tom towards the front
door. 'I haven't told her,' he muttered, turning to her, whacking the
torn newspaper against his leg in barely controlled fury. 'I wanted to
show you first, because I knew you'd understand.' Lucy checked her watch
and calculated there would be enough time before she had to leave for
work. 'Well, let's go and tell her now.' Tom was ahead of her on the
path as she banged the door behind her, but once they were out of the
gate she turned right rather than left to the Murrays' cottage. She knew
he needed to let off some steam before they could talk. 'Race you to the
bus stop,' she called over her shoulder, tearing ahead. They ran through
the familiar village street in the misty October morning, past the
greengrocer's and the butcher's. Tom was hampered by the fact that he
was still wearing his bedroom slippers. They dodged between the early
commuters on their way to Welwyn station to go to work in London. Lucy
reached the bench at the bus stop first and threw herself down, puffing
slightly, tucking her curly blonde hair behind her ears. How many times
had she sat here with Tom, talking him out of some mad plan or calming
him down after a row with her father or his older brother? He slumped
next to her, the precious newspaper now scrunched in one hand. 'I didn't
have shoes on,' he explained, holding his slippered feet out in front of
him. 'I knew that,' she smiled. 'And you haven't shaved or brushed your
hair.' She sniffed. 'Or washed.' He edged an inch or two away from her
on the bench. 'Sorry. No. I was too excited.' 'All right, show me what
it says.' They pored over the paper, holding the torn page together, and
Lucy couldn't think what she might say to

stop him going, but for now she knew she just had to let him chatter on.
'You do understand why it's important, don't you, Luce?' Tom pleaded.
'Schools and women and peasants and education and everything.' Lucy
thought about the number of times she had defied her father and ignored
Jamie's disgust to go with Tom to pro-Republican meetings. They'd been
going ever since July when they'd heard about General Franco's brutal
Fascist army sweeping up through Spain, destroying all the good work the
Republicans had done since their election. She'd been most impressed by
Dolores Ibárruri, the fiery Spanish politician known as La Pasionaria,
whose face lit up with fervour as she spoke. She patted his arm. 'You
know I do.' 'OK, let's go and tell Ma. Will you come with me?' Lucy and
Tom hurtled into the kitchen where Mrs Murray had been cooking Tom's
breakfast, and Tom wordlessly passed his mother the newspaper. She
quickly scanned the headline, and her pale face seemed suddenly much
older than her forty-three years. 'I feared this day would come,' she
said, smoothing the ripped page out on the kitchen table. 'Where's my
glasses?' Lucy found them on the sideboard and passed them over, giving
her hand a reassuring squeeze. Mrs Murray pressed back and they both
knew they would do everything they could to prevent Tom going off to
war. They stood side by side, with their shoulders just touching as Mrs
Murray carefully read the article. Tom watched anxiously, drumming his
fingers on the table. Mrs Murray looked up and removed her spectacles.
'Oh, Thomas!' she pleaded. 'Surely there will be other men to go? You
are only halfway through your degree.' 'You've only just started the
second year,' added Lucy.

'You could maybe finish the year and then see?' suggested Mrs Murray.
Tom clicked his tongue impatiently. 'Don't you understand? It's now. It
has to be now, if we have any chance of stopping Franco. You know what
those vile bastards are doing to women in every town and village. We
have to stop them taking Madrid, and this is our chance.' Lucy tried
another tack. 'But surely they'll want men with experience? Older men
who were in the Great War? What good would you be?' She tried to force a
laugh. 'I don't suppose they need economists!' 'Cheers, Luce! Thanks for
the vote of confidence. You've forgotten I can shoot a rifle. I learned
at school, thanks to your father! And I can handle myself. I learned
that on a rugger pitch. I think I really could help.' 'Being able to
handle a rifle didn't save your own dad, did it?' Mrs Murray cut in. Tom
twisted his hands in exasperation. 'Oh, I might have known you wouldn't
understand.' 'It's just that we love you,' his mother said. 'You can't
speak Spanish,' Lucy hazarded, grasping at straws. 'I can a bit, from
when Jamie taught us both. I know you were better at it than me, but
that was because I was only doing it not to be left out.' He cleared his
throat. '¿Dónde está el burro?' Lucy couldn't help laughing, and told
Mrs Murray, 'It means "Where is the donkey?"' 'Very useful, I'm sure,'
said Tom's mother. Lucy gave Tom a playful shove. 'We all know where the
donkey is! He's here in this room.' Mrs Murray pulled a rueful smile. 'I
dread to think what Jamie is going to say when he gets home tonight.'
Out of her front bay window, Lucy watched Jamie walking up the road from
the station that evening at his usual time,

and as ever with his nose in a book. It was a marvel that he didn't bump
into a lamp post, or step out in front of a car. He always left his job
as a subeditor at the Catholic Herald on the dot of five, and caught the
5.15 from Moorgate. You could set your watch by him; quite unlike Tom.
Even as small boys they'd been opposites. By the time they had arrived
in Welwyn seven-year-old Jamie was filled with a quiet determination to
be a continuation, almost a reincarnation, of their dead father. He had
grasped hold of the few things he knew about Robert Murray and dressed
himself in them: his father had been a Catholic, so Jamie found the
local Catholic church and went to Mass every Sunday on his own through
hail, snow and burning heat. His father had been a soldier who laid down
his life to save his superior officer, Captain Nicholson. Jamie burned
with desire to somehow become a hero as well, to become worthy of him.
But four-year-old Tom had none of Jamie's admiration for their father's
sacrifice. He was simply furious that Daddy had died and left them. All
their lives would have been so different if Private Murray had simply
saved himself. Lucy slipped out the back of her own house, through the
gate in the fence which her father had made when the boys were young,
and was in the kitchen next door with Mrs Murray and Tom before they
heard Jamie's key in the lock. She and Mrs Murray exchanged an anxious
glance. They knew this was not going to go well. The brothers never saw
eye to eye on anything, but on the question of Spain they were as
opposed as it was possible to be. All three heads turned towards the
kitchen door as Jamie opened it. He surveyed them guardedly and laid his
book on the table. 'Uh-oh! What's all this? Some sort of deputation?'
Mrs Murray filled the kettle to give herself something to do. 'How was
your day?' she asked in a voice which was

supposed to sound normal, but Lucy noticed had a tight squeak in it. 'A
brew before your tea? It's nearly ready. Toad in the hole.' Tom moved
about the small kitchen like a caged animal and Jamie sat down
cautiously. 'Yes, a cup of tea please. Now who's going to tell me what's
going on?' Tom and Mrs Murray both looked at Lucy, always the
peace-maker and go-between, and Lucy knew there was no hope for it, so
she sat across the table from Jamie. 'It's Tom,' she began. 'I thought
it might be,' Jamie said drily. 'Has he been sent down, or got a girl in
trouble, or lost a fortune at cards?' 'Cheers,' muttered Tom. 'None of
those,' said Lucy slowly. 'Something you'll think is worse.' Jamie
stared at her with his piercing blue eyes and seemed to read her mind,
as he always did. 'Please tell me he's not signed up to go to Spain?'
Lucy reached out to place a restraining hand on Jamie's wrist. Tom
stopped pacing. 'Not actually signed yet, but I'm going to.' Jamie's
voice was dangerously quiet. 'You certainly are not.' 'I certainly am!'
Jamie stood to face Tom across the kitchen table. 'No brother of mine is
going to fight for those murderous commies. You know what they've done,
don't you? I've shown you all the stories: beheading priests, doing God
knows what to nuns, murdering monks ...' 'I know what stinking
propaganda and lies your Tory papers are peddling,' spat Tom. 'It's the
truth. You just refuse to see the truth when it's staring you in the
face.' Lucy tried her teacher voice on them. 'Stop it, boys. We all need
to sleep on this, and talk about the pros and cons

tomorrow.' 'There are no pros,' said Jamie. 'It's perfectly simple. If
he goes to fight in Spain, he's no longer my brother.' 'That's perfectly
fine by me,' yelled Tom. 'I don't want to be the brother of a Fascist.'
The kitchen suddenly seemed terribly hot. Lucy turned to Tom, removing
her cardigan. 'You know Jamie's not a Fascist.' 'I'm going to Spain, and
that's all there is to it,' Tom shouted. Mrs Murray's voice could hardly
be heard. 'Please, laddies. Just talk about this reasonably.' Lucy lost
her temper with the pair of them. 'You are both impossible! I'd like to
knock your heads together. Stop it at once.' Jamie's voice was
steel-edged. 'If you go, I'll cut off your allowance. You won't have a
penny, and you can starve to death for all I care.' His words hung in
the air, and they all froze. Tom picked up the newspaper and flung open
the back door. 'He doesn't mean that,' called Lucy, shooting a
daggerlook at Jamie. But Tom was gone, out of the house, without a
backward glance. Mrs Murray stood in the doorway, looking after him,
twisting a tea towel in her hands. Lucy turned to Jamie. 'You could at
least have listened to him, talked about it.' 'Listened to what? All
that bloody Red-worshipping, when he knows the facts.' 'The facts are
complicated,' said Lucy. 'We all know that.' Jamie left the room and ran
up the stairs. The two women could hear him rummaging in his bedroom
above their heads. They raised their eyebrows to each other. 'His
scrapbook,' said Mrs Murray, and Lucy sighed. The papers, cinema
newsreels and radio news had been full of the conflict for more than six
months. The only

stories which ever pushed Spain off the front pages were those about the
King's affair with Mrs Simpson. The whole of Britain was obsessed with
the Spanish war and opinions were sharply divided. Most of the British
press and all the newsreel companies were stridently anti-Republican,
fearing that communist fervour would spread from Russia to Spain to
Britain. They had latched on to the Republicans' hatred of the Catholic
Church. As part of his religious faith, Jamie had always taken an
interest in the politics of the Roman Catholic countries, so it had not
been surprising when he chose to study Spanish at Oxford. And it was
even less surprising how fervently he'd railed against the Republicans
back in July when mobs had gone on the rampage, burning churches and
committing atrocities against the priests who they believed had kept
them in medieval darkness and ignorance. That's when Jamie had begun to
cut out newspaper stories and paste them into a scrapbook. Lucy gave Mrs
Murray a hug and ran her hand over the older woman's faded hair. It
would have been the colour of Jamie's once, shot through with coppery
highlights, but now seemed washed out by care. 'Maybe Tom won't go,'
Lucy said hopelessly. 'Maybe we can persuade him.' Mrs Murray laid a
head on her shoulder in despair, as they heard Jamie thundering back
down the stairs. He threw the familiar scrapbook down on the table in
front of them. 'Look, go on, just look!' Lucy had seen all these
articles before, but she knew she must placate Jamie before they had any
chance of dissuading Tom, so she opened the scrapbook, which blazed with
headlines he'd snipped out of newspapers. Jamie turned over page after
page of cuttings from the Daily Mail in July and August 1936, only three
months before, prodding the words with his finger for emphasis:

RED WOMEN BUTCHER SPANISH PRIESTS; FAMILY BURNED BY REDS; REDS DROWN 447
IN WELLS; REDS' SHOW OF SKULLS IN A ROW; PRIESTS AND MONKS TORTURED BY
REDS. 'Enough,' she said. 'Enough. I know that all these awful things
happened.' 'One more,' he insisted. 'Just so you don't say they're all
from the Daily Mail.' He flipped through the book. 'Here. This one's the
Daily Mirror.' Lucy forced herself to look at the page. PRIESTS BEHEADED
AND NUNS STRIPPED NAKED BY MOB the headline screamed. 'It's terrible,'
she whispered, and she meant it; it was more terrible than she had words
for. How could people do that to each other? Mrs Murray laid cups of tea
down in front of them both, and Lucy spooned in sugar. Jamie's face was
scarlet with anger. 'You know all that's true and you still side with
Tom?' 'I'm not on anyone's side,' Lucy protested. 'I know the mob did
all those things in the early days. But the Republic's done so many good
things too.' 'How can evil people do good things?' 'Everything is always
so black and white to you. The world is more difficult than that.' 'Not
to me it's not. They are evil Antichrists, and Tom wants to be one of
them.' 'I could try to explain, but I know you won't listen.' 'I'm not
interested in listening to you defending the indefensible.' Lucy felt
exhausted by it all. 'Oh Jamie,' she sighed. Jamie gathered up his
scrapbook. 'I'll be in my room if anyone wants to talk sense.' 'Oh
Jamie,' echoed his mother, but Jamie had left the room.

Both women were silent, then Lucy took Mrs Murray's hands. 'You are so
cold,' she said. 'Here, have my tea. I'll pour another.' 'You don't
think he'll really go, do you?' Mrs Murray's eyes searched Lucy's. 'Tom
won't go to war? Into that war.' Lucy shook her head, but it seemed
horribly likely. She'd watched him at the rallies and meetings, seen how
his eyes shone with missionary zeal. She lifted her head and sniffed.
'What's that smell?' Mrs Murray leapt to the oven door but, as she
opened it, black smoke furled out. 'It's the toad in the hole,' she
cried, yanking out the pan. 'I don't suppose anyone will want it now.'
And as if that thought was the last straw, she threw her apron up over
her face and wept.

OceanofPDF.com

2

Back in her own house, Lucy began to rapidly cook a chop for her
father's dinner. It almost seemed like a dream now that before Captain
Nicholson had lost most of his money three years ago they'd had a cook
and a housekeeper who came in every day. Lucy hadn't known then how
books and skirting boards and door-tops gathered dust; hadn't known the
weight of the iron or how difficult it was to dry the sheets on a rainy
day. She was ashamed now of the way she'd taken so much for granted --
the way food magically appeared in the house, and meals materialised on
the table. Just three years ago she'd been on the brink of achieving her
dream. She only had to pass her exams to go to university and become a
doctor. All her teachers agreed she would sail through. She would heal
the sick, and make the world a little easier for as many people as she
could. And then came the day when her father had told her and the
Murrays that all his savings were gone, and there would have to be big
changes. First he said their cook and housekeeper would have to go.
Sixteen-year-old Tom would have to come home from the minor public
school of Wellington in Somerset which Captain Nicholson had been paying
for, and go instead to the local grammar. Jamie was on a Catholic
scholarship to St Benet's in Oxford, so the change in their fortunes
barely

affected him. Mrs Murray had held a job in the local haberdashery shop
since they'd arrived in Welwyn and had always insisted on paying some
rent for the cottage. She was prepared to accept Lucy's father's
generosity to her boys, but never wanted to be any more beholden to him
than necessary. Her father cleared his throat. 'I'm afraid you will have
to leave school and go to work, Lucy.' He was staring fixedly at a point
just beyond her left shoulder. 'I'm very sorry but there won't be any
university for you. There's no point for a woman anyway. You'll only get
married. So I thought you could teach perhaps, here in the village, so
you can be home early and do whatever needs doing in the house.' For a
moment she'd stood speechless. It was as if a great iron door had
clanged shut on the sunny country of her future. She opened her mouth to
speak, but her father met her eyes with that commanding-officer
expression which told her there was nothing she could say or do. Jamie
quickly indicated to her to go next door with Mrs Murray and Tom, while
he stayed to reason with her father. Jamie had always been willing to
fight Captain Nicholson for her, and usually managed to talk him round.
In the cottage, they waited in strained silence for Jamie's return, but
as soon as she saw the pallor of his face, she knew it had been in vain.
'I begged him,' said Jamie, 'literally begged him. I reminded him you'd
wanted to be a doctor all your life, and you would be a marvellous one.
I told him you were too clever, too bright and sharp to be relegated to
be an untrained teacher in the village school. I really, really tried.'
Her eyes were brimming with tears, and she couldn't speak, but Lucy
believed him. 'But it's worse than we thought,' he continued. 'When the
stock market crashed in 1930 he began to borrow money,

and now he's in the most terrible debt. He owes more than you can
imagine. Your house might have to be sold.' 'If he'd just let me stay at
school and take my exams, perhaps I could get a scholarship like you,'
pleaded Lucy. Jamie shook his head in misery. 'I said that. I said maybe
there was something I could do, that I'd get a job in the evenings and
holidays, anything to let you stay on. When he said no to that, I
offered to leave university myself and get a job. I wouldn't mind what
happens to me. But he's adamant. He says it's not just the cost of your
medical training; he needs whatever wages you can bring in right now.
I'm so sorry, Lucy.' His face was twisted in anguish at his own failure
to save her dream, as though it was his dream too. Lucy sobbed in Mrs
Murray's arms and both the boys patted her shoulders. When she'd cried
herself out, Jamie had given her his handkerchief and sat close, with
his forehead leaning on hers, as if in that way he could share her
suffering. A few days later, when Captain Nicholson had spoken to the
head teacher of her own school, who also pleaded in vain, and then to
the headmistress of the village infants' school, who had agreed to take
her on, Lucy was back in the Murrays' kitchen. Jamie took her hands in
his across the table. 'I know it's not the same as being a doctor, but
you can still do good as a schoolteacher, you know,' he said earnestly.
'And you'll be a marvellous teacher, and the children will love you and
look back on what you've given them all their lives. There are so many
children here who need your help. Poor children who'll never have any
other chance in life.' She'd smiled wanly, thinking he was the person
who understood her best in the world. Tom crouched down at her feet and
assumed a falsetto voice. 'Please, miss, teach me to read, teach me to
write,

I'll love you forever, so I will.' And Lucy, who could never resist his
antics, gave a hoot of laughter, reached out a foot and tipped him over.
He rolled on to his back and waved his arms and legs in the air like an
overturned beetle. 'Please, miss, a big girl pushed me.' 'Ridiculous!'
muttered Jamie. 'Get yourself up,' said Mrs Murray indulgently. 'You'll
make your sweater all dirty.' So Lucy's life had changed overnight from
schoolgirl to teacher, from a carefree seventeen-year-old to cook,
cleaner, housekeeper. Each day she bought groceries on her way home from
school, rolled up her sleeves and began to make a fish pie or cheese
tart. Heavy things like potatoes were delivered on a Saturday by the
greengrocer in his van. Saturdays were also wash day for Lucy, pulling
out the copper to boil the sheets, and the mangle to squeeze the water
out of them. Her dream of becoming a doctor had been the obvious
conclusion of her lifelong desire to mend things. Jamie and Mrs Murray
had always been her allies in that, helping her to feed a baby bird
which had fallen out of its nest, or bind up the broken leg of a kitten.
Aged nine, Lucy had rescued the kitten from a group of older boys who
were torturing it, down by the canal. She'd heard the pitiful mewling,
and peeped between their legs to see them poking at the injured animal
with sticks. Without another thought she steamed into the centre of
their circle, elbowing them out of the way, swooped up the kitten in her
arms and turned to face them, all towering over her. 'You should be
'shamed,' she yelled. 'You are disgustin' bullies.' And they were so
surprised that they let her pass, to take the kitten home and nurse it
back to health. It was the same with people. If she saw another child
being picked on at school, she would immediately befriend

them, seeking them out in the playground, sitting with them at lunch,
her very presence signalling to the other children that they could no
longer be nasty to her new protégé. It was a terrible grief to be told
that she would never have the opportunity to be a doctor and learn how
to mend broken humans: never be able to save women like her mother from
dying in childbirth; never prevent other girls from growing up without a
mum. She'd even suggested becoming a nurse, but her father had refused
to allow her to live away from home. So Lucy went to work as an infant
teacher, and Tom transferred to the local grammar school where his
sporting prowess and general clowning soon made him popular and filled
their house with boys who lived nearby, many of whom sighed over his
blonde seventeen-year-old neighbour. That was all three years ago. Since
then, Tom had won a scholarship to the LSE and Lucy had become
accustomed to her life as Miss Nicholson, the teacher. At first she'd
resented being incarcerated in the dingy Victorian schoolrooms and was
determined to hate teaching, but despite herself she discovered a
pleasure in the company of small children. Their imagination, creativity
and honesty energised her. Every day they did something which made her
laugh, and she couldn't help responding to their unguarded adoration of
her. It didn't take her long to realise that people can be damaged in
many different ways, and that teaching might give her the means to
support girls and boys who were suffering in ways other than the
physical. She had an intuitive knack of recognising a look she had first
seen on Jamie and Tom's faces on the day they arrived in her life which
told her that children were bereaved, or uprooted, or oppressed, and
they needed her to help them. She knew she had fallen in love with Jamie
and Tom from that first moment, instantaneously and unreservedly, in the

way that only small children can bestow their affection, and nothing in
the intervening years had dimmed her initial devotion. But now she also
found room in her heart for inventive Joan with her skinny arms and
legs, Alfie who laughed all the time but wore shoes which were too small
and had socks which were more darn than knit, Jean who was the youngest
of a family of fierce redheads, Harry who always begged for her apple
core, Gladys who couldn't get the hang of reading until Lucy realised
she needed glasses which her parents couldn't afford. Although Captain
Nicholson's fortunes were much reduced, Lucy knew very well that they
weren't as poor as so many people in those dark years: the parents of
many of her pupils, the Jarrow marchers and three million others without
work. It smarted when her father seemed to find dribbles of money to
supplement Tom's scholarship, but she had realised many years ago that
the boys were everything to him and she was next to nothing. After all,
she was the baby who had caused the death of his wife. Perhaps she
should have hated the brothers for getting the fathering she lacked, but
right from the start she had loved them too -- Jamie for his pathetic
determination to be the man of the family, and Tom for his playful
nature. She couldn't resent Tom for getting the support from her father
which she hadn't received. It wasn't his fault. \* Now, Lucy pulled the
brush furiously through her hair and stared at herself in the
dressing-table mirror. In the ten days since the call had appeared in
the Daily Worker, she and Mrs Murray had cajoled and pleaded with Tom,
but failed to change his mind about going to Spain. She could hear Tom
and her father downstairs, and knew she was expected to join them, but
how could she possibly say goodbye to one of the boys she'd loved since
she was five?

She was too angry with herself for her failure to dissuade him, and too
terrified at the danger he was heading into. She heard Tom's voice at
the bottom of the stairs. 'Luce, come on, I'll miss my train.' I hope
you do, she said savagely to herself in the mirror. Her grey eyes
flashed like knives. I hope you miss your train, and they turn you down
for being too young and unreliable to get there on time. Her hand halted
in the brushing as she heard him on the stairs, taking two at a time in
his usual way. He burst into her bedroom, and she swung round. 'Haven't
you ever heard of knocking?' she snapped. He raised his palms in
half-hearted apology. 'It's time to go,' he said. 'I'm just leaving.'
Lucy slammed the brush on to the dressing table. 'Well, I wish you
weren't.' 'Don't start all that again. It's decided.' He was standing
next to her in two strides, vibrating with excitement. 'I'm going, and
that's that.' He came close behind her, took one of her curls and
twisted it round his finger, as he had done since he was a small boy.
Usually she found this endearing and he knew it. It reminded them both
of when she was five and he was four, and she was his only friend. Now
she shrugged him away. 'Get off me.' She stood up, knocking over a jug
of hair pins, but he didn't step away, so they were standing
uncomfortably close, and her heart began to thump in her chest. His eyes
locked on to hers, and he raised his hand to her head again, but instead
of wrapping a curl, he grasped the back of her neck and quickly drew her
face to him in a fierce kiss. With his other hand, he pulled her body
tight against him, and despite herself she was kissing him back,
feverishly, desperately, as though she had always been waiting for this.

Captain Nicholson's voice came from below, 'Where's the damned boy gone
now?' and he began to lumber up the stairs. They were both trembling as
they pulled apart. Lucy searched Tom's face to try to fathom what this
must mean. He had kissed her once before, when he was twelve and she was
thirteen, but although she had never forgotten it, that kiss had not
been anything like this. 'Don't go,' she said. 'I have to.' But she
thought she detected a new hesitation, a new anguish in his voice.
Captain Nicholson was in the doorway. 'Ah, there you are Tom. Your
mother's waiting. And Jamie.' Lucy and Tom exchanged a look. So he had
persuaded Jamie to come and say goodbye. Her father shepherded Tom out
of the room and Lucy caught sight of herself in the mirror. Her cheeks
were flushed, there was a fire in her eyes, and her hair fluffed out
around her heart-shaped face. She thought she looked almost pretty. Very
well, she thought, lifting her chin. This would be the memory of her
which Tom would carry with him. Perhaps it would bring him back. They
all stood awkwardly on the crazy-paved front path. Tom opened the gate
and passed through, and was out on the street with his small leather
suitcase, while Mrs Murray, Jamie, Lucy and her father remained in the
garden. Tom clicked the gate shut between them. They all looked at him
in his cavalry twill trousers and red tie, with his hair brilliantined
to a dark shine, and his hat resting on his suitcase until he had kissed
them goodbye. Lucy could feel Mrs Murray shivering beside her though the
day was not cold. Tom leaned over the gate and shook hands with Captain
Nicholson. Then Lucy stepped forward, offering

her hand, but he grasped hold of both her shoulders, pulled her into him
and kissed her loudly on the lips. She felt Jamie's eyes on them, taking
this in, but she didn't look at him as she moved aside to let Mrs Murray
through. Tom hugged his mother tightly over the gate and whispered,
'Don't worry Ma!' into her hair. As he let go of her, she staggered, and
Lucy took her arm to steady her. Tom picked up his suitcase and turned
to leave. 'Your brother. For God's sake, shake hands with your brother,'
barked Lucy's father and Tom swivelled again. Captain Nicholson gave
Jamie a shove and the brothers' fingers met in a flaccid shake. Wiping
his palm down the leg of his trousers, Tom settled his hat on his head
and walked away, rapidly, without looking back. When he reached the
corner, Lucy thought he might turn and wave, but he didn't, and she
would have run after him if Mrs Murray hadn't slumped against her.
'That's that then,' said Jamie, as though his infuriating little brother
had never existed. Lucy felt Mrs Murray begin to shake with tears. 'How
could you take leave of him that way?' she asked Jamie, but he just
shrugged and strode across the low picket fence which separated Lucy's
garden from theirs. Embarrassed by all the emotion, Captain Nicholson
cleared his throat. 'Well, I'll leave you women to, umph ... I've got to
...' He waved a distracted hand and scuttled back to the house, leaving
the two women gazing through their tears in the direction where Tom had
disappeared. That night Lucy lay in bed, picturing her lovely Tom
marching off to war, fighting in muddy trenches, his flesh being torn
apart by the steel of bullets or bayonets, until she covered her face
and wept. And that kiss. Where had that come from, and what did it mean?
It wasn't the sort of kiss a brother would give a sister, and her
response had been very far from sisterly -- a world away from how she'd

felt about the unexciting kisses from her few short-lived boyfriends.
When she had cried herself out, she crept to the bathroom to wash her
face, and on the landing she was stopped in her tracks by a sound
downstairs. She edged stealthily down the stairs and pushed open the
dining-room door. At the table with his back to her and an almost empty
bottle of whisky in front of him, sat her father. The strange sound was
deep, muffled sobs, coming up from the pit of his stomach. Lucy had
never heard a man cry before, and especially not her father. For a
moment she wondered whether to go to him, to put her arm around his
shoulder, to comfort him as she would comfort anyone in distress. But
she knew it wasn't her he wanted. It had never been her. Jamie and Tom's
father, Private Murray, had died from the gas he'd inhaled saving
Captain Nicholson's life, and in paying his debt of honour by taking
care of his saviour's sons, her father had pushed her aside. Jamie and
Tom had become the centre of his world and taken every ounce of the love
which should by rights have been hers. There was nothing Lucy could do
to win him back. She stepped away from the door and mounted the stairs
again, with fear for Tom pounding in her head. Back in bed, she twisted
her head against the pain of loss, and remembered when Tom was about
seven and he'd been teetering on the edge of a bank over the stream,
trying to recover a fishing net he'd dropped. As he tottered on the
brink, she'd reached out, grabbed him by his collar and yanked him back.
She was a year older than him and it was her job to save Tom from all
the scrapes he got into. 'You almost strangled me,' Tom had complained,
easing his shirt from his throat. 'There was no need for it, I'd almost
got the net and I knew perfickly well what I was doing and wouldn't have
fallen in. And now the net is lost

forever and your dad gave it to me and he'll be cross and you are a
stupid girl.' He'd pushed past her and gone back to the house on his
own, even though they were meant to stay together. Lucy had studied the
lost net, and then looked around her until she found a long branch.
Holding on to a willow trunk for balance, she'd fished for the net and
pulled it back up the muddy bank to where she could lean down and grab
it. It was her job to make things right and she had, though Tom took the
returned net from her without a word of thanks. She sat up in bed as
conviction hardened in her. She had failed to talk him out of signing
up, but that was just a boy's bravado. Perhaps when he was in Spain and
had seen the reality of war at first hand, then she might be able to
persuade him to leave the fight to others and come home. It became clear
that there was only one thing to do. She would have to go to Spain and
bring Tom back, whether he liked it or not.

OceanofPDF.com

3

Dusk fell earlier and earlier as October became November, reflecting the
dreariness in Lucy's days without Tom to make her laugh, to dance her
round the kitchen, to take her to political meetings. She knew he could
be self-centred and unreliable, but his enthusiasm and good cheer were
infectious and always lifted the spirits of those around him. Now Lucy
felt the light travelling further and further away from her, leaving her
in deep darkness. In all the outward ways, life was unchanged. Lucy went
to her teaching job at the local infants' school each morning, Captain
Nicholson set off for his office and the two of them came together in
the early-evening gloom to eat their meal. They ate mostly in silence to
the tick of the big grandfather clock, and he never thanked her for
cooking. When he turned on the wireless and settled down with his
newspaper Lucy slipped through the back gate to the Murrays' house, as
she had done for years. But it wasn't the same without Tom. The space in
her life where Tom had been seemed like a tangible thing, and every
moment of it confirmed her resolve to go to Spain and bring him home.
She had no idea how that might be possible, but began to make
preparations. The day after Tom had left, she'd asked Jamie if he would
start to teach her Spanish again, as he'd done in his

university holidays. Then she'd been a keen pupil, finding it good to
have something to sharpen her brain. It always gave her joy to please
Jamie and she basked in his admiration as he praised her quick learning.
Tom had tagged along to the lessons too, though he never did any of the
homework Jamie set and couldn't conjugate a verb to save his life. Lucy
suspected he was only there because he couldn't bear to see her and
Jamie doing something from which he was excluded. The lessons had often
disintegrated into a shouting match, with Jamie calling Tom a lazy dunce
and Tom accusing him of being a hopeless teacher. Without Tom's
disruptive presence at their Spanish lessons, Lucy learned fast, and it
was obvious that Jamie was enjoying the hour they spent together every
evening just as much as she was. They sat together at the kitchen table,
and Jamie loosened his tie. He'd brought out all his old college books
and sat close to Lucy as they worked through them. Lucy felt as if his
mind was joined with hers, filling it with new knowledge. But as the
days passed, Lucy found it increasingly difficult to force herself out
of bed to go to work. A cold fog hung about the streets, and the church
steeple was lost in the grey cloud which also seemed to have swirled its
way into her head. People turned up their collars and drew their scarves
round their throats as they appeared out of the mist and vanished into
it again. And though she was a good teacher and enjoyed the company of
the children, somehow she could no longer put her whole mind to her
work. Every morning she pulled aside the curtain which hung inside the
front door, to look for a letter from Tom. Each day there was a moment
of hope and a crash of disappointment, until on the tenth of November a
letter lay there in its airmail envelope with Tom's familiar, scrawly
handwriting addressed to Miss Lucy Nicholson. She stuffed it quickly
into her bag, leaving the house without calling

goodbye to her father, and almost running around the corner, where she
could open it unseen. Her fingers were trembling as she pulled the thin
paper from the envelope and she blessed her stars that she'd thought to
stuff the stationery into his case. Tucking her hair behind her ears,
she read as she walked.

6 November 1936 Somewhere in France Hello Luce, Well, this is an awfully
big adventure already. I can see you frowning at me, so yes, I do know
that I'm heading into a war, but at the moment I can't help enjoying it
all so much. (Don't tell your father.) I'm on a train going down through
France, so my handwriting is probably going to be a bit jumpy. There.
Like that. Let me try pencil. That'll be less blotty. The countryside
here is not unlike Hertfordshire, with gentle green hills and homely
villages and bare trees standing sentinel over it all. In my carriage
are three other volunteers, but we aren't supposed to know each other,
so we just keep exchanging little looks and lifted eyebrows when some
funny French thing happens. Someone got on with a live cockerel! A bit
later an old lady boarded -- as wide as she was tall, and dressed all in
black, with a black headscarf -- and unwrapped the biggest baguette
you've ever seen, and laid it over her ample lap, and then stuffed it
full of ham and cheese and we must all have been staring at it and
possibly drooling, because she carefully broke us off a bit each,
gabbling away in French. I understood some of it, but I could see the
other blokes didn't and that suddenly seemed so

funny to me that I had to press my nose against the window and pinch my
arm to keep from laughing. How we would have got the giggles together,
Luce. But I'm jumping ahead, and maybe I should tell you all about my
adventures from the beginning. You know I wrote in after that piece in
the Daily Worker, and they told me to go to London, taking my passport
and £5 8s for my fare to Spain, and find the Communist Party HQ in King
Street, Covent Garden. I'm sorry I took off so suddenly. I didn't want
to spend too long saying goodbye to you and Mum. I didn't trust myself
to turn around and wave. I hope you understand. Covent Garden is a bit
of a run-down area of London, smelling of rotting fruit and vegetables,
and there were about twenty men gathering there, looking pretty shifty.
Mostly about my age, but older men too, and mainly I'd say labouring
men, in flat caps and mufflers, like they'd heard there might be work
and were waiting to be hired. The door opened and we all crammed into
one room where we had a talk from Harry Pollitt of the British Communist
Party about taking this seriously, and going for the right reasons and
understanding that we might not return. (Don't fret, old girl, I promise
I will.) Well, I've never quite been a communist, but the excitement
buzzing around that room made me feel like leaving the Labour Party and
joining up. No, no, don't worry, I didn't! Not yet, anyway. Then we were
taken one by one into a little side room for an interview about our
political allegiances and motives. I wasn't sure what I was supposed to
say about political allegiances, so I just told him I'd been a socialist
ever since I started university. The question about motives was easier.
My interviewer

was a very serious young man with steel-rimmed spectacles, and he leaned
across the desk and I'm sure his eyes twinkled a bit when I said, 'To
fight those Fascist b---s, and save the Spanish revolution.' I think it
must have been the right answer because he just moved on. I suppose they
have to identify spies in the midst of us. He asked me if I had any
dependants, and I thought about Mum, and whether I ought to mention her,
but Jamie can look after her, so she's not just dependent on me, is she?
And I dare say your father wouldn't let her starve, so I just crossed my
fingers behind my back and looked him straight in the eye and said,
'None. I'm free as a bird.' Then he asked me about my physical fitness
and I told him about playing scrum half and doing a bit of rowing. He
seemed to think that would be good enough. Last of all he asked me if I
had any 'special experience', and I suppose I must have looked a bit
puzzled by that, so he prompted me: had I done any first aid or ever
handled a weapon, or organised a trade union and did I speak any
languages, and I told him I spoke a few words of Spanish, though my
brother was the real linguist. I did get a first-aid badge in Scouts,
but I didn't mention that. I hope they are going to have better medicos
than me. All I can remember is how to tie my scarf into an arm sling. I
thought about telling him I was an economics student, but I couldn't
really see how that would be any help in a battle. All that calculus
gone to waste. He looked like he'd sucked a lemon when I mentioned being
in the Cadet Corps and I suppose that marked me down as a boy who'd been
to a posh school, even though it wasn't my choice to go there, but he
seemed a bit more positive when I said I knew how to

strip down and handle a rifle. I haven't done it since I left
Wellington, but I expect I can remember how. After he'd finished
scribbling down answers to my questions, he sent me through to another
room, where there was a doctor (or a man in a white coat anyway -- I
assumed it was a doctor, ha ha!) who told me to strip and gave me a
rather cursory physical examination, like could I touch my toes and
could I read some numbers on a chart on the wall, and then asked me to
get dressed again. I saw him give a big tick on a piece of paper, so I
knew I'd been passed fit for service. I went back to my college digs
that night and looked around my room, knowing it would be the last time
for quite a while, and that felt rather queer. So I started packing, and
that brought back the thrill of it. I'd done what the letter said and
bought two khaki shirts with pockets, and a pair of shorts. Though
surely it won't be weather for shorts? And all the while, it was running
through my head, I'm going to Spain, I'm going to Spain. Then I stood in
front of my little bookcase and tried to decide which books to take. I
put in too many and the case wouldn't close -- it's just that little
brown one -- and had to take them out again. Guess what I chose in the
end? Hugo's Spanish in Three Months Without a Master obviously, but the
rest I'm not going to tell you. Let me know your guess when you write.
You will write, won't you? Write soon. Send it to the Communist Party HQ
in London. Then one of the fellows who shares my digs knocked on my door
and suggested we went to the pub for one last drink. So we did, and
there were some other chaps I know in there who insisted on buying me
drinks and slapping me on the back because I was going off to fight for
freedom and

democracy. I don't mind telling you I felt pretty pleased with myself by
closing time. The next morning I dressed in some corduroy trousers
because that was what most of the volunteers had been wearing, and left
off my hat. I do so want to fit in with them and they were wearing flat
caps, not hats. When I pulled my door closed behind me, my stomach gave
a funny little lurch, and I wondered what I might have seen by the time
I opened it again. Back at the CP HQ we were given weekend boattrain
tickets to Paris. They have to be weekend tickets because most of the
men don't have passports, and if you've got a weekend return you can go
to Paris without one. We were given a bit of French money, and told not
to spend it on drink or women! So, as it was Friday night, we all caught
the Underground to Victoria, and we'd been told just to go in pairs and
'behave like tourists' so we didn't draw attention to ourselves. I was
with a rather weedy-looking type, who was a union man from a Lancashire
mill. At Victoria we stood about waiting for the train, trying to appear
nonchalant, and spotting other little groups of men who we'd seen in
Covent Garden. Two blokes were on the wrong platform, and apparently a
guard said to them: 'The International Brigaders are over there.' So
much for looking like tourists! I can't tell you how exciting it was to
climb on to that train and settle down, then to board the ferry and
cross the Channel in the dark and then to take the second train to
Paris. I was the only one of our group who could speak any French, so it
was down to me to get coffee for everyone at Calais and on the train. We
were met at the Gare du Nord, and taken to

a hostel. It was a bit of a fleapit, but I suppose I'm going to have to
get used to worse than that! Some of the other blokes went out on the
town, and came home drunk, and they were sent packing in the morning --
back to Blighty. I sat in a café with the man from Lancashire and bought
him a French beer which he didn't like and let him tell me about his
life. There's so much I didn't know about the way most people survive,
about back-to-backs and knockers-up and never having money to see a
doctor. I feel ashamed. This is going to be a real education. The next
day we were taken to the Paris CP HQ and given breakfast and another
medical examination and a Spanish ID card. They've stamped it with the
word 'Antifascista'. I'm so proud of that card. I keep taking it out and
reading it when I think nobody's looking. And now we're on a train south
again. Heading towards Spain. Imagine that! After all these months
reading about it and talking about it and shouting at Jamie, I'm
actually on my way! Fondest love, Your Antifascista Tom P.S. -- I'll
write separately to Mum. Don't let Jamie get hold of this letter, will
you? The church clock struck 8.45 a.m. and Lucy ran the last few steps
into school. As she hung up her coat she thought how this was exactly
the kind of letter she would have expected him to write before that
kiss: a loving, brotherly letter. Fondest love! What did that mean?

OceanofPDF.com

4

Every evening Lucy lifted yesterday's copy of The Times out of the waste
bin beside the fireplace, where her father had left it. As their dinner
was cooking, she rolled and twisted some pages of the newspaper into
firelighters. Once she'd made a little heap she laid them carefully in
the freshly swept grate, with the wooden kindling and a few lumps of
coal on top. When she had touched a match to the paper and the flames
were catching, she would hold the unused double pages across the chimney
opening to draw the fire. As she did so, she would idly read the
articles in front of her. On the nineteenth of November, she knelt in
front of the fireplace with her arms outstretched, listening for the
crackle of fire behind the paper, and watching that it didn't catch
light, when her attention was drawn to a letter from the Society of
Friends about Spain. The sufferings of the children ... she read as she
rocked back on her heels. Havoc ... Bombings from the air ... She
whipped the hot sheets of newsprint back towards her. The one nearest
the fire was scorched and she dropped it on to the hearth as she folded
the letters page small enough to handle and carried it to the light from
the window. Untold miseries are being inflicted on the child population
of this unhappy country, not only by wounds and

death, but also in shattered nerves and ruined health. It said that
Quaker Relief was working with Save the Children International Union and
the International Committee of the Red Cross to evacuate children from
the worst war zones. A thousand youngsters had already been moved to
holiday camps or 'colonies' in safer Spanish districts or in France, but
thousands more needed to be evacuated in what it called the impartial
rescue of children. It gave an address and requested donations for the
cause. Her throat dry with excitement, Lucy forced herself to read the
letter again more slowly. Surely it wasn't an accident that she had
stumbled on these words, which seemed aimed at her alone? After she'd
read it for the third time, she held the page close to her heart and
thought of the boys and girls in her class. It could be Joan who had
witnessed her parents killed by a bomb; it could be Alfie whose home had
been destroyed and was now forced out on to the road; it could be Gladys
packaged off to a children's home where there was nobody who knew her,
let alone anyone to love her. Only a week before, Mrs Murray had shown
her pictures in the Daily Worker of Spanish children killed by General
Franco's bombs, and now those terrible images fused with this letter in
The Times. The fire in the hearth might have failed to catch, but
another had been lit in her mind and it burned with a bright flame. The
impartial rescue of children. During dinner that night Lucy could hardly
contain her excitement. It bubbled and boiled up inside her, as if any
second she might burst out with the shrill whistle of a kettle on the
hob. She could barely swallow the cauliflower cheese she'd cooked. As
soon as Captain Nicholson had opened his copy of The Times, Lucy slipped
next door to show Jamie and Mrs Murray the newspaper cutting, already
soft from handling.

'You always have a gleam about you, Lucy, but tonight you are positively
glowing,' Mrs Murray observed. Jamie studied her hard. 'You can't be
thinking you'll go to Spain too? You've never been further than London
on your own.' He didn't say, 'You're a girl!' but Lucy could see him
thinking it. He always wanted to protect her, but now it was time for
her to stand on her own. 'Don't pour cold water on me, Jamie Murray, or
I won't come here and tell you my secrets any more. You sound just like
my father.' She turned to Mrs Murray. 'I could be of real help over
there. I know I could. And when I'm there I could look for Tom and bring
him home.' 'But how would you manage it, dear?' 'I'll be twenty-one in
January, and then I get the allowance from my grandmother. It's only £50
a year, but I think that would be enough to live on in Spain, don't you?
And when I'm twenty-one my father can't tell me what to do any longer.'
'That's true,' agreed Mrs Murray. 'It probably doesn't cost much to live
there. And I've got some savings I could lend you for your fare.' Jamie
looked from one to the other of them, and his horror about the plan was
written clearly on his pale features. 'But it would be dangerous, Lucy.
You'd be going to a war zone. I wouldn't want you to get hurt.' Lucy
turned the full beam of her joyous smile on him. 'But the children,
Jamie. The children need me.' After a mostly sleepless night, Lucy
sought out Ruth, one of the other teachers at her school, just two years
older than her, and the only Quaker she'd ever met. Lucy wore her own
religion lightly, going to St Mary's every Sunday with her father and
Mrs Murray, more because it was the centre of the village community than
from any strong faith. She had taken all she needed from Christianity --
the notion that

she was put on earth to help others. She had no idea what Quakers might
believe, but knew that Ruth exuded an enviable kind of calm. Ruth was on
playground duty, bundled up in a brown scarf and gloves, when Lucy
showed her the cutting. 'Yes, it's really bad in Spain,' said Ruth. 'I
want to go,' Lucy blurted out. 'I know it sounds stupid, but I feel this
letter was written to me, telling me I have to help.' Ruth smiled. 'I
think it was written to raise money for the cause.' 'Well I haven't got
any money, but I have got myself. And I know about children.' 'You
certainly do.' Ruth picked up a ball which had rolled to her feet and
threw it back to a group of boys. 'There's a speaker about Spain at
Friends House in Euston next month.' She could see Lucy was looking
puzzled. 'It's the Quaker headquarters. Our official name is the Society
of Friends, and we call ourselves Friends, but most people know us as
Quakers. I'll take you if you like.' Lucy squeezed her hand. 'Oh yes.
Yes please!' A childish wail rose from the corner of the playground and
the two young women hastened to investigate. It was mid-December before
the next letter arrived from Tom, and so cold in the house that Lucy had
to get up early to make sure the range was full of coal before she went
to school. She heard the post drop through the door and her heart
flipped.

1 December Barcelona. España!!!! Dear Comrade Luce,

I'm now in Spain, in Barcelona, in a little hostel near the main street,
La Rambla. God, Luce, you'd love it here. I wish you were with me. So,
the train chuffed down through France to Perpignan. And by then we'd
given up pretending to be tourists, and were all sitting more or less
together. We are mostly young but there's some men who served in the
Great War and a lot of union organisers. Miners and suchlike. Your
father would call them Reds or 'Bolshy types'. I'm going to like them
very much. Perpignan is a pretty place with palm trees like Torquay. By
the sea, I think, but we didn't go there. We went to a café for wine and
food. The wine was quite vinegary. Just as we were beginning to think
we'd be spending the night in the café, a Spaniard came, possibly the
smallest man I've ever seen. And I was very pleased that I could
understand what he was saying. Well, some of it anyway. I've been
brushing up on the train. He told us we'd be picked up by a bus, so we
sat down by the roadside for a few hours, and it was quite cold and I
felt an idiot for packing shorts. I hope nobody ever sees them. I was
glad of my corduroy trousers. It was starting to get dark before the bus
turned up and it was the oldest thing I've ever seen -- almost looked
like it ought to be horse-drawn -- but we all piled in. I wish I hadn't
brought a suitcase too. Most of the men have kitbags, which looks a lot
less poncey. I look like I'm going on a holiday. Everything marks me out
as a man with a privileged upbringing, but the others don't seem to hold
it against me. The bus took us on twisty-turny roads up and up in the
mountains, and I was really suffering from car sickness, so had to open
a window and hope I

wouldn't show myself up. Most of the other men were smoking and that
made it worse. It was all right as long as I didn't think of that wine
I'd just drunk. The wine is stronger than British beer. I don't know how
long it was, and I wouldn't say if I did, just in case this letter falls
into the wrong hands, but it felt like a lifetime we were on that bus.
And then, finally, it stopped, and we all tumbled out. I took deep, deep
breaths of mountain air. I could tell we were high up because it was so
cold, and there was snow on the ground, but it was too dark to see
anything else, except thousands of stars. I put on all my shirts on top
of each other, and my sweater and my jacket, but I was still very, very
cold. The Spaniard came round to us handing out rope-soled shoes -- no
more than slippers, really, with canvas uppers. They are called
alpargatas. I noticed for the first time how badly shod most of the
other British men were, though one chap was wearing brogues which
wouldn't have been much good for mountaineering. Luckily I'd brought my
walking boots -- you know, the ones I had from the Lake District holiday
-- so although I politely accepted my pair of alpargatas, I shoved them
in my suitcase when the Spaniard wasn't looking. I felt a damn fool
carrying a suitcase, I can tell you, but didn't want to leave my books.
And, did I say? I've got a picture of you. The one taken at your
cousin's wedding: you were laughing your head off and wearing that blue
dress I like, though of course it's grey in the photo. Anyway, then it
started to get serious. The Spaniard told us there must be no talking
and no smoking and we must walk single file behind our French guide.
That sobered us up, I must say, and we were looking all about us and
listening for border guards who might have stopped us crossing, and our
ankles kept

nearly twisting over on the rocky path because we couldn't see where we
were putting our feet. Almost as soon as we set off, it began to rain,
icy rain, which might have been sleet -- driving into our faces. Even
with gloves, my hand holding the suitcase was frozen, and I had to keep
swapping, and ram the other deep into my pocket. Some of the men didn't
have gloves, and I felt a chump for leaving my hat behind, just because
I was trying to fit in. My hair was soaked and freezing rain was running
down my face and neck. We must have walked, or rather tripped and
stumbled, in the darkness for about two hours and then the guard stopped
ahead of us and, because we were in a line, we all bumped into each
other. It would have been funny if it wasn't so frightening. He shushed
us furiously and whispered that we should all be completely silent,
because we were near the border. We could just about make out white
painted rocks and boulders which glowed faintly in the moonlight, and we
understood that this side of them was France and the other was Spain. We
fanned out, and as we approached the rocks I could feel the men on
either side of me speeding up, and I did too, and in the end we were all
running for the last few yards, expecting a shot to ring out any second.
And then we were past the rocks, and they told us to stop running
because we might fall off a cliff. Well, that stopped us pretty quickly
I can tell you, and we were all laughing and slapping each other on the
back, because here we were. We'd made it into Spain! Not that our joy
lasted very long, because we had to trudge further, down another
treacherous track for about an hour, and the rain was now much more like

snow, and our feet were numb, and the sleet was melting into the neck of
my jacket and dribbling down my back. Eventually we came to a track that
was wide enough for a vehicle and there was a lorry waiting for us, and
we all clambered aboard, and sat in the back of it, huddled together and
shivering, and everyone tried to light cigarettes while the lorry was
bumping us around like spuds in a sack. And now, here I am in Barcelona,
and my God, Luce, you should see it. It's everything we dreamed the
Republic would be. Every building has a flag flying from it -- either
the red flag, or the red and black of the anarchists, or the red and
yellow stripes of the Catalan flag. (Barcelona is in Catalonia and they
speak a separate language and the Republic is giving them independence.
Fancy that! The Welsh miners who are with us think that's a great idea.)
So imagine all the flags flying against the bluest sky you ever saw, and
it's like a fiesta everywhere you look. There are revolutionary posters
blazing red and blue pasted up on every wall and in the small gaps
between them people have painted the hammer and sickle or the initials
of the revolutionary parties. The buses are all red and black and even
the bootblacks' boxes have been painted red and black! Then there are
the people -- everyone dressed more or less the same, no well-dressed
people at all, everyone wearing working-class clothes, or blue overalls
or some kind of militia uniform. There are women fighters too, Luce --
you'd love to see them. They look so splendid in their corduroy knee
breeches and zipped woollen jackets and their flashing eyes. I've got
myself kitted out with a leather jacket and a forage cap and a red and
black handkerchief to wear around my throat. I look very dashing, and
because I'm so dark, I often

get taken for a tall Spaniard. Please send woollen socks when you can.
All the socks here are cotton, and no use at all. Tell Mother to send
anything warm -- flannel shirts, wool underwear. Almost the best thing
is everyone addressing each other as 'comrade'. If I go into a shop,
they don't call me 'Señor' and the polite form of 'you', they look me in
the face, like an equal, and call me 'comrade' and the familiar 'thou'.
Nobody says 'buenos días', it's always 'salud!' All the shops and cafés
have notices saying they've been collectivised and you aren't allowed to
tip waiters any more. In the centre of town, the road called La Rambla,
there are loudspeakers bellowing revolutionary songs day and night.
Nobody seems downcast and there's a thrilling sense of equality and
freedom. It's what I came for, Luce. We can't let General Franco and his
Fascists take this away. I have to admit there are signs of war too --
all the buildings are in disrepair and (don't tell Jamie) every church
has been gutted and there are gangs of workers taking them down stone by
stone. At night they keep the lights in the city low in case of bombing
raids. There are long bread queues -- bread is really short because all
the wheat-growing area is in Franco's hands. And there's not much meat
or coal or sugar. The only sort of meat is a bright red sausage which
gives you the runs. (Sorry.) And you can't get milk at all. How I long
for a cup of tea with milk! I drink tiny cups of thick black coffee now.
And there are refugees coming in by train from the areas where the
fighting is. You'd want to take them all home with you, especially the
children. So here I am, Luce, and our train is taking us south tomorrow.
Yes, I'm a bit scared about what I'm going into, but now I've seen it
with my own eyes, I'm even

more sure that it's worth fighting for. I promise I'll be careful and
keep my head down. Don't forget to ask Mother to send socks and warm
things. She can send them via the Communist Party in London. And letters
too. Please write. And please give Mother a hug, and have one for
yourself. Night night, comrade! Tom Not even fondest love this time,
thought Lucy, folding the letter into her pocket. Now she was just a
comrade. But now she had a plan. She was going to Spain to join the
Quakers, and as soon as she was there, she would be the comrade who
would bring him safely home.

OceanofPDF.com

5

By Christmas Lucy's resolve to go to Spain had hardened diamond-sharp,
and she focused on her Spanish lessons with absolute concentration.
Jamie was surprised at the speed with which she progressed and, as
always, she glowed in the warmth of his approval. Ruth had taken her to
the meeting at Friends House in London, where she'd heard speakers talk
movingly about the plight of the refugee children in Spain. What they
were told was heart-rending. Thousands of women whose husbands and
fathers were away fighting on the front line had taken to the roads with
their offspring to escape the bombing which preceded the approach of
Franco's brutal army. As those refugees converged on towns which were
already poor and desperate, the Republican government struggled to feed
and house them. To make matters worse, many children had been orphaned
and were now alone and vulnerable in strange places. At the meeting Lucy
listened intently to a couple called Alfred and Norma Jacob who were
going out to Barcelona, where thousands of refugees were heading. They
were both Oxford graduates, only in their twenties and with a young son
and daughter, but had been chosen because they were Quakers who had
already lived in Spain and spoke fluent Spanish. An older woman called
Edith Pye and her

translator Janet Perry were also about to leave on a factfinding
mission. Edith was a dumpy little ex-midwife with a Somerset accent, the
kind of woman you'd pass in the street and barely notice. Lucy was
thrilled that women were involved in such important positions. She had
expected that only men would be allowed. On the train home, Lucy said,
'I felt a bit conspicuous in my red hat and gloves.' 'I'm sorry, I
should have told you that Quakers like to dress soberly,' said Ruth.
Lucy realised she'd never seen Ruth in bright-coloured clothes, always
in grey or brown, and had thought it was just personal taste. 'Would you
be interested in coming to the local meeting house with me?' asked Ruth.
'It's in Welwyn Garden City.' Lucy laughed uncomfortably. 'If it's like
a church service, I wouldn't know when to stand up or sit down. Jamie
dragged me to Catholic Mass with him a few times in my teens, but I
couldn't make head nor tail of it.' Ruth raised her eyebrows in
amusement. 'I can promise you it's nothing like a Latin Mass. We don't
have any priests or vicars. And there isn't any standing up or kneeling.
We just sit in silence.' 'No hymns or sermons or readings or prayers?'
Lucy was astonished. Ruth shook her head. 'If anyone feels moved to
speak they will do, but otherwise we just sit quietly together. It's
very peaceful.' 'I normally go to St Mary's,' Lucy said doubtfully. 'But
all right. I'll come.' A thought struck her. She remembered Mrs Murray
telling her that she'd had to convert to Catholicism when she married Mr
Murray, even though she reverted to her Protestant roots when he died.
'Would I have to become a Quaker if I wanted to help them in Spain?'

Ruth laughed again. 'No, it's not like that. We don't have any creed or
doctrine. Nobody tells us what to think.' Lucy liked the sound of that.
'What do you believe, then?' 'It's quite simple, really. That there's a
light, of love I suppose, or God or whatever you like to call it, in
everyone, in every human being. And that makes every person valuable.'
'I see,' Lucy said slowly. 'So that's why you are pacifists.' Ruth
nodded. 'It's why we oppose war and slavery, and so on. Why don't you
come and see? You'd be very welcome. And someone there can write you a
letter of introduction to the Jacobs in Barcelona -- if you're really
serious about going.' Lucy grinned. 'I've never been so serious about
anything in my whole life.' The festive season without Tom felt empty.
He'd always been the one to choose Christmas trees and lug them home for
both houses. Then he'd helped Lucy and his mother decorate the trees,
singing carols loudly and often with the wrong words till they all fell
about in giggles. On 25 December, Lucy got up early to light the fires
and put the pudding to steam in the clothes-washing copper. She knew
that Mrs Murray would be next door peeling potatoes and preparing the
swede and carrots. The two families always shared Christmas dinner,
cooking half of it in each house, and gathering around the larger table
at the Nicholsons'. By 8 a.m. Jamie would already have gone to his
Catholic Mass, and Lucy wondered if he would be praying for his brother.
Mrs Murray would be alone and Lucy knew they were both thinking of Tom,
of where he was and how he would be marking the day, both desperately
hoping that he was safe. Lucy wiped a tear from her eye and wished they
could just pretend Christmas wasn't happening.

At least it felt normal when Lucy, Captain Nicholson and Mrs Murray
walked to church together and took their usual pew. Tom had given up
coming with them some years before, saying it would be hypocritical now
he was an atheist. But it was some comfort to Lucy to sing the old
familiar carols and shake hands with her friends and wish the other
villagers a happy Christmas. Over dinner they dutifully pulled their
crackers, donned their paper hats and read each other the riddles. Jamie
tried hard to engage everyone in conversation about topics of general
interest -- the abdication of course, and poor King George, and the
Croydon air crash. Mrs Murray chattered on in a falsely bright voice
about what the customers in the shop had said about that devil Mrs
Simpson, how some of them liked her clothes and one of them had been to
Cannes where the couple were now living. The one subject they studiously
avoided was the war in Spain. Lucy had rearranged the seating for the
four of them so there wasn't an empty chair, but her eyes kept straying
to the place Tom usually sat. Captain Nicholson carried in the plum
pudding, poured brandy over it, and set fire to it. Tom usually loved to
do that, and they always exclaimed at the blueness of the flames. This
year they all watched the flames die away and said nothing. After dinner
they exchanged their gifts. Lucy's father presented her with a
surprisingly attractive silk scarf in misted blues and mauves and
greens, which she suspected Mrs Murray had chosen. Jamie had bought her
a petite English--Spanish dictionary. Mrs Murray gave her a pocketsize
folding photograph frame made of leather, in which she had put a
hand-tinted photograph of each of the boys. Jamie's classical features
looked as if they had been painted in the soft pastels of watercolour,
whereas Tom's red lips and brown hair seemed to have been rendered in

oils. It was just as they were in real life and would be perfect to pack
in a small suitcase. The largest and most carefully chosen parcels this
year had been posted to Tom. Each family had sent one containing warm
clothes of all kinds, with chocolates and other modest treats. The
parcels had gone to the Communist Party in London, and from there would
be transported to Marseilles and by sea to Valencia. Although they'd
been parcelled up in good time, nobody knew if or when they might
arrive. Both families had received a card from Tom, drawn by one of his
comrades-in-arms. It sat in pride of place on each mantelpiece. After
they'd cleared away dinner and washed up, they all gathered in the
living room for half-hearted word games, until Captain Nicholson fell
asleep and began to snore loudly. Mrs Murray stood up. 'I think I'll
just pop home for a little nap. I'm feeling quite tired after all that
lovely food.' With evident relief, Jamie suggested a walk to Lucy and
she hurried to get her coat, hat and wellington boots. Once away from
the village, they paced side by side through the woods, and their
comfortable silence was calming after all the forced conversation of the
day. The leafless trees dripped from earlier rain, and the wet earth
gave off a rich, mulchy smell as they walked. Where the path came out of
the woods and overlooked ploughed fields, Jamie paused for a moment.
Lucy was gazing out over the countryside and felt his eyes on her. When
she looked up, he was assessing her shrewdly, but she also sensed an
excitement. 'I've got something to tell you,' he blurted out. 'You
mustn't repeat it to anyone.' His usually pale face was flushed, and her
first thought was that he had a girlfriend nobody knew about and he was
going to announce his engagement. It would be so like

Jamie to keep the girl a secret, Lucy thought, and a pang of jealousy
stung like a slap. The strength of her own reaction took Lucy by
surprise, but she tried to arrange her face into a mask of pleasurable
anticipation. Jamie started to walk again, striding off down the muddy
path which ran around the field. She hurried to keep pace with him. 'The
Herald's correspondent in Spain is coming home, and I've persuaded them
that I should go in his place. I didn't want to say anything before,
because I wanted Mother to have one last Christmas before I go too. I'd
be filing copy for all the Catholic papers, and trying to get stories in
the nationals too -- though they'll have their own men there. But it's a
great opportunity. I won't tell Mother till tomorrow, till Christmas is
over, but I couldn't wait any longer to tell you.' He stopped again and
scanned her face anxiously. 'What do you think?' Lucy was still trying
to realign her thoughts. 'It's ... it's ... a surprise,' she stammered.
'Why would it be a surprise?' He set off so fast that she almost had to
run to keep up with him. 'You know I've wanted to go,' he continued. 'To
shout the truth about the Catholic cause to all the corners of the
earth, ever since this all began. It was only that the Herald already
had a man there. It's like all my life has been coming together to this
end -- if I hadn't kept my last promise to Dad, and hadn't stayed a
Catholic, I'd never have learned Latin, never got the scholarships to
Ampleforth and St Benet's, never learned Spanish, never got the job on
the Catholic Herald. It's all been mapped out for me because I was true
to myself and true to my promises. You do see what it means to me and
that I have to go, don't you?'

Lucy's head spun and she felt as if she needed to sit down. It seemed
such a short time ago that she'd had almost the same conversation with
Tom. Although the brothers were so unalike to look at and held such
radically opposing views, they were so similar at heart, she thought,
both pig-headed, stubborn idealists with an overblown sense of their own
destiny. It was bad enough that Tom had gone. It would be a complete
disaster if Jamie went to Spain too. 'Surely there are other reporters
out there?' she argued weakly. 'But hardly any of them speak Spanish
like I do, and they're probably not Catholic, not understanding that
this is a crusade -- a modern crusade against the powers of darkness.'
Lucy sighed, seeing him clad in armour with a great red cross on a
tabard, and unquenchable zeal written all over his face. At least he
wasn't planning to go to fight, she thought. 'But won't it be dangerous?
Won't you have to go where the fighting is?' 'That's what Mother will
say. I thought you at least would be glad for me, would understand that
this is everything I've been waiting for. You know me better than anyone
in the world.' They turned back off the path into the top corner of the
woods, and he stumbled slightly as they entered the dark of the trees.
She grabbed his elbow to steady him. 'Of course I understand. I was just
... a bit surprised, because I thought for a minute you were going to
say something else.' 'What on earth would that be?' She laughed at
herself. 'I thought you were going to tell me you had a secret
girlfriend and were going to get married.'

He stopped abruptly and gazed down at her in amazement. 'How could you
think that?' She shrugged. 'You had girlfriends at college. And I don't
expect you to tell me everything.' His blue eyes bored into hers as if
he was searching for something. 'But don't you know?' 'Know what?' 'That
you've always been the only one for me.' Lucy had a sudden memory of
them when she was about six. She had been playing hospitals on the lawn
with Tom and a row of dolls and teddies. They often played this game
and, being a year older, Lucy was in charge and enjoyed bossing Tom
around. When Tom became bored, he pretended to be a kitten, and made her
scratch his belly. His capers always made her laugh. At the age of
eight, Jamie obviously thought the hospital game was babyish, but stood
watching them, hating not to be included. When he finally asked to play,
Tom had said, 'But we are the doctor and the nurse, so who are you? You
are nobody.' Even then, Lucy had registered the stricken look of dismay
on Jamie's face and tried to be kind, suggesting 'Maybe you could be the
man next door?' But Jamie had stalked away and Lucy had realised for the
first time that the two boys were rivals for her affection, and she had
power over them both. So yes, he was right. She had always known he
loved her. It was always Jamie she turned to with her problems, always
Jamie who understood, who seemed to know her own mind before she even
knew it herself. But was that the kind of love he meant? She nodded
slowly and he reached down and tucked a stray curl back under her red
hat. 'The other girls were just me checking, measuring them against you.
And nobody could hold a candle. And I hoped it was like that for you,
with the boys from the Young Farmers and church.' Lucy nodded again. He
was right, of course. Her few boyfriends had seemed lumpen and stupid
compared with

Jamie and Tom. 'I want to marry you, Lucy. You know that, don't you?' He
looked down at the muddy path. 'I'd go down on one knee, only ...' She
caught hold of him, laughing. 'Don't do that, you idiot! You'll get
filthy.' 'I'd do anything if you'll agree to marry me.' Lucy felt hot
and confused. 'I'm too young to marry anyone. I haven't had a life yet.'
'Is it Tom?' Jamie didn't try to keep the jealousy out of his voice. 'Is
it that you won't marry me because you want to marry Tom?' She couldn't
lie to Jamie. He would see clean through her. 'I don't know,' she said,
taking his arm. 'I just don't know.' 'Did Tom ask you to marry him,
before he left?' Lucy stammered, 'No, no. Of course not. He's only
nineteen!' 'I couldn't bear to lose you.' 'When we both get back from
Spain,' she said. 'Then we'll know for sure.' 'I've always known for
sure.' He pulled off his gloves and stuffed them in his pockets, then
softly took her face between his hands. He looked deep into her eyes and
she felt as if her soul was known to him. Then he bent and kissed her
lips, so very gently that her insides seemed to melt. Pulling her in
close to him, he whispered, 'I love you. I've been waiting to tell you
that since I was seven years old.' She buried her face in his tweed
coat, and muttered, 'I love you too,' because it was true, had always
been true in its own way, and she wanted so much to please him, and it
seemed too terrible not to say the words back to him. They stood in the
woods for a long time, listening to the drip of the trees, and a
blackbird singing somewhere far

off. Then they drew apart and Jamie's face was ablaze with joy. 'Promise
me this at least, will you -- that you won't marry anyone else till the
war in Spain is over?' She easily promised that she wouldn't. She had no
intention of marrying anyone. 'I'll wait for you for as long as it
takes,' he said. 'I know you will.' He took her gloved hand in his.
'Come on, let's get back. They'll be wondering where we are.' She was
suddenly afraid. 'We won't tell them anything, will we?' 'About us? Not
if you don't want to. It's enough that I've told you how I feel and that
I can write to you and call you "my love". This is my best Christmas
present ever.' It would be nice to be called 'my love', Lucy thought. A
whole lot nicer than 'comrade'. The next morning Jamie told his mother
he was leaving for Spain, and two days later they were gathered round
the front gate again to say goodbye. He kissed Lucy's cheek in a
brotherly fashion, and she was glad he wasn't making any public claims
on her. They watched as he walked to the end of the road, where he
turned and lifted his hat and blew a kiss to her and his mother before
he too was gone.

OceanofPDF.com

6

January 1937 was mild, wet, grey and depressing, and Lucy didn't know
how she would have got through it without her pupils, who trod on her
toes and hugged her legs and made her laugh. She knew she would miss
them dreadfully, but told herself sternly that they were children with
roofs over their heads and warm clothes and food. She had to go and help
others who had none of those things. The newspapers were full of the
Spanish war, and every night Lucy sat with Mrs Murray as they listened
to the news on the wireless, and pored over a map of Spain, trying to
understand where the fighting was worst. Franco was trying to take
Madrid. It would all be over once he'd captured the capital city. Lucy
remembered La Pasionaria and her slogan, '¡No pasarán!' -- they shall
not pass. Mrs Murray had decided that once she was left alone, she would
go to visit her family in Lanarkshire, Scotland, and might even stay
there. Neither of them mentioned her plans to Captain Nicholson. At
weekends they worked quietly together, packing everything into tea
chests to go into storage. Both women felt as if they were in limbo,
fearful for their boys, longing for letters from them, and waiting for
Lucy's twenty-first birthday on the eleventh of January when everything
would change.

Lucy had been to Thomas Cook's and worked out the route by which she
would travel to Barcelona, down through France and across the border by
train. She had studied the railway timetables so often that she'd almost
memorised them. Mrs Murray had insisted on giving her the money for her
ticket and Lucy had changed some of her own savings into French francs
and Spanish pesetas. Her stomach felt tight all the time with a mixture
of anxiety and excited anticipation of the adventure she was about to
embark on. Ruth had written ahead to Alfred Jacob in Barcelona, and one
of the elders at the Quaker meeting house had given Lucy a letter to
carry in case the other didn't arrive. Lucy had handed in her notice at
the school, and sworn the headmistress to secrecy. She'd had her hair
cut in a shorter bob than usual so it would be more manageable. The
shorter her hair, the closer the curls sat to her head and the easier
they were to subdue into something which looked like a permanent wave.
She had washed and ironed her four plainest dresses -- two woollen and
two cotton, all made by Mrs Murray over the years. The winter ones were
plum-coloured and dark green, the summer ones mauve and pale blue; this
was the frock Tom liked. She would wear the green dress to travel. It
might be lucky. Her new silk scarf would look well with any of them. She
decided to take one brown belt and her sensible laceup shoes with the
half-inch heel. When summer came she would buy sandals in Spain. Her
only books would be the Spanish dictionary Jamie had given her for
Christmas and a Catalan one he'd bought when she'd told him she was
going to Barcelona, plus Palgrave's Golden Treasury of Poems, which was
portable. She had to be able to carry her own case easily. She would be
an independent woman on a great adventure and she was impatient to
begin. Before she folded and packed the hinged photo frame, she kissed
each

of the pictures of the boys and swore she would bring them back alive.
Now all she could do was wait. At breakfast on the first Sunday of
January, she steeled herself to tell her father she wouldn't be going
with him to St Mary's but to the Friends Meeting House with Ruth
instead. 'Just to see what it's like,' she said casually, buttering her
toast. She held her breath, expecting a tirade about Quakers being
yellow-bellied conchies who ought to be taken out and shot, but Captain
Nicholson gruffly said, 'Brave men. It was the Friends Ambulance Unit
that picked up me and Private Murray. We wouldn't have made it if they
hadn't dashed out with stretchers to carry us back behind the lines.
They had to run with us, ducked low because of snipers. And they got us
back to the field hospital in double-quick time.' Lucy took a breath of
surprise. He'd never told this story before. 'They're pacifists, the
Quakers,' he continued. 'But not cowards.' Lucy and Ruth caught a bus to
the Friends Meeting House in Welwyn Garden City, and as they looked out
of the window at the drab, sodden countryside, they talked about
Barcelona, which seemed so alive and vibrant in their minds by
comparison. They knew it was the heart of the Republican area and the
city where many of the refugees were heading. Ruth said she'd heard that
Alfred Jacob had set up a canteen at the main railway station. 'They
have women and children arriving there at all times of day and night,
and they've been allowed to serve hot milky drinks to them while they
wait to be taken to the Refugee Receiving Centre. There are three
English chocolate companies supplying cocoa: Rowntree's,

Shuttleworth's and Cadbury-Fry. Cadbury's gives the most. They're all
Quaker companies, you know.' Lucy shook her head. There seemed so much
she didn't know. 'They started serving the drinks on Christmas Day, in
the early hours of the morning, with just eleven children who'd come
from Madrid where the fighting is worst. It must be such a long, hard
journey. They must be so frightened. Now there are hundreds coming every
day.' Looking out at the neat houses of Welwyn Garden City, Lucy found
it was hard to imagine living through such turmoil. But Barcelona was
where she had to be. She knew it with every fibre of her being. Ruth
introduced her to a few people before the meeting began and they
welcomed Lucy warmly. She was glad Ruth had told her about sober
clothing and she hadn't worn her red hat and gloves. Then she sat and
listened to the tick of the big clock and a robin singing outside, and
the occasional winter coughs of the people around her. She thought about
Tom's kiss and Jamie's proposal, and how bewildering it all was, and she
thought about the refugee children, and what horrors she might see, and
shut her eyes and prayed that she would be strong enough to bear them,
and that Tom and Jamie would not be killed or wounded before she'd
managed to persuade them to come home. And she thought about hot cocoa
and how she'd like one right now, and that her bottom was starting to
feel uncomfortable on the hard seat, and was startled when someone stood
up and cleared her throat. Three people spoke in all. One talked about
her week, and how kind her neighbour had been. Another recited a poem.
Lucy slowly felt the agitation of the last few weeks begin to subside. A
grey-haired woman struggled to her feet and read something written by
William Penn who founded Pennsylvania. Her eyes met Lucy's as she read,

'Let us then try what love can do.' Lucy felt a jolt of electricity up
her spine, as though William Penn had reached out of the past and spoken
to her directly across four hundred years. In her head she replied to
him, 'Yes, I'll try. I'll go and see what love can do.' When it was
over, tea and biscuits were served, and Ruth introduced her to more
people and, for the first time, she heard herself say aloud, 'I'm going
to Barcelona, to help with the children. The refugee children.' 'She can
speak Spanish,' said Ruth proudly, 'and she's a wonderful teacher.' Lucy
tensed herself for their reaction, but nobody told her she couldn't, or
mustn't or shouldn't. They simply offered kindly advice and support, and
said they would 'hold her in the light'. At last it felt real. She was
going. The day before her birthday a third letter arrived from Tom. This
time it wasn't dated and had no location.

Dear Comrade Luce, I can't tell you where I am for obvious reasons, and
I don't know when it will get to you, but letters seem to arrive here
quite quickly, so please write back. The CP in London will know where to
send it. We are now in an International Brigade training camp 'somewhere
in Spain'. It's a bit warmer than Barcelona. It was so thrilling the
night we left the city. Red flags and torchlight and songs roaring out
on loudspeakers and us marching off to the train with knapsacks on our
backs (I sold my case) and rolled blankets across our shoulders. Did I
tell you I bought a Sam Browne belt and a holster and a hunting knife
and a leather jacket? I look quite the outlaw!

The train was packed full of soldiers, International Brigaders like us,
from so many countries -- Hungary, Yugoslavia, Romania, Poland, Finland,
France -- and Germans and Italians who hate what Herr Hitler and
Mussolini are doing; and Spanish militia men and women looking rather
shabby and exhausted. Coming south on the train took a long time, and we
could see how much the countryside has suffered. The fields were full of
last year's crops which had never been harvested. And orange trees and
olive trees. Going the other way we could see great waves of refugees,
heading for Barcelona. So many children, Luce. It would break your
heart. The train was so slow-moving that fresh oranges were passed
through the windows by boys running alongside. And now we are in a
training camp on a rolling plain of vineyards and unharvested wheat
fields. We're in a village with the remains of a large stone church
which is used as a latrine. (Don't tell Jamie.) We are No. 2 company of
the Batallón Inglés, which basically means everyone who speaks English.
The Irish don't want to be in with us, and I think they are going to
join the American battalion when that's set up. No. 1 company is already
up at the Front. There's a village hall where most of us sleep and also
sit on the floor for lectures on things like gas drill and cleaning our
billets and how to judge distances when throwing a grenade and Spanish
lessons. And we have weapon-stripping practice and meetings and
discussions there. You should hear the debates! We've got a Political
Commissar as well as a military commander, to inspire us with discipline
and loyalty. But we don't need that. We know that we are here to defend
a noble cause, to fight the good fight. You've never seen such
enthusiasm, such solidarity. We are full of splendid spirits, in such
great heart.

I've already met some men I think I'll get on with: Frank Graham who was
a student in Sunderland, Charles Goodfellow who was a miner from
Bellshill, John Cornford who's a poet and Miles Tomalin who's a writer.
There are lots of Welsh miners, and you should hear them sing! New men
arrive all the time, sometimes in twos and threes, or as many as fifty.
We've all been given temporary ranks till we've been in action. Then you
get promoted by how well you did. Imagine that! Not what school you went
to or how rich your father is! And the officers and men all get the same
pay. We have got some officers who were in the Great War and we have to
address them as 'Comrade Captain'. And we are allowed to debate their
orders with them. I wonder what your father would think of that? The
food is terrible. Really greasy, with olive oil slopped over everything,
even eggs. It gives you real tummy trouble, I can tell you. We get a
quart of water a day each, and plenty of wine. No. 1 company of the
Batallón Inglés is still in the front line, helping to hold Madrid, and
we are getting fed up with training. Some men 'desert to the Front'
because they want to get stuck in. But they say it won't be long now. We
aren't going to let Franco win. Please send woollen socks and chocolate.
Parcels are getting through and I got your letter about the Quaker
people coming out to help with the refugees. They certainly need all the
help they can get. And I got Mother's, thank you. Give her a kiss from
me, and have one for yourself. Don't let her worry about me. Have a
happy Christmas, won't you? I don't know what it will be like here. In
love and comradeship, Tom

Have a kiss for yourself. What kind of kiss would that be? Lucy
wondered. And if it was a passionate kiss, not a brotherly one, would
she have to stop him, now that she'd said she loved Jamie? She shook her
head. She couldn't think about that just now. It seemed he hadn't yet
had the letter in which she told him she had decided to come out to
Spain. Lucy hugged herself with the thought of how pleased and surprised
he'd be. 'Good old Luce,' he'd say, she was sure. If it hadn't been a
school day, Lucy's twenty-first birthday would have been a dismal
affair. She was bitterly disappointed not to have a letter or a card
from either of the boys, but her despondency lifted when the
headmistress struck up the opening bars of 'Happy Birthday' in assembly
and all the boys and girls riotously joined in. Ruth had secretly
arranged for each of the children in Lucy's class to make cards for her,
and slipped into the classroom to orchestrate the presentation of them.
As one after another handed her their scrawled images, Lucy was deeply
touched, and hugged them to her, realising with a pang how much she was
going to miss them all. At the end of the dinner break, Joan and Jean
solemnly handed her a fistful of snowdrops and grass, saying, 'It's a
bookay Miss Nicholson,' and tears prickled her eyes. In the evening,
when she arrived home, Mrs Murray had already cooked a meal for the
three of them and lit the fire and even baked her a cake. Over dinner
Lucy's father thought it was funny to present her with a gift-wrapped
package which turned out to contain the 'key of the door'. Of course she
already had a front-door key and was tempted to ask him how he thought
she came home from work and cooked his dinner and cleaned his house
without one. But she stretched her face into a smile. Soon she would be
gone from here. She just had to gather the courage to tell him.

Mrs Murray had offered to be with her when she broke the news, but Lucy
thought if she wanted him to treat her as an adult she would have to
face him alone. She waited until he had finished his favourite pudding
on the night after her birthday to ask him how the allowance from her
grandmother's will would be paid to her. 'You don't need to worry about
that,' he said indulgently. 'Oh, but I do,' said Lucy. 'Why's that?'
asked her father. 'I'll draw it on your behalf and it'll be jolly useful
to help with the debt.' 'It's not the debt,' said Lucy slowly, 'it's
your debt, and I need my allowance because I'm going to Spain.' Captain
Nicholson's jaw dropped open like in a cartoon and Lucy almost wanted to
laugh. 'I'm going to Spain to bring back Jamie and Tom before they get
themselves killed, and while I'm there I'll help with the Quaker relief
work with refugee children.' 'That's ridiculous,' he stammered, his face
pale with shock. 'Pointless. It's a war. No place for a woman.' 'Tell
that to the refugee women,' Lucy retorted. 'What do you think you can
do? One foolish girl can't possibly make any difference.' Lucy had
calculated that her father would be more pleased at the prospect of
having the boys back than angry with her for going. But she had
forgotten the financial question. He made a hurumphing sound. 'And the
household needs your teacher's wage.' Lucy gave her father all her
salary every month and he handed her a little back for what he called
'gewgaws'. Her wages were virtually invisible to her. She forced herself
to remain calm. 'Well, I'm going. Next Monday. It's all arranged.' 'Oh
no you are not, my girl.' His voice rose to a bellow. 'You live under my
roof and you'll do as I say.'

Lucy pushed out her chair and stepped back from the table, away from his
red, furious face. 'I'm twenty-one now,' she said quietly. 'And I don't
have to live under your roof a moment longer.' 'You are still my
daughter Lucy Nicholson, and you do as I say,' he roared. Lucy could
feel her own anger mounting and she struggled to control it. 'You never
cared about me, never took any interest in me. All I am to you is a pay
cheque and a skivvy. Well, I've come of age now and my life is my own.'
A vein pulsed in her father's forehead as he stood up and took a step
towards her. 'You will do as I say,' he repeated. The words were out of
her mouth before she had time to think of the consequences. 'You are not
my commanding officer,' she said with slow emphasis, and gripped the
chairback. Her father stared at her with astonishment, as if really
seeing her for the first time. And though she was terrified, Lucy lifted
her chin and met him with a defiant gaze. He was used to being obeyed.
For three long seconds Captain Nicholson didn't move, and then was the
first to drop his eyes, muttering, 'Stupid woman.' He turned and almost
ran out of the room into the darkness of the hall. Lucy waited until the
front door banged and then subsided into a chair, trembling all over. It
was done. Only Mrs Murray came to the train station to see Lucy off. Her
father had left the house before breakfast that morning, leaving a note
by her plate, which told her how the allowance would be paid to her. She
had turned it over, but there was nothing more, no 'Be careful' or 'Love
from Father'. Nothing. Lucy folded it carefully and slipped it into her
handbag with the letter of introduction from the Friends and her
tickets. As she opened the front door, the postman was outside and
handed

her an airmail letter. Lucy almost grabbed it from him. Jamie's
handwriting! She would read it on the train. Mrs Murray kissed her
through the train window and wished her Godspeed, and told her to write
frequently. 'You know you are like a daughter to me,' she said. Lucy
spoke through a constriction in her throat. 'And you are the mum I never
had.' All the accumulated sorrow of goodbyes welled up in the older
woman's eyes. 'Come back safely. And bring my boys back too,' she said,
as the tears spilled down her cheeks. 'If you can.' She stood on the
platform and waved until the train was out of sight, and when Lucy could
see her no longer, she pulled up the window to keep out the cold January
air, wiped her wet cheeks on her sleeve, and sat down to open her first
letter from Jamie. Her heart leapt at the first words.

My darling Lucy, I can't tell you what joy it gives me to write that, so
I'm going to write it again: my darling Lucy. It feels as though I've
been hiding something all my life, which I can now -- at last -- bring
out into the light. The Spanish poet Lorca wrote, 'To burn with desire
and keep quiet about it is the greatest punishment we can bring on
ourselves.' And now I have lifted that punishment from my heart and I
feel free for the first time in years because I can say -- you are my
darling. And though I wish you were here and I could hold you tight and
whisper those words to you, I'm also glad that I can't see you pulling
that mocking face, where your mouth forms a little moue. You are too far
away to make fun of me, as you always do. Well, now it's all out in the
open between us and I am filled with gladness. And I shan't mind you
teasing me as long as

you love me too, and don't marry anyone else while I'm away. You were
quite right that you are too young to be married yet; only, I do love
you so much. And now I can picture you laughing at me again, throwing
your head back a little and your eyes filled with twinkles and your
curls bouncing in merriment at my expense. Well, laugh away, it won't
stop me loving you. I will tell you about my journey. I wish you had
been sitting next to me on the train in the window seat, pointing out
everything to me in your lovely, quick way. But I wouldn't have seen
anything, I would have been watching your reflection in the glass, the
way your eyes light up with interest and excitement at every new thing.
It was quite an adventure, taking the train to Portsmouth and finding my
boat to Lisbon. On board the ship I settled myself on a table with a
Portuguese priest who spoke Spanish. When he heard that I was heading to
Spain to report for the Catholic Herald he began to tell me stories that
I couldn't repeat to you, but made my blood run cold. Worse than
anything in those newspaper headlines I showed you. He said seven
thousand monks, nuns and priests have been slaughtered. There are skulls
of nuns decorating chapels. They seemed to be tales out of the Middle
Ages, acts of unimaginable barbarism. How can people treat each other
so? I feel my life has been so sheltered, so quiet, and I've never known
any really bad men or women, not people who would do the kind of things
to each other that I've been hearing about. I don't understand how Tom
can support the devils who committed such atrocities. And then we were
in Lisbon. What a city! I think I will take you there on our honeymoon
and we'll stay

in the swankiest hotel, not the smelly hostel I went to. In Lisbon I was
introduced to a French film crew from Pathé News, heading to the same
place as me, where all the journalists are together. They were very
excited that I spoke perfect Spanish, and asked if I would be able to
help them with interviews and so on. They had room in their van, and we
drove across Portugal together and into the part of Spain which has been
won back by Franco. It feels as though this is what all my life has been
leading up to and I am certain this was God's plan for me. Now I can
hear you mocking me again, and asking why I would think myself so
significant that the omnipotent deity should have a plan for little me.
But I do believe that, with all my heart. And I think He has a plan for
you too, and I pray it is for you to be my wife and bear my children. I
know my father would be so proud of me. I want to be a hero like him,
but hopefully not die like him. Because I want to come back and take you
in my arms, and make you my wife, my darling Lucy. I'll write again as
soon as I'm settled and can tell you all about what's happening. I'm so
glad that I'm here to tell the truth to the world, even if it means
leaving you for a while, my beautiful, wonderful Lucy. I love you more
than I can say. Yours for ever, Jamie Lucy read the letter twice and her
heart was beating fast. In all her life she had never been loved like
this. She felt as if she was sitting in front of a roaring fire on a
cold winter night and glowing in its flames. She dismissed the small
doubt which nagged at her, asking if she loved him in quite the same
way, and smiled to herself as she thought how she would tease him for
his extravagant romanticism.

OceanofPDF.com

BARCELONA January 1937

OceanofPDF.com

7

Lucy had never been further than London on her own before, and she tried
hard to tell herself that the fluttering in her stomach was excitement,
not nerves. As long as she kept her head, everything would be fine. The
middle-aged man in Thomas Cook's had been anxious about her travelling
on her own -- 'You do know there's a war on, miss?' -- but she'd told
him she was going to visit her brother. It was almost true. The travel
agent had wanted her to stop overnight in Paris and Béziers, but Lucy
said firmly that she'd sleep on the train. She'd always been a good
sleeper; it would save money on hotels and save precious time and she
wouldn't have to admit to herself that she was afraid of finding her
way, alone in a French town. So he had written her careful instructions
in spidery handwriting about how to negotiate every step of her journey.
The ferry crossing to Calais was relatively calm, so she spent most of
the time on deck, pulling her coat around her, with her new black beret
holding her hair out of her eyes, chatting to other passengers, watching
the white cliffs shrinking away from her and the coast of France
advancing with its promise of foreignness. She'd been to France before
but never further than Honfleur, where her father had taken them all for
a holiday in better times. The

Thomas Cook man's instructions about crossing Paris from the Gare du
Nord to the magnificent chandeliered Gare de Lyon were simple to follow,
though the loud French crowds and the men who looked her up and down
with frank appraisal were more daunting in reality than in her
imagination. Luckily she only had to use her schoolgirl French to buy a
baguette and a coffee when the sausage rolls and corned-beef sandwiches
she'd brought from home were long gone. She looked all about her,
inhaling the unknown smells, fizzing with adrenaline. And now she was on
a train chugging along the Rhône Valley, passing pretty French villages
with picturesque churches. As she looked out of the window, her mind
roamed around her own internal mysteries: Tom's kiss and Jamie's
declaration of love, and which of the brothers she loved the most. Was
it wicked and unnatural to think she loved them both? Perhaps it would
all become clear in Spain. Snow-topped mountains rose in the distance on
both sides of the track. How she wished she had someone to point them
out to. The French family in her carriage talked to her and she nodded
and smiled even though she didn't understand everything. From time to
time she stretched herself and went to stand in the corridor.
Occasionally two or three young French or British working men would pass
her. She heard a Welsh and a Liverpool accent. Why would they be going
to Spain if not to join the International Brigades? She longed to ask
them to take a message to Tom but thought it best not to speak to them
in case all of them were thrown off the train. The non-intervention pact
meant that going to fight in Spain was illegal in France as well as
Britain, though of course the Germans and Italians were ignoring the
agreement in order to help Franco. The rhythm of the train made her
sleepy as twilight fell and she dozed for a length of time which might
have been

minutes or hours as they travelled ever further south, only rousing
herself to read the station signs as they halted in Nîmes and
Montpellier and people struggled on and off. The man in Thomas Cook had
told her she must see the cathedral in Béziers, but it was dark when
they passed through. At dawn she woke with a stiff neck and her beret
lopsided to find the train skirting the Mediterranean coastline with its
deserted beaches and marshy lakes, where flocks of pink flamingos stood
one-legged in the shallows. Imagine that! She had seen flamingos! If
only Tom or Jamie were here to tell. The grandmother of the French
family offered her cheese, which she took, and an onion, which she
declined. How Tom would have loved to watch the old woman tucking into
the onion as though it were an apple! She was sorry to see the family go
when they alighted at Cerbère, and the grandmother looked long and hard
at her and promised to pray to the Holy Mother for her safekeeping. A
prickle of unease crossed Lucy's scalp as the enormity of heading into a
war zone began to impress itself on her. Lucy knew the train would dive
under the Pyrenees at Cerbère in France and emerge at Portbou in Spain,
and as they entered the tunnel, her stomach clenched in a mix of
excitement and dread. She was almost there. They emerged from the tunnel
and she blinked at the bright sunlight as the train drew into a small
coastal town dominated by an enormous railway station. Standing and
stretching, she grabbed her luggage and stepped down onto the platform.
For a moment she looked up at the huge iron and glass roof which arched
above her, straddling the tracks. Its resemblance to King's Cross gave
her a sudden jolt of homesickness. But she couldn't stand still, as the
disembarking passengers pushed her forward towards the building which
housed the passport office. The border

guards who shepherded them into line were speaking Catalan with a
smattering of instructions in Spanish and French. Nobody spoke English
and she felt very insignificant and far from home. She presented her
passport at a window and it was checked by a disinterested border guard.
She had been worried that the non-intervention pact might mean she would
have trouble entering Spain. After all, that was why Tom had climbed
over a mountain pass and Jamie had travelled via Lisbon, but the guard
looked from her photograph to the young woman in front of him, gave her
a flirtatious wink and waved her through. He obviously didn't seem to
think a smart señorita like Lucy was on her way to join the
International Brigades. Stepping away, she glanced around quickly for
the young men from Wales and Liverpool, but they were nowhere in sight.
Perhaps they'd left the train at Cerbère and were crossing the border on
foot? She whispered a silent prayer for their safety as she followed the
crush of people through the building and out to a wider track -- Iberian
gauge, the man in Thomas Cook had said. She climbed into the broad train
which would take her to Barcelona and settled herself in a window seat.
The other passengers eyed her with frank curiosity, so as the train
pulled away she gazed studiously out of the window to avoid their
stares. Steam from the engine clouded past, and as it cleared a snowy
mountain dominated the skyline. She felt how far she now was from
Hertfordshire, from her father and Mrs Murray. It was electrifying. More
and more people climbed on to the train as it chugged slowly -- oh so
slowly -- towards Barcelona. Everything was different -- the clothes,
the smells of the people and their garlicky food, the loudness of the
Spanish and Catalan voices crashing over each other in waves. She tried
to follow conversations, but everything was too fast and heavily
accented. Men stared at her with unguarded

admiration, and one sitting opposite kicked the edge of her shoe until
she tucked her legs back out of his reach. Eventually the train pulled
into Barcelona station, almost twenty hours after she'd left Welwyn. She
didn't know how long she'd slept, but she wasn't tired; her brain was
buzzing and the butterflies in her tummy were spiralling. Massive vaults
of steel rainbowed over her head as she walked towards the cream stone
building with eyebrowarched windows at the end of the platform. She
thought it looked like the façade of a medieval palace. It was easy to
find the Left Luggage to deposit her case and a Ladies to wash her face
and comb her hair, though, to her horror, the toilet was simply a hole
in the ground which she had to crouch over. If it was like that in a
mainline station, she dreaded to think what she would find in the
countryside. She stood on the crowded concourse feeling very alone for a
moment, with women examining her clothes and hair, and men jostling too
close as she looked around for Alfred Jacob's canteen. She knew it was
situated on the platform of the main line from Madrid. Then she spotted
it: a large waiting room with the red and black Quaker star and a
hand-lettered notice in Spanish and Catalan, welcoming refugees.
Smoothing down her creased coat, she pushed open the door. The waiting
room was empty except for a young man and woman sitting at a table near
the door. Warmth and the smell of chocolate engulfed Lucy as she
recognised the young man with mousy hair and blue eyes, even though he
looked smaller than he had done on the stage at Friends House. 'Alfred
Jacob,' she said, with a flood of relief, holding out her hand. The man
looked surprised for a second before he stood and smiled. In English
with an American accent he said, 'You must be Miss Nicholson? Lucy? We
weren't expecting you for another couple of days.'

The striking young woman who sat beside him nodded in agreement. She had
jet-black hair, crimped in waves and secured at the back of her neck.
Her high forehead and thinly plucked eyebrows gave her an aristocratic
look which belied the friendly roundness of her face and body. 'This is
Margarita Ricart,' Alfred said. Margarita looked shrewdly at Lucy and
fetched a chair. The conversation switched into Spanish as they asked
her about her journey. Margarita was small with quick movements and
laughter in her eyes. Alfred was slightly formal and seemed a little
wary of this non-Quaker who'd come all the way from England to help him.
Lucy knew he was an Oxford-educated American, but she couldn't detect
that in the way he spoke Spanish. His accent was as perfect as Jamie's.
She could tell they were both speaking deliberately slowly to enable her
to understand, but she also thought Alfred was testing her language
skills. He indicated the empty waiting room. 'We never know what time
the trains will come, so one of us has to be here all the time. It's
mostly staffed by a rota of local women who'll arrive soon. But they all
speak Catalan and most of the refugees only speak Spanish.' 'Well, now
I'm here to help you,' said Lucy. 'I can start at once.' Margarita put
her head on one side and looked closely at her. 'You must be tired.' And
as she said it, or because it was said with sympathy, Lucy felt the
tension of the last twenty-four hours ebb into exhaustion. She nodded.
'If you don't need me right now, I could take my case to the hostel, and
return later?' At that moment a bespectacled Spanish man entered, nodded
to Lucy and crossed quickly to kiss Margarita on the mouth. Margarita
introduced Domingo Ricart, her husband. All three of them were not much
older than Lucy -- in their early thirties at the most, she guessed.
Margarita addressed both men.

'Now you are here, why don't I take Lucy to the YWCA and explain
everything to her?' Lucy liked her already. Margarita took Lucy to
collect her case and led the way through the cathedral-like arching
domes of the station out into the street. 'Are you too tired to walk?'
asked Margarita, in a deep, gravelly voice which seemed out of keeping
with her small body. 'It's about half an hour.' Lucy assured her she
would be keen to walk after so many hours on the train, and she was
eager to see the city which Tom had loved so much. He was certainly
right about the colour -- the flags and posters were everywhere. She
passed one showing European, African and Asian soldiers, with the slogan
ALL THE PEOPLE OF THE WORLD ARE IN THE INTERNATIONAL BRIGADES. The
streets were crowded with people walking quickly, as if they were late
for an appointment. They were mostly dressed in overalls of blue or
brown. Many of them stared openly at her as they passed. 'It's your
hat,' laughed Margarita. 'Republican women don't wear hats. And a Basque
beret. They are trying to work out if you belong to some unknown militia
group.' Lucy hastily shoved it in her handbag. 'And now they will be
admiring your beautiful hair,' smiled Margarita. 'You can't win!' As
they walked, Margarita explained that she and her husband had met Alfred
at the YMCA where Domingo worked. Domingo had been so impressed by
Alfred's ideas about pacifism and the refugees and it was such a
complete meeting of minds that he'd soon invited Alfred to live with
them. Lucy was unable to tell how Margarita felt about that arrangement.
Her Spanish was too imperfect to understand nuances of inflection; it
was hard enough just to translate

the words, and even though Margarita spoke slowly, there were many
phrases Lucy didn't grasp, although she found she could pick up the
general drift if she concentrated hard. Margarita said that she and her
husband were fluent in Catalan as well as Spanish and it had been their
pleasure to introduce Alfred to the right people to help him. The
authorities were doing everything they could but they were grateful for
any assistance with the flood of refugees who poured into the city each
day. Alfred had quickly identified that the lack of any milk in
Barcelona affected the children badly, and had raised money through
Quaker Relief to set up the canteen giving hot drinks to children as
they arrived. Margarita was proud of the way Domingo had persuaded the
authorities to release five spacious 'requisitioned' warehouses free of
charge to store the powdered milk and cocoa which had quickly begun to
come from England. Lucy was looking about her as she listened, impressed
by the orderliness but shocked by the poverty of the city. The streets
were clean, but many of the children who played in them were wearing the
kind of ill-fitting hand-me-downs she'd only seen before among the
poorest English children. Margarita led her across the Avinguda
Diagonal, which reminded Lucy of Oxford Street or Regent Street, with
shops beneath imposing public buildings. The tree-lined pavements on
either side were each the breadth of a road. 'It's the widest street in
Barcelona,' said Margarita with native pride. Lucy thought it was
probably the biggest in the world. She hadn't pictured such grandeur in
this communist--anarchist city. The shops were open but there seemed to
be no food or clothing for sale; most windows had displays of military
ware, knives, water bottles and gun belts. The majority displayed a
revolutionary poster, often of Dolores Ibárruri, La Pasionaria, or her
slogan for the untrained army of

peasants, factory workers, trade unionists and International Brigaders
defending Madrid: '¡No pasarán!' 'I heard her speak in London,' said
Lucy, and Margarita cocked her head on one side questioningly. 'My
friend Tom took me. He's here now, with the Batallón Inglés.' Pride and
fear mingled in her voice as she added, 'There, I suppose, defending
Madrid against Franco, though he's not allowed to say.' Margarita
studied her for a second, and Lucy thought it was best to be honest.
'And his brother is a journalist -- but on the other side.' Margarita
sighed heavily. 'It is not unusual for families to be split in this way,
for brother to be fighting against brother. War is an evil thing.' They
crossed the street to avoid a long, snaking queue of women. 'A bread
queue,' said Margarita. 'People spend many hours each day standing in
line for bread or for fuel. It's rationed and fair, and the government
does what it can, but there simply isn't enough.' For the first time
Lucy wondered if she would go hungry herself. This was something she'd
never considered. She indicated the intricate paper designs on all the
windows they passed and Margarita explained they were to stop the glass
shattering in a bombing raid. Hunger and bombing. Lucy swallowed hard.
Was she really prepared for this? She switched her case to the other
hand. 'Is the bombing bad?' 'Not as bad as Madrid. But the blackout is
too patchy, so when the siren goes, they turn all the electricity off at
the power station. I'll bring you candles and matches, and you must buy
a torch. And tonight I'll give you a Friends armband with the Quaker
star. It helps people know who we are.' 'But I'm not a Friend,' said
Lucy. 'Nor am I.' Margarita smiled. 'Or maybe we both are.'

Margarita left her at the YWCA reception desk. As Margarita was on the
YWCA board she had managed to secure a small single room for Lucy,
knowing she might be working all night and it would be impossible to get
enough sleep in a dormitory. She promised to return at 9 p.m. -- the
earliest the next train might arrive. 'I can't wait to change out of
these clothes and wash,' said Lucy. 'Get some sleep,' Margarita advised.
'We might be busy till dawn.' The tiny room was sparse but clean. There
was a hook on the back of the door to hang her dresses and coat. Lucy
unlaced her shoes and then, despite her excitement at being here in the
city she had dreamed of and so much closer to the boys, and her
intention of washing her dress, she lay down fully clothed on the narrow
iron bed and fell into a deep sleep. Lucy was grateful when Margarita
collected her that evening. She'd barely had time to change her dress
and didn't think she would have found her way back to the station in the
dark, even though the roads ran on a grid system and Margarita had shown
her the most straightforward route. Welwyn would have been deserted by
nine o'clock, except for a few men coming and going to the pub, but here
the streets were as busy as daytime and the station was thronged with
people. Tom had been right; nobody was well-dressed. She wondered if all
the rich people had been killed, but didn't like to enquire. Instead she
asked about the refugees, and where they went when they left the railway
station. 'Tomorrow I'll take you to the Refugee Receiving Centre at the
stadium,' said Margarita. 'That's where they go to be registered and
processed. And later perhaps we'll visit some of the children's
colonies.'

Lucy already knew that many of the youngest refugees were being housed
in children's homes or colonies, like Dr Barnardo's in England, which
made it easier to feed, clothe and educate them. 'I was a teacher in
England. Perhaps I could help with classes, or in the Quaker office,
when there are no trains?' 'I'm sure Alfred would be glad to have your
assistance. There is so much administration, you wouldn't believe. He
prefers to have local women working in the canteen, and has a good rota
of Boy Scouts and women's groups, but the refugees only speak Spanish so
he needs a Spanish speaker with them at all times.' As they re-entered
the railway station, Margarita halted for a second to adjust one of the
combs which held up her hair. 'I'd cut it off like yours,' she sighed,
'but Domingo likes it long, and you know what men are like.' She rolled
her eyes expressively, and Lucy laughed. It seemed she would have a
friend in this strange city. 'Are you married?' asked Margarita, and
Lucy found herself explaining that she'd never found anyone as special
as Tom and Jamie. Margarita looked at her quizzically. 'So these boys
from next door, they are like brothers to you?' Lucy wriggled uneasily.
'Well yes, and no. I can't remember a time when I didn't love them. Tom
is fun and Jamie is caring,' she said, as if two adjectives could sum up
the complicated twisting fibres of both men, rooted down in the very
core of her. Her Spanish was not good enough for this conversation. She
tried again. 'Tom makes me feel alive but Jamie understands me.' She
thought 'mercurial versus steadfast', but couldn't translate those
words. 'And do they both love you?' Lucy hesitated only for a second.
'Yes, I believe they do. In their own ways. Jamie asked me to marry him,
and Tom kissed me like he wanted me.'

Margarita whistled softly. 'But which one do you really adore?' Lucy
shook her head. How could she explain it to someone else when she
couldn't explain it to herself? Jamie would be a perfect husband and
father, but Tom had an energy which radiated excitement. 'I don't know.
Sometimes one and sometimes the other. One for one reason and the other
for another. They are so different from each other, and I love them in
different ways. I just hope they don't kill each other before I can take
them home.' Margarita's carefully plucked eyebrows lifted almost into
her hairline, and Lucy flushed as she understood how strange and
shocking it must seem to love two men. At 3 a.m. a packed train arrived
from besieged Madrid and officials steered an exhausted straggle of
women and children towards Alfred Jacob's canteen. There were perhaps
sixty of them, some carrying suitcases and wearing fashionable outfits
which wouldn't look out of place in London, and others in the long
skirts, headscarves and shawls which Lucy thought of as peasant clothes
and carrying bundles tied with string. They queued for the hot chocolate
which two Catalan women were handing out. Lucy and Margarita were
wearing Quaker star armbands over their dresses and some of the refugees
glanced suspiciously at the unknown symbol. Lucy watched Margarita for a
moment as she moved down the line, exchanging a word or two with the
haggard women, welcoming them to Barcelona, patting their shoulders and
assuring them they would be fed and housed tomorrow. Then Lucy began to
do the same, bending to the children and asking their names and where
they had come from, admiring a doll here and a toy car there, briefly
touching their dirty hands or tangled hair. Some looked half-starved and
she was sure they must have lice.

One woman indicated a child who pressed close to her and said, 'She's
not mine. I found her in the ruins. What can you do?' The girl's eyes
were dark with trepidation, and Lucy wondered what horrors she had seen.
Other children half-hid behind their mothers' skirts, trying to work out
if this white-faced, fair-haired woman in the plum-coloured dress meant
them any harm. None of them strayed from their mothers, or seemed
inclined to play with each other as normal girls and boys would. Lucy
thought they were unnaturally quiet. When all the women and children had
been served, Margarita brought Lucy a cup of hot chocolate, which she
took gratefully. She had lost count of the hours since she'd last eaten.
As she drank her own cupful Lucy watched the way the youngsters wrapped
their fingers round the mugs of cocoa and inhaled before sipping the
milky sweetness. She realised how clever Alfred had been -- he was not
just giving them much-needed nourishment, but the smell of chocolate
also seemed to carry an assurance that here they were safe, here things
would be better. She hoped this would be true. On Lucy's first full day
in Barcelona, Margarita took charge of her. 'I'm going to show you how
it all works,' she said, and Lucy couldn't miss the pride in her voice.
Lucy already knew that the newly arrived refugees were taken to the
Receiving Centre at the stadium, and that's where Margarita began their
tour. She was obviously well known at the offices and greeted with
respect by the director, who talked Lucy through the system they'd set
up. Incoming refugees were registered on a card index, and when they
were ready to move on from the stadium, the card was updated with their
destination and what assistance they had been given to get there. Lucy
understood how important this would be for men trying to find their
families in the future. Some women and children

were sent to villages, further from the main danger of bombing in
Barcelona city. She was told that more than fifteen thousand young
people had already been placed in farms, villages and children's
colonies. Orphans, or those who had become separated from their parents,
automatically went to the colonies, but many mothers chose to send their
children to a colony, bearing the pain of parting in the knowledge they
wouldn't be hungry or cold. Lucy wondered if the women went to look for
their husbands, or to help as nurses near the front line or to join the
fighting, and with what unbearable sorrow in their hearts. 'I should
like to see the colonies,' said Lucy, and Margarita nodded. They would
visit some soon. The director accompanied them to the dormitories --
mostly beds for women and children, but also some married quarters for a
few old couples who had lost their homes but not been separated. Lucy
looked at these people, sitting or lying on their beds, and although
this place was clean and they were out of the weather and being cared
for, she tried to imagine how it would feel to be forced to flee the
home you'd lived in for forty or fifty years, with only the few items
you could carry, and to find yourself on the road not knowing where you
would end up or where your next meal was coming from. Margarita showed
her the huge dining hall, the infirmary, the rest ward. Lucy thought it
was intelligent of the Refugee Committee and the doctors to recognise
that sometimes people were not ill as such, but unable to do anything
for themselves without time to adjust their damaged minds. One young
woman, nursing an infant, looked up at her with blank despair in her
eyes. Margarita saw the look between them, and gently propelled Lucy
onwards. She was shown the spotless swimming pool and showers and then
they went out into the low winter sunshine on the

stadium steps where small groups of children sat, each with an adult.
'This is where they have their school,' said Margarita, shading her
eyes. 'We know that education is the key to everything, and their minds
need to be occupied with things other than the horror they've seen.
Having lessons gives them structure and normality.' Lucy heartily
approved. They walked slowly up and down past the groups. Lucy noticed
some children were dressed well, perhaps having come less far, or from
wealthier homes, while others were in stained sweaters with runs and
pulls in the knitting. Her eye was caught by a little girl with a blue
bow holding back her dark hair. She had laid down her paper and looked
close to tears. Lucy crouched down beside her and looked to the teacher
for permission, who motioned her to sit. She picked up the girl's page
and saw she was having difficulty making her letters. Her pencil was
clutched awkwardly in the right hand, as if it was a knife she would use
to stab the paper. 'Which hand do you use to catch a ball?' she asked
and the girl waved her left. Lucy fitted the pencil into her left hand
and the child looked apprehensively at the teacher, who nodded approval.
'The nuns didn't let me,' whispered the girl before confidently drawing
a line of 'A's across the page with her left hand, and beaming up at
Lucy. Margarita watched carefully. 'You will enjoy visiting the
colonies,' she told Lucy as they left the stadium. 'Most of them are run
by a teacher with Montessori training. I think you will get on well.' On
the way back to the YWCA Margarita asked when Lucy had last heard from
Jamie and Tom. She was obviously fascinated by the idea of Lucy's two
beaux. 'Tom's not in the front line yet,' Lucy told her. 'At least I
don't think he is.'

Margarita frowned. 'The International Brigades are taking heavy losses
in the battle for Madrid,' she said gently. Lucy's stomach twisted in
anxiety. 'I know. I don't think I could bear it if he dies.' Margarita
patted her hand. 'We all have loved ones at the front.' When they
arrived at Alfred Jacob's office in Calle Caspe, Lucy was put to work
with a complex ledger of orders which showed Alfred was in charge of the
supplies of dried milk funded by the British Friends and also tins of
condensed milk sent by Save the Children in Geneva. He was angry about
the condensed milk. 'I had a report done by Cadbury's about the
nutritional contents of dried milk versus condensed milk, but she didn't
even read it.' Lucy soon gathered that 'she' was Mrs Small, the Save the
Children representative, who had now returned to Geneva. Alfred
obviously couldn't stand her. 'The condensed milk is £60 a ton, but the
tins are so heavy that each costs 275 pesetas in freight!' he fumed. 'We
could feed so many more children for the money if we used powdered milk.
But she wants everything done her own way.' Lucy nodded. She could see
from the books that the condensed milk was working out twice as
expensive. Even refugee support was more complicated and political than
she'd realised in England. Alfred's blue eyes flashed with irritation.
'The refugees aren't the only hungry children in Barcelona. I want to
expand the canteens into the poor districts. There hasn't been any milk
in the city since October and the local children are starving too.' 'But
aren't the authorities doing anything?' asked Lucy.

Alfred nodded but explained, 'They are doing all they can. There just
isn't enough without the supplies from abroad. Mothers with children
under eighteen months old are entitled to receive milk from the Casa
Maternologia, but only four hundred mothers can be supplied and rations
have been cut from five tins a week to two.' Lucy felt a surge of
energy; she was here and would do whatever she could to help. For the
first time in her life she had purpose. Lucy assisted in the office for
most of the day, apart from a short siesta after lunch, and then
returned to the station canteen to greet the next trainload of refugees.
As she gazed into the weary faces of these women, she wondered what
their lives had been before and how she would cope with being uprooted
and moved around the country like cattle. By the time she was back in
her room at the YWCA, she was exhausted. But shortly after she'd climbed
into bed, she was jerked awake by the shrill warning of an air-raid
siren. She leapt to her feet, terrified, and tried to turn on a light,
but it didn't work. She remembered Margarita telling her the electricity
was switched off at the mains during a raid. She shoved her feet into
her shoes, and pulled her coat over her nighty, then groped her way out
of the bedroom and down the cellar-dark stairs, clenching her teeth with
fear. A crowd of other women burst from a dormitory, pushing and bumping
into each other, and the stairwell echoed with a high-pitched chatter of
anxiety and the play of torch-light. She concentrated on keeping her
footing. In the dining area, candles had been lit and the girls crowded
round the tables. Someone switched on the battery-powered radio and an
announcer called out, 'Catalans! Catalans! Keep calm! Serenity! Keep
calm!

There are two enemy aircraft circling overhead, go to your shelters!'
Lucy's heart was pounding. Where were the shelters? Had she come all
this way to be killed by an air raid on her second night in Spain?
Nobody else seemed to be scrambling for these shelters. Did they even
exist? The wireless was turned down and everyone sat and listened for
the enemy approach. Lucy strained her ears but couldn't catch any sound
of aircraft and certainly no bombing. Eventually the cook put her head
outside and announced there was no sign of the planes. They had gone
away. They all made their way back to the bedrooms in the dark and Lucy
resolved to buy a torch first thing in the morning. She lay in bed, too
agitated to sleep, wondering if her boys were lying beneath bombers
dropping death out of the sky. Or even if they were already dead. She
couldn't help picturing Tom's lovely, energetic body, spreadeagled over
the edge of a trench, with bloody gore leaking from his guts. She
imagined Jamie holding his gentle fingers to a wound in his head, as the
life drained from his eyes. No! She must not allow herself to think like
this, or she would go mad. She must not dwell on imagined horrors when
there were so many real ones right in front of her. Instead, from now
on, she must concentrate on things she could help to change. If she was
to survive her new life in Spain, she must direct all her energy to the
children, like that poor little left-handed girl at the stadium who
might have been dragged from a bomb shelter or the ruins of her home and
then been on the road for days and nights, with nothing to eat or drink.
What nightmares must she suffer? Until Lucy could get to Jamie and Tom
and persuade them to return to England, she must focus only on the
children.

OceanofPDF.com

8

Lucy was rapidly accepted by Alfred Jacob as an invaluable member of his
team as the scale of the Friends' ambitious operation to run children's
colonies and canteens threatened to overwhelm him. Lucy worked in the
office in the mornings and in the first few afternoons Margarita took
her to meet the important people who she would need to know to arrange
the movement and storage of donated food. 'They will pay attention to
you because you are my friend,' said Margarita, laughing. 'And they will
remember you because you are a pretty English girl.' On their way to
meet the key officials, Margarita showed off a little of her birthplace.
Lucy was interested to discover that there was a medieval labyrinth of
streets in the heart of this grid-patterned city. The fortress-like
black stone buildings had windows and balconies which faced one another
across winding alleys where the sun never reached, and a sickening smell
of drains hung over the whole dismal maze. It made Lucy shiver to think
of lives eked out in the grim darkness of these slums. Margarita led her
up the wide steps of the cathedral and inside was almost impenetrable
gloom, hiding those who were still sneaking in to pray. Lucy was glad to
leave it and be taken out on to the broad promenade known as La

Rambla with its plane trees, seats, newspaper kiosks, shoeshine men,
flower stalls and perpetually moving crowds. In the bright winter
sunshine it seemed a world away from Welwyn. On other afternoons
Margarita took her to visit the children's homes, or colonies as they
were called, and at night Lucy became part of a rota for the station
canteen. It was tiring work and she slept soundly, and soon began to
feel at home in Barcelona. As she walked to work Lucy often saw angry
crowds of women protesting about the bread shortages and once she drew
back into a doorway and watched as the protests were roughly broken up
by the police. The food-rationing system simply couldn't cope with the
number of people flooding into the region. Alfred estimated there
already were more than 350,000 refugees in the city. The air-raid sirens
went off every few nights, and there was panic in the canteen at the
station among the refugees who had come from places like Madrid which
had suffered frequent bombing. Lucy's job was to keep them calm and
usher them to the nearest shelter. Having a practical task kept her from
worrying too much about herself, especially as most were false alarms.
Ten days after her arrival the sirens went off at 3 a.m., just as the
cocoa had been issued to the newcomers. All the lights went out and
women and children's voices were raised in terrified cries as they asked
each other where the shelters were. The Friends had bought a megaphone,
and Lucy stood on a chair and bellowed into it, 'Be quiet. Keep calm,'
until the hubbub subsided. She turned on the red torch which they kept
with the megaphone and waved it over her head. 'Follow this light and I
will take you to the shelter.' She climbed off the chair and felt the
crowd surge towards her, threatening to crush her and each other. 'Make
way,' she yelled into the megaphone, half-tripping over a bundle of
clothing. 'No pushing.'

They parted to allow her to reach the door. 'Keep calm, and everyone
will be safe.' As she quickly led the way towards the shelter, the deep
rumble of aircraft shook the air and she glanced up at the arching iron
roof above the tracks, shuddering as she pictured the spears of metal
which might fall on them if bombs landed close by. Searchlights played
across the sky and she could hear the ack-ack of anti-aircraft guns from
the direction of the docks. The refugees behind her pushed forward like
a wave, with moans and cries of fear. At the entrance of the shelter she
stood aside and let the crowd sweep through, calling, 'Go slow. Mind the
children.' The crash of bombs landing down by the coast shook the city,
and for a moment terror overtook Lucy. This was war and she was in it.
She had a desperate urge to shove people aside and push her way down
into the safety of the shelter, but she controlled it. When the last of
the night's refugees had been swallowed down the steps, she turned and
shone her torch around the station concourse. At first she thought it
was empty and then the beam picked out the crouching form of a boy of
about four or five, huddled beside a platform entrance. In a dozen
strides she had reached him and swept him up, carrying him in one arm as
the metal structure vibrated to the explosion of another bomb. Down in
the shelter the noise was deafening, a cacophony of shouting adults and
crying children. She eased her way through the crowds and the small boy
clung to her, burying his face in her shoulder. Finding a place between
two families, she settled down with her back to the wall, and sat the
child on her lap. Her fear slowly subsided as she focused on the boy.
'What's your name?' she asked, and after a moment he lifted his head and
looked at her. His eyes were brown with flecks of gold, like a tiger's
eye. 'Jorge.' 'That's a manly name for a little boy.'

'I am six and a quarter.' As he spoke, she saw his front tooth was
missing. Of course he was six, though so small for his age. 'Ah yes,'
she said thoughtfully. 'Now I can see you are. And where do you live,
Jorge?' He recited the address in Madrid which he'd been taught in case
he was ever lost, and then his face crumpled. 'But we don't live there
any more.' 'No,' she said. 'Now you are in Barcelona.' He looked around
him. 'It's the same, with the bombs.' 'Who did you come with?' 'My big
sister Maria and my auntie, but I lost them and another lady found me
and she forgot me when the bombs came.' His eyes were great pools of
despair, but he didn't cry. Perhaps all his tears had been spent, Lucy
thought. 'Well, my name is Lucy and tomorrow I'll take you to the
Refugee Centre. They might know where Maria is. Will that be OK?' He
considered her seriously. 'Yes, OK.' His eyes moved over her, as if
learning her, and he pointed to her Quaker star armband. 'What's that?'
'It means I'm your friend.' He reached up to her hair and patted it.
'Why is your hair yellow?' She shrugged and smiled. 'It's just how I
am.' He nodded sagely. 'OK.' Then he snuggled closer into her, and his
thumb found its way into his mouth, and soon he was asleep. Although she
quickly became uncomfortable, Lucy moved as little as possible till the
all-clear sounded and she had to wake him. At first he looked startled
to see her, and then remembered. 'Lucy with the yellow hair.' Lucy took
him straight to the stadium and watched as they took down all his
details and wrote them on a card. They told her he would be taken to a
colony in the north of the city and hopefully one day be reunited with
his family.

'And now you are going to leave me too,' he said to Lucy, and her heart
turned over. 'You are going to go to a nice place with other children,
and I will come to visit you.' He looked very hard at her with his old
man's eyes in his child's face. 'I don't think you will,' he said, as he
let himself be led away. Letters from home began to arrive within days
of Lucy reaching Barcelona. First, of course, was a chatty missive from
Mrs Murray, telling her about packing up the house for her return to
Lanarkshire. She had arranged to stay with her sister until she found
work, and couldn't wait to go now all three of 'her' children had
departed. Lucy's first letter from her father was a complete contrast
and as unemotional as she would have expected. He went so far as to say
the house was 'different without you', but ruined the possible inference
of that by telling her that, although he was managing the cooking and
cleaning, he was thinking of moving next door to the cottage and asking
Mrs Murray to stay on as his housekeeper, an arrangement he thought
might suit both of them. When Lucy wrote back, she didn't comment on
that, but spent her two sides of airmail paper telling him about her
work in Barcelona. Letters came too from friends in Welwyn, curious
about her exotic new life, but Lucy had so little free time that her
answers were very short. No letters came from either Tom or Jamie. With
the station canteen running smoothly, Alfred Jacob was busy on the next
step of his plan, to open canteens for the poorest Barcelonian children,
who were suffering from the diminishing food supplies because most of
Spain's agricultural land was now in Franco's hands. Margarita said to
Lucy, 'Have you seen the cats?'

Lucy looked puzzled. 'No, I don't think I've seen a cat since I
arrived.' Margarita nodded. 'Exactly. They've all been eaten.' She said
the boys and girls of Barcelona weren't just hungry, but developing
rickets and tuberculosis. 'Their mothers are terrified of them catching
measles. It has a hundred per cent death rate and spreads so fast
through the refugee centres.' Lucy hammered away at the typewriter,
sending letters to everyone she could think of to raise more money. She
organised the storage and distribution of clothing and blankets from the
USA and England, and donated by betteroff Catalans. The British biscuit
makers Macfarlane's and McVitie's agreed to donate supplies. Quaker Oats
offered to send porridge oats. The station canteen gave the children
half a litre of cocoa each, and even though the taste of English hot
chocolate was unfamiliar they seemed to relish it, and their eyes became
round O's when they were also handed two English biscuits. Seven hundred
boxes of milk, cocoa, sugar, biscuits and oats arrived and were
distributed not just to the canteens but to the refugee centres which
had been set up in the church of Sant Felip Neri, the gloomy Durán
Asylum and ex-convents across the city. Alfred and Margarita's husband
Domingo worked closely with the Ministry of Health and the Regional
Committee for the Aid of Refugees to ensure that nobody starved to
death. On the eighth of February the southern Spanish town of Málaga
fell to General Franco and the stream of refugees travelling north
became a river. Many of these refugees were the poorest people, looking
to Lucy like medieval serfs in their long skirts and shawls, sometimes
wearing clogs rather than shoes and with sacks slung across their
shoulders to keep out the rain. Most had been forced out on to the road
with no money, bringing only the rags they

stood up in. Those who made it to Barcelona told Lucy and Margarita the
escaping lines of refugees had been strafed by German and Italian
planes. Lucy could not believe such wickedness existed in the world.
Surely Jamie couldn't know this was happening and still support Franco?
The Red Cross, city council and militia groups helped with a boatload of
3,500 refugees which arrived from Málaga. Then Basques and Asturians
began to arrive from the beleaguered northern provinces. Lucy worked
longer and longer hours, only stopping when she couldn't keep her eyes
open. The authorities took Alfred Jacob to look at an empty fire station
in the Sans district which they agreed to redecorate as a canteen for
the poorest inhabitants of Barcelona. On the night before opening,
Alfred and Domingo helped to set up tables, while Margarita and Lucy
went down on their knees and scrubbed the floors. Alfred had enlisted
the help of local women to run the canteen. That way he knew they would
keep coming and the mothers would understand it was a safe place to
bring their little ones. There would be a doctor on duty to look at the
sickliest children, and warm clothing would be distributed to those who
needed it. By the morning everything was ready. Pounds of powdered milk
had been mixed with water, cocoa and sugar and heated in huge cooking
pots to feed an estimated eight hundred children under the age of six.
Margarita took Lucy by the arm, and they watched as the doors were
opened. A long line of women stood outside, holding babies in their
arms, with toddlers clutching their skirts. The women carried bottles
and jars to fill with the precious milk and cocoa. Lucy noted again how
quiet the queuing children were, how listless, how pale, how unlike her
pupils in Welwyn. When she asked their ages, she realised the skinny
Catalan six-year-olds were the size of English four-yearolds.

A local woman had the unenviable task of turning away those who had come
too late or weren't named on the list. On the second morning the queue
began to form before dawn. Alfred and Domingo badgered the authorities
to let them open a second canteen in Calle Carmen in the notorious fifth
district. Mrs Petter of the Save the Children International Union was
put in charge, and she refused to use local helpers, preferring instead
to pay staff she had chosen. She also insisted on using condensed milk
rather than skimmed, and set up a special depot to water down and heat
the canned milk. A thousand children could be given milk and porridge
each day here. But it still wasn't enough. On the first day of opening
at Calle Carmen, Lucy watched a group of five or six weeping women hold
up the wasted limbs of their babies as they were turned away. She turned
to Margarita in anguish. 'What can we do? What can we do?' Margarita
clenched her teeth. 'Just work harder, write more letters, set up more
canteens, I suppose.' Margarita went back inside, but Lucy stayed at the
entrance, watching one woman who held back slightly from the group. When
the others had left she still hovered close to the canteen. She was
dressed in skirts to her ankles, a black headscarf covered her hair and
she cuddled an infant wrapped in a grubby shawl. Lucy thought she could
have come from a Bible story; she could have been Mary escaping into
Egypt with her baby son. As Lucy approached, the girl lifted her head.
Close up she was younger than Lucy, perhaps no more than seventeen, and
her gaunt face was filled with despair. One of the baby's arms hung from
the shawl, thin as a twig. Lucy's heart contracted. Perhaps it was
already dead. 'Come with me,' she instructed, and the young mother
followed her round the building to a side entrance.

Lucy touched her arm, fleetingly. 'Wait here please.' Inside, Lucy
hurried to find the doctor, her fingers drumming impatiently on her own
wrist as he gave cod liver oil capsules to a worn-looking woman with
five children. Before the next family could approach, Lucy stepped
forward and softly asked him to come with her. He could read the urgency
in her voice and followed at once. The doctor took the unmoving bundle
from the girl's arms and gently unwrapped the shawl. Lucy held her
breath. At the feel of the air, the baby let out a thin, plaintive cry
and Lucy exhaled in relief. As the doctor hurried into the canteen with
the infant, its mother looked back at Lucy over her shoulder, mouthing,
'God bless you.' Lucy leaned against the wall of the building, looking
about her at the milling crowds. That girl was only one, and there were
so many. So many. Margarita also took Lucy to visit some of the
children's colonies which were being supplied with food and managed by
Alfred Jacob's team. They were mostly in the big houses of the rich
which had been abandoned as they fled to their country estates. The
houses were clean, airy and painted in bright colours -- a blue
dormitory in one, a yellow dining room in another. There were flowers
and plants everywhere, and pottery ornaments and bookcases filled with
books. The children seemed well dressed and occupied, though there was
something unsettling to Lucy about their regulation haircuts. The girls
all had their dark hair cut with a fringe and bobbed just below their
ears, while the boys' was shorn very short. Lucy noted with approval
that there were plenty of art materials and sports equipment, and no toy
guns. The youngsters slept on metal beds with cheerful covers. Each bed
had a drawer underneath in which they kept their clothes, books and any

personal items. One boy showed her his collection of cardboard soldiers,
and another his book of stamps. She was told that the children all
played a part in the running of the colony, making their own beds and
taking turns to wait at table, do gardening and care for the chickens
and rabbits. There was a cleaning rota. The older boys and girls helped
the younger ones. At one colony the residents were gathered together for
what they called a 'Children's Parliament'. There was orderly debate and
discussion about the running of the lessons, meals and dormitories. Lucy
filed this away for future use; she couldn't imagine schools in England
asking the pupils what they thought! When they arrived at the Los
Cipreses colony in Pedralbes, to the north of Barcelona, her heart
jumped as she recognised a little boy. 'Jorge!' she called. He turned
and his face lit up with joy. 'You came!' He ran up to her and then held
out a hand and formally shook hers. Lucy was both amused and touched.
Jorge turned to his companion and rather pompously announced, 'This is
Lucy Yellowhair, and she is my friend.' He took her by the hand and
insisted on showing her around the colony. He was particularly
interested in the room where they were producing leaflets on a printing
press. Lucy exclaimed in astonishment at the presence of such a machine
and the head teacher raised her eyebrows. 'Don't you have these in
England?' she asked. 'Almost every school in Republican Spain has a
printing press.' Spain seemed a country of contradictions, thought Lucy,
where innovative ideas existed side by side with medieval feudalism, and
squalor with lush fashion. The furnishings in the colonies looked like
something from Heal's, so different from her own drab Victorian
classroom. 'It's all so modern,' she whispered in wonder to Margarita.
'The teaching methods, the equipment.'

'What did you expect?' Margarita smiled with satisfaction. 'We live in
the twentieth century too.' 'But in England it's only the children of
the rich who would get education like this.' Margarita raised her
shoulders and spread her expressive fingers. And that's what Tom is
fighting for, Lucy thought, feeling a rush of warm pride. When she left
the colony, Lucy shook Jorge by the hand and promised to return. On the
way back from the colony, Margarita told Lucy more about her life. She
and Domingo had been married for three years, and shared many interests.
Domingo was on the board of the YMCA and Margarita was on the board of
the YWCA. 'We are like two halves of one person,' said Margarita, and
Lucy felt a twinge of envy. Would she ever be able to say the same?
Margarita laughed her deep, guttural laugh, tinged with bitterness. 'But
now we have Alfred Jacob, so we have three halves. Domingo thought he
was the only pacifist in the world till he met Alfred. Now it is like
they are brothers. But more than brothers. Soul brothers.' Lucy looked
sideways at Margarita. Is she jealous? she wondered. 'How do you find
having Alfred living with you?' Margarita sighed softly. 'Alfred's wife
Norma will come soon with their children. And they will move to their
own place. But I will always have Domingo.' She hesitated shyly, and her
hand fluttered over her stomach. 'And soon we will have another!' Not
having known Margarita before, Lucy had assumed she was always a
comfortably rounded person. She grasped Margarita's hand. 'That's so
exciting. When is it due?' 'I am five months gone. I know it's bad to
bring a baby into a war, but we are so happy. And this child might grow

up to be a peace-maker, a diplomat who will bring harmony to the world.'
Lucy wondered if she would ever be able to joyfully announce a
pregnancy, and if so, who the father would be. Margarita turned. 'What
about your young men? Is one of them like the other half of you? Like
your soulmate?' Lucy hesitated. Sometimes one of them felt like that,
and sometimes the other. How could she explain it? 'Who do you love
most?' pressed Margarita, sounding both intrigued and slightly outraged.
Lucy chewed her lip. 'I love Tom because he is so vital, so full of life
and laughter. And I love Jamie because he is so loyal and trustworthy
and understanding. It's as if together they make the perfect person. And
some days I feel like I want to be with one of them, and some days the
other. It's like if you were a mother with two children. You would love
both of them just as much, even if they were so different.' Margarita
raised her thinly plucked eyebrows. 'But the way you love a man is not
the way you love your children. And the way you love brothers is not the
way you love your husband.' Lucy thought of the very different kisses
the boys had given her. 'No, I suppose not.' In her father's weekly
letter from home, Captain Nicholson reported that he had told Mrs Murray
he could no longer afford to keep both the house and cottage running.
He'd said he needed to let the house and move into the cottage, offering
her the opportunity to stay on as his housekeeper. His indignant
astonishment vibrated through the paper as he described her refusal, and
Lucy couldn't help giggling as she pictured the scene. Mrs Murray's own
letter about 'declining your father's generous suggestion that I should
become his unpaid skivvy' made her howl with laughter. Now Mrs Murray
couldn't wait to go to Lanarkshire, but she was very worried,
particularly about Tom. She hadn't

heard from him since a scribbled note written at Christmas, though two
letters had arrived from Jamie. She wondered if post from the Front
might have reached Barcelona, but Lucy hadn't had word from either of
the brothers. Lucy scanned the newspapers every day for news of them,
and listened to the wireless in the YWCA canteen where she took lunch.
There she heard news of the Battle of Jarama to keep Franco out of
Madrid. It was well known that the International Brigades and militias
were suffering appalling losses. After all, they were barely trained
foreigners, peasants, teenagers and trade unionists fighting against
General Franco's well-drilled and equipped brigades of Moroccan
mercenaries and German and Italian soldiers. Any day, at any time, Tom
could be killed. Lucy wondered if she would somehow know the moment of
Tom's death. Anxiety about him was like a tight band around her chest.
She hoped Jamie was somewhere safer, behind the front lines. She was
less worried about him being physically injured, because as a journalist
he wouldn't be as directly in harm's way as his brother. She was more
concerned that the pure light of him would become tainted and
diminished. And she worried a little about herself. There were the food
shortages and occasional bombing raids, of course, and one night,
hurrying home from the canteen through the dark streets of the city, she
rounded a corner into a group of young militiamen, lounging on guard
duty. She stopped dead for a moment, playing her torch over the faces
which turned towards her. They exchanged a few ribald jokes and then
began to close in on her, moving silently on their ropesoled sandals and
surrounding her. She heard a clatter as one by one they laid their
rifles on the cobbles. They would not be needing them for what they had
in mind. She shone her torch behind her, and it picked out the dark
shape of a man who moved to cut off her retreat. Her mouth went dry and
her pulse thundered in her ears. She switched her

torch to her left hand and raised her right in the closed fist of the
Republican salute and remembered La Pasionaria's call to arms. '¡No
pasarán!' she called, in a small, squeaky voice. And then louder and
firmer, '¡No pasarán!' There was a pause, and she could hear all the
far-off sounds of the city, but the men around her seemed not to move or
breathe. '¡No pasarán!' she shouted angrily. Then one of them replied,
'¡No pasarán!' and raised his hand in salute, and one by one the others
echoed him and fell back to let her on her way, trembling from head to
foot. When she told Margarita what had happened, they agreed that in
future she would stay in the canteen until it became light. After seven
weeks with no news, two letters arrived from Tom on the same day in
early March. One had been written just after Christmas and had travelled
to England and back again.

30 December 1936 Somewhere in Spain! Dear old Luce, Well, it wasn't
quite like Christmas at home. We had cold corned beef for Christmas
dinner. But I can tell you that seemed like a treat compared with our
usual oily beans! It was foggy and there was deep snow. I didn't imagine
snow in Spain, but we are high up here. We went out and made a snowman.
The locals thought we were mad. The 2nd battalion, which I'm in, hasn't
been allowed up to the front line yet. We are still stuck behind the
lines doing weapons training. I'm trying to be patient.

Your parcels arrived in time, and I'm now the warmest chap in the
company. The battalion postman is a wizard -- he's called Ernest
Mahoney, and he used to own a bookshop. He has a little van and he
drives up to the front line, no matter what the weather, to make sure
that everyone gets letters and parcels from home. I'm wearing three
pairs of woolly socks. You've probably heard it's bad at the front line,
Luce, so there's no point in my lying to you. The No. 1 company set out
on Christmas Eve. 145 of them went into battle and only 67 returned. You
know I told you about the poet John Cornford? He was killed, the day
after his twenty-first birthday. I volunteered to send his personal
effects to his family -- it wasn't much for a life -- a few photos, a
pencil, a knife and the last letters he got from home. I hope his poems
will survive. Those who made it back got a heroes' welcome from us, I
can tell you. We formed up in a guard of honour and cheered them so loud
you could probably hear it in Barcelona. But you mustn't think we are
downhearted. We are like young doctors setting out to cure the world.
It's a crusade, a brotherhood. I can't explain, but on some days I feel
exultant, maybe like hearing the 'Hallelujah' Chorus for the first time,
or standing in a cathedral when the sun is pouring through the stained
glass, or seeing the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel or something. We have
a cause we believe in so absolutely that our own lives seem unimportant.
I can't wait to get stuck in. Not long now. With love, Tom

Lucy quickly turned to the second letter, which proved Tom had been
alive only a few days ago.

28 February 1937 Base camp Dear Luce, I suppose you've been following
the Battle of Jarama on the news, and you'll know now that we held it
and Madrid is still safe from Franco. Frankly I don't know how we did
it, but we did. And as you can see, I'm still alive. The 2nd battalion
-- my battalion -- went up to the Front in a convoy of trucks with the
Dimitrovs from the Balkans, and the Franco-Belge battalion. The
villagers lined the street and cheered us and some of the women cried.
And we felt pretty good about ourselves. Then we went by train and then
lorry again, up towards Madrid. When we arrived in a village, the locals
gave us such a warm welcome -- they seemed to have found every egg in
the district to give us! If only they wouldn't coat them in olive oil!
We stopped at a farm which had become the cookhouse and had bread and
coffee. We filled our water bottles and then we were ordered up the
hill. We could already hear the drum of machine-gun fire, not far away.
We had no idea of the position of the enemy, but we scrambled up the
escarpment across a plateau and a dry valley and then we were on a hill
looking down on the Jarama River. The blokes who got up there first had
christened it Suicide Hill because we were surrounded on three sides.
The heavy rifle and machine-gun fire made clods of earth jump up all
around us. We set up our machine gun and then

found we'd been issued the wrong ammo. There were a lot of jokes about
'non-intervention'. I can't tell you what the next seven hours were
like, except that there's a fear which dries up your mouth and throat
when you are lying with your face on the ground surrounded by the flash
and roar of shellfire. And then suddenly there's a surge of adrenaline
and you forget about fear, and I felt I was fighting for all the poor
and downtrodden in the world. I had that sort of wild joy you get in
standing up to the bully even though you know you might be beaten
yourself. In those seven hours more than half our battalion was killed
or wounded. I don't know what it does to a man to see his friend who was
laughing and talking one minute, smashed into a carcass like a butcher's
shop, to see a face become a bloody hole. I can't get those images out
of my head. I don't know if I'll ever again be the Tom you knew. The
stretcher-bearers were running up and down the hill with the wounded,
taking them to our HQ on a sort of sunken road behind the line. That's
where we were given hot food and something to drink -- the first for
seven hours -- and had a short sleep. Then we were back again. Day after
day. By the thirteenth of Feb there were only 160 men left of 500, and I
think I'd accepted that I wasn't going to make it. One day there was a
gap in the line, and we marched out again to fill it, led by an Irishman
called Ryan who started singing the Internationale and we all joined in
and others from broken units came to join us, and we held the position.
And Franco's troops didn't get into Madrid. Now they tell us we won the
Battle of Jarama. But it doesn't feel much like winning when most of
your friends are dead.

There's a song they're singing, written by a bloke called Alex McDade.
You sing it to the tune of 'Red River Valley': There's a valley in Spain
called Jarama It's a place that we all know so well For 'tis there that
we wasted our manhood And most of our old age as well. From this valley
they tell us we're leaving, But don't hasten to bid us adieu, For e'en
though we make our departure We'll be back in an hour or two. Oh we're
proud of the British battalion And the stand for Madrid that we made For
we fought like true sons of the people As part of the fifteenth brigade.

There are other versions, but not fitting for mixed company. And now
we're back at base again. Showers. Delousing. Drinking wine. Sleeping.
We held a complaints meeting about all the things that went wrong. And
I'm looking at your picture, and thinking of the way you kissed me on
that last morning, and I don't think I'm going to make it now, Luce, but
I would love to see you one last time. I know your work in Barcelona is
really important, but aren't there any refugees further south who need
your help? Then if I got a few days' leave, maybe I could come and meet
you somewhere? Would you think about it? With love, Tom

Lucy's heart squeezed with pain at the change which had come over him
between the two letters. If he had given up hope of surviving, she knew
it was urgent that she reach him quickly and persuade him to return
home.

OceanofPDF.com

9

The opportunity to travel south came sooner than Lucy expected, with the
arrival at the end of March 1937 of three English Quaker women:
Francesca Wilson, Barbara Wood and Alfred's wife Norma Jacob. Francesca
was a teacher from Birmingham who'd been given two months' leave by her
headmistress to come to Spain and see how she could help. At first she
seemed nothing special, a tall, slim, middle-aged woman with a beaky
nose and amused eyes, whose plain frocks had seen better days. But Lucy
was soon to discover that an unremarkable-looking woman could also be an
unstoppable force of nature. Francesca's arrival in Barcelona coincided
with the peak of the battle between Alfred Jacob and Save the Children
about condensed versus powdered milk. An officious woman called Dr Marie
Pictet had arrived from the headquarters of Save the Children
International in Geneva with her sidekick Mrs Small. Dr Pictet was a
nutritional expert and she considered condensed milk to be superior to
powdered milk because of its healthful content of sugar and cream. Mrs
Petter came from the Calle Carmen canteen to join them and the three
women moved as one organism. They had all taken an equal dislike to
Alfred, who waved the report from the Cadbury experts to no avail.

Margarita and Lucy tried to act as a buffer between the warring
factions, saying they could see both sides of the question, though
privately they agreed that Alfred was right, because a greater number of
children could be fed if the money was spent on powdered milk. 'He
doesn't have any diplomatic skills,' Lucy said to Margarita. 'He knows
that what he's doing is the best way, and he won't even discuss anything
different.' The three women from Save the Children didn't seem to
appreciate that without Alfred's vision and Domingo's common sense,
there wouldn't be any canteens to debate. The argument then extended to
the running of the canteens, and Alfred's conviction that they should be
staffed by local women and refugees against Mrs Petter's view that they
must be led by people from overseas. The atmosphere in the office grew
more and more oppressive, so Lucy was delighted on three counts when
Francesca announced her intention to journey south to Murcia and said
she'd be glad to have Lucy's company. Firstly Lucy would be relieved to
escape the warring factions among the aid workers; second it seemed
right to be heading to where children were most desperately in need and
third, she was happy that she'd be closer to both Tom and Jamie, with
the possibility of persuading them to leave Spain before they were
killed. In the few days before they departed, Lucy took Francesca to
visit the three children's colonies at Rubí near Barcelona, which were
supported by Friends groups in Birmingham, St Helen's and Paris.
Francesca brought her camera and took photographs of the clean, neatly
dressed children. Lucy wasn't surprised to see the camera because the
Quaker medical advisor Dr Audrey Russell had told her that Francesca was
a journalist and photographer as well as a teacher. 'The children were
evacuated from Madrid,' explained Lucy. 'Slum children who'd never been
to school. They

were terrified at first, but look at them now.' 'It's impressive,'
remarked Francesca, and her eyes glittered behind the camera.
'Photographs of happy children persuade people to donate more money.
They can see what good they are doing.' Francesca snapped away at
beaming youngsters in the colony's art rooms and on wide verandas where
lessons would take place as the weather grew warmer. Lucy thought the
children in the colony now looked much more like her class at home, with
rounded limbs and pink cheeks. Only their dark eyes and hair cropped in
regulation cuts marked them out as different. For a moment she felt a
great homesickness for the pupils she'd left behind. 'Before I left
home, someone talked to me about the Spanish Republic fighting for its
social experiments and reforms,' continued Francesca. 'They said the
Republicans would fight to the death because there was a whole Spanish
renaissance at stake. I had no idea what they meant, but I think I'm
beginning to understand.' They stood together watching two
five-year-olds trying to carry water from a sink to a bucket for their
own serious purpose. They had figured out that they needed to work
together to transport the pots of water and hold the bucket still.
'Well, that says it all,' said Lucy, and Francesca beamed at her. The
day before they left for Murcia, Lucy went to see Jorge. He rushed out
to meet Lucy Yellowhair, and dragged her straight to see his latest
print productions. His teacher said he was making reasonably good
progress in class, but slipped away at every conceivable moment to work
with his beloved printing press. That evening she was packing her small
suitcase when Margarita knocked on her door. They had agreed that Lucy
would leave her woollen winter dresses, coat and

underwear with Margarita in Barcelona. She knew it would be much hotter
360 miles further south in Murcia, and summer was coming. Margarita sat
down on the bed, and opened the bag she'd brought with her. 'I've
brought you three presents,' she said. Lucy was nonplussed. She hadn't
bought anything to give her only friend in Barcelona. Margarita took a
pair of rope-soled alpargatas sandals from her bag and handed them over.
'I'll keep your lace-up leather shoes for you. That way I know you'll
return,' she laughed. Lucy sat down next to her to try on the new
sandals. 'And I brought you this,' continued Margarita, pulling out a
soft cotton dress in the palest shade of dove grey. It had pin-tucks all
down the front and covered buttons. Lucy could see it had been
expensive. Margarita rubbed the round of her stomach, which was pressing
against the fabric of her frock. 'It won't fit me this summer,' she
grinned. 'Go on, try it.' Lucy removed her green woollen dress over her
head, making her hair stand up with electricity, then unbuttoned
Margarita's gift and dropped it down over her petticoat. Although Lucy
was taller, the dress fell just below her knees in pleasing folds. The
little room at the YWCA didn't have a mirror, but Margarita purred in
approval. 'I knew it would suit you even more than me,' she said. 'It's
the colour of your eyes.' She patted the bed beside her and Lucy sat
again as Margarita produced a jam jar from her bag with a flourish. The
jar appeared to be filled with a squashed creature preserved in
formaldehyde. 'It looks like a medical specimen,' grimaced Lucy, hoping
Margarita wasn't going to make her eat it. 'This is the most important
gift,' said Margarita dramatically. 'I think when you go south you might
meet

with your Tom or your Jamie.' She pronounced the J in the Spanish way
like a guttural H. 'And then you might decide who it is you love as a
woman loves a man. You might marry them -- or perhaps not marry with a
priest, but just in your heart, because in wartime everything is
different. And then you will need this.' Lucy was turning the jar around
in her hands, still mystified. Margarita suddenly clapped a hand over
her mouth, and searched Lucy's face. 'You do know what happens between a
man and a woman when they are married? How babies are made?' Lucy
blushed and nodded. Mrs Murray had carefully explained all the details
when Lucy's periods first began. Margarita laughed her deep laugh and
threw up her hands. 'Thanks be to Maria I don't have to explain that!'
She unscrewed the jar and carefully lifted up the contents. 'It's a
sponge,' she said, and now Lucy could see the holes. 'A sponge kept in
vinegar. Do you know about this in England?' Lucy shook her head and
Margarita continued, 'When you think you are going to make love, you
take the sponge and push it as far inside you as you can reach. And
leave it there for four hours afterwards or eight hours. Just don't
forget to take it out. Do you understand?' 'Yes, yes, I understand. What
does it do?' 'Sperm don't like the acid of the vinegar. It will help to
stop you making a baby if you don't want one.' Lucy indicated
Margarita's stomach questioningly, and Margarita burst out in peals of
infectious laughter. 'Sometimes a man can take you by surprise, and you
might get carried away and not want to stop to go to the bathroom. The
sponge does not work well if it is in its jar under the bed.' Lucy
laughed too. 'I'm going to miss you!' she said, hugging Margarita.

'And I will miss you. I have never met anyone so brave as you, to come
so far alone and go now so blasé into the terrible south.' Lucy patted
her friend's shoulder and wondered what she would find in the south and
if she would see Tom and Jamie again. Would she ever have to take the
sponge from its jar? And if so, who would she be with? On the day she
was leaving, letters arrived from home and from Jamie. She quickly
scanned the ones from England first, savouring the pleasure of waiting
to read Jamie's. Mrs Murray told her she was now in Lanarkshire and
fully reconciled with her family. She had already found a job in a
draper's shop, and was paying rent to her sister, though hoped to find a
little flat of her own for when the boys came home. Her father's letter
didn't even refer to Mrs Murray's departure, but gave a long and
detailed explanation of his dire financial position before telling her
he had decided to rent out their house and move into the Murrays'
cottage for the time being. 'It's much smaller and I can look after it
on my own much more easily,' he said. If that was supposed to make her
feel guilty for leaving him, she was afraid it didn't. It would do him
good to find out what all the women around him had done for years. Then
Lucy could wait no longer, and set aside the letters from home to open
Jamie's.

29 March 1937 Sevilla My darling Lucy, I wish you could have been here
in Holy Week, to see the joy people have when Franco has liberated them
from the Republic. I was with the French film

crew from Pathé-Journal, and also filed copy for all the Catholic papers
and the dailies. It's certainly nothing like Holy Week in England! It
went on for eleven days and nights with enormous crowds thronging the
streets to see processions like nothing you could imagine. There are
about seventy brotherhoods who each take two or three giant 'pasos' from
their church to the cathedral and back. The pasos are huge wooden floats
with carved scenes from the Passion covered in gold, or giant silver
statues of Mary weeping and holding Jesus in her arms. Some of the pasos
date from the fifteenth century and it's a miracle they survived when
the Reds attacked the churches. Men carry them on their shoulders and
they are incredibly heavy and some of the brotherhoods take twelve hours
to complete the circular route. Each procession was led by a giant
cross, and behind them came the members of the brotherhood, all barefoot
and dressed in white robes with tall pointed white masks with eye holes
in them, like the Klu Klux Klan in America, but here they represent
penitence. In some processions there were hundreds of these men. Then
there were altar boys, and some groups had brass bands with them, but
some were in complete eerie silence. One was so long and moving so
slowly that it took an hour and a half to pass me. All the women in the
crowds were dressed in black with traditional lace mantillas in their
hair, and they were crying or saying their rosaries. It was like really
being at Christ's funeral. I'm sure they were also weeping for their own
loved ones who've died in this terrible war. It was so moving, Lucy, to
see all these thousands of people who are now free to worship as they
choose again. It makes me so sure that Franco is on God's side.

I wish you could see it for yourself. Is there any way you could get
here? Safely, I mean. I so much want to see you and hold you in my arms.
Perhaps we could even get married here in Spain, though I promise I
wouldn't press you on that. I hope you aren't fooled into believing the
false news put out by the Republicans. When you came back from one of
those meetings with Tom you said Dolores Ibárruri -- La Pasionaria --
had claimed that peasant girls were being violated by Franco's
legionnaires, mercenaries and Moors, but this is Republican lies -- it
was Reds and anarchists who mutilated corpses and raped women. And they
tell me that the outskirts of Madrid are alive with Republican women
militia fighters, stripped to the waist like Amazonian warriors,
carrying modern Soviet rifles, with blood-rage in their eyes. You can't
possibly think it's right for women to behave like that? I pray every
day that Tom will understand the error of the cause he has chosen. I
know he means well. And I pray for you, to keep safe and keep doing the
marvellous work you are doing. With all my love, Jamie Lucy folded the
letter irritably. Why on earth would female fighters be going round
bare-breasted? It wasn't practical or rational. She thought she had
better get to Jamie soon and talk some sense into him.

OceanofPDF.com

MURCIA April 1937 OceanofPDF.com

10

Francesca persuaded Alfred Jacob to lend her a car to drive down to
Murcia to see what needed to be done in the south, and Lucy agreed she
would share the driving. Truth be told, Lucy was rather terrified at the
thought of driving on these lawless Spanish roads, but Francesca's
energetic fearlessness was infectious. At the age of forty-nine
Francesca seemed almost elderly to Lucy, and she thought, well if an old
person like her can do it, I'm sure I can too. It was now April and
although the days started with a freshness in the air, the temperature
soon climbed. Lucy was glad she'd only brought her two summer dresses
and Margarita's which she would keep for 'best'. Francesca had decided
they shouldn't drive for more than three hours a day, because she wanted
to see something of the way people lived outside the cities, so they
travelled in the cooler part of the mornings and stopped overnight
halfway. Lucy could not have been happier, drinking in every detail of
the countryside they passed. She saw orange groves and lemon groves,
rice fields where green shoots were just sprouting through the water,
and then the road opened out on to the coast. Lucy craned her neck
towards the sandy beaches, tumbledown white fishing villages and sea
which faded from stripes of deep royal blue at the horizon to palest
aqua near the shore. Then the road

meandered inland again. Lucy couldn't identify the plants in the fields,
but Francesca pointed out date palm, hemp, peanuts, cork trees and
pimento. It was thrilling to Lucy to see these exotic species, and it
seemed so utterly impossible that this peaceful countryside was in the
middle of a war. At the edge of the plain mountains rose, terraced for
olives and vines. Everywhere there were fruit trees in blossom and the
sweet smell of spring wafted through their open windows. Lucy soon
discovered that Francesca was a great storyteller and she certainly had
stories to share. She came from Tyneside, though Lucy couldn't hear any
trace of it in her accent, and was the child of Quaker parents but not a
practising Friend herself. She'd studied history at Newnham College, and
then taught history at Gravesend in Kent. In Gravesend at the start of
the Great War, she told Lucy how she'd come across the Belgian refugees
who were fleeing the German army and arriving in great numbers in
Britain. 'In the late afternoons I used to take the ferry across to
Tilbury where they were landing and in the dim light I saw hordes of
bewildered women and children with their treasures tied up in sheets, or
sometimes nothing but a canary or a parrot in a cage.' She was told off
for 'hanging about' and she asked if she might teach English to some of
the Belgian women to prepare them for life in Britain. Her request was
granted, but soon this wasn't enough for her; she heard that Quaker
Relief was helping civilians in France and she applied to go out there.
She grinned. 'I was interviewed by Ruth Fry at Friends House. I stressed
my fluent French and willingness to do any kind of work. But she said,
"You are engaged in useful work here. What is your motive for wanting to
leave it? Is it a genuine concern for the relief of the unfortunate or
only

love of excitement?" And I was found out! I'm an adventurer at heart!'
Lucy laughed aloud and wondered what Ruth Fry would think of her motives
in heading to Spain to save Tom and Jamie from their suicidal idealism.
Francesca went on to describe the devious way she'd found to get to a
POW camp on the Dutch island of Urk and from there to a refugee camp in
Gouda, and later to work with refugees in France, Corsica, North Africa,
Serbia, Austria, Russia and now Spain. Lucy was awestruck at the places
Francesca had travelled to. To think she'd written her off as a drab old
woman! 'Aren't you ever afraid?' she asked. Francesca overtook a
slow-moving lorry. 'I have a species of arrogance that this is not my
time to die,' she said. 'My insolent confidence protects me from fear.'
She glanced sideways at Lucy. 'And what about you -- are you afraid?'
'No, not much. Mainly excited and eager to help, but I have two ulterior
motives.' Francesca pressed her and Lucy found it was a relief to tell
her new friend about Tom and Jamie as well as her desire to help the
children. 'I've met a few of the International Brigaders,' said
Francesca. 'I didn't know there were such idealists left in the world. I
can't see you talking Tom out of it.' 'No, but I have to try. And in the
meantime I am determined to be an enormous help to you.' They stopped
halfway and after their evening meal Francesca ordered coffee with a tot
of rum in it, and lit a cigarette. She had talked while they were eating
about her activist women friends, her journalism for the Manchester
Guardian, the lectures she'd given, the books she'd written about Vienna
and Macedonia, and her passionate belief in progressive education.

'I met Sigmund Freud,' she said casually, taking a long draw on her
cigarette. 'I didn't like him.' Lucy felt rather provincial until
Francesca echoed Rousseau's ideas about making schools 'into gardens
where children could grow', and Lucy thought yes, that was exactly what
she wanted to achieve. That's what she knew how to do. On their second
day's journey Lucy drove the car, with some trepidation at first, but
soon gaining confidence, while Francesca leaned a lazy hand out of the
window, talking non-stop. She sympathised with Lucy's frustrated
ambitions to become a doctor, and said she was the only one of her
siblings to go to university. Lucy suspected she had worn down her
parents until they agreed. It seemed that, like Lucy, she hadn't had a
particular desire to teach, but 'what else can a woman do?' Lucy
wondered why she'd never married. Perhaps she'd had a sweetheart who was
killed in the Great War? Francesca's explanation was more surprising
than that. 'My affairs were all with foreigners who it would have been
disastrous to marry.' She described a failed love affair in Serbia and a
deep friendship with a man called Nikolai Bachtin who was disastrously
married to a friend of hers. 'If he died I would miss him more than
anyone in the world.' Just as Lucy was wondering how she could bear to
leave this Bachtin, Francesca continued, 'This may seem odd to you, but
all my adult life I've had this great conscious desire not to cling to
any human being.' Lucy thought how opposite she felt, how she longed to
wind herself like ivy around those who she loved and hold them close to
her. She had never met anyone like Francesca, with her infectious zest
for life but determination to remain at arm's length.

It seemed Francesca's house in Birmingham was a kind of hub for
refugees, with boarders and lodgers including a writer called Nikolaus
Pevsner. Lucy thought she recognised that strange name. Most astonishing
of all, Francesca casually reported that over the years she had
'adopted' or fostered eight teenage girls and two boys, who had been
Russian refugees living in Paris. Lucy risked a glance at her. 'What
happens to them when you go away?' 'I have made up my mind to demand
nothing from them, to remain detached from them. I have too much
wanderlust.' Lucy didn't know how to reply, and was glad that she now
had to concentrate hard on driving into her first big town, Murcia,
where the carts and other traffic seemed to follow no known rules of the
road. Murcia looked as it must have done for centuries -- an Arab town
whose main streets had once been souks and were now thronged with all
the poor of the south. Francesca and Lucy followed instructions they'd
been given to the offices of the Refugee Committee. They pushed their
way through crowds of ragged, desperate-looking refugees who milled
around the building, and inside found four distracted officials,
struggling with card indexes and lists. It was almost impossible to hear
them above the cacophony of angry men and women yelling their
frustration, wild with hunger and anxiety about their families. Lucy
spoke to the man in charge, who shouted in her ear that Murcia was a
poor town of sixty thousand people, and it was full even before twenty
thousand refugees and soldiers arrived. They had sent the Málagan
refugees to five 'night shelters', including one called Pablo Iglesias
which was the worst. At the other shelters the refugees were provided
with two meals a day, but at Pablo Iglesias

they were only given an evening meal and a little milk for the babies.
Francesca nodded decisively as though that was what she'd needed to
hear, and Lucy said, 'We'll see what we can do.' Soon Francesca and Lucy
were outside the Pablo Iglesias shelter, looking up at the unfinished
block of flats and attracting immediate attention. Both of the English
women were taller than the refugees who surrounded them and strikingly
different-looking with their pale faces, clean clothes and Lucy's blonde
hair. Francesca swept in without hesitation, and Lucy followed, jittery
with nervous excitement as hands clutched at her and women begged for
help for their children. She sailed in the wake of Francesca's
confidence. Nothing seemed to daunt her. As they stepped inside Lucy was
appalled at the stench, the din, the filth. It was a huge, incomplete
apartment building, nine storeys high. There weren't any windows or
doors and the floors had not yet been divided into rooms, so formed vast
spaces swarming with women, children and occasional men. There was no
furniture, just a few straw mattresses. The noise in the echoing space
was deafening: babies crying, boys running from floor to floor, sick
people groaning, women shouting. There were flies and mosquitoes
everywhere, but particularly in the corridors and unplumbed toilets
where human waste swilled about the floor. They had been told the
building held four thousand Málagan people, though Lucy doubted anyone
had counted them. As they entered each floor the refugees surged around
them, clamouring above each other to be heard. The smell of the unwashed
bodies and the reek from the latrine areas made Lucy's stomach churn,
but she furiously quelled the urge to retch. One woman was weeping
bitterly, saying she had lost her children in the mayhem of the flight
from Málaga and didn't know if they were dead or alive; another held out
a limp child in her arms and shrieked that

her other three children had died and now her baby was dying of fever;
another yelled, 'They carry the dead out of here every day.' Lucy looked
into the faces of the children who had seen such horror, and for a
moment in the pandemonium she felt the utter impossibility of helping
them. But within another hour Francesca had telephoned Barbara Wood, who
had moved down to be the Quaker organiser in Valencia. Barbara told her
she would send lorryloads of milk, cocoa, sugar and biscuits. Lucy
watched Francesca and thought, if she can do this, perhaps I could too.
One person can't change everything, but maybe they can change something.
The two women spent the night in a cheap but clean hotel, where sugar
bags had been stitched together to make sheets. They were surprisingly
soft. Francesca helped Lucy push her bed to the middle of the room under
the light fitting, and hung a mosquito net over it. They agreed this
hotel would be their base in Murcia, and Lucy dashed off quick letters
to Tom, Jamie, Mrs Murray, her father and Margarita, giving her new
address. She knew Margarita would forward any letters which came to
Barcelona for her. That night Lucy slept soundly and woke filled with
energy and anticipation at what they might achieve. In the morning she
and Francesca queued for a shower, but there was no hot water left.
Tomorrow, she decided, they would have to get up earlier. Back at the
Pablo Iglesias shelter they found a man in a shabby suit who told them
he'd been a government official before the war. He spread his hands to
indicate the squalor around him. 'That it should come to this,' he said,
with tears in his eyes. Lucy could hardly imagine how she would feel if
she was reduced to living in conditions worse than any animal.

Francesca sent him to gather the details of all the children, and give
them tickets for breakfast, but he came back with a list which only had
sixty names on it. Lucy looked around. She could see at least two
hundred youngsters from where she was standing. The man explained, 'They
saw you yesterday and could see that you were foreign, so the rumour
went round that all the children on the list would be sent to North
America or Mexico or Russia. These people might have nothing, but they
won't be parted from their niños.' 'That's all right,' said Lucy. 'Sixty
children would be a good number to start with, until we have helpers.'
Francesca had asked for volunteer helpers from the Refugee Committee,
but she'd been told Murcia was not like Barcelona. Most Murcian women
before the war still lived in uneducated seclusion, scarcely emerging
from their homes except to go to market. They were not prepared to mix
with the 'filthy Málagans', as they called the southern refugees, and
catch their diseases. So Lucy and Francesca set themselves up in the
rudimentary kitchen and served the first drinks to relays of girls and
boys who brought their own bowls, tin cups or empty bottles to fill with
cocoa. The children had to hand in tickets for their hot chocolate and
Lucy laughed when she saw one enterprising boy picking up used tickets
from the floor and then nipping to the back of the queue for a second
and third helping. She could imagine Tom doing this when he was younger.
When they arrived the next morning, Lucy and Francesca could feel a
change in the building. They could barely pass up the stairs for the
press of people, and had to lock and bar the kitchen door, which left
them coughing in the clouds of smoke which billowed out of the stove.
There was pushing and shoving, and any orderly queuing system was
impossible to maintain. Every child in the building was now clamouring
for cocoa.

Francesca visited the Refugee Committee again and that night they sent
workmen to hose down the latrine areas with disinfectant, and connect
rudimentary plumbing. They cleared a landing, and carpenters hung doors
on to it to make a dining room. Tinsmiths fashioned cups out of empty
condensed-milk tins. Francesca and Lucy decided that they had enough
supplies to feed the expectant and nursing mothers as well as the
children. Lucy was amused to hear that in Spanish they were called
'embarrassed and creating women'. Word spread fast around the shelter
and at breakfast the next day, the little ones were reasonably well
behaved, but the 'embarrassed and creating women' broke down the new
doors and surged forward, shoving each other aside to dip their tin mugs
into the scalding vats of cocoa. Lucy's voice, calling for calm, was
drowned out by the shrieking of the women as they yanked each other out
of the way by the hair. Francesca said, 'They're like a pack of ravenous
dogs.' Lucy thought anyone might act the same if they were so desperate.
For two days the breakfast was like a feeding frenzy, but by the third
day Lucy had bought a megaphone and two English girls had arrived from
the University Ambulance Unit. Between them the four women managed to
restore order, as the starving refugees slowly realised there would
always be enough to go round. Soon, however, Lucy and Francesca became
aware that some children were too sick to turn up for breakfast. They
lay on straw, covered by filthy rags, plagued by flies and mosquitoes,
their voices so feeble that their cries for water couldn't be heard
above the hubbub. Francesca shook her head. 'This is the greatest misery
I've ever seen in my life. And I've seen some terrible sights.'

Lucy was shown a baby who had been born on the roadside as his mother
fled from Málaga and whose body was covered with sores. Lucy drove the
mother to the civilian hospital but it was overwhelmed and they were
turned away. 'There's a man called Sir George Young,' Francesca told
her. 'He saw similar conditions in Almería and set up a children's
hospital there with nurses from England. Let me see whether I can speak
to him.' Within a couple of days Sir George had come on a flying visit
and agreed to fund another children's hospital if they could find a
suitable building, so Lucy and Francesca returned to the Refugee
Committee and explained Sir George's offer. The harassed officials said
they would see what they could do. The following day Francesca was
leaving to assess the situation in Madrid and find out how Quaker Relief
might help there. Lucy marvelled at her courage at heading into the
heavily bombarded city, and worried about being left alone in Murcia.
Francesca just shrugged. 'I'll be fine. I always am. And I can leave you
in charge here. I know you can do it.' Part of Lucy wanted to say, 'I'm
only twenty-one. I can't be responsible for feeding starving people,'
but Francesca was appraising her with such confidence that despite her
terror she looked her straight in the eye and said, 'Of course.'

OceanofPDF.com

11

For the next few days, Lucy struggled to maintain order at the Pablo
Iglesias shelter, but she and the two English girls from the ambulance
unit stood firm. She overheard some of the Spanish women saying, 'Don't
mess with the one with the iron-grey eyes,' and realised it was her.
Very well then, she would use all her steely teacherly skills to keep
control. Having learned from Alfred's success in using refugees as
helpers, Lucy was keen to find volunteers among the Málagan women to mix
the milk and serve the breakfasts. The two English girls couldn't keep
assisting with cocoa in the morning and then returning to the ambulance
unit to work the rest of the day. Lucy spent several hours moving around
the building, asking about the refugees' experiences. It became clear to
her that most of the Málagans came from a kind of horrifying poverty
which she'd thought only existed in India or Africa. She hadn't known
that Europeans in the twentieth century could be living in hovels, or
even in caves in the countryside. Many owned nothing apart from a
cooking pot and the rags they wore, and scraped a living doing the most
menial tasks. They had trekked along the coast road to Almería, picked
out by searchlights and shelled by warships at night and machine-gunned
from the air by day. A woman with a dirty bandage round her neck

described the Italian plane which had swooped down on them and strafed
them as they fled. Another told her about a Canadian ambulance driver
called Norman who raced back and forth along the road picking up the
wounded. But whole families had been wiped out. It was said that fifteen
thousand people had died trying to escape. The refugees clustered around
Lucy to tell her about the horrors which had devastated their dirt-poor
but peaceful lives. By the end of the day she had identified six women
who seemed to have some natural authority and were respected by the
others, and she asked if they would help her. Lucy knew that clothing
and fabric had been sent to Spain by the American Friends, so she called
Barbara Wood in Valencia and asked for some women's dresses and soap and
bales of cloth to be sent in the next consignment to Murcia. When she
presented the women who had agreed to help with a new dress each and a
bar of soap, they fell on her with embarrassingly effusive gratitude. It
was clear they'd never been given anything in their lives. The next day
these Málagan women in their enviable new dresses took charge of the
breakfasts. With Francesca in Madrid, and the English girls back with
the ambulance unit, letters became an even more important lifeline for
Lucy. While Jamie had been away at Ampleforth College, he had developed
the habit of Sunday letter writing. It appealed to his sense of order.
Every week he sent a letter to his mother, often with a note to Lucy or
her father slipped into it. Now he wrote to Lucy every Sunday, even
though the letters sometimes arrived out of order or in batches. Captain
Nicholson and Mrs Murray also wrote weekly, even when Lucy was too busy
to send anything back but a scribbled note. Her father was proud of his
new abilities to 'do for himself', though often asked her when she was
coming home. He told her she would like

living in the cottage. He never said so, but she knew he was lonely. Mrs
Murray, on the other hand, was fitting in well to her old Scottish
community, meeting up with long-forgotten schoolfriends and helping to
run the Sunday School. She said the local postmaster was retiring and
she was going to apply for his job, as living accommodation was provided
over the shop. Where Captain Nicholson's letters were factual, Mrs
Murray's were overflowing with emotion -- particularly how much she
missed her boys and Lucy. Lucy heard intermittently from friends in
England, who were fascinated by her decision to go to Spain, but more
occupied with their own lives -- their parents, their boyfriends and
their jobs. Among her friends, her most regular correspondent was
Margarita, who told her all the news from Barcelona, and often made her
laugh. When no letters arrived from Margarita for two weeks, Lucy
assumed it was a problem with the postal system. When none came in the
third week she began to be worried. Surely she would have heard if
they'd been bombed? Or had she said something wrong and upset her
friend? Her written Spanish was far from perfect. She shook these
thoughts out of her head and concentrated on her work. All the same, it
was a relief when a letter arrived with Margarita's looping handwriting.

My dear friend, I haven't written because I knew you might try to come
back to Barcelona to be with me, and your work in Murcia is too
important to leave. I am now up in Puigcerdà with Norma Jacob. I am
sorry to tell you that I have had a miscarriage. I can hardly bear to
write the word, but I must accept that it has happened. The pain was
terrible, as though I was giving birth. Domingo could not bear to

stay in the house and hear me. I fear I made a lot of noise. They
wouldn't let us see our child, but the doctor said his head was the
wrong shape and he could not have survived. I feel sick at the thought
of something abnormal and monstrous growing inside me for all these
months, and then terribly, terribly sorry for my poor broken son. And, I
don't mind saying, I feel terribly sorry for myself and for Domingo. I
have cried until I think I can't cry any more. And then I begin to weep
again. It is impossible to know where all these tears come from. And my
breasts leak milk and that seems the cruellest thing of all when I have
no baby to feed. I didn't want to get out of bed for the first two
weeks. I just wanted to sleep and forget. Though every time I woke up
and remembered, it was a new agony. Domingo and the others were kind,
and brought me food to my room, though I didn't want to eat. Even when
they brought me honey cake! Then the Danish Quaker Elise Thomsen came
and sat with me. She told me Domingo was suffering too and I was making
it even harder because he was so worried about me. I looked carefully at
him the next time he came and I could see he had deep, dark circles
under his eyes. So I forced myself to get up and dress and told him he
must concentrate on his work. Elise gave me the idea that I should come
to Puigcerdà to be with Norma and the two children. The mountains and
the clean air are some comfort, and I take long, long walks. Norma is
kind but she is not you. She obviously thinks I should 'pull myself
together'. You would have understood. It pains me to see her healthy
children, running about and laughing when my boy will never do that,

but at the same time it soothes me to hold Norma's little girl Terry in
my arms. I will stay here for another week or two until I feel stronger.
And then I will go back to Barcelona and immerse myself in work. I know
Domingo is missing me. He writes every day. The doctor said there is no
reason why our boy was not whole, and it shouldn't stop us having
children in the future. I don't know if I would dare. When the war is
over, perhaps. You mustn't come to me. I know you would if I asked, but
you have so much important work to do. Write to me, and perhaps pray for
me and our boy. With love, Your friend Margarita Lucy had tears pouring
down her cheeks as she read. Her poor friend. Despite the instruction to
stay in Murcia, she wondered if she could get to Margarita by train once
Francesca returned from Madrid. She sat down and wrote a long letter,
struggling to express the depth of her sorrow and telling her about the
work in Murcia. As she wrote about the refugees at Pablo Iglesias she
knew Margarita was right and they needed her most at the moment. As Lucy
walked about Pablo Iglesias talking to the families, she couldn't help
worrying about the children who were too ill to eat the breakfasts. She
brought them water and milk and biscuits, but could see many of them
were so weak they were unable to swallow. Every day another child died.
And every day Lucy returned to the Refugee Committee to ask about a
location for the proposed hospital. She also noticed a different
problem. The adolescent girls who weren't engaged in taking care of
their small brothers and sisters hung about in groups, followed around
by gangs

of boys. Their swearing and snarling kept the boys at bay. But for how
long? Frustrated with the slowness in finding a hospital building, Lucy
decided to tackle the issue of the girls. She had read a newspaper
article about the Mayor of Murcia, who was a headteacher, so one morning
she picked her way through the narrow, twisting passages and
sun-drenched squares of the town to his school. She had to wait for two
hours while he dealt with a strike of student teachers and when she
entered his sweltering, airless office the Mayor was slumped down in his
chair as if exhausted. Lucy had prepared carefully for the interview,
wearing Margarita's lovely grey dress, and taming her hair with a little
olive oil on her brush. She'd even applied a coat of lipstick. As she'd
pulled on her Quaker armband it seemed to give her a courage she didn't
normally possess. 'You aren't doing this for yourself,' she'd reminded
herself sternly. 'It's for those girls.' The Mayor looked up at her
enquiringly, then smiled and drew himself a little taller. 'I have come
for your help,' she said, as imperiously as she could manage. He
straightened his tie and indicated the chair opposite his desk. As she
sat, Lucy said, 'There are girls, young women at the Pablo Iglesias
shelter with nothing to do. I want to give them work and the ability to
earn a living.' He nodded approvingly. 'I am a teacher like you,' she
continued, 'and most of the refugees seem to be illiterate. I thought if
we could get a few girls together and begin to teach them to read and
write, they would be able to teach each other their letters.' He pulled
paper and a pen towards him. 'You are a woman after my own heart. What
do you need?' Lucy took a deep breath. This was her opportunity. 'I need
sewing machines, as many as you can get. And needles and thread. I can
get fabric. I need a blackboard

and chalk and paper and pencils. And perhaps a rota of your teachers who
might be able to help after school hours. I won't be in Murcia forever.'
'A pity,' he murmured. 'Can you teach sewing?' Mrs Murray had taught
Lucy to make her own clothes, but she was far from an expert. 'Not
really. I saw there was a seamstress with a workshop a few streets from
Pablo Iglesias. I thought I would ask for her help.' The Mayor put his
head on one side. 'Be diplomatic,' he said. 'The women of Murcia can be
very conservative, secretly religious. They have not embraced the
Republic and they are afraid of catching illness from the refugees, and
they will be shocked by the language the Málagan women use.' Lucy could
tell she had been given good advice. She wondered if she could push her
luck any further. She told him about Sir George and the offer of a
children's hospital. 'That would be a miraculous thing,' he said. 'I've
heard about the English Hospital in Almería. I'll see what I can do.'
Lucy had heard this too many times before, but he seemed to be serious,
and her hope rose a little. The Mayor stood up and walked around the
desk. He shook Lucy's hand hard and then, rather to her surprise, kissed
her on both cheeks. Lucy retraced her steps through the heat of the
afternoon. She wondered how unbearable it would be here in August if
April was so hot? She hoped she would become acclimatised. Or perhaps by
August she would have persuaded Jamie and Tom to return to England. A
startling thought struck her. If the boys went back to England would she
return too, or would she stay with the refugees who needed her so badly?
Would she perhaps become like Francesca, an unmarried woman who spent
her life travelling the world forging order out of chaos?

She went back to her hotel to check her dress and her hair before
setting out to the seamstress. This time she left the armband on her
bed, thinking perhaps it looked too much like a militia or trade union
badge. A thin, bespectacled woman came to the door, looking angry at the
interruption, then took in the blonde foreigner in the expensive dress
and ushered her inside. Lucy blinked to adjust her eyes to the gloom of
the shop. She wondered how anyone managed to do any sewing in this
light, but then the noise of sewing machines and women chattering drew
her attention to a room beyond. The seamstress saw the direction of her
gaze and closed the workshop door. 'How can I help you, Señorita?' Lucy
gripped her nails into her palms and tried to adopt Francesca's tone
which brooked no argument. 'I haven't come to have a dress made. At
least not today.' The woman pursed her lips. Evidently this was not what
she wanted to hear. 'I've come to ask your help,' said Lucy. 'I am an
Englishwoman, working with the refugees.' The seamstress made a noise
like pshh, wrinkling her nose in disgust. 'There are girls, young women.
I am afraid they may fall into the ways of bad women unless they learn a
useful trade.' The seamstress pulled a face which clearly conveyed
'that's all they are good for'. 'It isn't any of my business,' she said.
Lucy noticed a gold chain disappearing into the neck of the woman's
dress. She wouldn't mind betting that a crucifix hung on the end. 'The
Mayor has promised me sewing machines. Kind Americans have provided
fabric. I just need some good Christian Spanish women to teach these
girls how to sew.'

'We don't have the time,' said the seamstress, starting to usher Lucy
towards the door. As she opened it and light fell into the shop again,
Lucy noticed a shape on the wall where the paintwork was less faded, as
if a picture had been removed. Surely a holy picture. Lucy turned her
back to the street and crossed herself. 'Doesn't Our Lord instruct us to
care for the poor and needy?' The woman stared hard at her, as if trying
to work out whether this was a trick to expose her secret Catholicism.
Then, perhaps seeing only sincerity in Lucy's light eyes, she slowly
closed the door again. '"Love thy neighbour as thyself, and um ... let
the children to come closer,"' quoted Lucy, wishing that all those years
at St Mary's had given her something more solid. The seamstress looked
even more suspicious, and Lucy realised her mistake. This woman would
only have heard the Bible in Latin, not in Spanish. She wished Jamie was
with her. 'Are you a Protestant?' the seamstress asked abruptly. Lucy
laid one hand on the doorknob, and then turned back slowly. 'Surely you
wouldn't have it said that a Protestant foreigner was more charitable
than a Spanish woman of the true faith? But never mind. I'm sure there
are genuinely Christian women somewhere in Murcia.' Their eyes locked
and Lucy thought she had lost, but then, unexpectedly, the woman laughed
aloud. 'You may be a Protestant foreigner, but you are wily as a fox.'
Lucy grinned, and her whole body relaxed as the seamstress led her
through into the workshop, clapped her hands and announced, 'Señoras!'
The treadling and chatter fell silent immediately. 'What is your name
and where are you from?' the seamstress asked Lucy, who told her.

'Señoras!' the seamstress announced. 'This is Lucy Nicholson, from
Inglaterra, and we are going to help her to teach the refugee girls to
sew. It is our Christian duty, to save them falling into sin.' They
didn't look convinced, but Lucy had no doubt that their formidable
employer would persuade them otherwise. 'Lovely dress,' the seamstress
commented as she showed Lucy out. 'Don't forget where to come if you
need another.' A few days later, after breakfast, carpenters reappeared
at the Pablo Iglesias shelter to cordon off a workshop and a schoolroom
on the top floor. One of the Refugee Committee brought Lucy a copy of
the local newspaper, turning back the page to an article by the mayor.
It said that benevolent women had come from England to help the dying
children of Spain. These selfless people were prepared to make a
hospital, and it was a scandal that no suitable building could be found
for them. In the afternoon the first two sewing machines were delivered,
amid much excitement and interest, and Lucy also received a summons to
meet the Civil Governor. She was relieved that Francesca arrived back
from Madrid just in time to accompany her to the appointment. As they
left Pablo Iglesias the seamstress appeared with two of her staff to
give the first sewing lesson. 'You see,' said Francesca. 'I knew you
could do it. I should have stayed away longer. You'd have had the whole
refugee problem sorted out.' The Civil Governor took them to see a large
white art deco villa in its own grounds, with ten bedrooms, two
kitchens, two bathrooms, cool tiled floors and marble stairs, balconies
all around and a flat roof. It was ideal for a hospital, but there was a
snag. The elderly married couple who owned it were living there. The
Governor had a

hurried conversation with them in a corner, then turned, beaming. 'It's
all settled. They have another house to go to, and we have agreed a
suitable rent.' Lucy was concerned that the old couple had been evicted
from their home, but Francesca showed no worry. 'Let's go and have
something to eat, to celebrate. I'm famished. And I'm dying for a
cigarette.' Lucy set aside any thoughts of going to visit Margarita as
she and Francesca swung into action. In just one week of frenetic
activity, the hospital was ready for its first patients. Lucy was
exhausted, but felt it had been the most thrilling week of her life.
Francesca gave her a budget and she went shopping. She bought pots and
pans for the kitchen. She placed an order for thirty beds, and the shop
owner promised her they would arrive in days. She set the refugees in
the sewing workshops to make sheets and mattress covers, and the Murcian
seamstresses produced nightshirts and nightdresses. Other Catholic
ladies of Murcia obviously heard about these good works for a children's
hospital, and more nightshirts and sheets and sets of clothes for sick
children arrived as donations. Lucy tried to think of everything. She
bought combs. She bought card indexes. She bought paper and paints for
the children to use as they recovered, as she was sure they would. The
Refugee Committee brought along tea chests carefully packed with
fine-quality glassware and china. When Lucy expressed surprise at the
expensive delicacy of these items, she was told they had been
'collected' from the houses of the rich who had fled at the beginning of
the war. She had nothing more than a slight twinge of conscience at the
good use they would be put to. While Lucy equipped the building,
Francesca was concentrating on the staffing. A cook, a ward-maid and a

washerwoman were all hired from among the refugee women at Pablo
Iglesias. The hospital was assigned a doctor, who helped Lucy and
Francesca ransack local pharmacies for the medical equipment and
medicines they might need. A nurse arrived from England. The nurse
seemed unimpressed by the fact that this hospital had been constructed
from nothing in little more than a week. 'Where are the thermometers and
temperature charts?' she asked, and her next request brought Lucy back
down from her state of euphoria with a great crash. 'And we'll need
screens to put around the beds of those who are dying.' Once everything
was in place, Francesca commandeered a small bus and she and Lucy began
to tour all the refugee shelters, collecting the most seriously ill
children. There were so many infants needing treatment that at first the
hospital looked more like a maternity ward, full of mothers and babies.
But the next week the boys and girls with typhoid began to arrive, many
of them delirious and with high fever. Lucy and Francesca took turns on
night duty, giving the nurse and doctor time to sleep between their
shifts. The English nurse quickly trained her in the special routines
for the typhoid patients, the rinsing of the mouth, the constant
changing of the sweat-and-diarrhoeasoaked nightclothes and sheets, the
washing of the small, shivering bodies. Lucy realised they were
shuddering with terror as well as fever and she sang quietly as she
sponged them down and dressed them in clean nightwear. This seemed to
calm them and many fell asleep in her arms as she sang 'Golden Slumbers'
or 'Speed, Bonnie Boat'. The English nurse explained that typhoid was
carried in the diarrhoea and urine, and the children's hands must be
washed thoroughly before they ate anything. Fear for her

own safety surged through Lucy. She didn't have Francesca's sense of
immortality. 'And me?' she asked. 'Will I catch it?' 'Not if you wash
your hands between touching their faeces and urine and touching your
food,' said the nurse firmly. Lucy scrubbed her hands raw with the
scarlet carbolic soap after nursing each child. She made a pact with
God, that if she didn't catch typhoid she would try not to mind the
constant itch of the mosquito bites she received in the hospital at
night. Sometimes her legs were covered with the ugly red weals. Various
people advised different treatments -- lemon slices, raw onion, baking
soda. None of them had the slightest effect. During the day Lucy and
Francesca were busy overseeing the work of the washerwoman, ward-maid
and cook, collecting young patients from the refuges or taking home
those who were considered to be out of danger, ordering medicine and the
special food which was needed for sickly and convalescent babies and
children. Here the International Brigades helped. There were hundreds of
wounded Brigaders in the military hospitals in Murcia and the Brigade
lorry drivers were very active in finding good food for them. They drove
to the coast for fish, and inland to farms for fresh fruit and
vegetables, eggs and meat. They were delighted to bring the tastiest,
freshest supplies for the hospital. And in between her shifts at the
hospital, Lucy walked back and forth on the floors of Pablo Iglesias,
urging mothers to bring their children to see the doctor. 'It's free,'
she told them. Or, 'He's a handsome Spanish doctor.' Or, 'There are
gardens you can sit in. It's very quiet and clean.' And most of all,
'The food is delicious.' Then she would help an anxious mother lift a
thin, mewling bundle of skin and bones from the straw, and on to the bus
outside.

Lucy's focus was entirely on the refugees and her work. Only at night in
bed did she have a moment to think of Margarita and Tom and Jamie, and
pray they were well.

OceanofPDF.com

12

Some events are so momentous that whole nations remember where they were
and what they were doing when they heard the news. Lucy was at her
hotel, at about 9.30 p.m. on 26 April, resting after a day on her feet
at the hospital, when she heard a great commotion in the street. Pulling
her alpargatas back on to her sore feet, she stepped outside. People
were rushing from building to building, shouting about a place Lucy had
never heard of -- a small Basque town in the north. A town called
Guernica. She stumbled into the hotel dining room where guests and staff
were clustered around the wireless, shushing each other and pressing
close to hear the news. It seemed that Guernica, which had no
anti-aircraft defences, had been bombed out of existence that afternoon.
Monday was market day, and people from the surrounding farms and
villages would still have been in the market hall at four o'clock when
the residents heard the loud rumbling of heavy bombers approaching.
People assumed they were on their way to a military target, but as the
first planes appeared over the town they began to drop bombs, sending
the terrified civilians screaming to their homes to gather their
families and huddle in basements and cellars. Twentyfour German and
Italian bombers returned for five major

bombing raids until the whole place shook with explosions and the crash
of falling buildings. The bombing runs continued for three hours, and
fighter planes machinegunned any civilians who dared to be seen above
ground or tried to escape. Very soon the whole town was ablaze. Flames
and smoke could be seen for miles around. The people in the dining room
clutched each other, their faces white with disbelief, asking: How many
people died? Did you know anyone there? Did General Franco give his
approval or were the German and Italian devils working on their own
initiative? Such barbarians! Lucy pulled aside the hotel manager. 'Where
is it? Why Guernica?' He shrugged. 'It's the capital of Basque
nationalism, I suppose. It's about thirty kilometres from Bilbao on the
northern coast.' Lucy grabbed her bag and ran to the hospital, knowing
Francesca was on night duty and might not have heard the news. 'Oh
Lucy!' Francesca sank her head in her hands. When she lifted her face it
was written over in abject despair. 'I thought I'd seen the worst, but
bombing unprotected civilians is a new hell. Basque refugees will be
pouring into France and Barcelona.' 'Isn't this a war crime?' asked
Lucy. 'What do they care? If the Fascists win, who's going to bring them
to trial?' 'It could happen anywhere,' said Lucy slowly. 'Even Welwyn.'
Francesca looked grim. 'If Fascism wins here then you are right -- one
day it might well be London.' It was the only political thing Lucy ever
heard her say. Within a few days Franco's ground troops were moving
rapidly through the Basque region. George Steer of The Times and Noel
Monks of the Daily Express had been on

hand in northern Spain, and gave full accounts of the attack on
Guernica, including the fact that bomb cases stamped with the German
imperial eagle had been found in the wreckage of the town. The New York
Post ran a cartoon showing Adolf Hitler brandishing a bloody sword
labelled 'air raids' as he towered over heaps of civilian dead littering
'the Holy City of Guernica'. Lucy was incensed at this new horror
perpetrated against undefended civilians. She cut out the articles and
posted them to Jamie, begging him 'for the love of God' to return home
to England, or at least to come and help her with the refugees. She felt
quite certain he wouldn't want to remain on Franco's side once he had
been told about Guernica. But before Jamie could reply, a hastily
scribbled note arrived from Tom. It simply read, Guernica.
Nonintervention? Bastards. When it came, Jamie's letter was also short
and seemed to have crossed in the post with hers.

28 April 1937 My darling Lucy, I expect you've heard about Guernica, but
please don't believe everything you read. There are so many lies flying
about it's hard to know what is the truth any more. Everything is
distorted in this terrible business of war. I think I am more in
sympathy with your Quaker pacifists than I realised. I can promise you
that General Franco says he had no planes up on 26 April because it was
foggy. I know they are saying it was the Luftwaffe and the Italians, but
Berlin completely denies the bombing. We had a briefing from Brigadier
General Queipo de Llano and he said they had evidence that the Reds
deliberately dynamited Guernica during their retreat from the city. The
front line was only kilometres away and

people must have already been fleeing the town. Why would they have been
having a market with the front line so close? You must admit it sounds
much more likely that the Reds would blow up an empty town to stop
Franco's men getting hold of their homes and belongings. I've heard that
Republicans are saying three small German bomb cases were found by
reporters. General Queipo de Llano says they were planted there by the
Reds to try to shift the blame. Did you ever hear of a German bomb that
didn't explode? I believe that there has been a massive lie told to
discredit Franco abroad. I wish you would come to see what it's like in
the areas which have been liberated from the Republicans, to hear the
stories I hear, to see the women crying over the desecration of their
churches and the murder of their priests. I still believe this is a holy
war and God is on our side. Please come. Won't you come? I long to see
you so much. Your ever loving, Jamie Lucy wanted to give him a good
shaking. She had always looked up to Jamie, to his bright intelligence
and clearheadedness, but now it seemed he was letting himself be duped
into believing what he wanted to be true. Her admiration for him
stuttered like a candle flame when a door has been slammed. In early
May, Lucy heard from Margarita that the food shops in Barcelona were
empty and the ration down to a thousand grams of food per person for ten
days. Margarita had returned to the city to help Domingo, but was firm
in

her instruction to Lucy to continue the marvellous work she was doing in
Murcia. I will never forget our son, or stop thinking about him, she
wrote. But I am all right. And you are needed there. She told Lucy that
Norma Jacob had joined Alfred's battle against Dr Pictet, Mrs Small and
Mrs Petter of Save the Children. Alfred and Norma had decided to resign
and return to London unless they were allowed to carry on the aid
operation without interference. But in-fighting among the relief
agencies wasn't the only civil war within a civil war to hit Barcelona.
On 4 May the newspapers were full of the story of the rival factions
within the Republicans whose differences had exploded into open warfare
across the city. Five parties known by different acronyms had seized key
buildings and opened fire on each other. Barricades were built across
roads. The Republican Assault Guards were fighting hand to hand with the
anarchists. The crack, rattle and roar of rifle fire, machine-gun fire
and hand grenades shook the streets throughout the day and night.
Margarita sent a message to say that the aid workers and canteens were
safe. 'Franco must be laughing,' she said. 'The Antifascistas are
slaughtering each other without any effort from him.' Throughout May,
Lucy and Francesca continued to work all of their waking hours at the
Pablo Iglesias shelter and the hospital. More and more of the refugee
women were assisting now, and another nurse had arrived from England.
News came that four thousand Basque children had been evacuated to
Britain, accompanied by their teachers and priests. Apparently Alfred
Jacob was furious. He believed the children should be kept in Spain and
fed there. 'They will be better off in England,' said Francesca, taking
a deep draw on her cigarette.

'But what about their mothers?' argued Lucy. 'Surely it isn't right to
take the children away from their families?' Francesca looked at her
sharply. 'You are too sentimental. You've seen how happy the children
are in the colonies. I'm sure I would have been more contented in a
colony than with my family.' Lucy thought perhaps she might have been
happier in a colony herself than being brought up by her father, but
then she would never have met Mrs Murray and Jamie and Tom. Francesca
had begun to worry that she'd told the headmistress of her school that
she would only be gone for two months. If she was to keep her job, she
needed to return to work in England. 'When I come back in the summer
holidays, I'd like to set up a colony for boys of about fourteen to
sixteen, to teach them to read and write and keep them out of the army.'
Lucy agreed. Far too many of the boys were leaving the refuges, lying
about their ages and volunteering for the Republican army. Their
mothers, who had already lost husbands, other children and parents in
the fall of Málaga, were inconsolable. 'I was thinking we could maybe
set up some short-stay colonies down at the fishing villages on the
coast,' said Lucy. 'To give the girls and boys some fresh air and a
chance to run about. Like a summer camp, with games and crafts and a bit
of reading and writing!' Francesca was enthusiastic and Lucy promised to
get it all arranged for her return. In the meantime an American Quaker,
Esther Farquar, arrived with suitcases of clothes and toys donated by
Friends in the USA. It had been arranged that she would take over the
running of everything from Francesca. Esther raised the question of
refugees on the other side of the front line, in Franco's territory. 'We
ought to be helping them too, to show we are non-political.'

Lucy explained that before Alfred Jacob had set up the first canteen in
Barcelona, he'd gone to Franco's headquarters in Burgos to offer
assistance, but been met with a frosty reception. The Fascists had said
they could feed and clothe their own people. 'But that was six months
ago. What's it like now?' pressed Esther. Lucy looked from one of them
to the other, thinking hard. For the week when Francesca was handing
over to Esther, she wouldn't be needed so much at Pablo Iglesias. 'Why
don't I go and find out?' she offered. 'My friend ...' she blushed
slightly, aware that she wasn't calling Jamie a boyfriend, let alone a
fiancé '... is a journalist, a Catholic, reporting from Franco's side.
He could take me around and I could see if they need help with the
refugees and children. If I went as an official representative of the
Friends there would be a way, wouldn't there?' So it was arranged. She
would go by boat to Fascist-held Ibiza, and from there into Franco's
south. She carried letters of introduction from the Friends Relief
Service and Save the Children, and Jamie managed to wheedle an
invitation letter from Franco's education minister, which he sent her,
along with his own promise to meet and escort her as a reporter from the
Catholic Herald. She was going to see Jamie!

OceanofPDF.com

13

As Lucy's boat approached Marbella, the white houses of the old town
backed by smoky-blue mountains looked like a wonderland after the filth
and despair of Murcia. She felt something in her chest lift, as if a
dark bird had taken off and flown away. It seemed to promise her that
despite her deep misgivings about Franco's Fascists, in this place she
would find joy. Jamie was standing on the quay as her boat pulled in,
shading his eyes against the glittering reflection of sunlight off the
water. When she spotted him, looking like a caricature Englishman in his
linen suit and straw boater, gladness swooped in her. It was so long
since she'd seen him. She waved furiously, and he caught sight of her,
took off his hat and waved it back. Then her heart began to beat hard as
she realised Franco's feared Falangist soldiers were checking the papers
of everyone who disembarked. Most people were signalled to pass through,
but one man was taken away under arrest. Lucy knew, with a twist of
nausea, that it could be her being frogmarched away to God-knows-what
torture or simple disappearance if they suspected her of being a spy.
She repeated to herself the Friends mantra: she was here to help
children in need, without fear or favour.

It was one thing, though, to say 'without fear' but another thing not to
feel it as the unsmiling, imperious soldier scrutinised her passport and
then each of the letters. He looked around him. 'Is this Jamie Murray
here to meet you?' He seemed to spit out the hard H of the Spanish J.
Lucy reached past him to point to Jamie. The soldier leaned in, so close
she could smell his breath. 'We will be watching you. If we find you are
not who you say ...' He made a gesture of a knife across the throat, and
Lucy forced herself not to shrink from him, not to run back up the
gangplank on to the boat. The soldier returned her papers and indicated
that she should go to Jamie, but she could feel his eyes on her back as
Jamie rushed forward and lifted her off her feet, covering her face with
kisses. Two sailors nearby whistled and applauded, and one called,
'Lucky devil. Give her one for me.' Lucy and Jamie both pretended not to
understand. Lucy looked over her shoulder and saw the Falangist soldier
still observing them, saying something to his partner, fingering the
holster of his pistol. 'We should move away from here,' she said
nervously. Jamie followed the direction of her gaze and grinned at the
soldiers with his open, trusting smile. 'Don't worry,' he said in
Spanish. 'I'm well known for what I write in support of Franco's regime.
You are quite safe with me.' Then he laid his arm over her shoulder,
picked up her suitcase, and led her away. As they entered the shadow of
a narrow road between buildings, he drew her to him again and kissed
her. Lucy was trembling, but whether from agitation or delight, she
couldn't have said. Finally, he held her at arm's length and looked her
up and down as if he was memorising every part of her. 'You are such a
sight for sore eyes. You look more beautiful than I

remember. A bit thinner. But it suits you.' He touched her head. 'Your
hair's gone as light and curly as when you were young.' She relaxed a
little in the glow of his attention. Perhaps he was right and she
shouldn't be afraid. He had always protected her, and it was a familiar
homecoming to allow herself to lean against him. After all she had seen
and done in the past four months, it would be a comfort to be the one
who was taken care of for a few days. She gazed at him too and touched
his nose. 'Your freckles have all joined up!' 'It's called a suntan!'
The unguarded adoration in the way he looked at her was like stepping
from a dark cellar into the sunshine, and Lucy thought, oh I do love
him. I do! 'I've found a little hotel,' Jamie said, picking up her case
again. Over his shoulder he caught the expression on her face. 'Separate
rooms, of course. What do you take me for?' Lucy hung on his arm as he
threaded his way through the crowds at the quayside. And Jamie smiled
down at her. 'I want to hear about everything you've been doing. I am so
proud of you. I think you might have become some sort of saint.' She
stopped and reached up on tiptoe to kiss his cheek. 'Not quite.' 'Thank
God for that.' He turned his head and kissed her quickly, full on the
lips. Lucy washed herself and pulled on Margarita's grey frock,
smoothing down her wayward hair. She could hear Jamie moving about in
the next room as he dressed for dinner, and there was a thrill of
naughtiness at the idea of him so close. She ran a finger over her lips
where he had kissed her, and smoothed her dress over the breasts and
hips which he had never touched. In her case, wrapped in a pair

of stockings, was the jam jar Margarita had given her, with the sponge
soaked in vinegar. The thought of it, and what it would mean if she had
to unwrap it, caused a flutter of anticipation low down in her stomach.
There was a small mirror in the hotel room, and she stared at herself,
trying to see the beauty which Jamie claimed he saw. Her chin still
looked too pointed, her mouth too wide, her hair too frizzy. And yet,
there was something which hadn't been present in the mirror in Murcia,
an excitement which flushed her face and dilated her pupils. The dress
really did match her eyes, she thought. The food in the hotel was
plentiful. There was meat as well as many kinds of fish on the menu, and
the bread was soft and white. When their meals arrived, Jamie said grace
and then began to tuck in to his paella. Lucy looked down at the
beautiful white fish and heaps of beans and rice on her plate and a wave
of sorrow rippled through her. She couldn't eat a thing. 'What's wrong?'
asked Jamie. 'This would feed a whole family. Fish! Vegetables! Bread!'
He set down his cutlery and laid a warm hand over hers. 'I know, Lucy. I
know you've seen terrible things, and I want to hear all about it. But
the refugee families aren't here and you are, and this food will be
thrown to the dogs if you don't eat it. I'm sure your families wouldn't
hesitate.' Lucy breathed deeply and began to eat, and though her body
was craving the vitamins and minerals, her stomach was not used to such
rich fare, and soon told her she'd eaten sufficient. 'You've really been
through it, haven't you?' Jamie asked, and the sympathy in his face was
enough to bring her close to tears. She shook her head. 'Not me. I'm
fine. It's just what I've seen. And it's not as bad as what Tom's going
through.'

A shadow of annoyance passed over Jamie's clear features. Perhaps he'd
hoped that Tom wouldn't be mentioned. He took another mouthful of food.
'How is he?' So the brothers weren't in contact with each other. Lucy
pulled out Tom's latest letter and handed it over. 'I haven't had
anything since this. Almost a month ago.' Jamie smoothed the pages and
read as he ate.

15 April A trench. Somewhere in hell Dear Luce, I'm sorry I haven't
written. There didn't seem much I could say. You wouldn't believe how
wintry and wet it is up here on the plain. Some bloke told me that
Madrid is the highest inland capital in Europe. I don't know if that's
true, but while it's probably spring down in Murcia, it's an endless
winter up here. What can I tell you? Heavy cold rain. Flooded trenches.
Soaked clothes. Sodden blankets. Guard duties. Sniper fire. Mortars.
Bullet-chipped trees. Uniforms caked with mud. Boredom. Confusion. Rats
that will eat a cartridge belt or a boot if they have half a chance.
Excrement everywhere. And bullets singing overhead instead of birds. We
don't see any real birds. The only relief is that it's too chilly for
mosquitoes and lice. And at least we've got steel helmets, bayonets,
maps, field glasses and torches now. But no gun oil. We have to use
olive oil. We dirty our bayonets so they don't flash in the light and
give away our position. Then there's the noise. The rumble of distant
guns. The deafening clatter of a mass of rifles. The whizz and explosion
of shells. Bullets like monsoon rain on a tin roof. The roar and flash
of grenades. The constant

din does your nerves in. I can tell how close a shell will fall by the
whistling sound of it. I take bets on it with myself. And I think about
where I will be hit, whether a leg or an arm would be worse to lose. I
wouldn't like to go blind. They say you survive if you take a hit in
your extremities. In war, only five things matter: firewood, food,
tobacco, candles and the enemy. Send food, tobacco and candles. Yes I
smoke now. Don't be cross. I'll tell you what I'm wearing: woollen long
johns and a long-sleeved vest, two flannel shirts, two sweaters knitted
by Mum, my leather jacket (which now doesn't look so dashing), a trench
coat, corduroy breeches with puttees and thick socks, a muffler, lined
leather gloves and a wool cap pulled down over my ears. And I'm still
shivering. It's too cold to sleep. When we come off guard duty at night
we rake together what's left of the cookhouse fire and stand in the
embers to thaw our feet. We get hot food, though, and cigarettes and
plenty of wine, thank God, which we drink from goatskins. I didn't
realise that the goat fur is still on the inside. That's a bit
revolting, isn't it? It comforts us a bit to know the Fascists must be
just as uncomfortable as us. The Italians and the Moors must be frozen
to the core. Bastards. I had three days' leave and thought about coming
to see you. But in the end I just slept and ate. It was enough not to be
cold and not to be shot at. We know when the Fascists are coming into
battle because they ring the church bells first. That gives us some
warning. Idiots. Our best weapon is a megaphone someone got hold of. At
the point where the Fascist trenches are closest we shout, 'Buttered
toast! We've got hot buttered toast over here!' and 'You are working
men. Why are

you fighting against your own class for the rich bastards?' and 'You
should see the militia women dancing!' And every night we get a trickle
of deserters. Yesterday I saw some green shoots -- iris, maybe, or
crocus. So perhaps spring will come. And as long as the people of Madrid
hold firm, we will be here to protect them from the Fascists. Do you
remember Dolores Ibárruri, La Pasionaria, and her slogan '¡No pasarán!
They shall not pass'? I promise you the Fascists will not pass us to
take Madrid while I've got breath in my body. Though so many have died,
Luce. So many good English boys. At night I say their names over and
over to myself, so they won't be forgotten. Perhaps we could meet in
Madrid on my next leave? They say it's 'Mucha alegría in Madrid' -- much
gayer in Madrid. One of my comrades saw women in a bread queue holding
on to each other's shoulders, having a knees-up and singing. 'We Spanish
die dancing,' they say. I should like to see that bravery and defiance.
It would do me good. Could you get there? I don't know when that will
be. Well, sorry if this is depressing, comrade. Maybe the censor won't
let it through. Everything before Spain feels like another life, and I
can't allow myself to think of it too much. But it helps to know you
aren't so far away. Tom A flicker of relief passed over Jamie's features
before he folded the letter and passed it back across the table. He must
have noticed that Tom called her 'comrade' and wrote no messages of
love. 'I wish you could persuade him to go home,' he said. 'I wish I
could persuade both of you to go home.'

He met her gaze and his eyes were blue as a Murcian sky. Lucy thought,
he always was the most handsome of the brothers. As if he read her mind,
he smiled and took her hand. 'Come on, let's go and join the evening
stroll along the promenade. The boys will be looking at the girls and
the girls will be looking at the boys, but I will only have eyes for
you.' It could have been the most romantic evening of her life if it
weren't for the memory of the horrors she had so recently been living
with, and the shock of seeing so many smartly dressed German soldiers,
who mingled with the locals, talking and laughing. How could Jamie think
Fascism was acceptable? How could he let himself be so blinded to what
was really happening? But she bit back the critical words, determined
not to spoil their first evening together. She reminded herself sharply
that she was here to see how the refugee children were treated, without
fear or favour, not as a judge of a political regime. So they watched
the sun set over the sea and she allowed herself to lean back against
him, with his arms wrapped around her waist. She was slightly tipsy from
the glass of wine he'd given her. It felt as if this was where they had
always been meant to be, ever since she was five and he was seven,
fitted against each other. Comfortable and right. Back in the hotel,
outside her door, they kissed, deep and delicious. Jamie told her she
was the love of his life and the most beautiful girl he had ever seen,
but finally he kissed her on the nose and said, 'Go to bed, my darling,
we've got a lot to see tomorrow.' The next morning Lucy wore her Quaker
armband over her dress, and as she pulled it on, it seemed to refresh
the confidence she'd gained in Barcelona and Murcia and strengthened her
resolve to look for the truth. She held her head very high and reminded
herself she was here on official business for Save the Children
International as well

as the Friends Service Council. She carried a notebook and pencil for
her fact-finding work, and tried to ignore the itch of the new mosquito
bites she'd gained in the night. The hotelier had given her a lemon to
rub on them. A driver in Franco's army uniform had been assigned to take
Lucy and Jamie around. He looked uneasily at her armband and she told
him firmly, 'Servicio Internacional de los Amigos -- Cuáqueros. Friends
Service International -- Quakers. I am here to make a report about
refugees and education.' Jamie beamed with pride at the new side of Lucy
he was seeing, though Lucy caught the driver pulling a sour face which
might have meant 'Protestants!' or 'women!' He held the door open for
her to climb into the back seat of the car and then showed Jamie the map
of the places they would visit in the next five days -- Ronda, Córdoba
and Sevilla. It sounded so exotic to Lucy and she knew she would have to
remind herself constantly that this wasn't a holiday. In the car they
held hands out of sight of the driver, and opened the windows wide to
let the rushing air cool them. They talked and talked as they made up
for the months they'd been apart. Jamie began in his perfect, formal
Spanish, telling her about the numerous stories he'd written for the
newspapers in England and all the film trips he'd been on with Pathé. He
described Father Vicente jumping out of trenches to give the last rites,
oblivious to bullets churning the ground, the purple tassel of his beret
flying in the wind. With satisfaction he listed the medical supplies
which had been donated by British Catholics, and the number of nurses
who'd volunteered from the UK. He tried to convey the disgust he'd felt
at the sight of stately houses and beautiful churches which the
Republicans had left inches deep in human dung. The image of these
churches obviously epitomised everything he hated about the

Republic -- what he saw as the disorder, chaos and filth which sprang
from a rejection of Catholicism. Lucy could see that the driver was
listening -- how could he help it? She replied in Spanish, and Jamie
complimented her on her progress with the language, though said she'd
picked up some interesting colloquial habits. She said a few words in
Catalan and she saw the driver scowl, though Jamie looked impressed.
Lucy switched to English to tell Jamie all about the refugees in
Barcelona and Murcia and the massive task faced by the Friends. Jamie
had always been a sympathetic listener and it was a relief to her to
pour out the details of the plight of the refugees and the work she and
her colleagues were doing to keep the children alive. The road twisted
and turned away from the coast and up into the mountains as she told him
about Alfred Jacob and Domingo, but as she said Domingo's name she saw
the expression of the driver in the mirror, and realised he could
understand English as well as Spanish. She would have to be careful, so
she changed the subject abruptly. 'But let's not think of that now.
How's your mother?' Of course Lucy had frequent letters from Mrs Murray,
but she let Jamie give her the news about his mother visiting
Lanarkshire and being reconciled with her family. 'Just think, I have a
whole family I've never seen,' he said, 'who cut her off just because
she married a Catholic.' 'If you went home now you could meet your
grandparents and cousins. I'm sure your mother would love to have you
with her.' He shook his head. 'I have my work here, and it's important,
Lucy.' She bit her tongue. Now was not the time or place to try to
persuade him he was mistaken. Instead, she turned the conversation back
to their childhood and watched the landscape of Andalucía out of the
window as it became gradually more mountainous and

olive groves gave way to pine forests against a vividly blue sky. She
saw craggy peaks with little white villages leaning against rocky
outcrops and watched a whole flock of sheep picking their way single
file down a track. In Ronda they were taken to two schools run by nuns,
and Lucy could see that all the children were decently fed, neatly
dressed and obedient. She took a few notes. The pupils sat in formal
rows and learned their lessons by rote. It was very different from the
progressive education she'd seen in Barcelona, but she could hardly
fault it -- it was how most young people in England were taught. She
walked around the classrooms and spoke to a few children and teachers,
but they had been well drilled and there was little to learn about what
might lie beneath their combed hair and shiny shoes. The youngsters'
accents were quite different from the Málagan and Barcelonian she was
used to hearing, but her Spanish wasn't good enough to tell if these
were simply local dialects or whether they came from the rich and middle
classes. 'How was it?' asked Jamie, who had been strolling around
outside while he waited. 'Orderly and calm.' He nodded with
satisfaction, and she could see again the little boy who liked to have
the pencils lined up exactly on his desk and for whom any disruption to
the expected timetable of their lives had been deeply disturbing. 'Just
like Ampleforth, I expect,' she said, and he began to warmly reminisce
about the world of his public school, with its bells and rules which had
gone back unchanged for generations. Their hotel in Ronda had a terrace
overlooking the countryside of rolling hills rising to meet sheer,
jagged cliffs. Some fields were almost vertical but still cultivated.
Close by they could hear a Spanish guitar player. It would have been
perfect apart from the insects. The terrace

smelled of jasmine and thyme, and canaries in cages sang as if there was
no tomorrow. As if there was no war. They ate cold gazpacho soup and
shared a bottle of wine and Jamie began to tell her memories of his
father which he'd never shared with her before. Small things: his dad
letting him put in the last piece of the jigsaw puzzle; sweeping up the
shards of a glass sugar bowl Jamie had broken, and taking the blame on
himself. As they strolled around the town and stared down into the
famous gorge of golden stone, spanned by its three impossible bridges,
Jamie's voice dropped almost to a whisper as he began to tell her about
losing his father. 'It was like that -- like falling into a deep gorge
and not knowing how I would ever climb out. Tom wasn't so close to him,
and Mother was in such a haze of grief that she let your father bring us
to Welwyn, away from the house we'd lived in with Dad, and she didn't
even seem to notice that your father was trying to take Dad's place with
us.' Lucy remembered clearly how enthusiastically Captain Nicholson had
welcomed the boys as the sons he'd longed for but never had. He would
invite them in from next door to kick a ball about, introduced them to
fishing and, as they grew older, took them to rugger matches. And
everything he did for the boys had been a smack in the face to her. When
she was still little, she tried to join in the ball games, but was sent
away to go and help the housekeeper or cook, until she no longer asked
but just sat on the lawn and watched them, whispering words of vengeance
to her teddy. She remembered the day her father came into the house
humming with two junior-sized fishing rods, and she realised he'd bought
two, not three. He loved them, and not her. But Jamie was thinking of
his father. 'It was as if it was up to me alone to keep my dad alive.
They tried to stop me -- my mother and your father -- but I was only
seven and I found out where the Catholic church was and went by

myself because when I went to Mass, it felt as though Dad would be right
behind me if I turned round, smiling with pride and approval. It sounds
silly, but it seemed he might lay his hand on my shoulder at any minute.
I was close to him there, and had him all to myself.' 'I know. I
understand.' 'I think my childhood ended on the day Dad died. Did I ever
mention that just before he died, he told me to take care of my mother
and Tom? That was the last thing he said to me.' Lucy's eyes welled up.
'You were such a brave little boy, always trying to do the right thing.'
Jamie wiped away the tear that slipped down her cheek, and then kissed
the path of it. 'You were the only light in all that darkness, Lucy. It
was you that brought me out of the gorge and back into the sunshine.'
She turned and kissed him, full and deep, realising how little love she
had known in her life. None at all from her father who should have loved
her most. Jamie's adoration of her was like a downpour of love in a
parched desert, and she wanted more of it. Wanted it never to stop. The
next day they drove to Córdoba, and on the three-hour journey they sat
in comfortable silence watching the scenery or reminisced more about
home. The countryside was flush with new crops, as if the war did not
exist. No wonder there weren't any food shortages in the Fascist
regions, thought Lucy. They passed peasants working in the fields who
lifted their heads and stared at the smart car with the soldier driving
the foreigners. The adults wore ragged blue shirts, black trousers and
broad-brimmed straw hats and their carts were pulled by mules. A boy was
drinking water in the Spanish way, holding a red clay jarra above his
head and letting a fountain of liquid arc into his mouth from the spout.
There were young people working

alongside the adults, and Lucy made a mental note that education was not
universal. She leaned forwards and asked the driver if they might stop
so she could talk to the children, but he didn't take his eyes off the
road, and very politely told her that they were expected at the next
school in Córdoba. 'Will we visit any refugee colonies?' she asked, and
he replied proudly, 'We don't have refugee colonies in Franco's Spain.'
No, she thought, I bet you don't. The Republicans are either dead or in
hiding, and all the refugees who weren't killed have struggled north to
us. She twisted her head to look back at the peasant children, so the
driver couldn't see the expression on her face. When she had composed
herself, she looked forwards again. She was determined she wasn't going
to be fooled into believing everything was all right when it wasn't. The
further inland they went, the hotter it became, until the olive trees
marching to the sky in their orderly ranks vibrated in a heat haze. They
entered Córdoba, and Lucy caught glimpses of plazas with fountains,
narrow white streets, minarets and towers, as if they had driven into
The Arabian Nights. The main street was lined with orange trees and the
bullring dominated the town. There was a flash of river, and an ancient
bridge and archway near the school they were visiting. She stepped out
of the car into air which was soupy with heat. The driver told them it
was over thirty degrees and Jamie translated into Fahrenheit: 'Well in
the eighties.' Lucy thought she would not be able to stand the heat in
midsummer, and finally understood the necessity for the siesta, resting
through the hottest part of the day. After the visit to yet another
scrubbed-clean, well-drilled school, she lay on her hotel bed in her
slip in the drowsy afternoon, and let the slight breeze from the open
window

play over her limbs. It was as if Jamie's kisses had brought her body
alive, so that every nerve ending was sensitive in a way it never had
been before. She drifted to sleep and dreamed they were two columns of
smoke, lifting into the air, mingling and merging. In the relative cool
of the early evening they visited the cathedral. Lucy covered her hair
with her silk scarf and gasped as they entered the Mezquita, once the
great mosque of Córdoba. It was the most perfect building she had ever
seen. Hundreds of stone pillars topped with red and white brick arches
stretched into the distance like a hall of mirrors. The cool symmetry
was infinitely calming. Jamie was busy trying to tell her about the
history; the pillars were meant to represent the trees of an oasis --
the tenth-century this and the thirteenth-century that -- but Lucy held
a finger to her lips and moved away from him to wander alone among the
columns. It seemed as if the stones had absorbed centuries of quiet
contemplation. Here was peace. Where the Catholic cathedral had been
built within the old mosque, it appeared to grow from the original
structure, as one culture grafted on to another, opening the oasis up
into the towering domes of Western architecture. She sat a long time,
absorbing the faith and hope of all those who had gone before. Finally
she looked around, and Jamie was there, watching over her, as he always
would be if she allowed him. He put his arm around her waist as they
walked out into the rapidly falling twilight, and neither of them wanted
to speak, to break the spell, and they each knew the other had felt the
mysterious power of the place. It truly seemed they were one soul,
thought Lucy. Over dinner, by candlelight, in a leafy courtyard under a
persimmon tree, they looked into each other's eyes, and Lucy felt
herself soaking up his adoration, as if she had been a dry sponge and
was now plump with it, revelling in

it. Then the thought of a sponge made her blush as she remembered the
jar in her suitcase, and he pressed her to tell him what she was
thinking, but she refused. If he asked her to go to his room tonight,
perhaps she would. As if he read her mind, in that uncanny way he had,
he said, 'I'm not going to ask any more of you till you promise to marry
me. I know you too well, Lucy. You might be doing it just to please me.
And I want you to be sure of your own mind.' She nodded. 'Actually, I
was wondering, if we got married, whether our children would have your
Scottish freckles,' she said, and he raised her fingers to his lips. 'I
hope they are all girls and they all look just like you.' 'All? How many
do you want? I'll be like one of those fat old Spanish women.'
'Hundreds,' he laughed. 'And I'll always love you, no matter how fat you
get.' But he was true to his word and didn't press her again for a
wedding date, and neither did he invite her to his hotel room or ask to
come to hers. He kissed her long and slow, with a deliciousness she
could feel right down to her toes, and they parted, leaving her longing
for more. Perhaps that was his intention, she thought. As she packed her
case the next morning, she couldn't find Tom's letter anywhere in her
room, but when she asked Jamie he promised he didn't have it. She tried
to remember if it had said anything which would give away Tom's position
or put the Batallón Inglés in danger, and was furious with herself for
bringing it south with her. 'Don't you think it's worrying that it's
missing?' Lucy asked him. 'Doesn't it make you worry about Tom?' But
Jamie shrugged it off. 'I expect you dropped it down the back of the bed
or something.' Lucy withdrew her hand from his and looked searchingly at
him. 'Why can't you believe anything but good of these

people here?' 'They are so genuinely thankful and glad to have their
religion back. Franco has given them order and stability again. Surely
you can see that?' On the road to Sevilla, through gently rolling fields
of wheat and hay, Lucy thought of her seamstress and knew she would
prostrate herself on the floor of the church in Murcia when she was once
again allowed to worship there. If the Republic believed in freedom,
surely it ought to include the freedom to worship, she thought. Perhaps
neither side in this conflict had got everything right. Despite the
disturbing loss of Tom's letter and Jamie's nonchalance about it, and a
growing unease that she was only being shown what the authorities wanted
her to see, Lucy enjoyed being shepherded around Sevilla by Jamie. He
pointed out the hundreds of orange trees which lined the streets and
took her into churches aflame with candles, to show her the pasos floats
and the faithful at prayer. 'You see?' he urged. 'Do you see now?' The
shops and cafés and restaurants were all open and people were hurrying
about their day in a completely normal way. Shop windows were crammed
with mouthwatering pastries and cakes. Business appeared to be booming.
Lucy noted that there seemed to be no children living on the street, no
scruffy urchins. That was good, surely, but it also increased her
suspicions that what she was being shown was too sanitised. The driver
took them to a back street where Jamie knocked on an anonymous brown
door set into a wall. They were admitted to a nunnery and escorted round
a museum of sculpted holy scenes before being sold a jar of marmalade,
made by the nuns. They visited two more schools where there was nothing
of interest to see, and on the last day they were taken to an orphanage,
again run by nuns, where they observed the

children taking their midday meal, which seemed substantial enough.
Jamie made notes for an article while they were told that these were the
abandoned offspring of wicked Republicans but thank God the souls of
these innocents were now safe. Lucy bent down and asked some of them
their names, and where they came from, but once again the replies were
guarded and well rehearsed. As they strolled through the city that
night, Jamie told her how he had always loved her, and her heart
expanded and she thought she would never tire of hearing it. He admitted
how jealous he had been of her boyfriends. 'Do you remember that dance?'
she asked, without any doubt he would know which one she was talking
about. He tutted at the memory. 'You must have been what -- sixteen? And
you went with that oaf of a farmer.' 'Hugh Hamilton.' 'He thought he was
the bee's knees.' Lucy teased him. 'He was very handsome. Every girl at
school wanted to go to the dance with him.' Mentally she added if they
couldn't have you, but didn't want to make Jamie big-headed by saying it
aloud. She knew how the other girls sighed over him; his shyness with
women gave him a slightly aloof air of unattainability. Jamie objected.
'But he was stupid.' 'He wasn't gifted with brains. And it's true he
couldn't dance like you.' 'He didn't have you to teach him.' In fact Mrs
Murray had taught all three of them to dance, pushing back Lucy's
dining-room table to make space. Tom had always been coltish and
exasperating, his energy and enthusiasm never quite fitting the rhythms
of the music. But Jamie let go of his conscious mind and the music
seemed to inhabit his limbs, so he swirled his partner around the floor
in effortless synchronicity. Every girl wanted to dance with Jamie, to
feel him lift them off their feet so that even the most ungainly and
clumsy of them felt

fluid and beautiful. Lucy remembered the slight pressure of his hand in
the small of her back, guiding her into the next turn. They had moved
together as if they were one, and she wondered if that's how it would be
to make love to him. But Jamie was remembering something else. 'You let
Hugh take you outside.' 'It was hot in the barn, and every time we went
round the dance floor either you or Tom were glowering at us.' 'It was a
good job we followed you out, though.' Lucy remembered how thrilling it
had been to be taken to the dance by Hugh and how she had basked in the
envy of the other girls and the visceral jealousy of Jamie and Tom. It
gave her power over them, and she liked that. She hadn't hesitated when
Hugh had suggested they went outside, and led her around the back of the
barn into the dark. But then he'd rammed her up against the splintery
wall, kissing her too hard, and squeezing her breast so that it hurt.
She'd started to push him away, and he'd called her a 'cock-tease', and
had rubbed his crotch against her. She'd shoved him harder, and he laid
one brawny forearm across her chest, pinning her against the barn while
he thrust the other hand up her skirt. She struggled to grab his hand
and yank it away from her body, and called out for help. He pressed his
mouth against hers to silence her, but at that moment, two shapes had
fallen on him. Jamie and Tom dragged him away and rugby-tackled him to
the ground, kicking him hard. Lucy recovered herself, pulling her skirt
back down. She could see Tom and Jamie were going too far. 'Stop!' she
shouted, grasping the brothers by their jacket sleeves. 'You'll kill
him.' 'I'd like to,' growled Tom, aiming a kick at Hugh's thigh. 'Not
half as much as me,' panted Jamie, with his fists raised.

Hugh lifted his head. 'Please, I'm sorry. I got carried away.' 'Don't
you ever touch her again,' warned Jamie. 'Or else,' added Tom, with one
last kick. Lucy leaned over him. 'And don't you dare try that with any
other girl either, or I'll set these two on to you.' Hugh nodded. 'I
won't. I promise.' And though Lucy didn't believe him, there was little
else she could do, so she linked arms with Jamie and Tom. They didn't go
back into the barn, but walked home together. Lucy assured them both
that Hugh hadn't hurt her, but she was trembling all over from the shock
of his attack and the knowledge that she wouldn't have been strong
enough to fight him off. It would be a long time before she would trust
a boy again. Looking back, she realised it was the only time she'd ever
seen Jamie and Tom so united in purpose. 'We did get there in time,
didn't we?' Jamie asked, tension evident in his voice. 'You did,' she
reassured him. Then she stopped. 'Would you still want to marry me if
he'd ...?' 'Of course I would,' said Jamie, but Lucy thought she could
detect a note of hesitation. During the night there was a disturbance
outside in the street and she woke to the sound of running men and a
scuffle. A couple of shots rang out and she jolted up in bed, grasping
the pillow to her chest, wanting to look out of the window, but not
daring. It seemed as if the whole town was silent and listening, as a
woman wailed, pleading, 'No, no, he's a good boy!' The noises moved away
towards the outskirts of the city and her heartbeat quieted as she tried
to settle. All she could hear was water from the fountain in the hotel
courtyard. Just as that was easing her back into sleep, there was a
rattle of multiple simultaneous gunshots. She

leapt awake and clutched the sheet, certain she had just heard a firing
squad. What else could it be? She waited in the dark, but the hotel was
silent, as though nobody dared to move or breathe. Eventually the
thudding of her heart slowed and she lay down again, but sleep did not
return until the sky lightened. Over breakfast she tried to discuss it
with Jamie, but he said he'd slept like a baby all night, and the
hotelier just shrugged and averted his eyes. She even questioned the
driver, who flatly denied there had been any disturbance and smirked as
he suggested it had been a nightmare. Jamie nodded patronisingly, and
Lucy fumed, certain of what she'd heard. Determination steeled in her.
She was not going to be fooled like him. On their last night they
returned to Marbella, and were once again walking along the seafront,
but this time Lucy couldn't enjoy the evening promenade. She had been
tense and jittery all day following the flat denials of the events of
the previous night. It was going to be hard to leave Jamie and return to
the squalor and desperate need of Murcia, but at least there she wasn't
being lied to or treated like an idiot. She was frustrated that every
attempt to speak to people outside of the schools and orphanage had been
blocked by their driver, and she knew that her report would be a
whitewash. She felt perhaps she should have worked harder to find out
what was really happening under the squeaky-clean surface. When she
shared her misgivings with Jamie over dinner, he shushed her. Later, on
the promenade, there was nobody listening so she tried again. 'I didn't
feel like I was being shown the real picture when we went to see the
schools.' 'Of course it was real, and please speak in Spanish, people
are looking.' She lowered her voice and switched languages. 'It was all
too sanitised.'

Jamie shrugged. 'It's just a return to order. You've forgotten what
that's like. Why can't you believe what you see?' Lucy pulled away from
him. 'For an intelligent man, you can be incredibly stupid,' she
whispered furiously. 'Can't you tell when you're being duped? You only
see what you want to see. You only hear what you want to hear. You only
believe what you want to believe.' 'Aren't most people like that?' 'But
you're a journalist and I expect something better from you. The world is
more complicated, and I'd have thought you might be more questioning.
Tom's letter was stolen, and someone was killed by a firing squad, and
you pretend neither happened.' They fell silent as two German officers
passed them, both with Spanish girls on their arms. 'That's what I
mean,' Lucy hissed. 'What about the German forces? They call Salamanca
"the German town" and that's all right with you?' Jamie sighed. 'Maybe
the means justify the ends.' 'You haven't seen the ends -- the starving
children and the bereaved mothers. You should come and see what's
happening on the other side of this war.' Jamie's voice was tight with
indignation. 'They shouldn't have turned their backs on the Church.' 'Do
you think Herr Hitler has poured troops and the Luftwaffe into Spain and
bombed Guernica out of existence to save your precious priests and
nuns?' They reached the end of the promenade and turned towards their
hotel. Lucy was walking fast now. 'And the Moorish mercenaries. Do you
think they're here to save the Catholic Church? You are so blind that
you can't see the truth under your nose.' He trailed her back to the
hotel, and outside her door he touched her arm tentatively.

'Lucy, please don't let's end like this. I thought this was going to be
such a romantic evening. Our last night together for I don't know how
long. Can't we make it up? Please?' But Lucy would not be mollified.
Everything she had said about Jamie was also true of herself. She hadn't
stood up to the driver or the teachers in any of the schools they'd
visited and demanded to see the reality. She was furious with herself as
well as Jamie. 'I need to go to bed,' she said stiffly. 'I'll see you in
the morning.' At breakfast they were awkward and silent, and it was
almost a relief when they parted at the quayside. Jamie looked
distraught as the boat pulled away but Lucy refused to feel pity for
him. When she had arrived in Marbella she'd felt like a flower opening
under his love. But if the price of his love was the truth, that price
was too high for her.

OceanofPDF.com

14

June came and the temperature in Murcia soared. Lucy filed her official
report about her visit to Franco's territory, which seemed to say next
to nothing, then she wrote to Jamie that she was sorry they had not
parted on good terms, and she hoped he would open his eyes to what was
really going on in Spain. The thought of marrying him receded into the
distance. Those first romantic days in Marbella and Córdoba felt like a
dream, and she was glad the jam jar had stayed in her case and she'd
done nothing to commit herself further to him. When Francesca left
Murcia to go back to her school in Birmingham, Lucy was sad to say
goodbye, but Francesca promised to return in August during the school
holidays, and Lucy had a great deal of preparation to do in the
meantime. She liked the energetic Esther Farquar who took over
management of their projects and brought with her generous donations of
money and goods from the American Friends. On their first day together
at the Pablo Iglesias shelter, Esther saw one of the boxes which the
condensedmilk tins came in being borne carefully out of the building,
surrounded by weeping women. Lucy explained that half of the refugee
babies died. More than ten tiny makeshift coffins were carried out of
the shelters every day. 'No wonder all the women wear black,' said
Esther.

Lucy continued her efforts to persuade mothers to take sickly children
to what was now being called the English Hospital; she helped with the
literacy workshops for the young women at Pablo Iglesias and was
particularly pleased with the progress of sixteen-year-old and
thirteenyear-old sisters Juanita and Carmelita. She also began to travel
around the military hospitals. There were hundreds of wounded
international volunteers in Murcia at any one time, and they seemed to
include men of every nation. The English, Scottish and Welsh soldiers
she met had left jobs and families at home to come and fight for the
Republican cause, and now they lay in sweltering heat in wards of forty
or fifty other men, unable to understand anything their doctors and
nurses said to them. Most of them spoke no Spanish, so were in isolation
as well as suffering great pain, and they hated the 'greasy' food they
were given in hospital. Lucy spoke to the medical staff on their behalf
and the men looked forward eagerly to her visits. Some told her stories
about the horror of the trenches which she wished she hadn't heard,
always imagining Tom in the scenes they described, while other men had
been shocked into wordlessness by their literally unspeakable
experiences. She asked all of them about Tom and occasionally found a
man who knew him and was able to say he was alive and in good spirits
when he last saw him. But everyone reported that the fighting was bitter
and relentless and every day she expected to get news that he was dead,
or lying in a hospital bed somewhere. After a day's work sometimes she
and Esther would join the evening promenade along the Malecón -- the
embankment built to stop the River Segura from flooding into the town.
On one side rose groves of date palms and oranges. On the other was the
rushing brown water and the green Moorish garden or heurta, ringed by
tawny hills,

which would have been beautiful were it not being used as one huge
public latrine. Esther linked arms with Lucy and they both ignored the
saucy remarks hurled at them by the gangs of passing youths. They talked
about anything and everything. Esther marvelled at Lucy's bravery in
coming to a strange wartorn country on her own, not as a representative
of any organisation. 'Your mother must be a remarkable person to have a
daughter like you,' said Esther. 'I never knew her,' said Lucy sadly.
'She died when I was born.' While Lucy waited for Francesca's return she
also began working on the plan to set up a children's summer camp on the
coast. By July Murcia was burning hot, with thousands of people crushed
into its streets and hovels, and it stank of excrement. The sun scorched
down as she stepped out of a shady alleyway to cross each scaldingly hot
square, and the flies were terrible. The lack of toilets in most of the
houses meant people simply squatted in the streets. As the human faeces
dried in the sun, dust from it blew on to the fruit and vegetables in
the market and the number of typhoid cases grew each day. Lucy knew she
had to get as many children as she could out of the city to somewhere
healthier. She went to see the Mayor again and he spoke to the Governor
of Alicante who had been impressed with the Friends' work in setting up
the hospital, and suggested that the quiet fishing village of Benidorm
might be a healthful spot for boys and girls. Lucy persuaded one of the
International Brigade food delivery drivers to take her there one
morning, and they found a white sandy beach flanked by rocky outcrops
and backed by palm and pine trees. It had a well of fresh water and a
welcoming fisherman called Juan who had lost his own wife and children
in the early days of the war. He had a black droopy

moustache which made him look like the saddest person she had ever seen.
A huge white villa stood amongst the pine trees behind the beach. It was
shuttered and closed. Juan told her that the owners lived in Barcelona.
The setting was perfect. Lucy cabled Francesca in Birmingham with a list
of what they would need, and Francesca promised to ship it to Spain
immediately. Towards the end of July, two letters arrived within days of
each other. Lucy could feel Jamie's displeasure vibrating through the
paper. It made her heartsick to read it and she wished she could rush to
him and cover his face with kisses.

23 July 1937 My darling Lucy, I have written so many letters to you
since you left, and then screwed up all of them and thrown them away. I
had hoped by bringing you to Franco's territory that you would see the
world through my eyes, but perhaps it's never possible to force another
person to do that. I have never felt so close to you in my life as I did
that night in Córdoba when we walked out of the cathedral and it seemed
to me we were of one mind, sharing one soul. But now I think I was
mistaken. What I saw there was the complete harmony of the architecture
expressing the harmony of religious feeling, which is of course simply
love. I thought you felt it too, and we were truly one. I have thought
very much about what you said on that terrible last night. I have asked
myself if I'm a fool who only sees what he wants to see. And I concede
that Franco's staff are keen to show

journalists like me and the film crews the best side of his regime. You
ask what has happened to the dissenters, and I fear you may be right to
ask that. But I have seen no evidence. I must redouble my efforts to
find out if there is another side to the story I am so fervently telling
in all my articles. I swear I will do that, for your sake and for the
sake of truth itself. I've thought about the German and Italian troops,
and I would vastly prefer that General Franco was not breaking the
non-intervention treaty by allowing them to fight on our side. But I do
believe many of the Italian troops are fighting for Catholicism, not
Fascism. I wish it was possible to be in favour of the Church without
looking like a Fascist, but in my head they are quite separate, and I'm
not a Fascist, and have never been, and never will be. I just want order
to be restored. As for the Moorish soldiers -- well, as you saw in
Córdoba, the link between the Moors and Spain goes back many
generations, and though they can't be fighting for the Church per se,
they are fighting for the soil in which that plant can grow and
flourish. I don't know if you know -- this month the Spanish bishops
have endorsed General Franco. They are holy men. Can they be so wrong?
On that last night, I had planned to ask you to marry me, here, now, in
Spain, and not to wait for our return to England. It was a crushing
disappointment to hear what you were really thinking. I didn't sleep a
wink that night. I hope all is not lost. I still love you more than I
love life itself. If your promise still holds true that you won't marry
anyone else until we return to England, I will content myself with that.

I am yours, forever. Jamie Lucy read the letter over and over, until the
paper was creased from the sweat of her hands. She began to doubt
herself, wondering if she had thrown away her best chance to be loved,
and then relived the sound of shots in the night, the
too-perfectly-behaved children, the missing letter from Tom, the German
soldiers, and knew she was right. She turned to Tom's letter.

Brunete 26 July 1937 Dear Luce, I am writing this partly because I want
to thank you for all your lovely letters, which mean so much to me, but
also as a record of what has happened here, and all the brave, brave men
who have died for what they believe in. In June we had more time behind
the line. We were able to wash and had fresh clothes. I can't tell you
the joy of clean clothes! A consignment arrived of English tea and
chocolates and books and cigarettes and lighters. I think I told you I
have taken up smoking? It helps when you are feeling hungry, and it
calms the nerves. We had two weeks' rest between our spells in the
trenches, and we went to a small dusty village on a plateau, with cafés
round the square. We slept in barns and schools and sat in the sun and
read. Miles Tomalin pinned up newspapers on noticeboards, and wrote
newsletters for us all to read. I played football every day. We were
allowed to go to Madrid for two days, but no leave beyond that,
otherwise I'd have come to see you. We had American visitors, and the
poet Stephen

Spender came out to speak to us. Imagine that. When shells were dropping
so close. And then into another kind of hell. First the hell of ice at
Jarama and now Brunete, the hell of fire. To begin with we weren't
down-hearted because Charles Goodfellow, a miner from Bellshill, had
proved himself so cool in warfare that he was promoted to
second-in-command, and we all trusted him. When the Battle of Brunete
began we were in reserve, watching from the hills -- and we could see
the advancing columns of men, tanks and cavalry moving over the plain
below, as if it was some kind of pageant or toy soldiers. The plain was
flat and brown, intersected by rivers marked out in vibrant green by the
willow trees along their banks. Here and there white-painted villages
reflected back the glare of the sun. And then we moved down on to the
plain ourselves and discovered that what looked like a flat, brown
surface was actually stubbly grass and sandy soil cracked into ravines
by lack of rain. It was impossible to dig proper trenches and there was
no cover except the willow trees. Every time someone was careless with a
cigarette end the stubble caught alight and the smoke drew enemy fire
towards us. I can tell you we shouted at the man who'd failed to
extinguish his fag end properly! It was over a hundred degrees for more
than twelve hours each day. Everyone burned and blistered, and you
drained your water bottle within an hour. The quartermaster dropped food
and water to us, and somehow Ernie Mahoney got mail to us in his little
van every day. We thought we were going to die of heat and thirst if the
constant snipers and shells didn't get us first.

On the second day we took Villaneuva and captured the Fascist
quartermaster's stores. That night we had cheese and coffee. And the
next day Frank Graham, who was a student from Sunderland, caught and
mounted a white horse and rode it bareback to the top of a ridge we
called Mosquito Ridge. He looked magnificent! After that, the Fascists
took Mosquito Ridge and they rained down their vengeance. It was like a
constant hailstorm of steel from their artillery, plus bombing from the
air. We counted three hundred Italian bombers. Supplies and the wounded
were moved by night, mostly on stretchers and mules -- can you imagine
the bumping of that to a man with gaping wounds? -- the Fascists
destroyed four of our ambulances. The heat was intense, not just beating
down from the sun, but all around in the air and shimmering up from the
ground. I've never felt anything like it, but one comrade used to be
employed in a steelworks and he said it was like the furnaces there. We
scraped dry river-beds to try to find water to drink. One man found a
small pool of water which nobody had touched because it contained a boot
with a severed foot still in it. He threw the boot out and drank his
fill. Men were staggering with heat, hunger and thirst. The Americans
took heavy losses. There are ninety Black American soldiers and they
tell me this is the first ever non-segregated US unit. Even they found
the heat unbearable. Our losses are terrible, Luce. Maybe I shouldn't
tell you, but on 25 July three hundred of us Brits went into battle and
only forty-two stumbled back. So many lovely boys. You would weep. I
wish I could weep. I'm dried up like a river-bed. I took a flesh

wound, but nothing more, and you mustn't worry about it. They dressed it
and it's healing nicely. Now we are back in a village for a few days --
cool and tree-lined. We divide into two types. Some of us sleep like the
dead. Others look like ghosts and say they may never sleep again. I'm a
sleeper, thank God, though I'm often disturbed by nightmares. On leave
we can have our clothes washed and repaired. The women of the villages
are glad to do that for us. We all take less than our full army rations
and send the remainder to children's colonies. Paul Robeson came and
gave a concert. And Harry Pollitt visited. He said £70,000 has been sent
by British miners to help the children of Asturian miners. Each time I
write to you I wonder if it will be the last time. Perhaps I shouldn't
say that, but it's true. I look around me for all the fine young men who
are missing from our ranks, and wonder why I should be spared. So, if
this is the last time, old girl, I just wanted to say that I still
believe in what we are fighting for with every bone of my body, and it
will all be worthwhile if only we can win. Keep your chin up, comrade.
Keep writing. And please send cigarettes. Tom His letter plunged Lucy
into anguish. She had failed to persuade either Jamie or Tom to return
home. She had failed Mrs Murray. All she could do now was focus on the
children and make sure she didn't fail them too. In the last days of
July, a ship docked in Valencia with all Lucy needed for her holiday
camp, and English lorries used by the Friends were despatched to collect
it. Great sacks of beans, peas, lentils, rice and sugar were deposited
from the

Friends' stores and half a dozen convalescing International Brigaders
came down to the beach near Benidorm to unload the tents and poles, pots
and pans, buckets, mattresses, cutlery and the cases of cocoa, dried
milk, jam and bacon which Francesca had sent from England. There were
also bats and balls, supplies for basketry and weaving, books, pens,
crayons and paper. Juan, the sorrowful fisherman, came to help them. The
empty beach was quickly transformed into what Lucy thought looked like a
Scout camp as the soldiers and Juan erected tents, dug latrines and
trenches for the stores, and built a central marquee, topped with palm
leaves. The International Brigaders pitched four tents for the girls
under the pine trees, and three for the boys nearer to the shore. Lucy
had her own small tent. When their work was done, the soldiers played in
the sea, diving and splashing, carefree as children themselves for a few
hours. Lucy returned to Murcia to gather up the helpers she had
identified. A young Spanish girl called Ana was the daughter of
Protestant missionaries and she was already helping to teach the other
children to read. Sixteen-yearold Juanita and her sister Carmelita had
taken readily to the sewing and reading classes, but that wasn't the
principal reason Lucy wanted them with her. Juanita said she had been
plump before the war, but deprivation had removed fat from her waist
while leaving generous padding on her breasts and hips. Her long, dark,
wavy hair fell over her shoulders and seemed to invite the eyes of young
men to her opulent curves and tiny waist. Crowds of boys followed her
around the Pablo Iglesias shelter nudging one another and calling out to
her. The cheekiest pushed the bravest into her so they put out their
hands to save themselves, colliding with her chest. Juanita snarled and
spat at them which kept them in line, but it seemed only a matter of
time before they would overcome her by sheer weight of numbers and
surging testosterone. Her skinny

younger sister Carmelita stuck close to her, guarding her and shoving
away the troublesome packs of boys, but Lucy was keen to remove Juanita
from danger. She also chose two seventeen-year-old boys she liked --
Julio and Alfonso. Julio was smart and respected by the other children
while Alfonso was a slender, timid boy whose eyes glanced off Lucy's in
the manner of someone who has been teased or tormented and who longs to
be invisible. He too might be better off in another environment, she
thought. The five of them helped her to find the forty girls and boys
between the ages of six and fourteen who were to come to live on the
beach near Benidorm for the first three weeks. Some of these were
children who had simply attached themselves to families in the terrified
dash from Málaga, not knowing what had happened to their own parents.
One was a girl of about six whose name was not known because she had not
spoken since she'd been discovered. It was assumed that her family had
all been killed as they fled Málaga. A passing woman had scooped her up
and brought her to Pablo Iglesias with her own children. 'She stood on
the road crying and crying,' said the woman, raising her eyebrows. 'It
turned out this was because she'd wet her knickers. Imagine that! Her
family all gone and she's crying because she's wet herself.' The woman
had called her Concha. Lucy stood looking at the child, who had straight
coal-black hair cut in a rough bob and a sickly, yellowish face. The
girl stared back impassively, as though she felt nothing. Lucy
determined to take her, and the woman who had found her sighed with
relief. 'I don't think she's stupid,' she whispered to Lucy. 'But she's
sullen, with no spark of life.' Lucy crouched down, level with Concha.
'I am taking some children to the seaside. Would you like to come?'

Concha looked into her and through her with dark brown eyes which were
blank with hopelesssness. After a long moment she nodded briefly and
stepped towards Lucy. Her hair fell in a curtain across her face, and
she didn't push it back. 'That's all the thanks you get,' shrugged the
woman. Other young refugees were nervous at leaving their remaining
families, and the mothers were pitifully anxious as they kissed them
goodbye, having lost so much already. They had come to trust the blonde
English girl, and the older girls Ana and Juanita promised that the
younger children would be well taken care of. It seemed as if all the
occupants of Pablo Iglesias came out to watch or hung from the unglazed
window frames as the youngsters were loaded into an International
Brigade lorry to be taken to the coast.

OceanofPDF.com

BENIDORM August 1937 OceanofPDF.com

15

The two-hour drive from Murcia to Benidorm seemed endless and some
children were sick in the back of the lorry. But as the doors were
opened all that was forgotten as they spilled on to the beach with
screams and whoops of joy, running, throwing up armfuls of sand,
pushing, leaping, and splashing each other in the shallows. For a moment
Lucy wondered if she would ever be able to bring them under control and
prevent them injuring themselves. Only the child they called Concha hung
back, watching it all, but staying close to Lucy as a shadow. 'Do you
want me to call them to order?' asked one of the International Brigade
drivers. Lucy fingered the whistle she'd brought, then held up a hand to
shield her eyes and smiled. 'No, let them run themselves ragged.
Eventually they'll get hungry, and then they'll come to heel.' She built
a fire and began cooking. Drawn by the smell of the smoke, Juan the
melancholy fisherman came over and wordlessly began to help her. Concha
stood nearby and watched them. For the first few days the children ran
wild. None of them had any experience of community life and they had
only been selected on need. They were greedy, self-centred and quick to
anger. Furious battles would suddenly erupt over

next to nothing. Maruja accused Luisa of throwing her sandal into the
sea, Eduarodo said Daniel had stolen grapes, Carmen insisted that Manola
had missed her turn at washing-up. Many of the quarrels were over
mattresses or blankets. The girls were the worst, yelling abuse at each
other or even locking together, screaming, biting or tearing each
other's hair out in clumps. Sometimes it took Lucy and three of her
helpers to pull them apart and calm them down. Most of the children's
games were 'playing war', running around with sticks as guns and
shooting each other. Lucy thought about banning this but decided that
would make it more attractive. Five-year-old Pepe was a complete
anarchist and thief. When everyone else was bathing or eating he would
disappear and Lucy would find him with his hands in the cocoa jar. He
shrieked like a stuck pig when Lucy washed his hands and face. The
majority of the children seemed happy, but ten-yearold Antonio and
eight-year-old Dolores began to weep with homesickness on their first
night, and would not stop until Lucy promised to send them back to their
families on the next supply lorry. They had seen such terror in their
short lives that it now seemed impossible for them to be parted from
their mothers. Concha had attached herself to Lucy and would not leave
her side. She reminded Lucy of some kind of cat, small and dark and
graceful. She never spoke, but clearly understood everything which was
said to her, so Lucy knew she couldn't be deaf. Sometimes she looked as
if she wanted to go and play with the other children, but something held
her back. And they ignored her, as a being who was alien and different.
On the first night she crept into Lucy's tent and snuggled up beside
her. Lucy was determined to be firm and waited until she was asleep to
carry her back to her own bed, but

over the next few nights she woke to find the child next to her on the
groundsheet, or curled at the entrance of her tent in the morning. And
often Lucy would be woken by Concha moaning and trembling in terror,
with tears pouring down her cheeks in her sleep. Then she folded the
little girl into her arms and told her to wake up. 'It's just a dream,'
she said. 'Wake up. I'm here. Everything's all right.' Though she knew
that everything was not all right for Concha or for millions like her,
and the nightmares were not imaginary terrors but the death and
destruction she had witnessed, things no child should ever have to
experience. As Lucy cuddled and soothed Concha, her crying subsided into
hiccups and snuffling, and Lucy drifted back to sleep with the warm
child in her arms. Most of the boys and girls quickly settled, and Lucy
saw she had chosen her helpers well. She had assigned each of them to
sleep in a tent with their own group of younger children, where they
would keep order, comfort them and tell them stories, and the youngsters
became fiercely loyal to 'their' helper. Ana was calm and pretty and
became a particular favourite among the littlest, who would crowd round
her and demand to be played with or taught their letters. The only time
Concha allowed herself to be parted from Lucy was when she listened to
Ana read. Julio taught ten-year-olds how to chop wood, make fires, draw
water from the well and keep from drowning. Alfonso lifted his head and
smiled fully into her eyes when he discovered she had ordered art
materials for the camp. 'Can I use these too?' he asked, and when she
said, 'Of course,' he gripped her hands and kissed them, like a medieval
courtier. Though Alfonso had never had any training, the whole camp soon
discovered that he had been born with a real artistic gift, as he sat
sketching them and giving away his oddly lifelike drawings. Naughty Pepe
was fascinated,

demanding, 'Make me a cat. Make me a train,' and Alfonso traded sketches
for good behaviour. Alfonso also took the older children out on to the
dark beach at night and they lay flat on the sand while he taught them
all the constellations. Lucy noticed that Juanita began to hang around
near this boy who was keen to sketch her but never pursued her or
pressed uncomfortably close, or even dared to meet her eyes for more
than a few seconds. In order to keep a close watch on the couple, Lucy
set Alfonso to work on a project she'd been thinking about for some
time. She had ordered plenty of paper and crayons from England, and
Alfonso encouraged the children to make pictures of their lives before
Pablo Iglesias. Most of them never talked about the horrors they had
witnessed, but their images were full of it. Almost every drawing had
aeroplanes raining death from the skies, with running people beneath
them, or bodies spreadeagled on the ground. One boy drew a square
blanket stretched beside the church. When Lucy asked him about it he
said, as if everybody knew this, 'That's where they put the parts of the
bodies, the bits of people who are blown apart. Arms and legs and all
that.' Concha sat for hours with crayons clutched in her fist, covering
page after page with furious scribblings, pressing so hard that the
paper was quickly worn thin and the red and black crayons used up. Lucy
gathered up the pictures and stored them carefully in her tent. Juan the
fisherman soon took over the cooking from Lucy and she learned how to
make many delicious Spanish dishes as his assistant. When she thanked
him, he told her that Benita, a curly-haired girl from Madrid, reminded
him of his youngest daughter. He turned away as he said it, so she
wouldn't see the tears in his eyes. When he wasn't cooking he watched
over the children clambering about the rocks, often going in search of a
lost child, or dropping

everything and running into the sea to bring back a girl or boy who he
considered had gone too far out. The local coastguard called each night
to make sure everything was all right, and to tell Lucy and Juan the
news of the day. He was shorter than Lucy and completely bald, so his
head resembled a shiny hazelnut. He was called Salvador, and he joked,
'What could a boy called "Saviour" do with his life but become a
coastguard?' As she sat with Juan and Salvador, watching the sunset
throwing red and gold reflections over the sea, Lucy asked if she ought
to set a sentry over the trenches of food, but they both assured her
emphatically that nobody would come from the nearby villages to steal
from refugee children, however poor they were. It was a matter of
honour. The villagers would rather die of starvation than take food from
these children who had suffered so much. Salvador and Juan also promised
there would be no intruders at the girls' camp in the pine forest. Lucy
found it difficult to reconcile this law-abiding community with
everything the newspapers had reported about the rioting and murderous
mobs of the first days of the Republic. 'I don't understand it. People
are so good now. There is complete order everywhere.' Salvador the
coastguard shook his head. 'You can't think what it was like back in
'36. It was horroroso -- horroroso. It was like hundreds of years of
fear and resentment came bubbling up together in one terrible explosion
of violence. A volcano of fire.' Juan agreed. 'Some people seemed to
have a thirst for killing. They were like animals, like wolves or sharks
who have scented blood, and all they wanted was to kill and maim and
slaughter. The government had no control over them. Everyone was
terrified.' 'Horroroso,' shuddered Salvador. 'Horroroso.' It seemed hard
for Lucy now to believe in the horroroso, although there were daily
reminders that the war was still

raging on. During the early hours of the morning, she would sometimes be
woken by the distant rumble of Fascist aircraft returning to their base
on Ibiza from bombing raids, and once she even heard them dropping the
last of their bombs on to Alicante. Concha clutched her in her sleep and
moaned softly. As Lucy got to know the children, they began to seem the
most wonderful beings in the world, who would flash in moments from
temper tantrums to hugs and kisses. By comparison Lucy's even-tempered
class in Welwyn seemed pale and insubstantial. Within a few days the
children had begun to fill out and become tanned and more
healthylooking. Concha's skin had lost its yellowness, and the deep
shadows under her eyes were starting to disappear as she slept more
soundly. Lucy dreaded the prospect of their inevitable return to the
stink and filth of the Pablo Iglesias shelter. At the end of the first
week, as the youngsters sat on the sand eating their evening meal, Lucy
told them they would take part in a children's parliament. She
remembered the reasoned debate she'd seen at the colony in Barcelona,
and wondered if it would look more like a rugger scrum on this beach
with these unruly girls and boys. Still, it was worth a try, she
thought. The younger children were to take their concerns and
suggestions to the helpers, who would be their parliamentary
representatives. A few days later she asked all of them to sit in a
semicircle and the helpers began in turn to bring forward their
suggestions and ideas. Concha sat with her head buried in Lucy's lap. As
a teacher, Lucy had been strict about never showing any favouritism, but
every time she moved Concha away from her, she simply crept back. To her
astonishment, the parliament went off with barely an argument -- except
when Carmen and Manola came to blows over the washing-up. Juanita firmly
separated them

to either side of her. Lucy was most satisfied with her experiment. They
received several visitors to their camp, who told her that Franco had
set up a naval blockade of the Republic's Mediterranean ports, which was
making the import of aid more difficult. The guests watched as the
children engaged in physical activity in the cooler part of the morning,
followed by lessons till lunch, a siesta, then arts or crafts in the
afternoon and a swim as the heat of the day diminished. Lucy wanted
everything to be perfect for the visitors but on the day when two
English nurses came from Alicante, there was a high wind and sand blew
into the soup. Another day, Alfonso had been distracted by a painting he
was doing and he burned the rice. Despite this, the visitors sat under
the palm-roofed marquee and asked Lucy what she needed, making pledges
of money or food or firewood. Lucy distributed the money among her
helpers, although Juan the fisherman refused to take anything. One day
an Englishwoman came from a delegation in Central Spain. Lucy knew that
her approval could mean more financial help for the project, which might
allow it to expand. The beans were tender, Juan's sauce was delicious,
and there were muscatel grapes for dessert. Lucy beamed round with pride
at the children, looking brown and healthy in their little sun-suits and
shorts, tucking in to their food without argument for once. They looked
so different from the pasty, wild children who'd tumbled out of the
lorry from Murcia. Then the visitor looked down her nose and asked, 'Is
there a shortage of soap?' 'I brought a case from England, thank you,'
Lucy said. 'Then why don't you wash the children?' To Lucy they all
looked perfectly clean from a recent game in the sea. 'But we do,' she
said, mystified. The English lady sniffed and pointed. 'That boy's back
looks as if soap hasn't touched it for a year.'

To Lucy's disgust, the woman's delegation did not offer any support.
What did a little dirt matter when there were children to be fed and
clothed? After ten days, Francesca came to visit. She had been busy on a
project of her own, to set up a farm colony for older boys to keep them
from joining the army. She had found the ideal spot in Crevillente and
it was already under way. She observed all the workings of the camp
approvingly, and was happy when Lucy suggested the two of them should
sleep under the stars at the edge of the water. 'I've found the
mosquitoes are less bothersome there,' said Lucy. 'And the sound of the
waves lulls me to sleep.' But Francesca was anxious about the way Concha
slipped down the beach in the night to curl up next to Lucy. 'That child
has already lost everything. If you let her get attached to you and then
leave her, it might break her forever.' 'I know,' said Lucy, wracked
with guilt that she'd already shown her such favouritism. On Francesca's
second-last day, Lucy held a sitting of the children's parliament for
her benefit. The motions put forward were the usual matters of rotas and
food preferences and requests for the little ones to be excluded from
particular games because they got in the way. Lucy was trying to teach
them beach cricket, which was proving especially popular. But she was
startled when Alfonso stood up and said, 'Some of my group have told me
they don't want to go back to Murcia. They want to stay here forever. Or
at least to the end of the war.' There was noisy assent from about half
of the children, while others shouted them down. The original plan had
been to take all these girls and boys back to Pablo Iglesias and bring
another set for three weeks, continuing in rotation until the weather
broke.

Francesca looked thoughtfully around the gabbling, lively circle, seeing
the young refugees so changed in such a short time, and Lucy caught her
eye and nodded to the shuttered white villa at the back of the beach.
Francesca smiled, and Lucy knew that smile meant business. The next day
Lucy and Francesca went to see the Mayor of Benidorm, who knew where the
villa owners lived in Barcelona. Margarita was despatched to talk to
them, and by the end of the next day she had cabled permission for the
Friends to set up a colony in the house. When Lucy gave the news to the
children, there was uproar. She held up a hand for silence. 'The older
boys will go with Francesca to a wonderful colony, where they will learn
the latest farming methods and other skills to earn a living, but the
younger boys and the girls who want to will move into the villa.' There
was animated chatter again, and Lucy waited for it to die away. 'First
you must all return to the Pablo Iglesias shelter and ask permission
from your families. If your mothers don't want you to come and live in
the colony, then you will stay with them. Do you all understand?' The
children broke out again into high-pitched, noisy excitement. Concha's
warm, sandy hand crept into Lucy's and she looked down at the little
girl, pushing her hair out of the huge brown eyes which looked up at her
with a mixture of terror and appeal. Lucy bent close. 'We'll see about
you,' she said.

OceanofPDF.com

16

Most of the mothers were so delighted to see their children looking well
fed and healthy that they gave permission for them to return to
Benidorm, in spite of the sorrow it brought to be parted. When news
spread round the Pablo Iglesias shelter about these tanned, happy girls
and boys, many more parents came forward to beg that Lucy should take
theirs to the beach. It was hard to choose just forty from so many in
such terrible need. Lucy was also busy buying the equipment she'd need
to establish the children's colony at the white villa behind the beach.
The shops and suppliers she'd used in setting up the English Hospital
were happy to help again, and many donated pots, pans and even beds.
Everywhere she went, Concha was at her side, peeping out from behind her
curtain of sleek hair. Lucy bought her a tortoiseshell hair slide and
the little girl marvelled at it as though she had never been given
anything in her life before. Her hair would have stayed out of her eyes
better if Lucy had cut a fringe, but she didn't want Concha to look like
an unwanted colony child. Lucy had asked the woman who'd found Concha on
the road if she had permission to take her to the new White Villa colony
and the woman had replied with a dismissive

flick of the wrist. 'Take her. I've got enough to do trying to feed my
own.' But Lucy still wasn't convinced that she wanted the responsibility
for Concha. She had come here to bring home Tom and Jamie, not to adopt
a Spanish refugee. What if either of the boys called for her and she had
to leave in a hurry? She couldn't promise to take Concha with her. She
went to see the Refugee Committee but couldn't tell them the girl's real
name or age or where she had lived in Málaga. Alfonso had drawn a
lifelike sketch of her, so Lucy left that with details of her height and
weight and a small pink birthmark on her left shoulder. Perhaps her
family hadn't all been killed, and someone would come looking for her?
They entered her into the 'orphans' card index. Lucy hoped that when
Concha was living in the White Villa, she would slowly become more
independent and would want to remain there when the time came for Lucy
to leave. Lucy had written home to her Quaker colleague Ruth about her
project, and the Welwyn Friends had agreed to donate a regular sum, in
addition to the donations from her visitors. Now her project had
funding, she was able to go to the Mayor of Murcia and ask for his
recommendation in hiring two student teachers. Children from the camp
and the villa would be taught together until the weather broke and then
the teachers would stay on to turn the White Villa into a proper
school-colony. 'I want teachers with modern methods,' she said firmly.
'They must be able to help the children learn through games and art, and
be prepared to play in the sea and on the sand with them.' He smiled.
'All my students have modern methods. I will ask Mateo and Valentina. If
they say yes, you can come and meet them.' The funding also allowed her
to take on more teenaged helpers from among the older refugee children
at Pablo Iglesias, and a second cook to work alongside Juan. For the

cook she chose Emilia, a gaunt woman in her late forties, whose clothes
hung on her body as though she had once been much fatter. She kept
herself apart from the other women, but they treated her with respect,
knowing her children had died on the road from Málaga. It didn't matter
if she couldn't cook -- Juan would teach her -- and it would be a
pleasure to take her out of the refugee hostel. Lucy would find cleaners
from the local village. She went back to the Mayor's school and met
Mateo and Valentina, the stars of his latest teacher-training class.
Mateo was a lean young man who shyly said he hoped to be able to
introduce drama and dance to the children in her colony. 'As well as the
other subjects,' he added hastily. Valentina was a square-built young
woman with heavy eyebrows, a faint, downy moustache, abundant hair and a
readiness to laugh which seemed to overtake her for no reason. It would
be good to have someone with such a merry disposition, thought Lucy as
all the arrangements were made. She marvelled that a simple idea was
providing employment for so many people as well as a healthy new life
for the young refugees. Once again the International Brigaders helped
with transporting the children and staff and setting up thirty beds in
the White Villa, but though she quizzed all of them, nobody had recent
news of Tom, and no letters had come through for weeks. They were able
to tell her that the remains of the Batallón Inglés had joined with a
Spanish battalion and been moved up to the Aragon Front near Teruel,
where a new military offensive was beginning. Everyone knew that Franco
had now taken Santander and neutral ships in the Mediterranean were
being attacked by submarines -- probably Italian and German. But they
shook their heads when she asked about Tom. 'I'm sure you'd hear if it
was bad news,' they offered, and that became her mantra. No news must
mean no bad news.

Although Lucy was anxious about Tom and sad about the rift with Jamie,
she had little time to dwell on either when she returned to Benidorm in
the last week of August with almost seventy children and her new staff.
She was busy from waking till sleeping with overseeing the slow taming
of the fresh influx of children from Pablo Iglesias, making sure Mateo
and Valentina understood the ethos of the colony, mediating the rivalry
between Juan and Emilia to come up with the tastiest and cheapest
recipes and watching out for romances between her teenaged helpers.
Juanita and Alfonso were now openly a hand-holding couple and clearly
infatuated with one another. Lucy felt obliged to have an embarrassing
conversation with each of them about the facts of life. All the young
helpers had been told that anyone who indulged in sexual activity would
be sent back to Murcia. She couldn't afford any irate parents or
unwanted pregnancies. She didn't want to lose either Juanita or Alfonso,
but wondered if she was taking too big a risk allowing them to remain?
Five-year-old Pepe still trailed round after Alfonso but had become much
more biddable. She hoped that his constant presence would limit Alfonso
and Juanita's opportunities to be alone. As she bustled about the camp
and the villa, she insisted that Concha stay with the other
six-year-olds for school and games. Lucy couldn't help a smile of pride
to see how quickly the little girl was learning to read and write.
Although Concha still didn't speak, the other children were beginning to
accept her and chatter to her without expecting any reply. But she still
slipped out to sleep by Lucy at night, and Lucy admitted to herself that
she liked to half-wake, listen to the swish of the waves and feel the
hot body pressed into her back, or the weight of an arm thrown out
across her stomach. Perhaps everyone needed the warmth of another human
touch, she thought. Then she would turn and secretly kiss the sleeping
child.

In mid-September, as both the camp and the colony were settling into
mostly harmonious routines, the coastguard's van pulled up in the middle
of the day, and Lucy's heart gave a jump as she hurried to meet him.
Salvador looked worried. 'I've brought a message for you. A telephone
call to say that your friend Tom has been wounded.' Lucy staggered
slightly, and he held out a hand to steady her. She felt all the blood
drain from her face. 'He's alive,' Salvador hastily assured her, 'but
it's bad and he's asking for you. They've moved him from the field
hospital to Valencia.' Lucy's thoughts tumbled over each other: how bad,
where was he, how soon could she get to him, would he still be alive,
could she leave the children? 'Go and get your things, and tell the
staff,' said Salvador. 'I will drive you to Valencia. It's my day off
and I have some business to do there.' He was a bad liar, but Lucy
wasn't going to argue -- she just pressed his hand in gratitude. She
rushed around the camp, and threw a few things into a suitcase. Mateo,
Valentina and Juan assured her that they would be able to manage without
her for a few days. 'Go to him. You must go,' urged Juan, and she knew
he was thinking he would not hesitate for a second if he had a chance of
seeing his wife alive again. 'There is nothing more important than the
people we love.' She left Concha in the care of her helper Ana who
promised to watch over the little girl. 'She has nightmares,' said Lucy.
'Then she can sleep with me,' replied Ana. Lucy knelt down next to
Concha whose eyes seemed black in her face. 'I promise I will come
back,' she said. But Concha already knew that promises couldn't always
be kept, and she was crying soundlessly as Lucy was driven away.

Salvador glanced anxiously at Lucy from time to time on the three-hour
journey, but understood that she was lost in her own thoughts, unable
even to see the beauty of the coast road with its higgledy-piggledy
fishing villages, long sandy beaches and impossibly turquoise waters.
Lucy's mind was fogged with worry about Tom and what she would find when
she reached Valencia, and also about how the colony at the White Villa
and Concha would manage without her if she had to accompany Tom home to
England. This would all have seemed so unimaginable to her a few years
ago. She might even have laughed if she'd been told they would all be in
Spain in the middle of a terrible war. It seemed as if their real lives,
the ones they'd planned for themselves, had been whisked away in some
macabre magic trick. Or perhaps they were still going on somewhere --
the lives in which Lucy became a doctor; where Tom was an economics
student, not lying in a hospital bed in pain; where Jamie's kindness and
sharp intelligence had not been hijacked by lies. No wonder the ancients
pictured the gods playing games with humans, picking them up by their
heads and laughing as their legs flailed uselessly in the air. Now Lucy,
Tom and Jamie had been lifted like pawns from one chessboard to another,
and all they could do was wait for history to move them to the next
square. Yes, it was true that they had come to Spain out of their own
choice, but there had been so many junctions where that choice would not
have been necessary: if Germany and Italy hadn't broken the
non-intervention pact; if England and France had stood up to Franco,
Hitler and Mussolini when they began flexing their muscles. And further
back, if Private Murray hadn't died, then Jamie wouldn't have felt
driven to turn himself into a small version of a man he hardly knew, and
Tom wouldn't have been forced to always take a position of opposition.
She was ashamed to think of it but if her father had died instead, then
she wouldn't be

here at all, and her mother might be alive, married to someone else. So
many consequences from Private Murray's single unthinking action. Lucy
shivered to think of the unknown after-effects of the actions she had
taken, and saw them spreading out down the years like the bow wave of a
ship. She thought of the refugees at Pablo Iglesias, of their quiet
existence before the war, where they worried about the mouldering bread,
the milk turning overnight, the pain in their tooth, minor matters of
love and death. And then the cataclysm of war had swept over them,
flicking some of them off the chessboard altogether, and allowing others
to struggle on into the horrific world of the refugees' night shelters.
It was said that five thousand people had died on the road from Málaga
to Motril; ordinary people with ordinary dreams of ordinary lives,
simply wiped out. Why had they died and Concha had lived? How could
Jamie think there was a loving God in charge of all this? She shifted in
her seat, and thought how different it might have been to come to this
beautiful place in peacetime. It was almost hard to remember that in
normal life it was possible to plan ahead, to think: I'll go to see
soand-so this weekend, or visit my aunt, or take a holiday in the Lake
District, or get married, or have a baby. It seemed unimaginable that
for most people in the world, life was still like that, but war wiped
all such possibilities from the map. An air raid, a call to arms, the
needs of one refugee child, could derail your hopes and dreams in an
instant and send you spinning off in another direction, spiralling out
of control. All you could do was be alive in this moment and follow what
your instincts told you, thought Lucy. And be thankful for the million
small kindnesses of others who sent money to feed and clothe children
they'd never met, for the people who owned the White Villa, for Juan who
cooked the beans,

for Salvador who was driving her, glancing in her direction from time to
time, patting her arm in reassurance. She lifted her head and smiled
wanly at him. 'How far now?' 'Nearly there.' Salvador pulled up outside
the military hospital, which was an old warehouse. 'Come out in two
hours to tell me if you are staying or going home with me.' Lucy leaned
over and kissed his leathery cheek. 'Two hours.' And then the dream-like
state of the journey became the clear-brained single-minded need to find
Tom and do anything she could to help him hang on to life. She ran into
the hospital and the blood in her ears was thrumming, 'Tom, Tom, Tom,'
as the young woman on the reception desk dragged her finger interminably
slowly down the list of patients to find his name and tell Lucy which
ward he was in. Lucy half-walked, half-dashed through the maze of a
building, following signs and asking passing patients and medics for
directions. 'Let him be alive,' she prayed, 'just let him be alive,' as
she pushed open the door to a vast ward crammed with beds of injured
soldiers and asked the nurse for Thomas Murray. The smell of
disinfectant was almost overpowering, and the air was so hot and still
it seemed difficult to breathe. Eyes fixed on her from beds all along
the ward. Sweat began to trickle down Lucy's back. The nurse frowned for
a moment and then said, 'Ah, Thomas, yes. Are you a relative? We only
allow relatives.' Lucy looked her straight in the eye. 'I'm his sister.'
'This way, then, but I must warn you he is very ill. The wound itself is
not so bad, but it was not cleaned properly in the field, and now it is
infected.' Lucy touched her arm, and the nurse turned. 'Will he die?'
Lucy forced herself to ask.

Sympathy flickered over the nurse's face before she regained her
composure. 'His fever is very high. Tonight perhaps the fever will
break, or we will lose him.' Halfway down the ward, she stopped at the
bedside of a man Lucy would hardly have recognised. Tom seemed shrunken
under the starched white sheets, apart from one thickly bandaged leg.
His hair was lank, his face thin and glistening with sweat, his lips
cracked and dry. Her heart seemed to turn over in her chest. Oh dear
God, don't let her have come all this way to Spain to watch Tom die! She
quelled the panic which rose up in her. 'What can I do?' she asked the
nurse. 'You can help try to bring down his temperature with cold
compresses. And give him sips of water. And talk to him.' She lowered
her voice to a whisper. 'And you can pray for him, if ...' She shrugged.
Lucy nodded and pulled out a chair, close to the head of the bed. All
around them, men turned in their beds to watch this blonde woman bend
over the English soldier. 'Tom, Tom, can you hear me? It's me, Lucy. I'm
here now, and I'm going to stay with you until you are better.' There
seemed to be a flickering of his eyelids. She touched his face and it
was burning. She pushed his greasy hair back off his forehead. The nurse
brought a cloth and bowl and showed her where to refill it with cold
water. Tom groaned and his body writhed. 'Is he in pain?' she asked the
nurse. The nurse looked at the clock. 'Perhaps. He can have morphia in
one hour.' Lucy wetted the rag, wrung it out and laid it over Tom's
forehead, and he moaned again. She opened the window behind his bed,
hoping for a cool breeze, but the air which came in was as hot and dry
as that in the ward, and two flies buzzed in. The nurse bustled over and
closed the window again, tutting.

Lucy laid the damp cloth on one cheek and then the other, and then his
neck. She pulled back the sheet. His face and forearms were sunburned to
a deep Spanishfisherman tan, which contrasted with the skin that had
been hidden beneath his clothes, which ought to be white, but was pink
with fever. His chest and stomach were covered in small cuts that were
beginning to heal and bruises turning from purple to yellow and so many
bite marks from lice and mosquitoes it was as though his skin had been
written with the story of his time in Spain. She dabbed the re-wetted
rag on his bare chest and he shuddered slightly. His body heated the
cloth in seconds and warmed the water in the bowl which she had to
constantly replace. He was wearing pyjama bottoms which had one leg cut
away to allow for the thick wads of bandages around his thigh. She blew
gently on to his burning skin to cool it and laid her lips briefly on
his hot arm. She spooned drops of water into his parched mouth. In her
head she was saying, 'Don't die, Tom, don't die,' but out loud she was
telling him everything which had happened to her since she'd come to
Spain. Just in case he could hear and would know she was there. He
groaned and writhed and she was almost overwhelmed with helplessness.
After a slow-ticking hour the nurse came with the morphia, and he
slipped into a quieter sleep, though his eyelids flickered with feverish
dreams or nightmares and sometimes he tossed his head. The nurse seemed
satisfied that his temperature was not rising any higher. Lucy watched
the afternoon shadows lengthening until it was time to go down and tell
Salvador that she would be staying in Valencia. 'Until he is better or
...' She couldn't say it aloud. Not Tom, not her dearest Tom! He handed
over her little suitcase, and some food and a water bottle he'd brought
with him. She hadn't realised but it was hours since she'd eaten.

'God bless you,' he said. 'And try not to worry about the colony.' The
colony! She had completely forgotten about the colony and Concha! Tom
was the only thing in the world that mattered. He was the only thing
which would ever matter, and she would never ask for anything else if
only he would live. She returned to Tom's side, and slid her suitcase
under his bed. Night fell quickly, and the other patients began to
snore. Further down the ward a nurse was sponging the body of another
feverish man. She yawned and looked about her as though her mind was on
something else. Lucy continued with the cold compresses, and when she
was sure nobody was watching, she kissed his poor bruised body -- as his
mother might, she told herself. At 10 p.m. the doctor came round and
stood looking closely at Tom. 'His fever is still too high.' 'He always
runs high fevers,' said Lucy. 'His mother would make him sit in a cold
bath.' 'I wish we had a cold bath,' said the doctor. The nurse cut in,
suspiciously. 'His mother? Don't you mean our mother?' Lucy turned her
face away to wring out the cloth. 'Oh, please excuse my bad Spanish.
It's the anxiety.' 'She can't stay here all night,' sniffed the nurse.
Lucy appealed to the doctor. 'But you don't have the staff to keep
applying the cold compresses all night. I can do that for my brother.'
He watched her lay the cool rag over Tom's neck and saw him shiver.
'Just do what you can to bring the fever down. I think there will be a
crisis in a few hours. And then ...' He shrugged helplessly. Lucy knew
he meant it could go either way.

'Then I'll find a hotel,' said Lucy submissively, and thought, or, if he
dies, I might lie here and howl and never get up. Laying the cloth on
his forehead, Lucy remembered the first time she'd really been aware
that he ran high temperatures. When he was twelve Tom had caught scarlet
fever from her. She'd had it mildly and soon recovered, but he became so
seriously ill that Jamie had been allowed home from school for the
weekend, though he was only permitted to look at the bright red face of
his brother from the door of the room. On Sunday morning Jamie had
persuaded Lucy to go to Mass with him to pray for Tom, and because she
was anxious, and Jamie seemed convinced it would help, she knelt beside
him, watching when he got up or knelt down, but not understanding
anything of the Latin. 'It's too difficult, like being in a foreign
country,' she'd grumbled on the way home. Jamie was clearly
disappointed. 'It's important to understand Latin. It's the basis of so
many languages. You can go anywhere in the world and be at home.' She
kicked through the dry leaves and thought quickly. 'Not Germany ... or
Japan ... or India.' 'All right, anywhere they speak a Romance language.
And I could go anywhere in the world to a Catholic church and it would
be familiar.' It started to rain and Jamie pulled his collar up. 'And
don't you think it's rather beautiful that people all over the world are
saying the same words, in Mexico and Ceylon and even Bulgaria and
Sweden?' Lucy had to concede there was something about that which felt
powerful. 'I just hope it makes Tom better.' Jamie's faith was
unshakeable. 'It will. I know it will. I'll go to chapel twice a day at
school until he's well.' As Tom worsened, Jamie redoubled his prayers
and Lucy was sent to help Mrs Murray, as she'd already had the

disease and at thirteen Captain Nicholson considered she should be
learning womanly skills like nursing. Lucy and Mrs Murray took it in
turns to sit with Tom, trying to cool his body as best they could. It
was agreed that Lucy would stay overnight in Jamie's empty room. When
Tom's temperature hit 104 Fahrenheit Mrs Murray ran a bath of cold water
and instructed him to get into it. He was already shivering, and though
his throat was almost too sore to speak, he croaked out, 'Are you trying
to kill me? I'm freezing. I need blankets.' But his mother had been
firm. 'We need to get your fever down. Just do as I say.' He had emerged
from the bathroom with his teeth chattering violently, but his
temperature had fallen two degrees. It was a constant battle. He tried
to pull blankets over him, and Mrs Murray took them away and opened the
window to let in cold night air. At 3 a.m. Lucy woke up to hear Tom
yelling nonsense. She yanked on her dressing gown and slippers and crept
into his bedroom. 'He's delirious,' said Mrs Murray. 'Don't mind
whatever he says.' As Tom sweated and shivered and shouted Lucy was
gripped with fear that he was not going to get better. Her heart felt
like it was being squeezed between two fists. As she laid cold cloths on
his scarlet head and neck, she repeated a snatch of something which
might have been a prayer or an instruction. 'Get better. Make him get
better.' Mrs Murray sponged his chest and stomach, and rolled up his
pyjama bottoms to cool his legs. At 4 a.m., Tom's delirious calling
slowed to an occasional mutter, then stopped altogether as he slumped
into sleep, with his breathing light and shallow. Lucy looked at Mrs
Murray and saw she was holding her lips very tightly between her teeth.
Did this mean he was giving up and letting go of life? She dipped her
facecloth and wrung it out

again, fighting to hold back tears. If Mrs Murray wasn't crying, then
neither should she. She ran the cloth over Tom's arm, and it didn't come
away warm. She felt his skin with her fingers. 'I think it's cooler,'
she said. Mrs Murray laid her palm on his forehead and nodded. Tom
inhaled, a great shuddering breath, and both women stood stock-still,
watching his face. He held his breath for the longest two or three
seconds of Lucy's life, and she held hers too. Then he slowly exhaled,
and she exhaled with him. She and Mrs Murray were frozen as they waited
for him to inhale again. How could she carry on breathing if Tom didn't?
And then he did, gently and normally, as a person who is fast asleep.
'Dear God!' said Mrs Murray. 'Never do that to me again!' Tears began to
roll down Lucy's face as she touched her palm to his shoulder, and then
brought it to her own forehead, to check his temperature against her
own. Although his skin was so red from the rash, his body was no hotter
than hers, and his breath was measured and deep. She watched as Mrs
Murray rolled his pyjama trousers back down, and pulled a sheet and
blanket over her sleeping boy, smoothing back his hair before kissing
his forehead. Lucy longed to kiss him too, to weep against his shoulder,
to have him pat her back and say, 'There, there, Luce. Give over now.'
Mrs Murray straightened, and her eyes were wet. 'I think we need a cup
of tea,' she said, ushering Lucy out of the room and turning off the
light, but not fully closing the door. 'You've been a brick. I couldn't
have done it without you. You will make a marvellous doctor. So calm and
collected.'

Lucy wiped away her own tears. She didn't feel very calm and collected.
She wanted to go and lie down with Tom, to sleep beside him until he
woke, but she followed Mrs Murray downstairs. As she blew across the top
of her teacup, Lucy asked, 'Have you seen him like this before?' Mrs
Murray crunched a biscuit. 'All the time until he had his tonsils taken
out. Not often since then. And please God never again. It makes an old
woman of me.' Lucy looked and indeed Mrs Murray did look ten years older
than usual, with deep circles under her eyes and her hair dishevelled.
'I don't know how you bear it.' 'You bear it because you have to, and
because you have a job to do.' Lucy sipped her tea. 'Can I ask you
something?' 'Anything.' 'At a time like that, do you love him more than
you love Jamie? Do you feel like you don't love anyone else in the whole
world?' Mrs Murray dunked her biscuit thoughtfully. 'When you have two
sons, you love them the same amount, but in different ways. Jamie is my
firstborn, and Tom is my baby. Jamie tears the heart out of me with his
efforts to be a man like his daddy, even though the irony is that his
dad was the spit of Tom, to look at and in character -- always joking
about, never serious like Jamie. While Tom ...' she hunted for the words
'... Tom annoys me and makes me laugh, and it fills me up with love just
to look at him. Though I'd never tell him so.' Yes, thought Lucy, that's
just it. It fills me up with love to look at him. 'And then, when one of
them is ill, or needs me desperately, I don't love him more than the
other, but he takes over my mind, and occupies it completely for a time,

as if all my energy must be directed to the one who needs me most.'
'Yes,' said Lucy. 'I understand.' Mrs Murray smiled at her. 'I know you
do,' and Lucy blushed. Mrs Murray gathered the empty teacups. 'Never be
ashamed for loving my boys.' It was too dark and too early in the
morning for Lucy to go home, so she climbed back into Jamie's empty bed.
She heard Mrs Murray check on Tom and then poke her head around the
door. 'He's sleeping like a baby. You could go to give him a goodnight
kiss if you wanted.' Lucy padded into Tom's room in her bare feet and
her nighty. A streak of moonlight fell across his sleeping form, and she
tiptoed forwards and kissed his cool cheek. He didn't stir. A week
later, Tom was up and about as if he'd never been ill. Jamie had come
home for the weekend again, and his eyes shone with eagerness as he told
Lucy he was sure that his prayers had saved Tom's life. 'Will you come
to Mass with me again, to give thanks?' And though Lucy did feel
thankful, to the very core of her bones, she shook her head. She had
felt too much of an outsider last time. Jamie's disappointment was
palpable. He drew himself up stiffly and forced his face into a mask of
indifference. Lucy always hated not to please him, not to have his
radiant smile of approval, and she relented immediately. 'Well, OK then.
Just this once.' When Jamie returned to school, and Tom was well again,
he mocked her for going to Mass. They were out walking in the woods. Tom
claimed to be birdwatching, but he didn't show much interest in any of
the small brown feathered things she pointed out.

'All that gobbledegook,' said Tom, imitating a monkish plainsong. Lucy
shoved him playfully, and he pushed her back. 'What do you think made
you better, then?' she asked, kicking up the crunchy leaves. He stood
still and was serious. The novelty of that stopped her in her tracks
too. 'You did,' he said. 'You and Mum.' She looked into his brown eyes,
on a level with hers, and he suddenly leaned forwards and kissed her on
the lips. She jerked back, surprised, but could feel the softness of his
mouth on hers, as if it left an impression which would never go away.
Her heart was beating fast. 'What was that for?' He laughed. 'Because
you saved me.'

OceanofPDF.com

17

Now, in the sweltering heat of the Spanish hospital, Tom's breathing was
fast and shallow again, and no matter how Lucy sponged his battered
body, she couldn't seem to cool him. Sometimes a patrolling nurse walked
by on squeaky shoes and nodded approval and encouragement. Most of the
other men in the ward were sleeping, some snoring and some shouting out
in their dreams. Further down the ward a nurse was doing the same as
Lucy, trying to cool a feverish soldier, though she often got called
away to other patients. Lucy and that nurse each had two candles to see
what they were doing, and there was a light at the reception desk, but
the ward was otherwise in darkness. Lucy's eyelids were drooping with
exhaustion, but hour after hour she patted the wet cloth onto him,
wishing Mrs Murray was beside her. 'I won't let him die,' she promised
her silently. She realised love was not a fixed element, but fluid as
water or mercury, flowing into every nook and cranny, filling you up,
just as Mrs Murray had said. The person you loved the most at any one
time was the one who needed you the most. And in this moment her love
for Tom was all-consuming. At 4 a.m., further down the ward, she saw the
nurse pull the sheet up over the head of the man she'd been trying to
save.

Lucy rose to throw away the warm water and refill the bowl with cold.
When she returned, Tom was lying very still in the flickering
candlelight with his mouth slightly open. Oh, no, please no. Please no.
Lucy's stomach contracted with a physical pain. She set down the bowl
and bent close to him. He wasn't breathing. She couldn't hear him
breathing. She laid her fingers on his forehead, registering that it was
now cool not hot. He had died while she'd been away getting water. He
had died in a foreign land without a friend beside him. She had failed
him utterly. Lucy tried to feel for a pulse in his neck, but there was
nothing, so she leaned down, laying her ear on his breastbone, and there
was his heart, his wonderful heart, beating strongly. Be-dum, be-dum,
be-dum. Thank God. He was alive. She lifted her head and now could hear
his peaceful breathing. She sank into the chair and bowed her head in
her hands, shaking violently. The nurse must have seen her listening for
Tom's heart and hurried over. She took his pulse and smiled broadly.
'One saved at least,' she said. Tom had survived and he was going to
live. The nurse tucked the sheet back around Tom's body and blew out the
candles. 'You'd better stay here till morning,' she said to Lucy,
returning to her desk. In the dark, Lucy covered Tom's salty face with
kisses, and wrapped her arms around his body, as she'd longed to when
she was thirteen. Then she sat back in her chair, folded her arms on the
edge of the bed, rested her head on them, and fell into the most
exhausted sleep of her life. At 6 a.m. the morning change of nursing
shift woke her and Tom at the same time. She raised her head and they
looked at each other without speaking.

'You,' whispered Tom. 'You,' she replied, entwining her fingers with
his. She was reminding herself of the exact conker-colour of his eyes,
the lift of his eyebrows, curl of his hair, his slightly sticking-out
ears. His lips were so pink, and the line of his top teeth so straight.
The nurse pushed a thermometer under his tongue and took his pulse,
while Lucy tried to flatten her wayward hair. She must look a sight! The
nurse turned the thermometer to the light. 'Good,' said the nurse to
Lucy, shaking the mercury back down. And to Tom, 'It was very lucky that
your sister was close enough to come in. She saved your life.' A flicker
of amusement passed over Tom's features, and he squeezed her hand. 'Very
lucky,' he agreed and, in English, 'Thanks, sis!' Lucy stood up,
stretched and retrieved her case from under the bed as a nurse brought
Tom a tray with greasy omelette, thin soup and bread. 'I need to find a
hotel, and sleep and wash.' He cocked his head. 'Yes, you look a
fright!' 'Charming!' She gave him a sisterly peck on the cheek. 'Oh, and
Luce ...' 'Yes?' 'I'm starving. Could you bring some better grub when
you come back?' She laughed out loud. The same old Tom. Lucy emerged
into the bright sunshine of a September day in Valencia. It was hard to
make headway against the throngs of people. She knew that a town of
thirty thousand was now swollen to a million with refugees, and it would
be hard to find a hotel room at a price she could afford. She hadn't got
the energy to tramp around one hotel after another, so instead took a
taxi to the office of Barbara

Wood, who was now running the Friends' operations in the town. Francesca
had called Barbara on their first day in Murcia and Barbara had been
supplying truckloads of food to the Pablo Iglesias shelter and the White
Villa ever since. She would be able to recommend a hostel. But of course
Barbara refused to do any such thing. She glanced at Lucy and led her
inside. 'You look done in, if you don't mind me saying so.' Lucy almost
fell into the offered chair. 'I've been up all night, nursing my dearest
friend.' She paused, then seeing the anxiety on Barbara's face, she
continued, 'At four a.m. the fever broke, and he's going to be all
right.' And then the tears came, pouring down her face in a torrent she
didn't have the strength to hold back. Barbara put an arm about her
shoulder and gave her a handkerchief. When Lucy recovered herself,
Barbara announced, 'You'll stay with me for a couple of days. And you
can tell me all about Pablo Iglesias and the English Hospital and your
White Villa.' At mention of the colony, Lucy realised with a start that
she hadn't thought of it for hours. 'I have to get back to the
children.' She looked into the older woman's eyes. 'But it would be so
kind of you if I could stay just a little while.' 'Cocoa and bed,' said
Barbara. When Lucy had slept for a few hours and eaten, she found her
way back to the hospital to see Tom. As she entered the ward, the other
patients began to call out to her in Spanish, 'Hey Señorita, come and
visit me.' 'Can you help me with this?' 'I think I love you.' Had they
done that yesterday? If so, she hadn't noticed. At the sight of Tom,
turning his head and grinning at her, she was so flooded with love for
him it almost stopped the breath in her throat. He began to wolf down
the meal she'd brought, as though he hadn't eaten for weeks, but soon
seemed to be full, and

pushed the remaining food away, so she finished it herself. He had lost
his square shape and become muscular and sinewy, and his dark hair was
unkempt. She laid the palm of one hand against his arm, and felt the
muscles rippling as he moved. The very fact of him living and breathing
was a miracle to her. When she asked how he'd been injured, he simply
shook his head. 'You don't need to know about all that, Luce.' 'You
won't go back there, will you? Isn't it time to go home? Surely you've
done your bit now.' He gave her a long look, but didn't answer and she
knew better than to press him, so she began to tell him about the White
Villa and the antics of the children, and about Concha, finding she was
missing the little girl. 'Typical of you to find a waif and stray,' said
Tom. She felt indignant on Concha's behalf. She was a person, a person
who had nobody, not a stray animal. So they fell silent, and Lucy held
his hand while Tom dozed, turning over the familiar fingers in her palm,
examining his blackened nails and frayed cuticles and an ugly red weal
of a gash which ran from his knuckles to his wrist. It was as if his
hands now belonged to her and she needed to learn every line in the
palm, the bend of every knuckle, the fine black hairs on the back of
each one to fix them in her memory. She bent and kissed the palm, and
when she raised her head, he had woken and was looking at her. He folded
his fingers around hers and she thought for a second that he would say
something mocking, but he just exhaled and whispered, 'I'm glad you are
here.' 'Where else would I be?' They looked into each other's eyes for a
long moment, and nothing more needed to be said. Later, Lucy talked to
the doctor about Tom's leg and how long it might take him to recover.

'We'll keep him here until we are sure he is healing properly. In the
field hospital wounds are left open and just covered with muslin to keep
off the flies. There's a lack of antiseptic, dressings, anaesthesia.
This was deep and has a lot of stitches. Some tendons and ligaments may
have been bruised or torn, but no bones broken. And all the other cuts
and bruises are healing nicely. He's been lucky -- this time.' Lucy
shuddered at the implication of another occasion when Tom could be
killed outright. She wished the bomb had broken his leg. A broken leg
would surely have taken him back to England, and then at least one of
her boys would be safe. 'He's been in different hospitals for two
weeks,' the doctor continued. 'If he carries on improving, he can leave
here in a few days perhaps, but he won't be well enough to return to the
Front. Is there somewhere he can go to?' 'He can come to me to
convalesce. Near Benidorm on the coast.' She felt a need to tell this
doctor that she was not simply a privileged British émigré. 'I run a
children's colony -- refugees from Málaga.' The doctor bowed his head.
'Then we are in the same business, Señorita, mending the broken jetsam
of this barbarous war.' She smiled grimly, and he continued, 'Though I
hope your refugees do not insist on hurling themselves back into danger
as soon as you have made them well.' 'I plan to persuade my brother to
go home.' He looked uncertain. 'I doubt you'll succeed. These
International Brigaders are stubborn men.' Lucy sat by Tom's side for
two more days, returning to Barbara's at night. She had arranged with
Barbara that Tom would be brought down to the White Villa on a Friends'
food lorry as soon as he was discharged. Lucy was going back by train,
but Tom wouldn't be well enough to manage that.

'The doc says you saved my life,' he said on the second morning. 'I
think that means I now have a say in how you spend that life.' He hooted
in derision, and then gripped his side, where laughing hurt his bruised
ribs. 'Not likely.' 'Oh, I thought I had power over you now.' He looked
down at the hand which lay in his and, as he slowly raised his eyes to
her face, she felt him taking in the curve of her waist and her bosom in
a way other men had often done, but he'd never have dared to do openly
before. 'You always had power over me. You just never knew it.' Tom was
still sleeping for much of the time, and when he slept Lucy went around
the ward, talking to some of the other patients. It was like the League
of Nations on this ward, she thought, with wounded soldiers from all
over Europe and America. Some of them she could speak to, and translate
what the doctor and nurses were saying for them, but some lay in painful
isolation. After lunch on the second day she stood up to leave, and it
felt like a physical stab in her chest to have to say goodbye to him.
Dear God, was this how hard it was to love someone? He took her hand,
and peered up at her. 'Do you have to go?' 'I have to get back to the
children.' 'Can't someone else look after them?' 'They are my
responsibility. As soon as you are well enough to travel, you can come
to us. It's all arranged.' 'I don't think I should.' 'It will do your
heart good to see them, and the salt water will help your leg to heal.'
He looked deep into her eyes, and his usual jokey mask slipped to reveal
a Tom she'd never seen before. 'I'm just

afraid I'll never want to leave.' A ripple of hope passed through her,
but she kept her voice casual. 'Then you could stay. The colony is still
work for the Republic.' Tom gripped her hand until it hurt. The words
seemed to be ground out of him, through clenched teeth. 'I have to get
back to the Front, to my comrades. You might make it too hard for me.'
She knew better than to argue with him. 'Well, you won't be much use to
them till you can walk, and you need to convalesce somewhere.' She shook
her right hand free of his grip, and rubbed it with the left. 'I have to
go now or I'll miss my train.' But still she couldn't bear to step away
from him. 'Go on then,' he said gruffly. She bent to kiss his cheek, but
he moved so their lips met and held and she wanted to go on kissing him
forever. She straightened up, trembling slightly and turned away. The
patient in the next bed called softly, 'Me next, lovely Lucy.' 'See you
in a few days,' she said to Tom lightly, though every fibre of her being
was screaming at her not to leave. What if he refused to come to the
White Villa, and went back to the Front and she never saw him again? The
new, serious Tom looked up at her. 'Not soon enough.' As she walked down
the ward, with her suitcase in her hand, wolf whistles passed from
patient to patient. At the desk the nurse said, 'I knew he wasn't your
brother,' and Lucy shrugged apologetically. She looked back over her
shoulder for one last glimpse of Tom, who was struggling up to a sitting
position to wave to her. Every step to the station was hard, as if she
wore lead boots. Why was she leaving him, when love for him had entered
every bone and sinew in her body? She had to remind herself that her
best chance of persuading him not

to go back to the Front was to get him to the White Villa. And if she
knew anything about Tom, her best chance of getting him there was
allowing him to think it was his decision. The ride from Valencia to
Benidorm took six hours rather than four. The train was crowded with
peasants with sacks of vegetables, clucking chickens carried head
downwards, a sack of live rabbits. At one stop a man got on with a
sheep. The other people in her carriage passed around wine in goatskins
and Lucy took hesitant sips, not wanting to seem rude. Out of the window
she saw a group of militiamen, singing as they marched; olive groves;
girls wearing black mantillas. In the late afternoon the train passed
through scrubby, drought-ridden hills so unlike the green of England,
and white villages reflecting back the harsh sunlight. The coast was
rocky in some places and fringed by blonde beaches in others but always
backed by the sea with its ever-changing patches of navy and turquoise.
The seat beside her was empty, and she wished that Tom was in it and she
could lean her cheek against his shoulder, and they could look out
together at all this beauty, untouched by the horrors of the war. As
dusk fell, she allowed herself to think about Jamie and how much he
loved her, and that she had honestly believed in Córdoba that she loved
him in the same way. Perhaps she had been intoxicated by his adoration
of her and wanted so much to please him that she had fallen in love with
the idea of loving him? She couldn't bear to think of the pain it would
bring him when he found out how she felt about Tom. It was dark long
before the train reached Benidorm station, and she pulled her torch out
of her suitcase to walk the mile and a half to the White Villa. She'd
never done it at night before and was nervous of wild animals or drunken

men. But there at the exit was Salvador's coastguard van, and she opened
the door most gratefully. 'You shouldn't have come,' she said as he
started the engine. 'I had dinner with my auntie in the village, and I
knew the train would be late.' 'I'm very glad to see you. I feel quite
worn out.' And as she said it, the emotional strain of the last three
days made her feel limp with tiredness. Salvador was trying to see her
face and she realised she hadn't told him about Tom. 'He's alive!' she
said. 'It was bad the first night, but he's going to make it. And it's
all thanks to you taking me there to nurse him. I'll never be able to
thank you enough.' Lucy told him that Tom would be coming to the White
Villa to convalesce. 'And if I can I'll stop him going back to fight.'
Salvador grinned approval. 'If anyone on this earth can do it, you can.'
When the car pulled up in front of the villa, first Juan and then the
teachers and then a flood of excited children who should have been in
bed tumbled out to welcome her, and as they crowded around, she realised
that the White Villa felt like home. They were all talking at once,
Valentina and Mateo assuring her that everything had been fine apart
from all the lights fusing and three boys having sickness and diarrhoea
and the flash in the sky of bombs falling over Alicante which had
frightened many of the children; Juan wanting to know if her dear friend
Tom was alive; Juanita and Alfonso had had a lovers' tiff and weren't
speaking; the girls 'telling' on each other -- who had pulled whose
hair, stolen whose pencil, trodden on whose toes. Lucy smiled and nodded
at them all, looking anxiously around for Concha. 'Is Concha sick?' she
asked.

'Heartsick,' said Juan, standing aside so Lucy could see her, hanging
back in the doorway with her arms folded, obviously not willing to
forgive her for going away. Lucy waded through the excitable crowd and
held her arms open to Concha who hesitated for just a second before she
rushed into them to be swept up in a bear hug. The heat of her small
body, her wiry arms tight about Lucy's neck, and legs wrapped around her
waist were a welcome home in themselves. Concha buried her face in
Lucy's shoulder and sobbed. And though Lucy couldn't promise never to
leave her again, she realised she must try. It was a terrible
responsibility to be loved with such ferocity. She shifted Concha to her
left hip, and walked into the villa.

OceanofPDF.com

18

A week had passed before the rumble of an approaching lorry made Lucy
leap up and scatter the mending on her lap. Her heart was fluttering
with excitement at the thought of seeing Tom, of having him here with
her and persuading him never to go back to the fighting. She stood on
the villa steps, shading her eyes from the low afternoon sun as the
driver jumped down and went round to the rear to let down the tailgate.
Slowly, gingerly, Tom eased himself out, feet-first. She'd never seen
him in his brown Popular Army overalls before, never seen him as a
soldier. The driver helped him down on to his good leg, handing him a
crutch which Tom settled under the opposite shoulder. Then the driver
moved away and Tom looked up at her, and it was as if the four-year-old
Tom met her gaze with the same mix of lively curiosity and fearfulness
which she'd seen on the day he arrived in her life. Lucy's heart
somersaulted in her chest. She called her thanks to the driver and
hurried to meet Tom, sliding her arm around his waist, and letting him
lean on her shoulder. The solidity of his body and his weight resting on
her was as thrilling as if she'd never touched another person before,
and she was aware of him in every inch where they pressed against each
other. She wondered

if it was like this for him. She could smell the sweat from his armpit
and she revelled in the sour aliveness of it. She tried to keep her
voice level. 'How was the journey?' 'Rattled around like a bag of spuds.
Even my bruises have got bruises.' She glanced into the back of the
lorry, and saw they had tried to make him a nest of blankets to lie on,
but it couldn't have been comfortable. 'I sat in the front halfway, but
then needed to stretch out.' Concha ran down the steps and stood in
front of him with her arms folded and her feet planted wide, like a
small avenging angel. Lucy knew this stance could mean trouble.
'Concha,' she said warningly, 'this is my friend Tom, who has come to
stay for a bit. I told you he was coming. I've known him since I was
younger than you. And if you are nice he will be your friend too.'
Concha eyed him suspiciously, then Tom stuck out his tongue and made his
eyes go crossed, and she couldn't help a peal of low, throaty giggles.
It was the first time Lucy had heard her laugh, and she wondered if her
voice would have the same peaty timbre when she eventually decided to
speak. 'So this is Concha,' he said, and held out a hand. 'Good evening,
Señorita.' She didn't take the proffered hand, but ran around and
attached herself to Lucy's leg, claiming ownership of her other side. He
raised his eyebrows at Lucy, and she smiled. 'She'll get used to you.
Now let's get you inside. Food? Or bed?' 'Both. Simultaneously.' Tom
didn't let out any sound as she helped him manoeuvre up the entrance
steps, but she could see how he avoided putting any weight on his
damaged leg. Good, she thought. He wouldn't be leaving here any time
soon. They had moved everyone around, so he could have the room next to
hers, on the ground floor, not too far from the

toilet. The driver followed with Tom's rucksack of belongings and helped
Lucy lower him on to the bed. Concha and some other children and
Valentina appeared in the doorway behind Lucy. 'Do you need any more
help, miss?' asked the driver. 'Getting him undressed?' 'No thank you. I
can manage now.' An impish grin crossed Tom's face, but Lucy ignored it.
She arranged for Valentina to take the children away and closed the door
behind them as he lit a cigarette. Holding it between his lips, he
carefully parted the mosquito netting and sat on the bed to unlace his
boots. She wrinkled her nose at the smoke but it wasn't enough to stop
her stepping up to him and running her fingers through his thick thatch
of hair. He grasped her hand and pulled her down to sit on the bed
beside him, grinding out the cigarette on the sole of his boot before he
drew her into an urgent kiss that left her panting for air and thrumming
with new sensations. He tasted of tobacco. 'You and food and bed
simultaneously,' he said. As a way of trying to collect her thoughts and
adjusting to this new way of being with her old pal Tom, she opted for
practicality, jumping up to pull off one boot and then the other. His
socks smelled terrible. She peeled them off. 'When were these last
washed?' she demanded, holding her nose. 'About the same time as
everything else,' he said regretfully. 'Maybe a month ago?' 'Then give
me everything except your pyjamas and I'll have them cleaned for you.'
'There might be bugs.' 'Then I'll have them fumigated. Have you got bugs
yourself?' 'I was deloused in the first hospital. They shaved off my
nice beard.' She couldn't imagine him with a beard.

He grinned. 'I thought you were going to undress me, Nurse Lucy?' 'You
can blooming well undress yourself,' she retorted. 'Bug-boy.' This felt
more like the normal banter between her and Tom. 'Throw your lousy
clothes in this corner, if they don't walk there themselves, while I
fetch you something to eat.' By the time she returned with a plate of
Juan's delicious beans and today's fresh bread, Tom was asleep. He'd
left all his dirty things with his rucksack in the corner, and wriggled
himself under the sheet. Beside the bed was his photograph of her,
laughing. Lucy laid the food and water on a chair by the bed, lifted the
netting, leaned in and brushed his bristly cheek with her lips,
lingeringly, half-hoping he would wake. She stared down at him, running
a finger over the stubble on his chin, accustoming herself to this
confusing new intimacy. On her own way to bed, she looked in again,
bringing him a chamber pot, an ashtray and a fresh glass of water. But
he hadn't woken. She removed the food in case it attracted cockroaches.
In the night she woke to terrible shouting. She sat bolt upright and her
heart banged in her chest. At first she thought they were under attack,
that the war had come to the sleepy fishing village of Benidorm, then
recognised Tom's voice and ran into the next room. He was still lying
down, but had kicked off the sheet and was yelling and waving his arms
as if fighting with someone. She ducked under the netting to stand over
him and grabbed a wrist in each hand. 'Tom. Tom! Wake up. It's a
nightmare.' For a moment he fought her and she thought he would
overpower her, but then his arms fell limp and he curled into a ball and
began to moan softly. She climbed on to the bed behind him and wrapped
her arms around him. 'Tom, Tom, wake up. It's Lucy. You're quite safe.'

The moaning stopped and he turned his head. 'Luce? Is that you?' She
held tight to him, pressed into his curled back. 'Yes, it's me.
Everything is all right. You are at the White Villa. Nothing can hurt
you here.' He turned over, and dashed tears from his face with his
forearm. She slid to the edge of the narrow bed, careful not to touch
his wounded leg. 'I get nightmares,' he said. 'Lots of the chaps do.'
She kissed his forehead. 'I'm not surprised. But I'm here now.' 'It was
horrible, Luce.' Whether he was talking about the war or the nightmare,
or if one was an extension of the other and it was impossible to know
where one ended and the other began, she couldn't tell. She smoothed his
hair, remembering how her father kept his bedroom door closed because he
would often cry out in his sleep, and wondering for the first time what
scars he carried with him from the Great War. She would write to him
tomorrow, she thought, and tell him about Tom's nightmares. Perhaps he
would be able to offer some advice. 'Go back to sleep now,' she
whispered. But she lay awake a long time, her mind whirling with
thoughts of how she could stop him going back to the Front, enjoying the
thrill of her body stretched out next to his but awash with guilt for
her betrayal of Jamie. In the morning Juan found Tom clean clothes and
stood by while he washed himself. Tom wasn't supposed to get his leg
wet. The deep wound in his leg had been sewn up in the field hospital,
but at Valencia they said he should leave it another week before finding
a doctor to remove the sutures. At breakfast Lucy saw him rubbing the
side of his thigh. 'Does it hurt?' she asked.

He made a face. 'Not as much as it did. My whole leg itches like it's
got lice, and the stitches are pulling.' Concha peeped round Lucy at
him. He held out his hand and showed her the long weal running from
knuckle to wrist. 'That had stitches too, but they took them out in the
hospital.' She examined the raised pink line with such serious interest
that Tom grinned at Lucy. 'Another doctor in the making.' He slipped his
hand from the table and rested it on Lucy's leg, as though he knew it
had every right to be there. She could feel the heat of it penetrating
her skin. Juanita leaned across the table. 'You shouted in the night,'
she said. 'Were you in pain?' Tom shook his head with embarrassment.
'No, I get nightmares. Lots of soldiers do.' Juanita indicated Concha.
'She gets nightmares too. But not so much now.' 'How did she get rid of
them?' Juanita looked nervously at Lucy as if she had said too much.
'She sleeps in Lucy's bed.' Tom laughed aloud. 'Well that's a good
idea.' Juanita coloured to the roots of her hair and Lucy gave him a
playful shove. 'Idiot.' Under the table he squeezed her leg gently.
Although it was almost October, the weather was still balmy. The
terrible heat of midsummer had departed and now the sun was delightfully
warm. Lucy set up two places for Tom to sit or lie and watch the
activity of the villa -- one in the sun and the other on the shady side
of the veranda. He leaned on the balcony rail, looking out at the palm
trees and the white sandy beach, and down at Lucy's hand on his
shoulder. 'This is like paradise.'

He lowered himself into the chair she'd set in the sun and squinted up
at her. 'I believe I've washed up on Aeaea and you are Circe, about to
bewitch me to stay for a year and give you two sons.' 'Abracadabra,' she
said, waving a finger like a magic wand. He turned his face to the sun
and sighed, but whether from pain or pleasure or the anguish of
decisions still to be made, she couldn't tell. Every time the duties of
the house allowed, she would slip back out to the veranda to check on
him. Wherever she was in the villa or on the sands, she felt her whole
body straining towards him, like a tide pulled by the moon. She wondered
if he felt it too. Several mornings later she found him sitting in the
sun. He had taken off his shirt and rolled up the legs of Juan's
trousers, and she saw how the bruises on his torso were beginning to
fade yellow. 'Does that hurt?' she asked, touching the largest with a
gentle finger. It was as if she couldn't resist making contact with him.
'Only when you poke it!' He caught hold of her hand, glanced around, and
seeing they were alone he led her finger to stroke another bruise. 'Try
this one. And this one. Tonight you could try kissing them better.' A
clatter of footsteps announced that the younger children were leaving
the villa for their swimming lesson. 'Ridiculous,' said Lucy primly,
while the thought of kissing his body ignited in her brain. 'I'm going
to help.' 'Can I come and watch? The doctor prescribed looking at you in
your bathing suit.' 'Ridiculous,' she repeated, but helped him down the
steps and on to the beach.

She felt him watching her as she lifted her dress over her head and
folded it carefully with the other clothes on the sand. She stood up
tall, holding in her stomach, and let him slowly study her, up and down.
When his eyes met hers he pretended to be fanning himself, as if the
sight of her had overheated him, and she laughed, running into the
waves. As she supported and instructed the children, she kept glancing
up at Tom who was using his crutch to hop along the harder sand at the
water's edge. Experimentally, he lowered his damaged leg to the ground
and put a little weight on it. Then he rested, and gazed out to sea.
He'd always been a strong swimmer, and she was sure he was longing to
dive into the waves. She imagined them swimming together in the
moonlight, limbs interlacing ... and then an insistent hand was tugging
hers. 'Señorita Lucy! Look what I can do.' After the swim, she stood
near him, towelling her hair dry. He reached out and touched her arm,
and his hand was warm against her cool skin. 'You're so brown.' 'I've
been doing swimming lessons all summer.' 'I can't wait to get into the
water with you.' Lucy looked into his eyes and wondered if he was
sharing her own daydream or if his went much further than she'd dared.
'I'm going back to dress for lunch. Do you need help to the house?' He
draped an arm across her bare shoulders. 'I probably could make it on my
own, but this is much nicer.' It was good to be needed by him, she
thought. In the afternoons, the villa quietened into the lull of the
siesta. Lucy and Tom sat on the veranda in comfortable silence and she
traced the lines on the palm of his hand, marvelling at their new
familiarity. He smoked a cigarette down to its tip and ground it out
under his heel. And then

the quietness began to feel strange, as if there were too many things
they couldn't share. She remembered how she and Jamie had chattered to
each other every minute they were together, and then wished she hadn't
thought of Jamie because it made her feel so wretched. 'You were at
Brunete in your last letter,' she ventured, and he snatched his hand
back from her and rubbed the palm vigorously. 'I can't talk about it and
I don't want to think about it.' 'I'm sorry.' And she was. Regretful to
have spoiled the moment, and also sad he couldn't share his battle
experiences, which stood like a wall between them. That and Jamie. He
heaved himself to standing, grabbing his cigarettes. 'I'm going to lie
down. I just need to be alone for a bit.' 'Can you manage?' 'I'm not a
bloody invalid.' He stumped to the door, and then turned and mouthed,
'Sorry,' and he looked so much like his naughty-then-repentant
little-boy self that she couldn't help but smile. What terrible things
her poor Tom must have seen, Lucy thought. She knew she wouldn't sleep,
so went to prepare a lesson in which she invited the older girls to
compare Homer's Odyssey with their own journeys. All that time which had
passed since the ancient Greeks, she thought, and still there was war.
Concha stayed close by Lucy wherever she went, particularly if she was
with Tom. Her jealousy hung in the air. After lunch one day she sat
between them, wiggling her loose front tooth. 'Let me take a look at
that,' offered Tom, and she opened her mouth to him. He gently pressed
the tooth with a forefinger, and it folded back almost horizontal in her
mouth, hanging by a thread.

'That's ready to come out,' he pronounced. 'What you need to do is pull
it down and turn it round and round.' Cautiously, in case it would hurt,
Concha gripped the little tooth and twisted it. Within seconds it had
broken free and was in her hand. She held it up for him to see,
exploring the strangeness of the new gap with her tongue. 'A perfect
specimen!' he declared. 'The tooth fairy will be wanting that to build
her fairy castle.' Lucy spoke English to him. 'I don't know if they have
the tooth fairy in Spain! And we can't start giving money to every child
whose tooth falls out.' Tom looked so crestfallen that Lucy wanted to
hug him. 'But I suppose we could give them shells,' she said. 'We can
find some fairy shells while they are having this afternoon's siesta.'
So that afternoon they meandered along the tideline, choosing the most
perfect and tiny shells, and that night Concha placed her tooth under
her pillow, and in the morning was amazed to find a miniature pink shell
in its place. When she showed it to Tom at breakfast, and he admired it
so seriously, Concha suddenly bent and kissed his hand. Lucy smiled at
Tom over her head, and it felt for a moment as if they were a proper
family. It was getting dark earlier now, and that evening Tom suggested
he might try a short walk to watch the sun set. Lucy guessed he needed
to escape the constant noise and bustle of the villa; the clamour of
thirty children must seem oppressive to someone not used to it. She
settled Concha with Ana who was reading a story, and they started out
along the beach together. She rubbed her skin with lemon oil. It was
supposed to deter the mosquitoes, but didn't really. Tom was using his
crutch, but beginning to put his bad leg tentatively to the ground. She
thought he might say

something romantic about the vivid tangerine and fuchsia ribbons of
cloud in the sky, but his mind was on himself. 'I need to walk more. To
get fitter,' he grumbled. It was on the tip of her tongue to say, 'Why?
Just so you can go back and get shot-up again?' but she lightened her
tone. 'Good idea. I've been trying to teach them cricket, but you'd be
much better at it.' 'I'm going to start some PT tomorrow. See what I can
do. My ribs aren't so painful today.' Lucy sighed. Perhaps it would be
safe to talk about the past. 'Do you remember my father trying to teach
you to catch a rugger ball? You kept on making him throw it to you for
hour after hour, until it got dark, and your mother came looking for
you.' 'I was a determined little sod.' 'You always knew what you
wanted.' He stopped suddenly and turned to her. 'I still know what I
want.' With his free arm, he drew her in tight to him and kissed her. It
was rough and desperate, as though there was no time to waste, and she
was kissing him back in the same way, tangling her fingers in his hair.
He pulled away. 'Sorry, I can't stand on one leg any longer.' Sitting on
the beach they fell on each other again, as if they had been waiting for
this all their lives. And now Tom's hands were free, he began to move
them over her back and arms, and finally to her breasts, bending to
cover them with kisses and biting through the cloth of her dress until
she was adrift with longing. He lifted his head for a moment. 'I want
you so much, Luce.' Part of her brain registered that it was want and
not love, and suddenly it all seemed too fast, too confusing. 'Hold on,'
she laughed. 'I've got to get used to this.' 'I've thought of nothing
else since I left England.' 'Just give me a bit of time.'

It had gone too dark to see his face, but she knew the sullen look which
came over him when he didn't get his own way. 'I don't know how much
time I've got,' he said, scratching angrily at new mosquito bites on his
leg. She stood up, and brushed the sand from her dress. 'Come on.
They'll be sending a search party if we don't get back.' She offered a
hand, but he pulled himself up on his crutch, and they walked back to
the house in silence. In the middle of the night, the screaming came
from his room again and Lucy ran in to wake him from his nightmare,
standing beside the bed and gripping his wrists. For a few seconds he
continued to fight whatever was bearing down on him, then clutched hold
of her around the waist and shook, holding on to her as if he was
drowning, his tears wetting her nightdress. She patted and soothed him,
trying to wrap him with her love, and eventually lay down beside him as
he fell back into a deep sleep. She began to doze herself until her arm
under his neck began to develop pins and needles and she softly
untangled herself and wriggled out of his grip. She stood by the bed and
kissed him, thinking perhaps she loved him best of all when he was
sleeping, then lifted the netting over her head and turned to leave the
room. Concha was standing in the doorway and Lucy wondered how long she
had been there. Lucy picked her up. 'Back to bed, you goose. Your feet
are freezing.' Concha whispered the first words Lucy had ever heard her
speak. 'I think his mummy and daddy got killed too.' Her voice was deep
and musical, like a jazz singer's. Lucy carried her back to their shared
bed and sat inside the netting with the little girl on her lap, wrapping
the blanket around them both, as the dammed-up words spilled out of her.

'The planes came over and over and we ran to the side of the road but
there was nowhere to hide and the noise of the planes and the bullets
and people screaming and crying to God and my mother tried to hide me
and my sister under her, and my father spread himself over us all and my
mother was saying, "Hail Mary, Hail Mary," and my sister was sobbing and
the bullets tore up the dirt next to us, and my father yelled out and my
mother stopped praying and my sister stopped crying, and then the planes
circled back again and shot up the ground a lot more, and I could hardly
breathe because everyone had got so heavy on me, and when the planes
were gone I wriggled out from under them and when I was standing by them
I could see bits of their insides on top of their clothes and everything
red, and a hole in my father's head and grey stuff coming out, and I
tried to pull at my sister in case she was trapped but she had a hole in
her too, and black blood pouring into the dirt, and I started to scream
and a man came and took me away from them. And then I wet myself, and I
was crying and crying and that woman found me.' Concha slumped against
her and Lucy kissed her head and rocked her, hoping that love would be
powerful enough to mend what Tom and Concha had experienced, but fearing
they would carry the scars of war all their lives. Lucy's days at the
villa were as busy as ever, as she divided her hours between discussing
the menu with Juan, making lists of the remaining food supplies and
ordering more to come from Barbara Wood in Valencia, checking the
laundry, accompanying one child or another to see the doctor or dentist,
teaching her classes and overseeing swimming, while all the time
watching for snatched moments alone with Tom. Juanita and Alfonso came
to see her to tell her they wanted to get married and Lucy was dismayed.
They were much too young; still only sixteen and seventeen. She

should have parted them sooner. Now she would have to send one of them
back to Murcia, and separate them until they were old enough for Alfonso
to be able to support Juanita. Only then would their families approve
the match. But which of them would have to return to the horrors of
Pablo Iglesias? When she said this they both wept and Juanita insisted
her mother wouldn't care, as long as she was off her hands. In the end
Lucy decided they had to go to Murcia to ask their families' permission
to marry. She wondered who she would have chosen to marry when she was
sixteen: Tom or Jamie? It felt a long time ago. Tom made himself useful
as much as he could by chopping firewood and playing games with the
children, who saw him as a hero. Lucy could tell he rather liked their
adulation, and at last he had an appreciative audience for his clowning.
Concha was warming to him, though she still saw him as a rival for
Lucy's affection. More and more, the peal of his familiar laughter would
sound on the beach or through the villa and Lucy would stop whatever she
was doing and hug to herself the thought that the old Tom was returning
to her. If only she could persuade him to stay once his leg was healed.
Sometimes during the day they would pass in an empty corridor and Tom
would take her shoulders and push her up against a wall, kissing her
till she trembled all over, or till he could no longer balance on one
leg, or a small child or one of the adults ran around the corner, and
they sprang apart. The adults would smirk indulgently or apologise, but
the children didn't notice. At siesta time Lucy and Tom would wait till
Concha was asleep and the whole villa had drifted into a hush of
suspended animation, and then creep out, far enough into the pine trees
not to be seen by the first wakers. Lying on a blanket on the soft pine
needles, with the strong scent of pine and the sound of the waves, their
kisses and their desire grew increasingly urgent. Each day

Tom ran his hands more freely over her body, through her summer dress,
over her hard nipples and round buttocks, and eventually into the cleft
between her legs. And she clung to him, panting for more. Every night he
woke with nightmares and she tiptoed in to comfort him, feeling the heat
of his body against the length of hers through her thin nightdress, his
tears soaking her throat and chest. And each night it became harder to
tear herself away from his bed.

OceanofPDF.com

19

Just over a week after Tom arrived, the whole camp was woken by the
drone of enemy planes overhead. The children who were in tents began to
scream, and those in the villa joined their panic. It was the first time
the planes had come so close. Lucy grabbed her megaphone, shouted for
calm, and ushered all the boys and girls into the cellar. She realised
that Tom hadn't appeared from his room, but had to ensure the youngsters
were safe before she went to look for him. Why wasn't he here helping?
she thought angrily. When all her charges were counted in the cellar she
ran to Tom's room and found him curled on his bed, trembling so hard
that the bed rocked beneath him. The planes now seemed to be getting
further away, towards Alicante, but she couldn't take any chances. 'Come
down to the cellar,' she urged him, but he shook his head. 'I can't let
the kids see me like this,' he said, through chattering teeth. 'They
think I'm a hero.' She looked out of the window and listened, as far off
the first bombs dropped on Alicante and the tracer fire of antiaircraft
guns ripped through the sky. It was unlikely the planes would return.

She climbed on to the bed behind him, stroking his hair until his
shivering subsided and the night-sounds were only the cicadas again. Tom
hid his face in the pillow and refused to speak, so she kissed the nape
of his neck before she went to organise the children back from the
cellar to their beds. Each evening, as usual, Salvador came with news of
the war. They sat on the veranda hearing the litany of advances and
retreats, of battle fronts and generals, of numbers of men presumed
dead, of bombs dropped on Alicante's civilians by Franco's planes
returning to their base on Mallorca. Salvador and Tom smoked and their
faces lit red each time they inhaled. One night Tom listened with his
head hung low, until suddenly in mid-sentence, he grabbed his crutch and
set off down the beach at a lolloping speed. Salvador looked stricken.
'Have I said something wrong? I'm so sorry.' Lucy reassured him quickly
before hurrying after Tom. She found him sitting on a rock with his head
in his hands. Settling beside him she laid one hand on his thigh, just
to let him know she was there. She watched the waves, making small white
runs in the moonlight, sighing as they tumbled on to the shore, as they
always had done, and always would do, years after she and Tom were no
longer there to see them. As the moon slowly rose higher it cast a
silver path across the sea towards the horizon. The regular shushing
sound of the waves was calming and when Tom raised his head, his voice
was controlled and even. 'I shouldn't be here. With all this beauty.
With you. I have no right to be alive when so many of my friends have
died.' Lucy wrapped an arm around his waist, and stroked his side. 'You
are convalescing,' she said reasonably. Tom stretched out his wounded
leg.

'I'm starting to feel things again, and you can't let yourself do that.
Being here is making me soft. I'll be a danger to everyone if I'm soft.'
She leaned her head against him, thinking, don't go back, then. Please,
don't go back. That night, after his nightmare, he didn't immediately
return to sleep, but began to kiss her and she let him run his hands up
under her nightdress to touch her naked body, pressing himself against
her, hot with desire, until she thought she heard Concha at the doorway
and tore herself away. 'Stop now.' She slipped out of his bed and he
rolled over and groaned. She looked at the curve of his back in the
moonlight. Perhaps, she thought, there might be one way to keep him from
the Front. A few days later a letter came from Jamie, the first for many
weeks.

1 October 1937 My darling Lucy, I think so much about the days in Ronda
and Córdoba, and wonder what I could have done differently. I felt then
that we were like two streams merging to become one river, that we
understood each other completely and nothing was hidden from us. And
now. What? You said in your last letter that you have Tom with you at
the villa. I know your aim is to reconcile him and me, but it only makes
me wildly jealous to think of him seeing you every day when I can't. I
picture you at the beach, surrounded by children, your hair blowing in
the sea breeze, and I'm empty with longing to be with you. I picture Tom
eating with

you, making you laugh, and other things I can't name, because he always
loved you too, and perhaps he will win you with soft words in the
sunset. Or not soft words, but something altogether more Tom-ish, more
physical. I beg you, don't do anything just because you want to please
him. You know he only thinks of himself. If I treated you too much as
the Madonna, he wouldn't hesitate to make you his Magdalene. There. I've
said it. And if I post this you will see my whole heart opened up to you
like glass. And perhaps you will hate me for thinking so little of you
that you might allow yourself to be seduced by him. Confession seems
easy on paper, so I'll tell you it's eating me up that I didn't press my
advantage when I had it, and now it might be too late. I think you would
have been mine that night in Córdoba, when we were so close that we were
like an extension of each other. Am I imagining that, deluding myself?
And couldn't it happen again? Should I release you from your promise
that you won't marry anyone else until we are back in England? I think
it would break my heart. Perhaps it would help if I told you that you
have sowed a seed of doubt and as I travel around I notice that nobody
at all says they aren't happy with the new regime. Even in paradise some
people would complain that the flowers were too bright or the milk and
honey too sickly, so that seems strange. And nobody is willing to admit
that the Republic might have had some positive ideas. What happened to
all the supporters of the Republic? After all, they were elected to
power with a democratic majority. I know you have huge numbers of
refugees, but surely the Republicans can't all have left? I remember
that day we went to Speakers' Corner in London and saw all those cranks
on soapboxes shouting their ideas, and I think about the opposing

views of the Daily Worker and the Daily Mail, and I am worried by the
lack of dissent here. Though I also wonder which would happen first:
freedom of worship under a communist regime or education of the peasants
under a Fascist one? For me, the freedom to worship is everything. But I
am going to travel more around the country, try to get closer to the
Aragon Front, try to understand more, try to win back your love. Your
ever-devoted Jamie Lucy sat with the letter in her lap, and wanted to
cry because Jamie was right, and that night in Córdoba she might have
gone to his room with him, and now she was on the verge of the same with
Tom. Did that make her some kind of bad girl? The lunch bell sounded and
she folded the letter and slipped it in her suitcase at the bottom of
her wardrobe. Tom had seen the letter arrive with Jamie's familiar
handwriting and he was sulky as they sat together under the pines in the
siesta time. 'So. Are you going to tell me what he said?' 'Letters are
private,' Lucy said primly, playing with the fringe of the blanket they
were sitting on. 'Love letters are. I bet it was a love letter, wasn't
it?' 'He said he's noticing that the Fascist regime doesn't allow any
sort of dissent.' Tom snorted in derision. 'It doesn't take a bloody
genius to notice that!' 'But you know what he's like about the Church.'
'Opiate of the masses,' said Tom automatically. He began to pick up pine
cones and hurl them out across the beach, using a boulder as target
practice. 'His religion makes him feel closer to your father.'

'Well, I don't remember "our" father. Jamie claimed ownership of him
long ago.' Lucy ran her fingers lightly up his back. 'Your mother says
you look just like him and act like him. She says your voice even sounds
like his.' Tom gave a giant throw and hit the rock. 'Yes! Well, that's
ironic, isn't it? I almost feel sorry for Jamie. All that effort to be
like Dad, and it's me who takes after him. That must eat him up. And now
I've got you too. Does he know that?' 'He's guessed.' Tom hit the rock
again. 'He loves you, doesn't he? He's always loved you.' And you?
thought Lucy. Have you always loved me? Why can't you say it? She told
Tom a little about her trip to the south. 'What was it, then?' he
mocked. 'A meeting of true minds?' She twisted and untwisted two fibres
of the blanket fringe and thought -- something like that. He pulled her
roughly towards him, kissing her so hard that his teeth were bruising on
her lips, and thrusting his hand up under her skirt to prise her legs
apart. She pushed him away with such ferocity that he toppled over. She
jumped up, rubbing her mouth with the back of her hand, eyes flashing
with fury. 'Don't you ever do anything like that again!' Immediately he
was contrite, shading his eyes to peek up at her, just like little-boy
Tom when he'd been told off. 'I'm so sorry. I would never hurt you.' He
took a deep breath. 'I'm just jealous. I've always been jealous of you
and him.' Perhaps that was as much an admission of love as she'd ever
get from Tom, she thought. She paced up and down and the anger ebbed out
of her. He tore the flanges off a pine cone, one at a time, not looking
at her. 'Has he asked you to marry him?'

'Yes, but I said I won't marry anyone till we are all back in England.'
She waited, but Tom didn't say, 'I want you to marry me.' The day he had
his stitches out, the sun shone and the sea glittered like a handful of
flung diamonds and Lucy had to pretend to be glad for him, though it
represented being one day closer to possibly losing him forever. The
doctor said that ligaments had been damaged and he would walk with a
limp for some time, perhaps for the rest of his life. He advised lots of
swimming and exercises. Tom asked when he would be fit enough to return
to the Front. The doctor raised his head and took in the misery on
Lucy's face. 'When you can run faster than a bullet,' he said. Tom
laughed, a sour laugh, without humour. 'I'm no good for anything else,'
he said. 'No good for normal life.' Despair washed over Lucy and the
brightness of the sun seemed to be mocking her. Tom began to put his
mind to mending his body, swimming several times a day, out further
every time, with Lucy observing from the beach. What if he had cramp?
Was he daring death to take him? As she watched his dark head receding
and getting smaller and smaller in the bobbing waves, it was as if he
was rehearsing for when he would go away, and she could barely breathe
until she saw that he had turned and was slowly coming back to her. The
anticipation of him going was a sickness in her stomach which prevented
her eating more than a few mouthfuls at each meal, and as she pushed her
plate away, he would draw it to him, greedily finishing her portion as
well as his own. 'Off your tucker, Luce?' he asked. She sighed. 'Just
not hungry.' 'Juan is a genius. I'm going to get him to show me how to
make this sauce, and I can show our company cook.'

A great weariness came over Lucy at his determination to return to the
battalion. He was just as bad as Jamie in his dogged inflexibility. She
forced herself to concentrate on what he was saying. 'And I was
thinking, maybe Juan could get a boat and we could teach the older kids
to sail.' A tiny lick of hope flickered in her. If he could play a
greater part in the life of the villa, perhaps he'd stay for the
children if not for her. 'You'd be great at that.' 'Another thing I
should have been more grateful to your father for,' he said ruefully.
'Teaching us to sail.' 'Teaching you to sail, not me,' Lucy pointed out
sharply. 'No, you weren't there,' he said, shaking his head in
disbelief. The nauseating disappointment of that first sailing weekend
lapped over Lucy. She had been eight when her father had announced at
the breakfast table his intention to take the boys away. She'd paused
with her toast halfway to her mouth. Surely he meant children, not boys?
'What about me?' she'd asked. 'No, no,' said Captain Nicholson, blithely
swishing his tea around the cup. 'I thought we'd have a boys' weekend,
all men together. Camping. Much too rough for you.' She had thrown down
her cutlery and rushed out of the room, hearing her father's 'What's got
into her?' as she stomped upstairs and hurled herself on the bed in a
storm of noisy tears. That was the day she had finally accepted that no
matter how hard she tried to please her father, he would never love her
in the way she needed to be loved. So it became her life's work to
please everyone else instead, to make her teachers admire her, her
friends choose to be with her above all others, Tom and Jamie to adore
her. And now there was one ultimate way left that she could please Tom.
Tom's mind was obviously still running on his own relationship with her
father. 'Do you know what the last

thing was that he said to me before I went away?' She gathered up their
dishes and he followed her from the dining hall. 'I thought he was going
to tell me something useful about estimating the range of artillery, or
not looking over the parapet of the trench, but the last bit of advice
from the old soldier was "Never marry a girl just because she says she's
pregnant." I promised I wouldn't.' Lucy wondered if that was why her
father had married her mother. She'd always assumed he disliked her for
being the cause of her mother's death. But perhaps he hadn't ever loved
her mother. She knew she wouldn't ever be able to ask him. The next days
would have been the most joyful of Lucy's life if she hadn't been
constantly living with the knowledge that they might be their last
together. If only it was possible to live entirely in the present and
not spoil the now with fears of what might soon be. But the thought of
him leaving hung like a dark shadow over the sunny, fun-filled hours as
Tom threw himself into sailing lessons, swimming lessons, cricket
matches and PT. The children loved him for his enthusiasm, energy and
laughter, and because he was a hero from the International Brigades,
come from overseas to be the saviour of the blessed Republic, with an
impressive red scar along his thigh. It was an equal joy and pain to
Lucy to watch them with him and hear their squeals of laughter as he
tossed them in the air or raced them up the beach with his new lolloping
stride. Alone with her he was more tender and gentle, laying his head in
her lap and letting her stroke his hair, or watching her face intently
as she rubbed a healing salve into the scar which ran almost the length
of his thigh, and lemon juice into his insect bites. The smoke from his
cigarette curled slowly into the still air, and sometimes he blew white
rings

and they watched as the circles lifted into the treetops and dispersed.
His nightmares reduced, and sometimes Lucy woke having slept all night
in her own bed with Concha. She was glad that he was sleeping more
soundly, but sad that he needed her less and desperately missed the feel
of his muscular body against hers. It began to seem that he was
settling, becoming part of their community, and she had almost persuaded
herself he would never leave, until one afternoon when they were under
the pines. He had kissed and caressed her to a fastbreathing fever
pitch, and then she had drawn back as though from the edge of a
precipice and now she was lying in the crook of his arm, batting away
flies. 'The food supply lorry is coming tomorrow, isn't it?' he asked.
'Yes, we're almost out of rice.' She heard the choke in his voice and
knew what was coming before the words were even formed. 'Then ... then
I'm going to go back with it to Valencia, and from there to the
Brigade.' A little cry escaped her. 'Oh no. Must you?' 'You knew I
would. My comrades need me.' She twisted up on to one elbow and looked
down at him, bleak with sorrow. 'I need you. The children need you.
Please don't go.' He wouldn't meet her eyes, but gazed up into the
canopy of the pines. 'You'll cope. You are a coper, Luce. Always have
been. But it feels like I'm betraying all those who died if I don't go
back and try to finish what we started together.' She sat up, wrapping
her arms around her knees, her fingernails biting into the palms of her
hands. 'You'll get killed.' He sat up beside her. 'Very likely. The odds
aren't in my favour.'

She was anguished. 'Don't you want to live? Don't you want to be with
me?' He jumped up. 'Don't make it any harder, Luce. Of course I want to
live and be with you and make love to you every day.' He reached a hand
down and pulled her to her feet beside him and his eyes were black with
despair. 'But this is my last night.' He laid one hand gently on her
breast, and her knees were weak with desire. 'So, will you? Tonight? I
want to know what it's like before I die.' She wanted to scream with
anguish, but she took a deep breath and said, 'That's blackmail.' He
tipped up her chin and kissed her till she was breathless. 'You know you
want to as well. And then when the war is over you can marry Jamie and
have four lovely Catholic children and forget about me.' 'I don't want
to marry Jamie, and I could never, ever forget about you.' 'Is that a
no, then?' He looked so sorrowful, so despairing, that she couldn't bear
it. Was that the look she was destined to remember forever? Perhaps if
they made love and it was marvellous he wouldn't be able to leave her.
It was surely worth a try? 'It's a maybe.' The evening seemed endless --
dinner, and storytime for the little ones, and conversation and reading
for the older children -- until finally, one by one, everyone began to
yawn and take themselves off to their beds. Tom went before Lucy,
throwing her a pleading glance over his shoulder and carrying half a
bottle of wine under his arm. Lucy undressed as usual, with a fizz of
nervous anticipation running through her, touching her own body as
though saying goodbye to her ownership of it, or to tell it what to
expect.

Concha was asleep but restless as Lucy slipped in beside her and waited
for all the creaks and footsteps of the house to settle. Finally it was
quiet, and Concha was in a deep sleep. Lucy climbed out of bed and took
the jam jar from the case in her wardrobe. Then she tiptoed to the door
and closed it tight behind her. She visited the toilet and pushed the
vinegar sponge up inside her as far as her fingers could reach, where
Tom soon would be, and that thought was thrilling and perplexing. Then
she crept to Tom's room, and he was awake, waiting for her. He opened
his arms, but she shook her head. 'Not here. Down by the sea. The
mosquitoes aren't so bad there. Bring a blanket, and be quiet.' She led
him by the hand through the pines, beyond the palms and left along the
beach, where they could not be seen from the house. The moon was waning,
and a thousand stars glittered above them. The sea was a dark navy,
reflecting the flickering light from the sky, and softly lapping on the
shore. A light breeze carried the fresh green scent of the ocean. It
could not have been a more perfect night. Finally she stopped. She could
feel a trickle of vinegar running down her inner thigh and it reminded
her what they were here for. Now or never, she told herself. 'Here. We
can use these stones to hold down the corners of the blanket.' They laid
it down carefully, and he took a swig from the wine bottle and then
handed it to her. She gulped it down gratefully, feeling its warmth
spreading through her, and then he turned towards her, taking her two
hands in his and spreading them wide. 'Will you let me look at you?' he
asked. 'Please?' It would feel strange to let her old childhood friend
see her naked, but she pushed that thought aside and nodded
imperceptibly.

He leaned forwards and raised the hem of her nightdress, lifting it
clean over her head and scrunching it into a ball. She took it from him
and wedged it under a rock so it wouldn't blow away. As she straightened
she laid one arm across her breasts and covered her groin with the other
hand. He gently took each wrist and moved them to her sides, then he
turned her slightly to where the moonlight fell across her body, and let
out a low sigh. His eyes were running up and down her as if he was
memorising every curve and crevasse. 'Can you turn around?' he asked,
throatily, and so she swivelled slowly, like someone showing off a new
frock, looking out to the moonlight on the sea and then raising her arms
and swaying a little in a mermaid dance in time with the swishing waves.
He stepped close behind her, cupping her breasts and sucking at the base
of her neck, and she was filled with electrifying desire, running
through her and through her. She turned in his arms and was kissing him
urgently as he struggled out of his shorts and led her to the blanket.
Her fast, shallow breathing and the rapidly drunk wine were making her
giddy as he lay her on her back, kissing her breasts and lips as he
climbed on top and parted her knees. He pushed his fingers inside her
and then kissed her more as he positioned himself, and she wanted him so
badly and knew it would be now, opening to take the shock of him, and
revelling in this complete joining. He moved gently, and at first it was
as though he was sending waves of sensation deeper and deeper into her.
He was looking down at her and even in the darkness she could see his
grin of sheer delight and it was her joy to be pleasing him so much. But
then something changed, and he closed his eyes and began to thrust as if
this was only about his brute gratification. Her body stilled and her
mind seemed to be standing outside of them both, watching this thing
which was being done to her, not with her, harder and

harder. It was not making love, she thought. This was being fucked.
She'd heard the word, but never used it -- until now. He rammed into her
with a strangulated cry, and then slumped down with all his suffocating
weight on her. Lucy trembled with rage. How dare he do this to her? He
was always so selfish. It was only ever about him. She pushed him off
her so she could breathe. He inhaled, withdrew and flipped down on his
back beside her. 'Well!' he said with satisfaction. 'Well, well.' She
turned her face away from him, too angry to speak. He struggled up to
one elbow to look at her, laying a hand proprietorially on one breast.
She flicked it away in disgust. 'Good old Luce!' And then, catching the
familiar scent of her disapproval, 'Did I hurt you?' She struggled to
control her fury and bite back the scathing words he deserved. This had
not been the romantic, loving experience she'd hoped for, but it might
still serve the purpose of keeping him from returning to the Front and
being killed if she could only say the right things. Hesitantly she
shook her head. 'Not much. I just didn't know what to expect.' He was
apologising now, but not for the act itself. 'I meant to, you know, pull
out before, but you were too much for me.' He ran a hand down her flank.
'But I don't think it's possible to get pregnant the first time, is it?'
She forced herself to keep her voice steady and pretend everything was
all right, explaining to him about Margarita and the sponge, and he
laughed to think what Catholic Jamie would think of her precautions,
repeating, 'Good old Luce.' There was a throbbing discomfort between her
legs. He had no idea of how she felt, and maybe he didn't really care.
Maybe for him it had only ever been lust. She wondered if it would have
been different with Jamie -- more

considerate and gentle, more loving? Or were all men the same in this
regard? But she couldn't think about that. She had made her choice and
now must play her final card. 'If you stay here we could do that every
night.' He flopped back on to the blanket, lighting up a cigarette and
inhaling deeply. The tip glowed red and she counted three waves breaking
on the shore before he replied, so quietly she could hardly hear. 'Don't
ask me that. You know I can't.' They lay for a long while looking up at
the millions of stars, and an autumnal breeze off the sea shivered along
Lucy's skin, warning of the magnitude of her misery to come. She sat up,
reached for her nighty and pulled it over her head. His mind was running
on a different track, pleased with himself again. 'You've made a man of
me, Luce. And I've made a woman of you.' How little he knew, Lucy
thought. That rutting wasn't what made me a woman. I became a woman the
day I gathered up Jorge in the middle of an air raid and ran to the
shelter with him. 'I can die happy now,' he said. She snapped, 'I'd
rather you thought about it every day and it helped to keep you alive.'
He took her face in his hands. 'I will think about it every day. And
you. I'll think about you, Luce. And I'll do everything to come back if
I can.' They folded the blanket, and began to walk back to the villa.
Lucy felt cold spreading up along her spine, settling deep in the core
of her. It was over, then. He was going off to get himself killed and
there was nothing more she could do to save him.

OceanofPDF.com

20

By a steely effort of will, Lucy somehow held back her tears as Tom
left, dressed again in his coarse, brown Popular Army overalls. She
wanted his last memory to be of her waving and smiling. But after the
lorry had passed through the gates, and there was no chance of him
changing his mind, she ran to her room and sobbed. After a while Concha
slipped in and sat stroking her hair, and when she had recovered enough,
Lucy took Concha in her arms and they both cried for the lost things in
their lives. Although it was still only October, in Lucy's mind that was
when winter began. Of course October in Benidorm was barely even
autumnal by English standards, but cold had penetrated deep, wrapping
around her heart. Every time she thought of Tom, she pulled down a
shutter and forced herself to think of something else, something small,
inconsequential and less personal: which child needed new shoes; whether
there would be enough tomatoes in the market this week; how best to
teach multiplication. Juan the fisherman was the only one who
understood, and he would sit on the veranda with her and Concha in the
evenings, each surrounded by their own ghosts. And once, when one of the
boys was praising Tom's courage, she overheard Juan say, 'He is a stupid
boy. To have thrown

away so much.' As he stomped towards the villa he muttered, 'He does not
deserve her.' Juanita and Alfonso returned from Murcia with the proud
news that they were married. A party was thrown to celebrate, and Lucy
quietly presented Juanita with a sponge in vinegar. When it was found
that the sound of their lovemaking could be heard all over the villa,
she suggested they move into a room over the garage. Soon it was
discovered that Pepe had moved in with them, claiming them as his
family. Lucy decided it was high time she helped Alfonso's artistic
talent to develop further, so she went to see a respected artist living
in Benidorm and took some of Alfonso's work. The artist spent a long
time perusing Alfonso's drawings and paintings. 'He is good, but he
needs training.' Lucy turned her most beatific smile on him, the one few
men could resist. 'But where would I find someone to help him here in
Benidorm? He has no money.' The artist's chest puffed up. 'It would be
my honour to take the boy under my wing, Señorita. Send him to me.' When
she told Alfonso, he gripped her hand so tight she thought he had almost
broken it. Tears stood in his eyes. 'It would be my dream come true,' he
said. So once a week he walked into town, and came back laden with art
books and supplies. It seemed the artist had almost adopted him. Lucy
released him from some of his duties in the camp to work on his
paintings, and the room over the garage became his studio as well as
their home. Concha was also growing and developing greater independence.
As soon as she had begun speaking, Lucy asked her what her real name
was, but Concha had looked troubled. 'My baptised name was Ernestina but
they always called me Conejito.' Lucy's throat contracted at the thought
of the loving family who had called Concha their 'little bunny'. She

steadied her voice to ask, 'Would you like us to call you Ernestina
now?' Concha shook her head and frowned. 'I hate that name. I am Concha,
who lives with Lucy.' Now that Concha chattered all the time in her low,
smoky voice, the other children had fully accepted her as one of their
own. It was a joy to see her playing with them, singing with them and
sometimes quarrelling with them. Lucy persuaded Concha out of her bed
into a small one alongside, though she missed the comfort of the little,
warm body. She knew now that she would take Concha with her wherever she
went. The unconditional love of a child was a precious gift, and she
must never let her down. She wondered if she had ever loved her father
in the unquestioning way Concha loved her. At the end of October
Margarita wrote with surprising news.

My dear friend, I have to tell you the most astonishing thing. One
evening the Danish Quaker Elise Thomsen came to our new headquarters,
Luis Vives House, looking very troubled. When I asked her what was the
matter she said one of the mothers registered at her canteen was very
ill and likely to die within days. 'She has a baby girl, Dorotea, only
two months old,' said Elise. 'The sweetest thing you ever saw. Smiling
already, as if fate wasn't about to deal her the harshest blow.' I asked
if the father was alive and Elise said he had been killed at Brunete.
'It will be sad to see the baby go to the orphanage,' she said. 'She's
been bringing her to the canteen every day since she was born and
everyone loves her.'

Her words clutched my heart. I can say this to you, dear Lucy, without
you thinking I have gone mad -- but it was as if my miscarried son was
speaking to me and telling me I had to help that baby. I could hardly
wait for evening when I could talk to Domingo. He was hesitant at first,
but when he saw my eagerness he said if it would make me happier I could
look after the baby for a bit while the mother was in hospital. I might
not have told him how very sick the mother was. So the next morning
Elise took me to see the woman. She was slipping in and out of
consciousness. The nurses were taking care of the baby which was crying
and red in the face -- hungry probably -- but when I took her in my arms
she quieted immediately and went to sleep. I felt an overpowering sense
that she was where she was meant to be, and my son approved. The mother
woke up and saw that I was holding her baby and she reached out a finger
to touch the little one's cheek. Then she looked straight into my eyes,
and said, 'Take care of my baby.' I nodded, and she insisted, 'Promise
me.' And I promised. Without asking Domingo, I promised. The doctor
arrived to check on the woman, and I walked away with baby Dorotea in my
arms. On the way back home to Luis Vives House I stopped and bought a
feeding bottle and a little dress for her as the one she was wearing was
soiled. At home I took out the nappies and knitted hats and leggings I
had already gathered together for our son. And I took the baby to show
Domingo. He was very busy, of course, but dropped a kiss on the top of
my head and said I could look after her if it wouldn't make me too sad
when I had to give her back.

We didn't have a cot, so I cleared out a drawer and lined it with
blankets and laid her in it beside the bed. And when I heard her cries
in the night, I slipped out quietly so as not to wake Domingo and
carried her down to the kitchen to warm milk for her. She began to cry
quite desperately and when I put the bottle teat in her mouth she spat
it out and seemed to be seeking something else. So I opened my
nightdress and the little one gripped hard on my nipple with her lips,
without any hesitation, but of course it was dry. I managed to slip the
bottle teat into her mouth as well and she was drinking from the bottle,
but sucking on me, and I began to feel a slight tingling in my breast.
After a few minutes she pulled away, so I moved her to the other side,
and she sucked again on the bottle and me simultaneously. And again I
felt a tingling, like when my breasts leaked milk after we lost our son.
Tears began pouring down my cheeks. Each time she cried for milk, I gave
her the bottle, but held her to my breast as well, and within a few days
I was producing milk of my own for her -- not much at first, but more
and more each day. The more she sucked, the more I produced. I kept this
as a secret, wondering over it in my heart. But after she had been with
us about a week, she was crying early one morning and I brought her into
our bed and opened my nightdress without thinking. After a moment or two
I could feel Domingo had woken up. He raised himself on one elbow and
looked at me. 'What are you doing?' he asked, as if it wasn't obvious.
'It's like a miracle,' I said. 'I have milk to feed this baby.'

He wiped a hand over his forehead and said uneasily, 'It isn't your
baby.' 'I know that,' I said. 'I know this isn't our son. But it is a
hungry baby and I have milk. Would you have me deny her?' He looked
doubtful and worried, but he pulled on his clothes and went to work,
leaving me with the baby, learning the contours of her face, letting her
hold my finger tight in her tiny hand as if she didn't want to let me
go. Later in the day Elise came to tell us that the baby's mother had
died, and Domingo looked truly dismayed. Elise left us alone, and I
pleaded with him, 'Perhaps this was meant to be? God has taken our son,
but given us this little girl?' 'You knew the mother was dying,' he
said, and I had to admit I had realised she was very ill. I stood up and
put the baby in his arms. He gazed down at the dark eyelashes on the
whiteness of her skin, the eyelids blue with tiny veins. Then she opened
her eyes and stared up at him, so serious, searching his face for an
answer. He looked up at me, awash with despair. 'I don't know what to
say.' 'Say yes,' I said. 'Tell me I can care for this baby. She needs
our love.' His face clouded. 'There are so many children who need our
love.' 'But this one is here.' 'Will it make you happy?' he asked, and I
nodded. 'Then you keep the baby for now at least, until we find out if
she has other family.' I kissed him over the head of the baby, and he
said, 'You have been so sad since ...' I told him, 'I will never forget
our son.'

So, Lucy, I have a daughter. Dorotea, which means gift from God. She is
the most beautiful creature on the earth, and so good. She only cries
when she's hungry or dirty. Everybody loves her. I love her. It was
true, what I said to Domingo: I will never forget our son, but love for
this little scrap has filled up some of the terrible hollow in me. I
hope you will come for the conference in December and stay with us and
meet her. Say you will. Your friend, Margarita Lucy wrote back at once,
telling Margarita she would come in December. It didn't seem so far
away. The leaves fell and the evenings turned chilly, and more letters
came. Margarita wrote again about her adoration of the miraculous baby
girl, and letters from Britain told Lucy about Captain Nicholson's new
cooking skills and Mrs Murray's life in Lanarkshire. But the letter she
most dreaded, telling her that Tom had been killed in battle, didn't
come. His scrappy notes arrived sporadically from the Aragon Front,
telling of the discomfort of trenches, of freezing nights and wet days,
of boredom and terror. Through the same months, Jamie's weekly missives
arrived from places all across Spain, as he followed in the wake of
Franco's triumphs, but in early December he too said he was going up to
the Aragon Front, to 'see for himself what was really happening'. He
claimed to be in search of truth, but Lucy thought he was as blinkered
as ever. In their letters both Jamie and Tom professed to think about
her, but neither cared about her enough to leave Spain and ease the
frozen band around her heart. In mid-December Lucy travelled to
Barcelona as Margarita had suggested, for the conference of relief
workers from

around Spain. She went with the American Friend Esther Farquar and on
the long train journey Esther told Lucy she had taken over the running
of the English Hospitals in Almería, Alicante and Murcia as well as the
night shelters like Pablo Iglesias. She looked exhausted. In Murcia she
was working with the local authorities to supply breakfast for four
thousand schoolchildren each day. 'We start work mixing up the milk at
half past six in the morning, and I have a team of eight women stirring
and sweating over the vats.' She sounded awed herself when she added,
'We have to make a thousand litres a day. That's more than two hundred
gallons. Every day. Imagine that.' She said they had introduced free
breakfast at many schools, and she laughed. 'I can't tell you how much
school attendance has improved!' Lucy was delighted to hear that 107
girls and women were now taking part in the sewing workshops she had
started. The embroidered tablecloths and dolls they made were sent to
England and the USA for sale. Esther told her the workshops had
dedicated spaces which were used for evening and weekend clubs where
women were taught to read and write or could gather to play board games.
The idea had spread to ten other towns and the local authorities had
promised to keep them going. It seemed extraordinary to Lucy that a
simple idea of hers could have become as big as an oak tree growing from
an acorn. As soon as they arrived at Barcelona station, Lucy could see
that everything had changed. She and Esther had to push their way
through the crowds of refugees who thronged the streets, while in the
restaurants people wearing elegant clothes were sipping coffee and
eating cake, and on the roads highly polished cars mixed with the carts
and wagons of the homeless. The flower stalls along La Rambla made it
seem as if everything was normal, but the sirens and blackouts told the
truth -- this was a city under siege.

Thirty aid workers who had come originally from nine countries and were
now spread throughout Republican Spain had converged on Barcelona for
the conference. These included pacifist Mennonites from America and
representatives of other Protestant groups. Somehow in this overcrowded
city, Alfred, Domingo and Margarita had found accommodation and provided
food for everyone. Lucy suspected Margarita had done most of the work,
busying about the house with baby Dorotea strapped to her back like a
peasant in the fields. She had ensured that Lucy was staying with them
in the new Quaker headquarters, Luis Vives House, a white stone mansion
behind high wrought-iron gates which had been owned by the Sagnier
family before the war, in the aristocratic suburb of Sarrià overlooking
the city. It was the kind of grand building which might have been an
embassy or an art gallery in peacetime, and the Quakers had renamed it
after a sixteenth-century humanist, Juan Luis Vives. It was a joy to be
reunited with Margarita, and they hugged for a long time before breaking
into an excited babble of news and questions. When they were alone they
talked about the horror of Margarita's miscarriage and the black despair
which dogged her afterwards, and Lucy spent hours cooing over Dorotea,
who had brought Margarita back to herself. Lucy felt the tension of the
past months draining out of her as she sang softly to a baby who needed
nothing from her. Snuggling this trusting, milk-smelling creature made
her feel that love for men was just too complicated. She missed Concha
with a small, sharp pain. 'You would be a lovely mother,' said
Margarita. 'One day, perhaps,' smiled Lucy. Margarita was gazing at her
expectantly, teasingly. 'So?' she said. 'Did you use the sponge?' Lucy
played with the baby's fingers as she told her friend all about the
visit to Jamie and then Tom nearly dying, and coming back to the White
Villa to convalesce.

'And so, is he the one?' asked Margarita. Tears began to slowly fall
down Lucy's face, for the first time since Tom had left. 'He's
determined to get himself killed. He loves the cause more than he loves
me.' Margarita reached over the baby and hugged Lucy as she wept. 'War
is a vile, filthy thing.' Baby Dorotea, half-squashed between them, sent
up a sympathetic wail, and they broke free, laughed, and turned their
attention to the affronted child. At the conference, Lucy learned that
large-scale US deliveries were filtering through, giving Alfred Jacob
and his team the task of running a huge operation of budgets, colonies,
canteens, supplies and a fleet of trucks for all the relief agencies.
They heard about the work being done by city councils and government
agencies, as well as religious groups from overseas. They talked about
practicalities like where to obtain cooking pots which could hold more
than fifty litres and how to find sufficient firewood. The wooden
packaging which the food and soap arrived in was their principal source
of fuel. Alfred summed up their task: 'Our job is to do the work of
peace in the midst of war.' It felt like a tall order. Cold was
spreading through the whole country, and everyone shivered in the
high-ceilinged, tile-floored conference room at Luis Vives House. It was
heated only by two electric hotplates propped up on their side, and most
of the delegates kept their coats on. Everyone agreed it looked set to
be a dreadfully cold winter and the plight of the refugees was more
urgent than ever. An American relief worker told about his trip to
Oviedo. 'We had forty blankets to share out, but there were six hundred
and fifty-two children who needed them.' He paused and took a breath,
scanning their faces. 'Several of the little ones who did not get
blankets walked up to them

and felt them. One child petted the blankets then walked out into the
night cold.' Margarita's head drooped and tears dripped on to her lap.
Lucy clutched her hand. The problem was so huge and what they could do
seemed so very little. The Barcelona canteens were now all being run by
Elise Thomsen. She took the conference delegates to the Cantina de Sant
Andreu, funded by Norwegian Quakers, where a young boy called Josep
proudly demonstrated a huge stainless-steel boiler a metre high by a
metre across, with a mechanism which mixed water with dried milk without
making lumps. She told them they made butter out of any excess. Lucy
admired her quiet good humour. She was obviously a born peace-maker who
had smoothed over the condensed milk versus dried milk row by the simple
expedient of letting the Quakers supply dried and Save the Children
supply condensed. In Margarita's eyes she was the angel who had united
her with baby Dorotea. When the conference was over, Margarita begged
Lucy to come back to Barcelona to live, but Lucy was not yet ready to
leave the White Villa. She was eager to return to Benidorm and Concha.
As with the Great War, when the names of previously obscure villages and
rivers like Somme, Ypres and Gallipoli were on everyone's lips, the
whole of Spain now knew the name of Teruel, the centre of the fighting
on the Aragon Front. Before Christmas Tom reported they were getting
ready for the big push, and Lucy sent him a parcel of cigarettes,
toothpaste, razor blades, chocolate and sweets. She even made him
something resembling a small figgy pudding. Christmas came and went, and
was celebrated with joy by the children in the White Villa. Mateo
organised a nativity play in which everyone had a part. Concha was an
angel and tears stood in Lucy's eyes as she watched her

little girl so seriously wishing them all peace on earth. Esther Farquar
sent a consignment of toys and clothes from the American Friends, which
were opened with squeals of delight and squabbling jealousies when the
'kings came' on the sixth of January. Francesca was in Spain for the
Christmas holiday, and she came to celebrate with them, bringing Concha
a pair of red shoes which she refused to take off, even at night. Tom
wrote that their quartermaster 'Hookey' Walker had rustled up a pig from
somewhere and they had wine and nuts. As the staff at the White Villa
welcomed in 1938, Lucy prayed it would be the year in which she would
persuade Tom and Jamie to return home. Eight days later the newspapers
announced that the Republican forces had taken Teruel amid fierce
fighting. Lucy held her breath, but no word came that either of the
brothers had been killed. Alfonso had somehow found out it was her
birthday on the eleventh of January and he organised all the children to
paint her special pictures, and Salvador brought rabbits for a delicious
stew cooked by Juan. Mrs Murray and her father had remembered to write
to her, though they weren't the letters she wished for most. The only
gift she wanted was to know that Tom and Jamie were safe. She looked
about her at her new friends, her new family, gathered in the White
Villa's dining room and thought how long it seemed since her
twenty-first birthday in Welwyn. Only a year had passed, but the girl
she was then was long gone. Somebody new had emerged from the chrysalis
of the 'foolish girl'. Somebody resilient, strong and decisive. But
somebody much sadder. She contemplated the children, helpers, Mateo,
Valentina, Juan and Salvador who had gathered to sing 'Happy Birthday'
to her and realised she wasn't the only one who had changed. Concha's
face had relaxed and her eyes danced as she clapped her hands with
delight; Alfonso

had his arm wrapped around Juanita's waist and was looking Lucy clear in
the face in a way he wouldn't have dared a few months ago. Emilia the
cook had filled out and even dear Juan had lost his perpetually mournful
expression. If only Tom was here with her. If only she knew that he was
alive. She wondered what the next year would bring for all of them.
Eventually a note arrived from Tom, giving some details of the battle
for Teruel and their losses. He didn't mention her birthday but wrote
instead about fighting taking place in snow drifts two to three feet
deep.

The Batallón Inglés is now half Spanish because so many English have
died. We sleep jam-packed into Soviet trucks and try to dig trenches in
frozen soil. We spent one night in a railway tunnel where the heat of
our bodies melted icicles which dripped on us all night, soaking our
poncho blankets. We cross trackless mountains. We fight in blinding
snowstorms. Our tanks freeze to the ground. The Fascist bombers fly
overhead in perfect formation, flashing silver against the deep blue of
the sky. I have frost in my hair. Really. Frost. Can you believe that?
He was alive. That was all she needed to know. Relief made her briefly
gay and she sang to the astonished Concha and whirled her round in a
merry jig before slowly folding herself back into the quiet, frozen core
Tom had left behind him. The winter days came and went at the villa in a
kind of noisy limbo. The storms of the children's joys and sorrows were
like a tornado around her, while she held herself protected in a still
centre. The daily anticipation of grief seemed to sap Lucy's usual
energy, but of course she had a job to do and people who needed her. The
girls and boys played on the beach, but only Lucy ventured into the sea.

The Spaniards all thought it was a kind of English madness to swim
during the coldest January for a hundred years, but the tingling of her
limbs every day reminded her that she was still alive and would be for
as long as those she loved remained in the world. She took her lessons,
and was pleased by the progress of the children, who seemed so changed
from the wild cats she'd first brought up from Murcia. Concha could read
now and she was very proud of the little girl. Lucy used her spare time
to gather up the pictures the children had painted for Alfonso, looking
again at the images of terrible swarms of black planes raining death on
their villages, the pools of blood and the lifeless, spreadeagled
bodies, the running shapes, the fires licking into the sky. She sent the
pictures to Francesca in England, who had a foreword written by a child
psychologist and, with her usual magic, somehow managed to get it
published as a book called They Still Paint Pictures, raising money for
Friends Relief in Spain. Copies arrived at the villa and the children
were astonished and full of pride to see their drawings in a published
book. On the twenty-second of February Salvador came with the grave news
that Franco's forces had retaken Teruel and would now be pressing on
towards the Mediterranean coast. It was said the Republic had lost six
thousand men. The Republican government had already moved up to
Barcelona, and Margarita's letters begged Lucy to return there to them
before her route north was cut off. From Barcelona she would be able to
escape into France if she had to. With the fall of Teruel, Juan and
Salvador added their voices to Margarita's, and as Franco's forces began
their deadly sweep down towards the coast, Lucy reluctantly began to
make her plans to leave the White Villa. It was agreed that some of the
children would stay in Benidorm, cared for by Valentina and Juan. Others
would return to

their families in Murcia who might be wanting to start the long trek
north together. The older boys would go up to Francesca's farm colony.
Emilia took a job as a cook in Benidorm and Mateo found a teaching
position. As for Concha, there was no question in Lucy's mind -- she
would come to Barcelona.

OceanofPDF.com

BARCELONA AND PUIGCERDÀ March 1938

OceanofPDF.com

21

Lucy kept a firm grip on Concha's hand as they pushed through the
milling crowds of refugees who thronged the streets of Barcelona. Very
few people wore coats and many had bare legs although spring had not yet
arrived. Children shivered in their thin clothes and it was clear from
the smell of passing bodies that there was no soap. Concha stopped in
front of a patisserie, gazing at the sweets piled high in the window.
Lucy was ready to go inside until she saw the staggering prices. She was
salivating herself as she pulled Concha away. 'I'm sorry, pet, but they
are too expensive for us.' Daily bombing raids had devastated much of
the area around the docks. Houses were in ruins and Lucy and Concha had
to pick their way through the rubble which had once been homes. And
every day she knew more refugees poured in, surging north from Murcia,
Valencia and Madrid. As Lucy rang the bell of Luis Vives House, Concha
pressed her face between the wrought-iron railings and looked up with
awe at the place which would be her new home. Lucy knew that its arched
windows, iron balconies and corner turrets must make it look like a
fairy-tale castle to Concha. Margarita, with her baby strapped to her
back, ran down the staircase from the front door to let them in.

She kissed Lucy and then Concha, leading them back up to the entrance.
Margarita was so delighted to welcome them that Lucy felt her heart
begin to thaw at the prospect of living in the midst of such undemanding
affection. Margarita untied baby Dorotea, who had grown a surprising
amount in the three months since Lucy was last in Barcelona. She woke up
and smiled at Concha, who was immediately smitten. Margarita took Lucy
and Concha up to their room in the attic, explaining that as
house-mother she was in charge of who slept where and had chosen them a
room close to her own, with spectacular views. Lucy dropped their
suitcases and lifted up Concha to peep out of the window. The white city
was spread before them with columns of smoke spiralling up from bombed
buildings around the docks. In the blue of the Mediterranean beyond, the
forms of low, grey warships sat ominously in the water. 'The Italian
bombers come over from Mallorca all the time,' said Margarita. 'When
they hit the petrol store a great plume of fire shot up into the night
sky, and the whole town was under a fog of black smoke for a week. It
wasn't so bad up here, but it was terrible down in the town. You
couldn't breathe, and everyone was coughing.' Margarita shook her head
at the memory, and Lucy hugged her, wondering what dangers she had
brought Concha into. Then Margarita showed them around the gardens,
holding her baby in one arm and Concha's hand in the other, pointing out
the bitter oranges, tangerines, lemons, olives and figs which grew
there. 'This is where you will play,' she told Concha. 'Nightingales
sing here in the summer. It is a magical garden.' Concha's eyes grew
wide. Margarita showed them the parking area for their six old Bedford
food delivery trucks with AMIGOS CUÁQUEROS

and the Quaker star painted on the side as well as six newer lorries
donated by the Republican navy. Each one covered hundreds of kilometres
each week, she said, distributing food to the colonies and canteens,
with petrol provided by the Department of Transport. She took a huge key
from the bunch she carried around her waist and opened the door which
led down to a cellar full of food. 'It's well known in Barcelona that we
have supplies here,' said Margarita, with a sideways anxious glance at
Lucy. 'All the staff have to work on a rota to stand at the gate and
turn away hungry people. It hurts.' Lucy bit her lip. 'I hope it'll be a
long time before my turn comes up.' 'I'll see what I can do,' said
Margarita, her dimples twinkling. Lucy thought how good it would be to
have someone caring for her for a change. Then Margarita turned to
Concha. 'Would you like to come and help me with my baby while Señorita
Lucy goes to do boring office work?' Concha took her hand and went along
with only one brief backward glance. Lucy pushed open the heavy wooden
door to an office which had once been a lavishly decorated ballroom or
perhaps a formal dining room. The tiled floor and high ceiling made the
space echo with the noise of people talking and the clatter and ping of
typewriters. Alfred Jacob looked up as the door opened and a grin spread
across his face as he hurried to meet her. His hair was beginning to
recede and tiredness made him look so much older than when they had
first met. She had to remind herself he was still only in his twenties.
He shook her hand between both of his in an American way. She wondered
if she too looked aged by all she'd seen. On some days she felt a
hundred years old.

'We're so pleased to have you back. There's so much to do and it will be
wonderful to have someone who can just get on with things. You can sit
here.' Alfred's refugee operation, which had begun with the one canteen
at Barcelona station, had now grown to a staff of twelve overseas aid
workers and sixty Catalan and Spanish people. Lucy counted thirty-two
desks, nine telephones and twelve typewriters while she listened to
Alfred warning her that they worked seven days a week for as many hours
as they could keep awake and took three shifts for lunch. He also
explained that back in England Edith Pye had set up an International
Commission for the Assistance of Child Refugees in Spain. She had
persuaded the British Foreign Office to pledge £10,000 if she could get
other governments to do the same. Her efforts had succeeded so well that
the commission was now based in Geneva and had money coming in from
twenty-four governments. Lucy thought of the little ex-midwife with the
Somerset accent who she'd first seen at Friends House with Ruth, and was
amazed that one middle-aged woman could achieve so much. Alfred said
that although they now had large international donations coming in, the
actual fieldwork was in the hands of volunteers -- in Catalonia the
English Friends led by Alfred, in southern Spain the Mennonites and the
American Friends led by Esther Farquar, and in Madrid by the Swiss. In
Barcelona alone there were now nineteen canteens feeding 3,500 people
each day, distributing clothing and encouraging refugees to form sewing
groups, choirs and dramatic societies. There were canteens in each city
district: in restaurants, a hotel, the fire station, the town hall, an
ex-seminary. He was proud to tell her that most of the canteen helpers
were refugees, rewarded for their labour with a weekly food parcel. Lucy
hid a smile. He'd won that argument, then. She knew they'd agreed a
shaky compromise over the dried milk versus condensed milk battle in
which the English Quakers

still sent dried milk, though most of the refugees were fed on
condensed. 'What should I do first?' she asked. Alfred looked down at
the piece of paper in his hand. 'The American Red Cross is sending six
thousand tons of wheat flour. We'll need warehouses away from the docks,
and you'll need to find bakers, and transport to get the wheat to the
bakers every day and the bread to the canteens and colonies.' Lucy knew
who to approach in the city council and the regional aid committee from
the introductions Margarita had made when she first arrived in
Barcelona. She took the paper from Alfred's hand. 'I'd better get
started then.' At the lunch break on her second day Lucy sat next to
Kanty Cooper, a dark-haired, vivacious Englishwoman in her thirties who
spoke perfect Spanish and had only recently come out from England. Kanty
wrinkled her nose over their meal of soup, with a plate of beans in
sauce, lettuce, and an orange for dessert, and said, 'On Sunday we had
dried cod and potato for a treat! The only thing there's no shortage of
is oranges. But we are lucky. Most people are living on boiled turnips
and rice.' As they ate, Kanty explained she'd been a sculptor in
England, who had studied under Henry Moore, but had to stop because of
neuritis. 'It was like arrows of fire down my arms at night when I'd
been working in stone or wood, or even just drawing,' she sighed. 'So I
came here instead.' Despite having to give up her art, Kanty was a
cheerful, energetic person whose laugh echoed round the chilly mansion.
She and her friend Audrey Russell were working on a scheme to focus
extra canteen feeding on two-to-fouryear-olds who weren't eligible
either for baby rations or food in school. 'The trouble is we can only
feed a third of the thirty-six thousand who need it.'

After a few days Lucy noticed that Kanty always wore trousers. 'It's
much warmer, and more practical. You can wear thick socks too,' she
said. Lucy went out and bought some boys' trousers and found she didn't
feel the cold so badly in the unheated office. Margarita put her head on
one side to consider Lucy's new look and said, 'The anarchists don't
like women to wear trousers.' Kanty snorted. 'Funny sort of anarchism
which makes more rules than before.' 'Hmmm,' said Margarita, and Lucy
knew this meant she didn't entirely approve of trousers either, or
perhaps she feared Kanty was having too strong an influence on Lucy. In
Kanty's enthusiastic company and with the affection of Margarita, Lucy
found her own drive returning, as the spring sunshine revived the trees
in their garden. After all, she told herself sternly, neither Tom nor
Jamie had been killed yet. It was a waste of energy to worry about
things she couldn't influence or control, and somehow disloyal or bad
luck to fear they were dead. She shook herself fully awake. There was so
much work to be done. A lorry arrived containing sweet oranges from the
south, but they couldn't figure out how to unload it. Lucy noticed that
the tail-gate was level with the first-floor windows of the office. So
the lorry was backed up to the building, and they unloaded ten tons of
oranges by hand on to the office floor. Everyone mucked in, and there
was much laughter, especially when Kanty tried to demonstrate how to
juggle with three oranges. Lucy filled two string bags and took them up
to the Los Cipreses colony in Pedralbes where Jorge was still living.
This time she took Concha with her and introduced her to the serious
little boy with the gold flecks in his eyes. He had lost another front
tooth, and Concha showed him how wobbly her second incisor was.

'That'll come out soon,' he said authoritatively, and this seemed to
seal their relationship. He told them he was now in charge of the
printing press because he was seven years old. He offered to show Concha
how it worked. Lucy watched the two dark heads bent together and a surge
of love went through her. When they left she said, 'I will come back,
Jorge.' He smiled. 'I know you will, Lucy Yellowhair.' On the way home
to Luis Vives House Concha asked, 'Am I seven too?' and Lucy realised
she didn't know when her birthday was. Concha screwed her face up in
concentration, but couldn't remember the date. 'I think it might be in
May,' she offered. 'May it is then,' said Lucy. 'What's your favourite
number?' Concha thought hard. 'Seventeen.' Lucy laughed. 'I think you've
just remembered your birthday!' In their second week in Barcelona, once
Lucy had organised arrangements for the American wheat delivery, Lucy
and Kanty were each assigned three canteens to run. Lucy was pleased to
have something practical to do which took her out of the constant
pressure of the office. It seemed real to her to be back in the world of
the needy. One of Lucy's canteens was in a bombed-out slum district near
the docks, and she had to step carefully through the rubble of the
streets to reach it. There was a little cocoa left when all the children
registered to Lucy's canteen had been fed, so she opened the doors to
some of the old people who gathered outside for leftovers. Earlier, as
they served the queuing children, she had watched one skinny girl,
dressed in black, being allowed to go to the front of the line and given
several allowances of milk and biscuits.

The helper saw her watching. 'That's Marita. She's twelve years old, and
she has five little brothers and sisters to look after. She leaves the
youngest in the care of the older ones while she comes to collect milk
for them all.' A few days later Lucy saw Marita again waiting to be
served. Marita raised her head at the sound of dull thuds in the
distance, and they all stood quiet to listen. Then the sirens shrilled
and Lucy jumped. Some people ran for the shelters, while others
scrambled under the furniture. The crash of bursting shells came closer
and closer. Lucy huddled beneath a table near Marita and gathered a
trembling child below each arm. She tried to speak calmly to them.
'Don't worry, it'll be over soon. We are quite safe here.' The ground
shook and milk flew everywhere. Lucy caught Marita's eye, consternation
and indecision written all over her face as she chewed her bottom lip.
Then Marita moved -- dashing out of the door crying, 'My children!'
before Lucy could stop her. Lucy let go of the two boys she was
comforting and ran after her, but outside the dust in the air was
thicker than a London fog and she couldn't see which way Marita had
gone. She almost stumbled over a dead horse lying in the shafts of a
cart which had been blown to smithereens. Whole trees lay across the
square and a wall had been sliced off a house. Lucy covered her nose and
mouth with her silk scarf, and went back inside the canteen to help
clear up the mess, but for the rest of the day she worried about Marita
and whether she had made it back to her brothers and sisters. She asked
all the assistants, but nobody knew where she lived. On her way back up
to Luis Vives House, Lucy crunched through streets which were thick with
shattered glass. Ambulances passed her with men clinging to their sides,
blowing whistles. In other places, men and women were digging through
the heaped remains of buildings to search

for survivors. Marita might be under those walls, she thought. Before
she could reach home the distant thuds began again and the sirens
sounded. Lucy raced for the nearby metro station. Her heart was beating
hard as the ack-ack of the anti-aircraft guns started and when she
glanced up she could see the silver specks of bombers in the blue sky.
As she reached the metro, she shaded her eyes to watch the Republican
fighter planes scramble to attack the bombers. They flew in low and at
great speed, swooping like swallows. The noise was deafening. A
middle-aged man was standing beside the station entrance, and as he
looked up at the battle overhead tears poured down his leathered cheeks.
Lucy took his arm. 'You should come underground.' He let himself be led
down the steps by her, blowing his nose on a huge handkerchief. As they
sat on the platform together he explained, 'I have four sons. Two are in
Franco's air force and the two others in the Republican air force. When
I see the fighters and bombers go up together I know there is every
chance one of my lovely boys will kill another.' He raised his hands and
wailed, 'My lovely boys!' A woman on the other side of him shook her
head sympathetically. 'This war is a bastard thing.' Lucy dropped her
head on to her knees, thinking of other brothers. In the canteen a few
days later, a woman was taken with labour pains while collecting her
ration. Lucy took her home to a high block of tenement flats. They
groped their way up a dark, smelly staircase, Lucy supporting the woman
who had to stop every few minutes as pain gripped her. Lucy helped her
into her flat, where her sister was waiting, and as she was leaving the
apartment a door

across the landing opened and there was Marita, her mouth wide in
astonishment. 'Señorita, what are you doing here? You must come and meet
my children.' Lucy followed her into a small, light room with potted
geraniums and ivy on a little balcony. A washing line dripping with
clothes hung across the room, and in the centre, five children sat
around a table, quietly eating milk and bread for breakfast. They were
all neatly dressed; the girls' hair was plaited, and the boys' had been
plastered down with water. The girls were clothed in black like Marita,
even one who could not have been more than two. As Marita introduced
each of them, they stood up, shook hands and said, 'Good morning,
Señorita.' Even the toddler solemnly held out her chubby fist. Lucy
didn't know whether to laugh or cry. 'I try to keep everything as my
mother left it,' said Marita, showing a darn in her brother's shirt
which had been mended with stitches so small that Lucy could hardly see
them. 'She would be very proud of you,' said Lucy, and Marita beamed. A
thought struck Lucy. 'What happens when an air raid comes?' She hated
the idea of Marita shepherding the children down six flights of stairs
in pitch-darkness to a dank cellar. Marita shrugged. 'We sit under the
table. We can only die once, and it's better if we all die together.'
Lucy shook hands with all the children again and dipped into her pocket
where she kept a few coins. She laid these on the corner of the table
without Marita seeing in case she was too proud to accept charity. A new
German word entered their vocabulary as they read in the papers that
Herr Hitler had begun something called a 'blitzkrieg' on the Aragon
Front. How could Tom survive

bombing raids there in dugout trenches, without even a cellar or shelter
to run to? Lucy shivered and crossed her arms in front of her. It seemed
impossible that he could live through it. If he wasn't already dead. In
Barcelona, the air raids increased in frequency until they were coming
at regular two-and-a-half-hour intervals. Everyone worked with their
eyes constantly on the clock and their nerves on edge as they waited for
the next attack. One week there were sixteen in thirty-six hours. If
Lucy was at the mansion she gathered up Concha and they took cover in
the cellar, but she was often out at one of her canteens, and ran to the
nearest shelter or the basement of whatever building she was in. At
first her arms and legs trembled for hours after a raid, but soon she
found she stopped worrying about herself. Her anxiety was all for her
charges, the refugees and helpers, and for her friends and Concha back
at Luis Vives House. If she took a direct hit herself -- well, she
shrugged, thinking of Marita, you can only die once. When the bombing
raids had frayed their nerves or tempers, or when they were just plain
exhausted, Kanty entertained them over their meagre meals with stories
of the scurrilous lives of famous artists and the details of flamboyant
parties she'd attended in Chelsea. The stories might have been slightly
shocking, but they certainly raised everyone's spirits. Lucy thought how
much wider and more varied the world was than she had ever realised when
she lived in Welwyn. 'You never seem to get downhearted,' she said to
Kanty one evening. Kanty looked at her shrewdly. 'The only thing I
wanted in life was to be a sculptor, and when that was taken away from
me I thought for a while that there was no point to living. Then I
pulled myself up by my boot straps, and remembered something my mother
used to say: "You can never be completely miserable when you are doing

something for someone else." And by chance I met Audrey who was coming
here. Well, chance or whatever you like to call it. So I decided to tag
along. Not being able to sculpt was the worst thing I could imagine. And
now the worst has happened and I've lived through it, and I've met you
and Margarita and Concha, and found something I'm good at which gives me
back my sense of purpose. So it doesn't seem so bad after all.' It was
the same for her, Lucy realised. Her world had revolved around Jamie and
Tom and her mission to bring them back to England. But in Spain she had
found other people who needed her and -- here she thought of Concha --
maybe who loved her even more than the boys. There was still no word
from Tom. In the evenings, if they were not too tired, Lucy, Kanty,
Alfred and Norma listened to the Socialist and Communist Party of
Catalonia radio station where Ralph Bates broadcast news stories in
English about the International Brigades and read out letters from the
Front. Another broadcaster was one of Tom's old comrades from the early
days, Jimmy Shand, a student from Liverpool who'd been wounded. One
night he announced that some International Brigade soldiers had been
captured. Lucy hoped Tom was one of them and that was why he hadn't
written. A prison cell sounded safer to her than a trench. On 15 April
the radio announced the news which everyone had been expecting and
dreading -- that Franco's Fascist army had reached the Mediterranean,
cutting off Barcelona from the other cities of Spain. Lucy thought of
her friends in Murcia, who were now at the mercy of the Fascists. She
wished she had brought Alfonso, Juanita and little Pepe north with her.
Alfred raised his eyes to Norma and she reluctantly nodded. Lucy knew
they had agreed that Norma would take

their children out of Barcelona once Franco reached the coast. A few
days later they waved goodbye to Norma, fouryear-old Piers and his
three-year-old sister Teresa, who was nicknamed Terry. They were moving
back up to Puigcerdà in the Pyrenees, close to the French border, which
had been a prosperous ski and hiking resort before the war. John
Langdon-Davies, the News Chronicle's correspondent in Catalonia, had set
up three children's colonies there through his own charity, the Foster
Parents Scheme for Children in Spain. Norma soon wrote that she'd found
a house backing on to the River Reür, which formed the border with
France at this point. Out of the rear windows she could see over the
French town of Bourg-Madame. She said, rather wistfully, that there was
plenty of room in the house for Lucy and Margarita if they wanted to
join her there. Although there had been two Italian bombing raids
targeting the railway station, Puigcerdà was still much safer than
Barcelona, and only a few steps away from France. Do come, she wrote.
The mountain air is wonderful. So good for the children. Lucy bent over
the sleeping form of Concha and moved a lock of hair off her face.
Perhaps she should leave Barcelona for Concha's sake? But there were
still so many people in need and so much work to be done. She was
finding it was becoming harder each day to make her way across the city.
Refugees often blocked the streets with their carts piled high with
bundles, mattresses, cooking pots and chickens. Horses and donkeys stood
listlessly in the roads which stank of their shit, with their heads
hanging down. But as Lucy waited for delivery trucks to bring the food
to her canteens, underfed men would stop to help the driver unload, and
nothing was ever stolen, not one bread roll, because the Quaker star on
the lorry told everyone this food was for the children.

One Sunday evening Margarita took Lucy, Concha and Kanty to the Plaza de
San Jaime, in the warren of slums which formed the old town. 'I want you
to see something,' she said mysteriously. 'The Sardana.' As they neared
the plaza through the dark, canyon-like streets, they could hear the
sound of a pipe or flute and a drum, and as the square opened out before
them they saw circles of serious-looking people of all ages dancing hand
in hand. The blue of the factory girls' overalls alternated with the
brown of the Popular Army, the black dresses of the widows and the grey
ragged suits of the older men. The music was jolly, but the dancers
moved slowly, stepping to left and right, crossing and uncrossing their
feet, raising their arms with dignity and grace. It had none of the
skipping and bobbing Lucy was used to in an English country dance but
the solemn circles seemed to be saying, 'We will go on. We will come
through this.' Margarita handed Dorotea to Lucy and took Kanty and
Concha to join in. Kanty grasped the hand of an old man and a soldier
and tried to copy the steps. Margarita's feet moved lightly and
naturally in a dance she had obviously been doing all her life. This was
where she belonged, and Lucy suddenly had a great longing to be in the
place where she had grown up and everything was known. When the music
stopped Margarita returned to Lucy and put her arms out for Dorotea.
'You see,' she said. 'We die dancing.' In May Norma Jacob wrote to say
that scarlet fever had broken out among the refugee children in one of
John Langdon-Davies's Puigcerdà colonies and the schoolmaster running it
had been taken seriously ill. She was doing what she could, but was
scared of catching the disease herself and infecting her own children.

'I had scarlet fever when I was thirteen,' said Lucy, turning over the
idea in her mind. Kanty grinned. 'Then it's obvious. You must go and
manage the colony till the schoolmaster recovers. It'll be good for
you.' Lucy hesitated, thinking of her three canteens, until Kanty
cannily added, 'And good for Concha to be up in the mountains. She's
looking very pale.' Lucy chewed her lip. How much she would like to take
Concha out of the constant danger of the bombing! 'But there's scarlet
fever; she might catch it.' Kanty raised her eyebrows. 'Much more chance
of catching a falling bomb here. Just don't take her to the colony.
Enrol her in a local school instead.' Lucy pictured Concha running in
the meadows below the mountains. It was an irresistible image. She
nodded. 'Just till the schoolmaster recovers.' It took little persuasion
to convince Margarita to bring Dorotea too, and soon they were packing,
with all the anticipation of friends preparing for a peacetime holiday.
The relief of leaving the besieged city made them lightheaded, and
though the train was dirty, slow and crowded, they giggled together like
schoolgirls. Concha beamed from one to the other of them, filled with
the novelty of seeing them so jolly. As the train drew into the little
railway station at Puigcerdà, Lucy's heart lifted. The mountains behind
the town still had snow on their peaks. As they disembarked, scrambling
over their luggage, the air smelled cold and clean. Norma met them on
the platform, and en route to the house she showed them the centre of
the town with its theatre, casino, tree-lined central square and an
artificial lake surrounded by the turn-of-the-century villas of rich
Barcelonians. In the water they could see reflected the china blue of
the sky, a villa with an elegant square tower,

and the trees just coming into leaf. It seemed to Lucy the most
beautiful place on earth. Everything was calm and quiet, and far fewer
of the people they passed looked ragged or starving. She hugged Concha
and Margarita and realised she was completely happy for the first time
since Tom had left the White Villa. The children's colony was in another
sumptuous home, the Villa San Antonio. John Langdon-Davies's charity had
taken over the three-storey mansion which, like the house on the lake,
had a tall square tower in one corner, topped with a pitched slate roof,
and tiny windows looking out north, south, east and west. It looks like
Rapunzel's tower, Lucy thought. When the scarlet fever was gone, she
would bring Concha to climb it. For now Lucy couldn't allow Concha to
enter the infected villa, but instead she enrolled her in the school
which occupied the ancient convent of Sant Domènec. Concha had never
been to school before, and she clutched Lucy's hand very tightly as they
stood outside the old building with its three tiers of arched loggias.
'You'll make some good friends here,' said Lucy, trying to sound
confident. 'But I can't talk Catalan,' said Concha miserably, and Lucy's
stomach twisted with guilt, as she wondered if she was really the best
guardian for her after all. 'Give it a few days?' she pleaded, and
Concha nodded slowly. Running the Villa San Antonio colony felt like
second nature as Lucy quickly learned the names of the boys and girls
and their sad histories -- those who had lost their parents on the
desperate flight from Málaga, or who had been sent to a safer place by
their families in Madrid. All of them hoped to see their mothers again
-- even those who knew them to be dead. She thought how she clung to the

hope of seeing Tom and Jamie, even though she knew the odds were stacked
against it. The ten children who had caught scarlet fever had been moved
into two back bedrooms and were kept in isolation. Two of the youngest
had died before Lucy arrived, and the others were terrified. Now they
were all covered in the livid red rash, but the worst of the danger
appeared to have passed. Lucy divided her time between nursing the sick
and teaching the healthy children alongside local women. One of the
nurses was a middle-aged woman who had lost a child herself to scarlet
fever and she slept in the dormitory, watching over them and praying
fiercely. Every evening, Lucy would go to read to the convalescing
children, rejoicing as they gradually regained strength and the skin
began to peel from their faces and bodies, revealing shiny pinkness
beneath. Within a week they all looked as if they had been sunburned.
Despite her concern for the children with scarlet fever, Lucy felt as if
she could breathe more easily in the peaceful air of Puigcerdà. A
tightness in her neck and shoulders which she hadn't even noticed
unknotted as she slept soundly in the quiet nights, and she could see
Concha's features visibly softening as she discovered the other girls at
the school were vying to befriend her, and one little girl had taken her
firmly under her wing. The teacher was asking her to assist with Spanish
lessons. Lucy and Concha both began to gain weight on the food which was
smuggled over the border from France. 'The border is permeable here,'
Norma had explained as she unwrapped the first clandestine parcel of
cheese. 'It follows the river in places but it mostly just meanders
through fields, and there are many contraband routes -- for food and
people.' How strange it seemed to Lucy that just there, over one of the
bridges or across the fields, brother wasn't fighting brother, death
didn't rain out of the sky, orphaned children

weren't being cared for in colonies, ordinary people weren't seeking
refuge in overcrowded, filthy shelters, and bereaved twelve-year-old
girls weren't bringing up their siblings. Lucy, Margarita and Norma
settled into each other's company, taking turns to cook and wash for the
household. Norma kept English bedtimes for Piers and Terry, so Concha
too went to bed early and in the peaceful evenings the three young women
would listen to music on the wireless while making clothes for the
children and themselves, or read, or talk about the futures they
planned. Norma agreed to help Lucy teach English to Concha, and
Margarita helped her make a special birthday present for the little
girl. Piers and Terry were becoming like Concha's brother and sister,
and as they only spoke English, she soon began to pick up words and
phrases. She loved being the eldest and 'in charge'. On the seventeenth
of May they held a birthday party for Concha. Margarita made honey cake
and Concha was given the rag doll which Lucy had sewn in the evenings
and kept secret from her. The doll had straight black hair made of wool
held in place with a slide, just like Concha's. And if the eyes weren't
quite level and the mouth was a little wonky, Concha didn't notice,
clutching it to her chest and swearing she would love it forever. Norma
and Margarita gave her new clothes they'd made. They all sang 'Happy
Birthday' in Spanish, Catalan and English and Lucy attempted to teach
them to play 'dead lions', though Piers and Terry thought it was funny
to tweak their noses and pull their hair to try to make them move. 'This
is the best birthday party I've ever had,' said Concha. She thought very
hard. 'I think it might be the only birthday party I've ever had.'
Whenever they could get away, Alfred or Domingo would come up to join
their wives for a few days, and Lucy wished

she had someone coming up to see her, to sit with his arm draped
casually about her shoulders, to kiss her when he thought nobody was
looking, and to make love in the depth of the night. Margarita was in
the next room to Lucy and, though she tried not to listen, it was
impossible not to hear the low moans and stifled cries of her pleasure
as the iron bedstead creaked faster and faster. On the day Domingo had
left for Barcelona again, Margarita was washing up while Lucy dried, and
Margarita blushingly said, 'I hope I didn't wake you in the night. I try
so hard to be silent when ...' Lucy picked up a dripping plate. 'Can I
ask you? About ... that?' Margarita glanced quickly sideways at her
friend. 'Of course. Anything.' 'You like it, don't you?' Margarita
laughed. 'Better than honey cake.' Lucy smiled. She knew Margarita could
not resist honey cake. Margarita glanced up again, frowning. 'It wasn't
like that for you with Tom?' Lucy shook her head. 'Sometimes it's not so
good the first time,' said Margarita authoritatively. 'You have to get
used to each other. Or maybe an eager English boy might be like a bull
charging a matador?' Lucy giggled. 'Something like that,' though she
wondered if an eager Spanish boy would show any more restraint. 'Well,
next time you must make him circle the bullring a few times until you
are ready. You are the matador. You are in control. And men need to be
told everything, like "yes, that's good", "stop that", "not there", "go
slower".' She laughed her deep, throaty laugh and counted on her fingers
as she listed the instructions. Lucy had been telling Tom what to do all
their lives. She didn't think she'd find that difficult.

'And try different positions,' continued Margarita, putting the last
dish on the draining board. Lucy's eyes widened. 'There are different
positions?' This was something Mrs Murray hadn't told her. 'The one on
top has more control,' said Margarita, and Lucy thought, yes, next time
it would be on her terms. If there ever was a next time.

OceanofPDF.com

22

It was June and there was still no news from Tom, but a letter arrived
from Jamie, forwarded from Barcelona to Puigcerdà. He wrote triumphantly
that he had been vindicated in his support for the Fascist regime
because Pope Pius had condemned the Republic's 'truly satanic hatred of
God'. The Pope had formally recognised Franco, and the Holy Father could
not be mistaken. Lucy shook her head and burned the letter. But Jamie
was following the advance of the Moroccan ground troops and was close to
the fighting, and soon another letter arrived.

My darling Lucy, Something most terrible. Oh, terrible, terrible! I can
hardly write it, but I will go mad if I don't tell someone, and who
could I tell but you? I might destroy this letter when I've written it.
If I was going to post it I would have to smuggle it out somehow. I am
broken. Everything is broken. Not in my body. I wouldn't mind that. But
my heart is broken. Something has happened and the scales have fallen
from my eyes. I thought I was a crusader doing God's work against the
powers of darkness. But now I see the

powers of darkness are everywhere and my soul is black as night because
I have been part of it. I will try to write it. The news crews and I
were following the army as it pushed forward. At every step we were
presented with grateful Catholics whose churches had been cleaned and
reopened -- ordinary people, Lucy, who just wanted to be able to pray in
peace again. And I felt so good about what Franco was achieving. And
then, yesterday, we were closer to the line of fighting and I came into
a camp of mercenaries. The men were resting after battle, eating and
drinking. Then I saw their sergeant, coming down the road from the
village they'd just liberated. He had two Spanish girls slightly in
front of him, walking slowly. When they came closer to me I could see
they were pretty girls, about thirteen or fourteen, sisters perhaps.
They were terrified, and one had a bright weal across her face. Their
arms were behind their backs, and as they came level with me, I could
see their hands had been tied, and the sergeant had a gun pointed at
them. 'Help us, Señor. Please save us,' the girls begged me. I held up
my hand and stopped the sergeant. 'What have these girls done wrong?' He
looked slyly at me. 'They are Republican filth.' I protested. 'But they
are only children.' 'They are the children of Reds.' The girls were
arguing loudly. 'No we aren't. We are good Catholic girls.' The sergeant
swiped one of them across the mouth with the back of his hand, and when
I jumped forward he levelled the gun at me. The girls' eyes were wide
with fear, as they looked all about them for somewhere to run and hide,
for

someone to rescue them. The one who'd been hit was crying. I stepped
back and raised my hands so he could see I had no weapon. I tried to
keep my voice even and friendly. 'Come on now, sergeant,' I said, more
calmly than I felt. 'Let me take them into custody, and I'll deliver
them to where the other prisoners are being held for interrogation.' The
sergeant's eyes flicked to the encampment ahead. Some of his soldiers
were standing now, watching us. He shrugged. 'I have promised my men.
They deserve some entertainment.' My stomach lurched and I thought I was
going to be sick. The girls were both weeping now. 'Please Señor, please
Señor, save us,' they pleaded again. I was begging too. 'No, no, you
can't do this. They are someone's children.' But the sergeant merely
prodded his gun into the back of one of the girls to move her forward. I
took a deep breath and stepped in front of them, and he raised the gun
to me again. 'If you interfere, my men will tear you limb from limb.' I
looked back over my shoulder and could see more of the soldiers were now
on their feet, some with weapons in their hands. And, oh Lucy, I'm so
sorry, but I was afraid for my life, and I stepped out of the way. The
girls began to wail loudly. 'Don't worry,' said the sergeant as he
pushed the girls past me. 'They will be dead in four hours.' I turned
away and vomited on the ground, trembling all over. And once I had been
sick, I ran back to the line, weaving between the tents, seeking out the
most senior officer I could find.

I was out of breath as I told my story to the sergeant guarding his
tent, and was then told to wait before I was ushered inside. The captain
was urbane and immaculate. He invited me to sit down and offered me a
glass of wine. 'No, no,' I spluttered. 'You have to go there now and
save those girls.' 'You've had a shock,' he said soothingly, and pushed
a glass into my hand. I took a big swig. 'You have to stop what they are
doing.' 'Tell me about it.' I told him quickly, the words spurting out
in disgust, hoping, expecting he would grab his gun and issue orders to
stop the horror going on just down the road. But he raised his hands in
a gesture of helplessness. 'What can I do? It's the same everywhere we
go.' I sucked back more of the wine. 'But they are innocent children.
Madre Día. Please. I beg you.' But he simply sat down and lifted his own
glass to his lips. 'I would if I could. But we would have another civil
war if I interfered.' He smiled at his own joke. 'One is enough. Please
sit and talk to me. Where are you from?' So I sat with him, Lucy. To my
everlasting shame, I talked to him and tried to keep my mind from what
those girls were enduring, and from my own cowardice in not being
prepared to die for them. We drank through one bottle and I told him
about Oxford, and he told me about his university days in Valencia. In
other circumstances I would have liked him. He opened another bottle,
and a man brought food to us, and finally I asked him about the German
and

Italian troops and why Moroccan soldiers were fighting for the Catholic
Church. 'They are simply mercenaries,' he said with a dismissive wave.
'They fight for money, and the ridiculous hope that Franco will give
independence to Morocco when he wins.' He laughed, a humourless laugh.
'And the Moroccans think it a great joke, that we, their imperial
masters, are paying them to kill Spanish people. Every chieftain who
supplied 7,500 soldiers was given three anti-aircraft guns. They hate us
and don't differentiate what kind of Spanish they are killing.' It's in
the Bible, isn't it: 'The scales fell from his eyes and he could see.'
That's what it felt like to me. Suddenly I felt as if I'd been duped,
taken for an idiot. My great holy cause, Lucy, was nothing but a sham. I
stumbled away from his tent, back to the journalists' camp, trying to
reason with myself, to persuade myself that sometimes the ends justify
the means, and the restoration of the Church to Spain was worth
anything. But it wasn't worth the gang rape and murder of those two
girls, was it, Lucy? And tomorrow they'll push on and it will be someone
else's daughters from some other village. My mind steamed with all the
other things I've denied -- the German bombing of Guernica, the reason
all the German and Italian troops are here. Franco isn't fighting for
God, but for power. For Fascism. This is not the holy war I believed it
was. I don't know how I went to sleep but I did eventually, and woke up
with a thumping headache. All the other journalists and news crews went
out interviewing the grateful Catholics who'd been lined up for them. I
stayed in my tent and wrote this.

I thought I might burn it once I'd written it, but I want to get it to
you somehow. I want you to know the truth. I can't stay here. I'll file
a piece for the Catholic Herald which tells what I know. Then I'll go up
to the Ebro Front, and try to make my way to you. Perhaps I can help you
with your refugees. Perhaps I can make amends. Perhaps I will try to go
to Rome and tell the Vatican what's really happening. Dear Lucy, can you
ever forgive me for not saving those girls, even if it meant my own
death? I know I will never forgive myself. I will see their faces to the
end of my days. I will pack my things now, and try to see if I can
somehow make it across the lines to join you. I don't know how. Oh Lucy!
Lucy crumpled the letter to her chest. How had it taken Jamie so long to
see the truth? And what would he do now? She was frightened by the
thought of him trying to cross the battle lines. She wrote urging him to
go straight home via Portugal, but knew there was little chance of her
letter ever reaching him. The schoolmaster at the Villa San Antonio
colony had recovered enough to resume his duties by the middle of June,
and Lucy knew she should return to Barcelona. Alfred had told them that
Kanty was now supplying fifty-four canteens and feeding almost twelve
thousand children a day as vast numbers of refugees continued to
struggle in from the south. She had also set up feeding stations for the
old and infirm. Barcelona was under siege and starvation gripped the
city. Luis Vives House was beginning to seem too small to run the
massive operation.

Lucy looked up at the mountains, and said goodbye to the peace which
seemed to flow down from them into the town. With a heavy heart she made
up her mind to leave Concha in the safety of the Villa San Antonio or
with Margarita and Norma. Lucy explained to her that she must stay
behind for her own protection, and assured her she would visit as often
as she could, but a furious determination gripped Concha's features. Her
catlike eyes narrowed to slits and her mouth set in a firm line. She
planted her legs apart and folded her arms. 'I will not stay here
without you. I will run away, and find a kind person to take me on the
train to Barcelona. And if you bring me back I will run away again.'
'But the bombing -- you remember what it was like. And next time you
could be killed. You will be safer here.' Concha's eyes flashed with
fury. 'I would rather die than live without you.' Lucy gathered up
Concha's stiff, furious body and held her until she felt it soften in
her arms. Margarita waved them off at the station, saying she would be
back in Barcelona soon herself. Concha sat close to Lucy, as if fearing
she would be put off at the next stop. The train going south was almost
empty, but on the roads coming north towards France there were
uncountable numbers of refugees. Out of the window Lucy and Concha
watched farm carts piled high with mattresses, saucepans, bicycles and
sometimes live hens or rabbits. 'Look, look!' pointed Concha in
amazement. 'A monkey!' Lucy thought she must be mistaken, but sure
enough, a tame baboon was sitting in the cart which passed them, its
eyes full of infinite sadness. 'Can I have a monkey?' asked Concha, and
Lucy laughed. Later that evening, and not long after they had arrived
back in Luis Vives House, the sirens sounded. As they

hurried to the cellar, they heard the roar of planes above the rooftops,
then a long whistle, and the thud of an explosion shook the house and
blew out the windows of a neighbouring property. Lucy tried to cover
Concha's body with her own as they ran down the steps to the basement,
furious with herself for not leaving the little girl in Puigcerdà.
Underground, Kanty rushed over to them, swinging Concha off her feet and
making her squeal with glee, forgetting the bombs overhead. They settled
down on boxes of oranges to wait for the allclear. Lucy noticed Kanty
was still wearing slacks even though it was hot in Barcelona by now.
'Still annoying the anarchists?' she asked. Kanty winked. 'Breaking as
many rules as possible.' She reached behind her for an orange which she
gave to Concha. 'Shhh. It's stolen!' she said and the little girl's eyes
glittered with fun. Kanty's face was filled with its usual wound-up
energy, but there were dark smudges under her eyes. 'You look so
rested,' she said wistfully. 'That'll soon go, though we have Sundays
off now. The London office sent a doctor to look at us all and he said
we must have one day off each week. So the day after tomorrow we'll go
to the beach. Would you like that, Concha?' Concha clapped her hands
together, and Lucy had a sudden lurching memory of her playing with Tom
in the waves at the White Villa. She saw his lean, tanned body, and the
livid scar down his thigh as he ran lopsidedly into the sea with Concha
piggy-backing on him, her legs tightly gripping his waist, and her arms
almost strangling round his neck. They were both laughing uproariously.
Where was he now? 'Yes,' said Concha. 'I love the beach. I can swim, you
know.' She turned to Lucy. 'See, I knew I should come

back.' 'You were right,' said Kanty, tickling her. 'So how is it?' asked
Lucy, when Concha's giggles subsided. Kanty shrugged. 'Grim. We've got
bread from American wheat going out every day to 93,000 schoolchildren,
but there's terrible illness among them. In one of your old canteens
we've got nearly five hundred on the books but a quarter of them are too
ill to attend and collect their ration.' Lucy wondered how Marita and
'her children' were faring. She promised herself she would visit as soon
as possible. 'I'm glad you're back,' said Kanty, resting her hand
briefly on Lucy's arm. 'I might get a pet monkey,' announced Concha. 'We
could take it to the beach. I could teach it to swim.' A few evenings
later, they were listening to Jimmy Shand on the wireless when he
announced, with crowing excitement in his voice, that the 14th corps of
the International Brigades had carried out a daring amphibious guerrilla
raid on Carchuna in the south, where 300 Republican prisoners had been
held by Franco's troops. The rescue had happened on the twentieth of
May, but it had taken over a month for the survivors to reach Catalonia,
travelling at night and hiding from the Fascists. He began to list the
names of those who had been rescued and made it to Barcelona. Lucy
inhaled sharply and prayed that Tom would be among them. She told
herself that if she could hold her breath until the list was complete,
he would be on it. Jimmy Shand continued to read the names, so slowly.
Then, just as Lucy thought her lungs would burst, he said, 'Comrade
Thomas Murray.' Lucy leapt into the air, scattering the mending on her
lap.

'Whatever is it?' asked Kanty. 'It's Tom,' Lucy stuttered, staring at
the wireless. Kanty held up a hand for silence as they listened to the
news that the rescued prisoners had been taken to Barcelona where they
would recuperate before being allowed to go back to the front line. Lucy
was already running towards the door. 'Where are we going?' Kanty asked,
following her. 'To find him,' said Lucy. 'I'm going to find Tom.'

OceanofPDF.com

23

The man who sat in the hospital chair with his head resting in his hands
was almost unrecognisable. The last time Lucy had seen him, Tom had been
muscular and his skin glowed with a deep tan from the weeks on the
beach. Now she stood in front of a skeleton of a man whose bony, white
arms poked out of the hospital pyjamas. Only his shock of dark, unkempt
hair told her who this was. She drew a breath and stepped closer. 'Tom?'
The man raised his head and Tom's familiar brown eyes stared out of a
strange skull-like face. His tongue flickered over dry lips as he slowly
focused on the figure in front of him. 'Lucy?' She sat on the edge of
the bed and ran her fingers through his hair. 'Who else would it be?' He
caught hold of her hand, turned her fingers over and brought her palm to
his mouth, holding it there in a kind of kiss or blessing, or as if to
prove to himself that she was real. She laughed nervously. 'I heard it
on the wireless. Jimmy Shand read out your name, and said you'd been
rescued. I can't believe you are actually alive!' He held tightly on to
her hand and sat up straighter. 'Well, sort of alive. As you can see.'
He indicated his wasted

body. She took in his translucent skin, and touched the stickthinness of
his upper arm where there used to be biceps. She wrinkled her nose
critically. 'A bit scrawny and pale, but certainly alive. Are you
wounded?' He seemed to gather himself from a long way off and spoke like
a bad actor playing the part of the boy he had been. 'No. I'm fit as a
fiddle.' 'Hrmph. A bit out of tune, I'm guessing. What have they said?'
His eyes never left hers. 'They won't let me go back to the Front until
I put on some weight.' He grinned in a way which was almost grotesque.
'I hope you've brought cream buns.' 'If you've got a small fortune to
buy one!' He lapsed into silence, as though speaking was a terrible
effort, and Lucy studied him carefully. He seemed very young and very
old at the same time. There was barely a vestige here of the boy she'd
loved. She spoke decisively. 'You'll have to come and live with us. I'll
scrounge as much food as I can and I'll get Margarita to send cheese
from Puigcerdà. We'll fatten you up. Will they let you come?' Tom's eyes
glimmered with a trace of his old amusement. 'They wouldn't dare refuse
you.' For the next few days Lucy visited him in the hospital, taking
whatever tasty titbits she could lay her hands on. Though he was eating
less than a small child, each time she came he looked more like himself,
and less like a ghost who might vanish again at any minute. Or perhaps
she was just getting used to his new appearance. He sat outside all day
in the hospital gardens, and colour seeped back into his skin, like a
watercolour wash over a pen and ink drawing. Each day he walked further.
He didn't speak of his time in

captivity, and Lucy knew better than to ask. He would talk about it when
he was ready, she thought. Meanwhile, she got everything prepared at
Luis Vives House. She told Concha that Tom needed to sleep in her room
while she nursed him back to health, and Concha was excited at the
prospect of sharing a bunk bed with one of the other aid-workers'
children. Kanty stood in Lucy's attic room gazing at the two narrow,
metal camp beds. 'I don't mean to ask a personal question, but my bed is
a double. I could swap rooms with you while he's here?' Lucy looked out
of the window to hide her blushes. Nobody but Kanty would suggest such a
thing to an unmarried girl. 'Yes please,' she whispered. Kanty crossed
the room in two strides and laid a hand on her friend's shoulder. 'Don't
be ashamed of grasping whatever joy you can. In wartime every moment
might be the last.' On the day Tom was allowed out of the hospital Lucy
brought him to the house by metro and tram, though he had to stop
several times to catch his breath as they climbed the final hill. He had
no luggage. As Concha had done, he stood outside Luis Vives House in
some wonderment, watching Lucy open the iron gates. 'Some place you've
got here,' he said hoarsely. 'There's a garden you can sit in, but don't
be surprised if you get given work to do. We are always short-handed.
I'll show you our room and then I'm afraid I have to go to the office.'
She had tried to say 'our room' casually, but she saw that Tom had
registered the words and she felt a hot flush creeping up her neck. Had
she assumed too much? Nine months had passed since the night on the
beach. They were both different people.

Kanty had found a bright cotton coverlet for the bed, and Lucy had
arranged some flowers from the garden in a glass jar. The room looked
welcoming. Tom acknowledged the double-sized bed, and walked to the
window, looking down on the garden, at the wreckage of the city and the
glittering sea. With his back to her, silhouetted against the light, he
said, 'Are you sure? About me being here with you? I look like a walking
skeleton and you are more beautiful than ever. And ... I'm not sure I
can do anything ... in that way.' Lucy replied tartly to cover her
embarrassment, 'You're in with me in case you still have nightmares. I
don't want you waking the whole house.' His head fell and his shoulders
slumped. 'Yes, of course. Of course. And I'm afraid I do -- have
nightmares.' He looked so alone. So vulnerable. Pity and love twisted
free in her and she came up behind him, wrapping her arms around his
skeletal frame, leaning her cheek on his back. 'I just want to be with
you,' she said. 'I thought you were dead.' He turned in her arms and
bent his head to hers for the first time since his rescue, kissing her
softly, with more sadness than passion. The familiar fire didn't leap up
in her, but it was so good to feel his lips on hers and his arms around
her. She rested her head on his chest and they stood for a long time,
until she realised his legs were trembling with the exertion of the
journey. 'Why don't you take a nap?' she said. 'I'll bring you some
cocoa and call you when lunch is ready.' For the first few days Tom
rested in the shade of the garden. He spoke little, brooding and
impatient to be back with his comrades at the Front. 'I'm like a fish
out of water here,' he complained. 'I don't know how to be with ordinary
people any more.'

Lucy made him cocoa three times a day with sweet, creamy condensed milk,
and he joined them for meals, gradually recovering his appetite. He
stood at the doorway to the office, hearing the hubbub of typewriters
clacking, phones ringing and people making urgent arrangements which
would save thousands of lives, watching Lucy's quick efficiency with
awe. He began to understand the size and scale of the aid operation, and
just how essential her work had become. On the first few nights he was
asleep long before she left her desk and slipped between the sheets
beside him. He still shouted and writhed with nightmares and, though his
terrible dreams didn't seem to wake him, he was still halfdrowsy when
she woke up and dressed to start work again in the morning. But on the
fifth morning she was aware that he was watching her when she removed
her nighty and stepped into her dress. As she sat on the edge of the bed
to fasten her alpargatas, he ran his hand up her spine and she felt a
tingling passing from his fingers into her skin. She swivelled to lay
her lips on his forehead, but he lifted his face and began to kiss her
like he had done on the day he left to join the International Brigade,
pulling her down towards him, and her body responded with a rush of joy.
He cupped her breast, but she drew away laughing. 'You're feeling
better!' He sank back on the pillow. 'It seems I am!' 'Well, I have work
to do. And if you are that much better, we'll find some work for you
too.' That night he was asleep before she joined him, but the next day
was Sunday, and when she woke, she didn't have to drag herself out of
bed to begin work, but turned to him and snuggled up close. He stirred
and pulled her tighter to him and an answering eagerness leapt up in
her. He shifted and put a hand down to check himself. 'You've mended
me,' he said with sleepy delight. 'For so long ... I thought it would
never ...'

If only every element of a man was so easy to bring back from the grave,
thought Lucy. 'I need to go to the bathroom,' she said, grabbing the
vinegar jar from under the bed. He sighed. 'Be quick.' When she
returned, he had rolled over, with his back to the door. She slid into
bed behind him, with ripples of excitement and desire running through
her, but he spoke to the wall in a harsh, strained voice. 'I can't
promise you anything. You have to know that.' She pressed her body into
his back, spooning into him. 'I know that.' She did, of course she did.
But she wanted him so badly. He continued, repeating a speech he'd
obviously been practising, 'I have to go back to the front line. I
expect I'll be killed. I ought to be dead already.' She ran her fingers
down the bony xylophone of his ribs, and whispered, 'But today you are
alive and I am alive.' He turned over and looked at her. 'Oh God, Luce,
you are so beautiful.' She stroked his stomach and he began to kiss her
with a hunger which matched her own. And this time she took charge,
telling him to go slower or faster, sitting astride him and moving at
her own pace until she knew why Margarita and Juanita had been unable to
muffle their moans and cries, and at last she felt emptied out and at
peace. Afterwards he held her for a long, long time, and she thought he
had gone back to sleep, but he hadn't. When she lifted her head she
could see he lay with his eyes open, staring at the ceiling. 'I'm no
good to you,' he said. 'Too much of me is dead already.' She swung her
legs out of bed.

'Cocoa,' she said. 'And today we'll show you Barcelona beach.' There was
a flurry of activity and excitement before Luis Vives House was locked
up and the entire staff boarded a lorry and headed towards the sea. They
laughed uproariously as their stress was released like steam from a
pressure cooker. Kanty set up a game of beach cricket and the serious
aid-workers became loud as children, running about the sand, yelling
instructions and hilarious abuse at each other in a Babel-mix of
languages. Lucy scored a six and danced a joyful jig. When they were all
too hot, they ran into the warm waves, eager to forget all their
pressing anxieties, living only in the moment. At first Tom was
reluctant to strip down to his borrowed bathing costume, self-conscious
about his skinny body, but Concha insisted. He ran to hide in the waves
and she followed him, shrieking like a demon. When Concha had tired of
splashing him and ordering him about, Lucy wrapped her in a towel and
then swam out beside Tom, doing a lazy breaststroke parallel to the
shore, keeping pace with him, until he tired. And then they lay in the
shade and ate beans in sauce and drank red wine until their heads were
muzzy and their skin glowed. That night they made love again, tipsy and
inhibitionfree, exploring each other's bodies with their fingers and
tongues and slipping into utter forgetfulness. Tom began to put on
weight and spent as much time in the garden exercising his body as
resting. He identified the enemy planes which flew over Barcelona:
Heinkel bombers, big with low wings, Heinkel and Fiat pursuit planes,
and he knew before the sirens sounded when they should all run to the
cellar. Over the next two weeks, he gradually regained enough physical
strength to offer to help the delivery drivers as

they took food to the canteens and colonies. It was the first time he'd
seen the devastation of the city as they steered around the rubble in
the streets. Sometimes the roads were blocked by the wagons and carts of
refugees. Other times they stopped to help people searching through the
heaped brickwork of bombed houses for their children or parents. It was
also the first time he'd seen the relief work at the refugee canteens
close-up: the desperation of the mothers, the stick-thin arms and legs
of their toddlers, the listless babies with their too-big, knowing eyes,
the enormous numbers of children Lucy was trying to save. Now he
understood why the phones rang and the typewriters tapped and Lucy only
came to bed when she could no longer keep her eyes open. All the
International Brigade soldiers like him already gave a portion of their
meagre salary for the support of hungry youngsters. Now he promised
himself he would give more. Every penny he could spare. But as his
physical strength increased, Lucy felt Tom mentally retreating from her
and, though she refused to let herself think about it, she knew he would
not be with them in Barcelona for long. There was no yesterday, there
was no tomorrow. She was determined to live only in each day, draining
every drop of joy she could from her short time with Tom. She knew that
he would return to the Front and she might never see him again, but she
locked away this knowledge. And because she would never be able to say
goodbye to him in so many words, she said it with her body, and he
replied with equal tenderness. Their acts of love through the hot
midsummer darkness were a long farewell, as they savoured each sensation
in a slow leave-taking from each other and perhaps from life itself.
Through early July Franco's army was concentrating its efforts in the
south, and the International Brigades had time to regroup and rest on
the north side of the Ebro.

Something began to harden in Tom's face as he listened to the news on
the radio, as though he was steeling himself for his return. Lucy saw
the echoes of battle flicker across his features, and sorrow solidified
in her chest. Concha watched Lucy watching Tom, and reached out a hand
as if to say, I will still be here when he has gone. This time Tom
didn't give her any warning of when he was leaving, knowing the pain of
that would be too much for them both. But after breakfast one morning in
mid-July as they sat in the dining room, he simply said, 'It's today,
Luce. I'm going back.' Her eyes searched his and she could see that he'd
brought down a shutter to protect himself from emotion. There was no
point in flinging herself on him and begging him not to go. It would
make no difference. She nodded bleakly, and he continued, 'I've got to
finish it.' She nodded again and studied his features, trying to
photograph them in her mind: his mop of unruly hair; his slightly
sticky-out ears and conker-brown eyes, knowing this might be the final
time. He was looking at her the same way, committing her to memory, as
if hoping her face might be the last thing he would see. He refused to
allow her to come to the army depot with him. 'You've got work to do
here,' he said. 'Important work. I'm so proud of you, Luce.' She stood
outside the gates of Luis Vives House and didn't cry as she kissed him
goodbye, though it felt as if she had swallowed a lump of lead and it
sat undigestible in her chest. This was too terrible for tears. Neither
of them said anything. What was there to say? His back retreated down
the hill, step by rapid step, and she wrapped her arms around herself.
As he reached the corner, he turned and waved, and then he was gone. For
a long moment she stood, taking in the empty space which had been Tom,
and then, just as she was about to go back into the house, another
familiar shape came around

the corner, struggling up the hill towards her, pushing a pram. Lucy
shaded her eyes from the July sun as the figure approached, and then ran
down to meet her. Margarita! It was Margarita! As they met, Margarita
put the brake on the pram and held out her arms to Lucy, clasping her
tight. They spoke at the same time. Margarita said, 'I think I passed
him. Was that him?' and Lucy asked, 'What brought you? How did you know
to come today?' Margarita loosened her grip around Lucy's waist and
searched for a hanky. Tears were running down her cheeks as if she was
doing all the crying for both of them. 'Kanty wrote to me,' she said,
blowing her nose loudly. 'But how did she know? I didn't know myself
till this morning.' Margarita shrugged. 'She said she could see him
withdrawing into himself, into a place where he could tear himself
away.' That evening Lucy and Concha moved back into their attic bedroom,
but before she retired for the night, Lucy sat with Margarita and Kanty
on Kanty's bed, and they shared a bottle of wine, and Lucy wept in the
comforting arms of her friends. When she couldn't cry any more, she told
them, 'The truth is simply that he wants to die for the Republic more
than he wants to live for me.' 'He's an idiot,' snorted Kanty. Margarita
shook her head. 'It's not about him or you. It's just war. This bastard
thing.' A week later Lucy received two short letters, from the opposite
banks of the River Ebro. The one from Tom, on the north bank, said:

Forgive me for not saying goodbye. It was cowardice on my part. I
thought if I had to say that word to you I would break down and not be
able to do what I knew I must do. Please try to remember me as someone
who loved you dearly, but owed too great a debt to his dead comrades. I
hope you will find someone who can love you as you deserve. I was never
worthy of you. She noticed it was the first time he'd said he loved her
but he was already speaking of himself in the past tense. A steel band
tightened around her heart. The note from Jamie, to the south of the
river, said:

This is in haste, and I don't know if it will reach you. I am near the
River Ebro now and I am determined to come to you, whatever it might
take, to tell you what a fool I've been and beg forgiveness. I love you
more than life itself. She pictured the brothers on opposite sides of
the river and was almost overcome with fear that they would die
together, or perhaps even kill each other.

OceanofPDF.com

24

As thousands of refugees continued to arrive in Barcelona, the food
supplies dwindled and the aid offered through Luis Vives House became
the difference between life and death for so many people, Lucy threw
herself into her work with absolute concentration. The refugees, her
friends, and Concha. She allowed herself to think of nothing else,
taking each day as it came. On the twenty-sixth of July the radio
announced that the Republicans had launched a great offensive, crossing
the River Ebro on a moonless night to drive Franco's army south. Lucy
was terrified that any day she would hear of Tom's death. Sporadic notes
got through from him. He wrote of intense heat, bare rock, the stench of
blood, of harsh sun, dogfights overhead, pilots bailing out on
parachutes, planes falling in flames. He didn't mention love. Lucy was
sick with anxiety about him, but she also had another thing to worry
about. Her period hadn't come when she expected it. She didn't need to
count the days, because all the women at Luis Vives House had slipped
into rhythm with each other, and Margarita and Kanty both held their
stomachs and complained of cramps on the same day each month. Lucy
thought perhaps it was sorrow which had interrupted her cycle. She had
heard of such things. Or,

despite Margarita's sponge ... might she be pregnant? There had been
that time when the sponge was still in place from the night before but
she hadn't refreshed the vinegar before they were overtaken by desire in
the morning. Or perhaps the sponge was just an old wives' tale. Maybe
her period would start tomorrow, or the next day. She shook herself.
Worrying wouldn't help, and there was so much work to be done. All
through the baking heat of August, the battle of the River Ebro raged
on. In July the Republicans had crossed the river and taken Franco's
troops by surprise, but he quickly sent heavy artillery and planes to
beat them back towards the water. The Republican air force was
outnumbered by at least two to one and their pontoon bridges were
constantly destroyed and rebuilt. Wounded troops had to be ferried north
across the river at night in small boats. Tom wrote of trench warfare,
an inferno of continual fire and explosions, machine guns in the
foothills, and bloody assaults as a few kilometres were won and then
lost. 'They have tanks, while we have hand grenades and Molotov
cocktails.' By September, everyone in Catalonia knew the Republican
losses had been devastating, and Tom's letters stopped. On 23 September
at the League of Nations in Geneva, Prime Minister Negrín announced his
intention to disband the International Brigades and send them home, in
the hope that Franco would also send home his German, Italian and
Moroccan troops. The Republican government believed it could still
defeat Franco if he didn't have the firepower from overseas. Lucy
thought it would be a cruel fate if Tom had been killed in the last days
before they were withdrawn from the Front. She remembered that the
25-year-old poet Wilfred Owen had died in the Great War just six days
before the Armistice. But there was no indication of when

the International Brigades would be removed from the fighting. By that
time, when the baking summer heat of Barcelona was beginning to be
wafted by cooler breezes, Lucy had missed three periods, and her breasts
were hard and painful, though she didn't suffer from any sickness.
Certain now that she must be pregnant, and sure that one of her friends
would notice soon, she took Margarita and Kanty to her room and closed
the door. Her friends sat side by side on one of the little beds and
looked at Lucy anxiously as she paced up and down, wringing her hands.
'I've got something to tell you, but you must promise not to tell anyone
else.' They both swore to keep her secret. 'I'm think I'm pregnant,' she
blurted out. 'That is, I know I am. I'm going to have a baby. In March,
I think. Or April.' On both their faces she could see the flicker of
sympathy which told her they knew how hard it would be to bring up an
illegitimate baby. A child who would be called a bastard. There was a
pause. 'Didn't you use the sponge?' asked Margarita crossly. 'I did, but
like you there was a time ...' Margarita flicked her expressive hands.
'You must write to Tom so he can come back and marry you.' Lucy sat down
with a thump on Concha's bed, facing them. 'I would have married him at
the White Villa if he'd asked me,' she said, and it was hard to bring
these words into the open, 'but he didn't love me enough.' And if he
didn't love her enough at the White Villa or here, how would he love her
enough to be a good husband and father when they returned to England? If
he was forced into marriage he might always feel resentful and trapped.
She remembered her father's parting advice to Tom: 'Never marry a girl
just because she says she's pregnant.'

'You deserve better than that,' said Kanty, tapping her foot in barely
controlled fury. Margarita nodded slowly. 'If you have the baby here I
could bring it up as my own. I would love it as I love you, Lucy.
Domingo will agree. Nobody in England need ever know.' Kanty clearly
warmed to this idea. 'You could carry on with your work, and one day if
Tom or someone is good enough for you, you could come back and claim the
child.' Lucy considered this for a fleeting second, but knew already
that she would never be able to give up her baby. 'No,' she said firmly.
'It's my responsibility.' 'Or,' said Kanty, 'you could wear a ring and
tell everyone at home you are a widow.' Lucy met her gaze. 'I could do
that,' she said, doubtfully. She had never been good at lying, and she
knew that in the eyes of the world she had committed the sin of
fornication, and would be made to pay the price. Even so, she felt a
lightening of the tension between her shoulder blades to have shared her
secret with her friends. When Margarita had left, Kanty stayed behind,
hesitating in the doorway. She looked up and down the corridor to make
sure she wasn't overhead and then searched Lucy's face. 'Do you need me
to find a doctor who could end the pregnancy? It would be dangerous, but
if it's what you want?' Lucy shook her head. That was unthinkable. This
baby was hers and it might be all she would ever have of Tom. Pregnancy
made her dreams extraordinarily vivid, and almost every night she had
the same nightmare of Jamie and Tom coming face to face on the banks of
the Ebro and killing each other in different horrific ways, with
bayonets thrust into each other's guts, or gunshots which blew off the
face of one or the other, or strangling each other with their bare
hands.

During the day she thought little of them or her pregnancy. There simply
wasn't time. More desks had been crammed into the office and they had
reorganised who did what. Lucy worked with Kanty and her local helpers
running the canteens for the Barcelona poor, while Domingo and his staff
focussed on the refugee canteens. Other people arranged the purchasing
and stores, supplying the colonies, managing the medical centres and
keeping track of the finances, while Alfred took a general overview. The
team struggled to keep supplies coming for seventy-four canteens feeding
fifteen thousand children as Franco's army effectively blockaded
Barcelona and starvation spread throughout Catalonia. Two of the Quaker
lorries were converted into travelling dispensaries as disease spread
through the overcrowded populations of the refugees and their weakened
children. From Murcia they received the terrible news of the
disappearance and possible shooting of the school inspector and chair of
the Refugee Committee who had been such a help to them, and Lucy
couldn't restrain her fury when she was told that the Fascists had
closed the children's hospitals. At the Ebro, the Republican forces had
been backed to the river and suffered massive losses. Lucy hadn't heard
from Tom for weeks and was in an agony of dread as she waited for news.
Finally, on the morning of the second of October, an official letter was
delivered -- the letter she'd so long feared. She took it out into the
garden, away from prying eyes, and opened it with trembling fingers. The
words swam out of focus and back in again. It said very little. Someone
she'd never met regretted to inform her that Comrade Thomas Murray had
gone missing in the valiant fight to keep Franco's troops from crossing
the Ebro and he was presumed dead. That one word leapt out of the page
as

though someone had screamed it in her ear. Dead. Tom was dead! It said
he had been a fearless hero, always leading his men into battle. She
crumpled the paper in disgust. She could see him at the head of a
brigade, brandishing his bayonet, running into the face of death. She
shook with rage, furious with him for loving his stupid cause more than
he loved her or his mother. More than he loved the future they might
have shared and the baby he would never know. More than he loved life
itself. She heard her voice crying, 'No! No! No!' and a wail like an
animal in pain, and clapped a hand over her mouth. Margarita ran across
the lawn and folded Lucy in her arms. Lucy clung to her and sobbed.
Grief was torrential as a tropical storm, wracking her whole body. Kanty
came out of the house and her two friends led Lucy back to her room,
sitting with her until she had cried so much she felt there could be no
more tears in the world and her face was red and swollen. But when the
tears stopped, the physical pain of loss wrenched her stomach and chest,
rose until it stuffed her throat and she swung her head in the effort of
breathing. How could there be a world with no Tom in it? He had been
there for as long as she could remember. And now the world was
shattered. She looked up at the careless sunshine and couldn't believe
the birds were still singing. It was all wrong. How could she go on
waking up every morning? She felt the weight of all the bereaved mothers
and wives and sweethearts of Spain pressing down on her. Somehow the day
passed, in a blur of time that was no time. Margarita and Kanty took
turns to stay with her. That night she realised Mrs Murray would have
received the same letter, probably with a parcel of personal effects,
the tattered remnants of a life. So she sat down to write, suddenly
feeling how much she wanted to see the woman who had been like a mother
to her. She held her pen over

the page and considered whether it was time to admit that she was
pregnant, whether it would be some comfort to Mrs Murray to know that
something of Tom would continue. But she might be horrified, or insist
that Lucy came home to be looked after, and there was still so much to
do in Spain, and still a chance that she could bring Jamie back to his
mother. Not yet, thought Lucy. I won't tell her just yet. That night
Concha crept into her bed as she hadn't done for months, and as she
sobbed for the loss of her friend Tom, Lucy wept too, for all the hopes
she'd had that could never now come true, for the father of her child,
for her lover who she would never see again. And in the morning when she
woke, the realisation of his death kicked her in the stomach, taking her
breath away with its ferocity, but Lucy dragged herself out of bed,
dressed and went back to work, because she had to, because the children
needed her, because it was the only way to get through. She worked with
fierce concentration, but her body knew Tom's loss. A weight sat in her
chest and she felt too nauseous to eat anything. In the evening
Margarita pressed a plate of food on her and Lucy pushed it away. 'You
must eat,' Margarita insisted. 'Why?' 'For the baby. For Concha. For all
the children.' Reluctantly, Lucy lifted a spoonful of beans to her
mouth. Chewed. Swallowed. And so the rest of her life began. Her life
without Tom. She had a sick emptiness inside, one which could only be
filled by working until she was exhausted, and holding tight to Concha
and her friends. Two evenings after the letter about Tom, on the fourth
of October, they heard on the radio that Republican Prime Minister
Negrín had finally withdrawn the International Brigades from the front
line. That night Lucy howled into

her pillow. Too late! He'd taken them out of battle too late and her
beloved Tom was dead. In the days that followed, Lucy threw herself into
work, from the moment she woke until she could no longer see straight.
She knew Concha was suffering too, but she could do nothing other than
hold her and rock her to sleep. Her friends looked after Concha in the
daytime and made sure Lucy took her meals, but didn't try to break
through the wall of grief she'd built around herself. They were just
there, as a steady presence, ready to catch her when she fell. Late one
afternoon, when her eyes were beginning to feel as though sand had been
thrown in them, Lucy raised her head from the supply list she was
ticking off, with that strange animal instinct which told her she was
being watched. Across the jam-packed office Kanty was on her feet,
talking into the phone. Then she twisted round and stared at Lucy with
an unreadable expression. She scribbled on a piece of paper, hung up the
phone and said something quickly to Alfred before she weaved her way
between the desks. Lucy stood up. Kanty grabbed her hand, dragging her
to the door. 'Come on, we have to go now.' 'Go where?' But Kanty was
already running round the house towards the undercroft. 'To a hospital.
West of the city. We need to take a car. Alfred knows. I'll drive.' Lucy
kept pace with her. 'But who is it? What did they say?' Kanty didn't
slow her pace. 'Tell you in the car. Hope you can map-read.' They sat in
the car, poring over the map. Kanty jabbed a finger to a district Lucy
didn't know, where an old nunnery had become a hospital.

As Kanty zoomed out of the drive, the wheels screamed and Lucy was
thrown from side to side. 'Sorry,' said Kanty, slowing down a touch. 'It
was a nurse on the phone. My Catalan is as bad as her Spanish but she
said Señor Murray was asking for you.' She flicked an anxious glance at
Lucy. 'I'm sorry, she said he's seriously wounded and there wasn't much
time, and you should get there as soon as possible.' Missing, presumed
dead, the letter had said. So Tom wasn't dead after all? But probably
dying. Maybe she would be able to save him again as she had done in
Valencia. Her stomach tightened in terror, and sweat trickled down her
neck. Although her four-month pregnancy wasn't showing yet, she laid one
hand on her stomach where their baby was cradled. 'If he's asking for
me, he isn't dead yet,' she said. 'Atta girl,' said Kanty, swerving to
avoid a prostrate donkey. Lucy concentrated on the map, though reading
in such a violently driven car made her feel increasingly sick. She
wound down the window. 'You'll have to go slower or I'll throw up,' she
said. Some roads were closed where bombed buildings had collapsed, and
sometimes they encountered refugees who seemed to have made camp in the
street. Kanty swung the car into reverse, driving as fast backwards as
she did forwards, her face set in determination to get Lucy to the
hospital in time to say goodbye. Finally she pulled up outside the old
convent, and Lucy flung open the door. 'Do you want me to come in?'
asked Kanty. Lucy was already moving away from the car, and called back
over her shoulder, 'No, no. Go home. Look after Concha. Thank you!'

The long ward was panelled with dark wood and badly lit. It had perhaps
been the convent refectory. Lucy squinted up and down the beds for Tom's
dark head on the pillow. A stocky nurse with cropped grey hair and a
large mole pointed out the makeshift curtains around a bed in the far
corner. 'Señor Murray is there,' she said in Spanish with a strong
French accent. Her voice was hoarse with sympathy. Lucy knew from the
hospital in Murcia that curtains meant death. She almost flew down the
ward, and for a moment couldn't find the opening between the curtains.
Then she twitched them apart and she was standing at the end of the bed.
But it wasn't Tom's brown hair on the starched linen. In the half-light
she thought a mistake had been made and there was a moment of complete
confusion, but then the head turned and to her utter shock she realised
she was staring at Jamie's sandy hair and pale face. His bright blue
eyes filled with tears and he whispered, 'They found you! You came.'
Lucy hurried around the bed, and took his slender fingers in hers,
bending to kiss his clammy forehead. 'Jamie,' she said, 'I'm here,' as
her brain tried to recompute. So Tom was dead after all. And now here
was Jamie with that extreme pallor she had seen so many times on the
dying. It was as if one of her nightmares had been a vision of the truth
and the boys had somehow killed each other. The curtains parted and an
elderly doctor with white bushy eyebrows whispered to her that Señor
Murray had only a few hours to live, a day at the most. 'Please step
outside for a moment while I tend to him.' Lucy stumbled out into the
ward, numb with grief for both her boys. She had failed to bring either
of them home and hadn't been with Tom when he died. There was no

question in her mind. She would stay with Jamie to the very end. A
Republican soldier in the next bed was talking to her and she forced
herself to concentrate as he explained how Jamie had been fatally
wounded. 'I saw it all,' he said. 'Señor Murray had successfully crossed
the River Ebro himself, and he could have scrambled up the bank to
safety with me, but he looked back and saw a family whose boat had
overturned. The water was jumping with hails of bullets from Franco's
troops and the father and mother were trying to shield their children.
It was suicide, but he slithered back into the river to help them.' The
soldier shook his head with a mix of admiration and contempt for Jamie's
recklessness. 'Without a thought for himself, Señor Murray swam to the
boat and hauled the whole family to safety but then was caught by sniper
fire as he carried the last of the children to land. He's a hero. Needs
a bloody medal.' 'Thank you,' muttered Lucy, thinking, a bloody medal
for a bloody fool. The doctor summoned her back to Jamie's bedside, and
brought her a chair. Lucy took Jamie's hand again. His fingers were
cold, even though the October day was warm. 'I heard what you did,' she
said, smiling into his dear freckled face. 'You idiot.' His voice was
weak. 'They had two daughters, you see,' he explained. 'Two girls saved
for the two I allowed to die.' He had succeeded in his ambition to
become his father and sacrifice himself for others, Lucy thought
bitterly. 'I know I'm dying, Lucy,' he whispered and his eyes were
clear. 'I'm not afraid. But I would like a priest. Would it get you into
terrible trouble to ask for one?' She stood up. She knew Prime Minister
Negrín was now allowing private Catholic worship in Catalonia and she
would find a priest if it was humanly possible.

Two young nurses were rolling a patient to one side to remake his bed.
Not them. She looked up and down the ward for the older nurse. There was
something nun-like about her shorn hair and the length of her skirt. The
nurse was washing out a bedpan when Lucy came up behind her and coughed
politely. 'Please can you help me?' she asked, and the woman turned. 'He
wants the last rites,' she continued and the nurse wiped her hands on
her apron, clearly sizing up this English girl and what risk she might
present. 'Please, for the love of God,' urged Lucy. 'It would mean
everything to him.' The nurse's face softened. 'I can't promise, but
I'll see what I can do.' Lucy watched her hold a whispered conversation
with the doctor who stared hard down the gloomy ward. She looked back
pleadingly at him, and he gave a curt nod to the nurse who hurried away
through a doorway hidden in the panelling. When the nurse returned, she
and the doctor carefully lifted Jamie on to a stretcher. He bit his lips
together but couldn't help a groan escaping and his face bleached of any
remaining colour. Lucy's heart contracted with pity and love. The doctor
and nurse carried him through the hidden door, beckoning Lucy to follow.
On the other side was a small, dark room which might once have served as
an office, but now it was empty apart from a bed and table. They laid
Jamie on the bed and pulled a starched sheet over him. The nurse took
Jamie's pulse and his breath became increasingly shallow, but his hand
reached out for Lucy's and she took it in her warm, firm grip. 'I'm
here, Jamie. I'll never leave you.' It was as Mrs Murray had said: the
one who needed her most filled her whole mind.

His lips moved and she had to lean down to hear him. 'When the priest
comes, after he gives me the last rites, if I'm still alive, would you
marry me, Lucy? It would mean so much to me.' Lucy looked into his
lake-blue eyes and ran her finger down his face into the red stubble on
his chin. He had been her dearest friend, who had known her better than
anyone, who had guided and protected her all her life, whose love for
her had never wavered. More than anything at this moment, she wanted to
marry him. Not to please him, as she might have done in the past, and
not because she couldn't have Tom, and not because he was dying, but
simply because she had always loved the bright flame of him. 'I will,'
she said, bending to kiss his mouth. 'Of course I will.' The short, bald
man who entered the office with the nurse and doctor looked nothing like
a priest. He was dressed in workers' blue overalls, and carried a large
canvas tool-bag. He took in the scene at one glance and smiled at Lucy.
'I am a carpenter now,' he said. 'Like Joseph.' He unzipped the bag and
lifted out a neat set of carpentry tools. From a hidden compartment
below he pulled out a white stole rolled like a bandage, a black hat, a
crucifix, a perfume bottle, a vial of water, a miniature wine bottle and
something folded in a napkin. He laid these things on the table by the
bed. The nurse covered her head and drew her own crucifix out from the
neck of her dress to lie on top of her uniform. The priest donned his
stole, crucifix and hat over the incongruous blue boilersuit and stood
over Jamie. While the priest heard his confession, Lucy whispered to the
nun that if Jamie lived long enough they would like to be married. She
patted Lucy's hand and hurried away again.

When she returned, the priest was giving extreme unction, anointing
Jamie with oil from the perfume bottle, laying his hands on him. As he
intoned the Latin words, all the tension seeped slowly out of Jamie's
face. His eyes were closed and he looked so peaceful that for a moment
Lucy thought he had died, but then his eyes flicked open and urgently
sought her out. The priest unwrapped communion wafers from the napkin
and unscrewed the wine bottle. Lucy smiled encouragingly at Jamie as the
priest lifted his head, placed a wafer on his tongue and brought the
bottle to his lips. Jamie swallowed and smiled. 'Viaticum,' he
whispered, and to Lucy, 'Provision for a journey.' Tears sprang to her
eyes and she dashed them away on her cuff. The nurse leaned in and said
something to the priest, who looked up at Lucy. 'Do we have a ring?' he
asked the nurse and she held out a gold band on her palm. Lucy could see
the indentation on her finger where the ring had encircled it for years.
Bride of Christ, thought Lucy. How could she ever thank her? The priest
could also see where it had come from and he pressed the nurse's hand as
he summoned Lucy forward. Jamie's breath was fast and shallow, and he
was obviously in pain, but his eyes never left Lucy's face as the priest
laid Lucy's hand over his on the sheet. He began to take them through
the purpose of marriage, even though it was obvious that Jamie would
never father any children. For the first time, Lucy remembered the baby
inside her and wondered whether she ought to have told Jamie, and
whether this marriage was a terrible disloyalty to Tom, but pushed the
thoughts aside as the priest began to ask them to repeat their vows.
Lucy's French and Spanish gave her an understanding of much of the
Latin, but the nurse whispered a translation in her ear, so she was able
to respond at the right times in Spanish. The ring was

sprinkled with holy water and slipped on to her finger, and the priest
laid a hand on each of their heads to bless them. As the priest stepped
away to repack his secret bag, Jamie reached up to her with both his
arms and Lucy bent and kissed him. 'My wife!' he whispered. Joy radiated
from his face, illuminating it from within. 'I wish Mum was here to see
us. She would be so happy.' Not if she could see you, thought Lucy, with
anguish. The priest left quietly before Lucy could even thank him,
because at the same moment a shudder of pain passed through Jamie and he
cried out. Lucy looked helplessly to the doctor and nurse. 'Isn't there
anything we can do?' 'Let's get him back to the ward,' said the doctor.
'We can make him more comfortable there.' They fussed around him behind
the curtains and Lucy could hardly bear the moans and groans which Jamie
failed to suppress. It was a physical hurt in her chest to hear his
pain. Her dear Jamie. Her dear husband. The strangeness of the ring on
her finger compounded the unreality of the last half hour. When she'd
left Luis Vives House she had no idea that this would be the outcome and
yet she tested the flavour of it on her tongue and it felt right. The
nurse came out of the curtains, her crucifix tucked back in her dress.
'You can come to sit with him now. We've given him morphia. He will be
drowsy, and please God he might slip away in his sleep with no more
pain.' Lucy sat down beside him and took his hand in both of hers,
kissing the long, pale fingers. He was gazing rapturously at her and his
eyes were bright in the dim light. He licked his lips to speak. 'You are
all I ever wanted,' he said as his eyes slowly closed.

Lucy sat beside him all night, holding his hand. Sometimes she drifted
into sleep and when she woke she found herself slumped over her forearm
on the bed. Every hour or so the nurse came in to feel his pulse and one
time she brought a pillow for Lucy to lay her head on. Dawn came and
Lucy stood and stretched. As he felt her moving away, Jamie's hand
fluttered towards her so she sat down again. The nursing shift changed
and a younger woman brought her a plate of beans and a coffee. Lucy
could hear the hubbub of the ward on the other side of the curtains. She
didn't know how much he could understand, but she talked to Jamie
quietly, about things they had done as children, about the damaged
animals he'd brought home for her to mend, about her gratitude for the
way he'd begged her father to let her train as a doctor and about her
work with the refugees, but she didn't mention Tom. She led him on a
mental walk through Welwyn, recalling every garden gate, every
aubretia-spilled wall, where every cat and dog lived that they had
petted in a childhood which seemed so long ago. Another life. From time
to time someone looked in on them, and Lucy simply shook her head. The
hours inched past, marked not by minutes and seconds but by the sound of
Jamie's faint breath: in, out, in, out, as his body somehow clung on to
life. The longest day Lucy could remember gave way to night again and
still his pulse flickered and his breath came and went. The effort of
opening his eyes was too much, but she could feel the faint pressure of
his fingers which told her he knew she was still beside him. And then
her eyes closed as well and she rested her head beside his hand. When
she woke, she knew at once that something was different. He was still
breathing, but the breath had a low, rattling quality. 'I love you,
Jamie,' she whispered, and there was the only the faintest twitch of his
hand in hers. After he exhaled there was a long, long pause before he
drew breath. She

leaned over and kissed his lips. The breath rattled out of him and she
waited for him to inhale again. Seconds passed. And then a minute, and
still he didn't breathe. She raised his hand to her lips and it was
floppy. She kissed and kissed it, and let tears fall until Jamie's
precious hand was wet with them. When she lifted her head his mouth had
fallen open and his eyes were less firmly closed, as though he had been
trying to look at her for the last time. She dried her face on the sheet
and went to call a nurse. The older nurse was back on duty, and came at
once, checking his neck for a pulse, closing his mouth and eyes and then
allowing Lucy to kiss his rapidly cooling lips before pulling the sheet
up over his face. Lucy put her head in her hands and wept and the nurse
helped her to the room where they had been married so little time ago.
When she had recovered herself, Lucy thanked the woman for all she'd
done, and made to remove the ring to return it to her. 'No, no, it's
yours now,' said the nurse, folding her hand around Lucy's. 'To remind
you that it really happened and you are Señora Murray. You could stay in
here till it's light. The morning shift comes on in an hour.' Lucy sank
thankfully on to the neatly made bed where Jamie had lain to receive the
last rites and to marry her. At the door the nurse turned. 'I know the
work you are doing at Luis Vives House, and I know it is holy work. God
bless you.' Lucy lay back on the bed and stared into the darkness. It
seemed as though all the tears of her life had been cried when she'd
heard the news about Tom and there were none left for Jamie. Her eyes
burned with the dryness of complete despair. She was physically
exhausted, wrung out,

utterly numb. Too tired to sleep, too tired to think, too tired to feel.
She watched the sky gradually lighten, and when it seemed another dawn
had broken and the world would go on turning even without Tom and Jamie
in it, she lifted herself from the bed and let herself out of the door
where the priest had entered, out into the senselessness of a new day.
Her mind had turned to stone, but somehow her legs carried her, one step
in front of the other, towards the metro and home, though she would
never know how she'd got there. The normality of walking back up the
hill towards Luis Vives House felt completely surreal. How could such
ordinary things happen in a world which was empty? She put out her hand
to open the gate and caught sight of the wedding ring. The nurse had
been right. If she hadn't had the band of gold on her finger Lucy would
think it had all been a dream. The way Margarita caught hold of her in
the hallway told Lucy that the strain of the last two days and nights
showed on her face and in every movement of her limbs. 'I just want to
sleep,' she told her friend. 'I want to pull the blanket over my head
and never get up again.' Margarita helped her to her room and knelt to
untie her alpargatas. And then Lucy laid her head on the pillow and fell
into a deep, dreamless sleep. When she woke it was dark and for a moment
she had no idea where she was or whether she had imagined the last days.
A cup of cocoa and two biscuits had been placed by her bed. The cocoa
was cold and had a skin on it. Pain lanced through her as she remembered
Tom and Jamie were both dead. She glanced over to the other bed and
Concha wasn't there. She had a sudden need to see her and hold her in
her arms. Lucy fingered the wedding ring. Was it wrong, what she had
done? She tested her conscience and felt no trace of guilt.

The door opened a touch, and light slanted in from the landing. Kanty
peeped in. 'Oh, you're awake.' Lucy pulled herself up on to her elbows.
'Yes, come in, what time is it?' 'Midnight. I was just on my way to bed.
You've been asleep for hours. Me and Margarita kept checking on you.'
'Where's Concha?' 'In with me.' Lucy waved her over and patted the edge
of the bed. Kanty sat and scrutinised her friend in the fall of light
from the landing, her brow furrowed with anxiety. 'Are you OK?' She
shook her head with irritation at herself. 'Stupid question. Would you
like a hot cocoa?' 'I'd like a hug,' said Lucy, expecting the tears to
come now. But she was hollow, sensationless and dog-tired. They held
tight to each other in silence until Lucy raised her head as Margarita
entered with tortilla, beans and cocoa, and sat on Concha's bed urging
Lucy to eat. The food tasted like sawdust, but she thought of the baby
and obediently chewed. She could tell they had both noticed the ring on
her finger. When she had finished eating Margarita said, 'You don't have
to tell us now,' though her face was alive with curiosity. But Lucy
found she wanted to share the whole story and see by their faces if she
had betrayed Tom, or worse still been untrue to herself. They had to
know that all was lost. She needed to hear herself say it before she
could begin to believe it was true. They were as astonished as she had
been to hear that the Señor Murray in the hospital was not Tom, and that
she had been married to Jamie. 'Was it wrong, do you think?' asked Lucy.
'It didn't feel wrong.' 'Then it wasn't,' said Kanty decisively.

Margarita nodded. 'Dear Lucy. Your heart was big enough for both of
them. And both of us. And Concha.' She paused as a thought occurred to
her, 'And the baby ...' She stopped herself, but Lucy knew she was
thinking ... now won't be born a bastard. An immense wave of tiredness
came over Lucy. She wanted to sleep and sleep and never wake up to the
pain she knew would be waiting every morning of her life to come.
Tomorrow she would have to write to Mrs Murray and confess that she'd
failed in her promise. She hadn't brought either of her sons home, and
both of them were dead. Everything was over.

OceanofPDF.com

25

7th October 1938 Barcelona My dearest Mrs M, Writing this letter is the
hardest thing I've ever had to do in my life. Perhaps I should have come
and told you myself. Forgive my cowardice in writing instead. I know
you've had the same appalling letter as me, telling us Tom is 'missing,
presumed dead'. I know the terrible agony you will be feeling, and the
cruelty of not even having his dear body to bury. And now I have to add
to that unbearable pain, because I have to tell you that we have lost
Jamie as well. There's no easy way to say it. I have written a dozen
letters and screwed them up. I will post this one, however crass it
seems. I don't know if it's any comfort at all for you to know I was
with Jamie to the end. He had been fatally injured rescuing a family who
were escaping across the River Ebro from Franco's troops. He got all the
family to safety, but was badly hurt himself. I was called to his
bedside in an old convent in Barcelona which is now a hospital. He was
awake and knew who I was. He asked for the last rites and I was able to
find a priest to secretly administer them.

And then he asked if I would allow the priest to marry us, and it was
the only thing I could do for him, so we were married then and there. I
don't know if it was legal without the banns and everything, but I truly
believe we were married in the eyes of God. A nurse -- or maybe a nun --
who was with us gave me her wedding ring. I'm looking at it now. I sat
by his bedside night and day then until he left us. There was plenty of
morphia and his passing was peaceful. That was yesterday. I came home in
a daze of pain, and my dear friends Margarita and Kanty are with me.
Funerals happen quickly in hot countries, and it will be held tomorrow.
So I have failed you. Utterly. Utterly. I have failed to bring back
either of your lovely boys. I am so, so sorry. I want to wrap my arms
around you and weep with you for the boys we have loved so fiercely. I
can't imagine how we will go on without them. I can't imagine how the
world will go on. I feel we must go on living for them, but I truly
don't know how. I have something else to share with you. Something which
may make you never want to see me again. I fear so much to tell you. My
heart is pounding. As you know, after Tom was wounded, he came to my
beachside children's colony near Benidorm to recuperate. We became
closer than ever, and -- I am ashamed to say this, but I thought he
might not return to the war if I allowed him to -- you know. I have to
write it ... we became lovers in our bodies as well as our hearts. But
even after that he still wanted to go back to the Front. Then of course
we thought we had lost him when he was captured, and finally he was
returned to me in Barcelona and he stayed with us at Luis Vives House
for two weeks. My joy in seeing him alive was so

great that I wanted to spend every moment with him, day or night. I hope
you will not think too badly of me when I tell you that we shared a bed.
I hoped he might want to stay there with me and help with the work for
the children. But he could hardly wait to return to his comrades at the
Front. You know how obstinate he could be. Nothing I could say or do
would change his mind. And now it is all as we most feared and he is
lost to us forever. But there are consequences of our time together, of
our love for each other. I am carrying his baby. Are you horrified? Are
you shocked? Will you never want to see me again? Can you ever forgive
me? I think my father will cut me off. It sounds so awful when I write
it down that I want to hide my head in shame -- to be married to one
brother while carrying the child of the other. But I had already been
told Tom was dead when I married Jamie, and I knew Jamie only had a few
hours to live, and he wanted it so much. And it feels so right to me to
be Lucy Murray, not Lucy Nicholson. Have I explained that properly? Do
you understand? Do you despise me? I tremble as I await your judgement
because you are the mother I never had and your good opinion matters so
much to me. It will be a triple bereavement if you never want to see me
again. And yet I wouldn't blame you. I hope you won't hate me forever
for not bringing your boys safely home to you. I tried so hard. And I
hope you will forgive me for loving both of them. The world would not
understand that. But I hope you will. With so much love and begging for
your forgiveness, Lucy

It rained on the day of Jamie's funeral. Kanty and Margarita stood
beside Lucy at the open grave. Margarita wore a black coat and dress and
carried an umbrella. Kanty and Lucy were dressed in their sober Quaker
greys and, though Margarita tried to share her umbrella, Lucy let the
rain run down her face and through her hair as though the world was
drenching her in grief. The only other mourner was the old nurse, who
stood a little apart from them, and the priest who had married them, who
wore his blue carpenter's overalls under a long dark coat. They were
invited forward to throw a handful of soil on the cheap coffin, and it
seemed she was throwing the earth on both Jamie and Tom, who were
wrapped together in a sleeping embrace as when they were very young. \*
Three weeks later, on Saturday 29 October, the 305 surviving
International Brigaders who had been withdrawn from the front line were
marched in a parade through Barcelona. Everyone wanted to be there to
cheer them. Concha begged Lucy to take her and, though she felt she
could hardly bear to see the Batallón Inglés without Tom, she knew he
would expect her to be there to say farewell to his comrades. Everything
now seemed an enormous effort to her, as though she had aged fifty
years, but she believed that this was the last thing she could do for
Tom and it was her duty to go. Kanty saw how she was struggling and
offered to come with them. Since losing Jamie, Lucy had forced herself
to focus only on her work for the refugees. Every time her mind veered
back to the horror of the brothers' deaths, she slammed a door on the
idea. Soon it felt as if she was in a long corridor of closed doors,
with nothing to do but keep plodding relentlessly forwards, one grim
step in front of the other,

repeating through clenched teeth 'the children, the children, the
children'. But now the day of the parade forced open a door, and the
pain of the boys' loss flooded over her as if she was reliving the
morning she'd heard that Tom was dead and the night she'd watched Jamie
die. Her heart pulsed with grief as she set out with Kanty and Concha.
The parade was to take place at the Avinguda Diagonal, because it was
the widest street in Barcelona, with broad tree-lined pavements to
accommodate the spectators. They could hear the noise of the crowds from
a long way off, and they arrived to find the boulevard thronged with a
crush of people and giant photographs of Stalin and Prime Minister
Negrín hanging from the buildings. Bands were playing in riotous
cacophony, and speeches being broadcast over loudspeakers. The uproar
was compounded by the drone of Republican aircraft which patrolled the
skies to protect them from bombers. The crowd was many people deep, from
the roadside to the buildings behind, as if everyone in Barcelona had
come out to cheer the heroes of Jarama and Brunete and Ebro and so many
other battles. Everyone knew what enormous losses they had suffered and
how many foreign men like Tom would never return home to their mothers.
Kanty shouted, 'I've never seen so many people in my life. There must be
a million. We need to move further down the avenue, or we'll never see
anything.' Concha shrank into Lucy's side, and Lucy clutched her hand
tightly as they moved in the river of people behind the massed throngs
and then tried to push forwards to where they might be able to get a
view of the ranks of the surviving International Brigaders. The crowd
erupted and the bands stopped playing as Lucy recognised the voice of
Dolores Ibárruri, La Pasionaria, as she began to make a fervent speech,
which blared through loudspeakers on both sides of them. It

seemed so long ago that she and Tom had gone to hear her lecture in
London. Another life. 'You offered your blood with limitless
generosity,' La Pasionaria declaimed to the remaining ranks of
volunteers from all over the world, and her echoing words were like a
knife in Lucy's gut. 'You can go with pride. You are history. You are
legend.' The crowd roared its appreciation but Lucy thought bitterly,
better a live coward than a dead hero. Tom was gone forever and her baby
would be born fatherless. Only one phrase resonated. 'We will not forget
you,' shouted La Pasionaria and the spectators erupted with whistles and
stamping. Never, thought Lucy, placing the hand with Jamie's wedding
ring on to her slightly rounded stomach. As long as I have breath in my
body, we will never forget you. The International Brigades began to
march through the crowded street and petals rained down on them till
they were tramping on pink and red blooms and the bright flowers clung
to their uniforms. The road ahead of the soldiers was strewn with
flowers. Women burst through the cordon of Spanish honour guards to kiss
and hug the men who had protected them from Franco's Fascists for so
long. Factory girls in their blue overalls planted lipstick kisses on
the faces of the marching men and threaded blossom into their hair.
Lucy, Kanty and Concha were jostled from all sides and crushed tight to
the packed rows of people in front of them who mostly blocked their view
of the parade. Lucy lifted Concha into her arms so she wouldn't be
trampled on. 'It's too dangerous for Concha. We should go,' she called
to Kanty, but Kanty cupped one ear and raised her palms to express that
she couldn't hear her over the racket around them. Kanty was a little
taller than Lucy and much taller than most of the Catalonian crowd, so
by standing on tiptoe and craning her neck, she was obviously getting
glimpses

of the soldiers between the heads of the women in front. Lucy could tell
Kanty was thoroughly enjoying herself and wasn't going to leave for
anyone. But Lucy herself could only see the occasional glimpse of a
beret or a saluting fist beneath the much-repaired banners of the
different brigades which one by one bobbed over the heads of the
spectators. As each new banner appeared, the whoops and whistles of the
crowd rose to a deafening pitch as they surged forwards. Lucy put her
head down, and clutched hold of Concha. This would be over soon and she
could go back to her desk, losing herself for a while in the urgent
problem of feeding the refugees. She looked at the scruffy, worn coats
of the people in front of her, and tried to concentrate on thinking
about when she would have a new coat herself. Then Kanty was nudging her
and pointing over the heads of the people in front of them who were
waving their arms with excitement, shouting themselves hoarse. Lucy
looked up to see the tattered banner of the Batallón Inglés approaching.
Red and pink petals rained down on the battalion from a window across
the street. That banner would have been fluttering somewhere when her
darling Tom was killed. A wave of sickness passed over Lucy and she
hoped she wouldn't vomit or faint. She glanced back over her shoulder to
see how far she would have to shove her way through people to escape.
She wanted air. She wanted this misery to be over. But Kanty was
cheering and yelling, and wresting Concha out of Lucy's grip to lift the
child on to her shoulders to see over the heads. The clamour of the
whistles and roars made Lucy's ears ring. Kanty was hollering and
stamping and Concha was waving wildly and shrieking like a banshee.
Concha suddenly lifted herself up off Kanty's shoulders, straining to
see better. As she lowered back down she drummed on Kanty's head with
her palms and kicked Lucy's arm to draw her attention, shouting, 'Tom!
It's Tom.'

Lucy and Kanty exchanged a quick glance of disbelief and astonishment,
but Concha was pointing and screaming, 'Tom! Tom!' with such conviction
that they were compelled to elbow a route between the people in front of
them towards the parade, pushing the men and women aside. Concha was
bouncing with excitement on Kanty's shoulders and Kanty gripped her legs
tightly. Lucy scarcely dared to believe her, but Concha had been so fond
of Tom, surely she couldn't be mistaken? 'He's there -- there!' Concha
pointed down the street as the men marched away. 'We'll never catch
them,' said Kanty, and Lucy gripped her arm. 'We should go around, try
to get ahead of them,' said Lucy, turning and shoving her way to the
back of the crowd, who moved aside to let them pass. Kanty lowered
Concha to her feet, and Lucy took her hand, setting off at a run down
side streets which had become as familiar to her as the lanes of Welwyn.
Concha was babbling with excitement. 'It was him! Truly! It was him! He
isn't dead!' Lucy knew they would be able to dash left, right, left,
through the grid-patterned streets, zigzagging around the squares where
roads intersected. Each time they neared the Diagonal they could hear
the yells and cheers of the crowd, telling them the avenue was still
thick with supporters of the International Brigades. As they rounded yet
another corner, Kanty developed a stitch and stopped still, clutching
her side. Concha hopped impatiently from foot to foot as Kanty touched
her toes, panting and blowing. But as soon as the stitch had gone they
were off again, pelting through the streets with their hair blowing
behind them. When they had been running up and down the side streets for
about fifteen minutes, the sound from the spectators seemed quieter, so
Lucy led them back to the

Diagonal, where the crowds had thinned to a few people deep. All three
of them were breathless, sweating from their exertion. Lucy's heart was
beating wildly when they emerged to a place where the marching parade
had not yet arrived. 'Por favor, si us plau,' said Lucy, diving between
the waiting people. 'Mi esposo! My husband!' and in Catalan, 'El meu
marit.' Men and women swivelled round, taking in the blondehaired,
light-eyed girl with such desperation in her voice, and they parted,
telling each other to make way for the wife of the Inglés hero. 'Thank
you, thank you,' said Kanty and Concha as they reached the very front of
the crowds, behind the Spanish honour guards who were holding back the
push of enthusiastic spectators. The carnival atmosphere rose to a pitch
of deafening excitement as the first International Brigaders marched
into view in their ragged, mismatched uniforms, their banners flying
ahead of each band of soldiers. Each man held his right fist to his
temple, saluting the people who had come to thank them. Here was the
Lincoln-Washington Brigade of American and Irish volunteers. Lucy had
never seen so many black men. The cause of freedom must be close to
their hearts, she thought. Now the Dimitrovs and the Paris Commune. And
then, at last, the remains of the Batallón Inglés under their familiar
banner, held aloft by the six-foot Jim Brewer. Lucy's heart was
hammering with hope and also with terror that Concha might have been
mistaken. She thought now she might really be sick. Lucy and Concha
frantically scanned the faces of each line of men as they drew level.
Many of them wore berets covering their hair, and some had their heads
turned away, nodding to the crowds on the opposite pavement.
Battlescarred men, marching with their heads held high, grinning

at the adulation of the women, their uniforms dotted with bright petals.
But none of them was Tom. And then Concha shrieked and wriggled under
the arms of the Spanish guards, into the parade. Her high voice carried
over the din as she screamed, 'Tom, Tom!' and she hurled herself at a
soldier who swept her up into his arms, looking all about him for Lucy.
She felt light-headed, dizzy with disbelief. It was as if all the rest
of the parade and the crowd melted away, all the noise and pushing and
colour blurred to nothingness, and only Tom's face stood out in sharp
focus. It was Tom. Concha was right. It was Tom. Lucy dipped under the
arms of the guards too and raced to him. If she pushed people out of the
way in her desperation to reach him, she didn't notice. There was
nothing in the world except Tom and the fact that he was alive. And then
she was beside him, gripping his arm, the solidity of it, and he was
laughing down at her with his familiar conker-coloured eyes. He slung
Concha on to his right hip and embraced Lucy tightly around her waist
with his left arm. The soldiers he'd been marching beside dropped back
to make room for the new additions to the parade. Lucy skipped into step
with the men, as, without breaking stride, Tom bent his head to kiss her
on the lips. A wild cheer rose up around them from his comrades and the
crowds. She clung to him and the softness of his mouth on hers was the
only reality for a few long seconds until the awkwardness of kissing
while walking forced them to break free. The soldiers who were close
enough slapped them both on the back. She thought she might burst with
the utter joy of feeling his arm like an iron band around her waist.
'They said you were dead,' she shouted. Tom grinned his old impish grin.
'Not when I last looked.'

It was impossible to talk more above the cacophony of the crowd, but for
these moments, nothing in the world mattered except the fact of his
living, breathing body, welded against hers. Lucy and Concha stayed with
the parade until the spectators had dispersed and other hangers-on had
dropped away, as they neared the outskirts of the city. Although she
never wanted to leave him again, she finally forced herself to say, 'We
should go back. We can't come all the way to France with you.' Tom set
Concha on her feet and kissed Lucy once more. 'I'll let you know where
we are,' he called as he and his comrades marched away, out of
Barcelona, up towards the mountains.

OceanofPDF.com

26

On her way back to Luis Vives House, her ears still ringing from the
noise of the crowd, Lucy stopped at the post office, light-headed with
joy, and sent a telegram to Mrs Murray. TOM IS ALIVE! it said. And then,
for good measure, I'VE SEEN HIM, because Mrs Murray might not dare to
believe the wonderful news. She was leaving the post office when she
realised she should also cable her father. Captain Nicholson had written
to her most movingly when she'd sent the letter telling him Jamie was
dead. His reply had said he was bereft at the loss of both his 'beloved
sons'. He deserved to know that one of them was still alive. The
telegram was quickly despatched. Concha danced and skipped beside her
all the way home. That night Lucy drank a toast to Tom with Kanty and
Margarita, her emotions swooping between exultation at Tom's miraculous
reincarnation, and bitter sorrow at the knowledge that Jamie would never
reappear. The following morning she received a formal letter from the
Batallón Inglés dated a week ago, telling her Tom was alive but had been
concussed and laid up in a deserted farmhouse, and a scrappy note from
Tom saying the International Brigade troops were being taken somewhere
near the town of Ripoll in the Pyrenees while arrangements

were made to send them home through Puigcerdà. He hoped she would be
able to see him before they left Spain. 'You must go to Puigcerdà,' said
Margarita decisively. 'I will come too. Domingo keeps telling me it's
time to leave Barcelona.' Lucy's eyes flashed. 'We could take some
orphans from the Barcelona colonies.' She turned to Kanty. 'What about
you?' Kanty considered. 'Not yet. We have so many good local staff, but
there's still so much to do. Puigcerdà's got John Langdon-Davies's
colonies and Save the Children and the Solidaridad Internacional
Antifascista, so I don't think they need me.' Lucy stumbled through the
following days in a mix of exultation and despair. As she looked around
her in the city, so many things mirrored her grief over Jamie: the
closed shops; the ruin and desolation around the docks; the pinched,
lined faces of the adults; the grey-white pallor and puffed eyelids of
the children with clothes hanging off them. And yet she heard laughter
and music too, and the familiar refrain of defiance, 'We Spanish die
dancing.' And then she thought of Tom, and the fact that he was alive
and she would see him again before too long. October became November and
the International Brigades were still camped at Ripoll in the Pyrenees,
waiting to leave Spain. But Lucy barely had time to think about Tom. The
telephones in the office were ringing constantly with new requests to
evacuate this or that colony and take the children into the mountains or
to France. The border with France was officially closed to refugees but
there were many reports of the long lines of people queuing to leave
Spain and people crossing secretly at night by the routes the
International Brigaders had taken to enter the war. It seemed hardly
anyone now believed a Republican victory was possible. Franco had not
followed the lead of the

Republicans and dismissed his international support from the Germans and
Italians. It was only a matter of time before all Spain would be his.
Lucy and Margarita made plans to travel up to Puigcerdà, emptying their
cupboards and getting their paperwork in order. Margarita would stay
there with Norma Jacob until Franco took Catalonia, and then they would
move to France to see how they could help the Spanish refugees there.
Lucy would only stay in Spain until she had seen Tom leave. A great
weight lifted from her as she made the decision to go home. A letter
came from Mrs Murray, which had been written before the telegram telling
her Tom was alive, in reply to Lucy's letter of confession. Lucy opened
it with great trepidation. Her heart beat hard as she slit the envelope.
After all, she was carrying the bastard child of one of her sons and had
married the other. She couldn't bear the thought that Mrs Murray might
despise her. She scanned the single page of thin, blue paper quickly.

My darling girl, Thank you for your courage in writing to tell me about
our sweet Jamie; it must have been so hard to do. And for telling me
about the bairn. My grandchild. Tom's baby. Something of him which will
live on. How could you think I might not want to wrap you and the baby
in my arms? Please come home soon and let me take care of you. It's much
too dangerous where you are. I would have welcomed you anyway but the
fact that this is Tom's baby will make it infinitely precious. I think
you'll love it here in Lanarkshire; the air is clean and we will have
family nearby. The bairn will have cousins to play with! But if you
don't like it here

or you miss your friends too much, we can go back to Hertfordshire
together. I can't wait to meet Concha. She will be like another
grandchild for me. A ready-made family will be like a dream come true
when I've lived alone for so long. Thank you for telling me about your
marriage to Jamie. It makes my deep sorrow slightly easier to bear when
I know you were with him to the last, and he died in the happy knowledge
that you were his wife. That's all he ever wanted. The loss of a child
is the worst thing in the world, and my heart goes out to all the
mothers of Spain who are suffering with me. I know there will always be
a rip in my soul which will never mend. But there is still kindness and
sympathy, in spite of everything. It might seem strange to other people
if you were ever to tell them, but I understand completely that you
loved both of my boys. Of course I do. And I know they always loved you,
in their different ways. Please come home soon. Come today. with much
love, soon-to be-nana Murray As she read and reread the letter, Lucy was
overtaken by a great longing to sink her head on to Mrs Murray's
shoulder and let herself be cared for, and at last to begin to think
about her baby. If Tom had left Spain by then, she could go home in time
for Christmas, and introduce Concha to Christmas trees and plum pudding
and carols and Mrs Murray's shortbread. She would teach her to sing
'Away in a Manger'. Once Lucy was in Britain, until the baby was born,
she would work at raising money for refugees. She would speak at Friends
Meeting Houses, WIs and trade union meetings. Francesca would help her.
Maybe she would write a book. Perhaps after the baby came there would
still be a way to

train as a doctor. It seemed the future was rising towards her like an
open road. She decided she should tell her father about the baby when
she next wrote to him. After all, it would be his grandchild too. Lucy
made certain that her two Catalan assistants would be able to take over
all the work she would be leaving behind in Barcelona. They visited the
colonies, where despite all their efforts the food shortages were
becoming serious. 'We opened the beanbags they used to sit on, and
cooked the beans,' one director told her. 'And then we used the material
to patch their trousers. The children can't stay here much longer.' Lucy
told Concha that from now on they would speak only English, so that she
would be ready when they both moved back to Britain. Concha hugged her
tight, and Lucy realised that she had still been worried that she might
have to remain in Spain when Lucy left. She raised Concha's head and
looked deep into the brown eyes which welled with tears. 'I will never
leave you,' she said. 'I love you like you are my own.' The next day
Lucy went to visit Jorge for the last time, halfthinking she might take
him with her to Puigcerdà. When she arrived, the colony matron was
wreathed in smiles. She began to say something, then stopped herself.
'No, let him tell you himself! He's in the printing-press room.' When
Lucy pushed open the door she could see a change in Jorge which buzzed
through every fibre of him. 'Lucy Yellowhair!' he yelled and threw
himself into her arms, squeezing her so hard, she had to prise him away.
'What is it?'

'It came today. Just this very morning!' He fumbled in his pocket for a
sheet of paper which was limp with being handled, unfolding it
portentously, and presenting it to her. But before she had time to read
it, he burst out, 'It's from my sister. My big sister. She is alive, and
is coming for me this very afternoon. She is taking me to live with
her.' Now it was Lucy's turn to hug Jorge. His whole body trembled with
joy, and the gold flecks in his eyes glinted like treasure. 'I knew she
was alive,' he said. 'Yes, you did. You were right.' He had never given
up hope. Perhaps she too ought to learn to believe in miracles, she told
herself sternly. In all this destruction and devastation there could
still be tiny pockets of joy, and when they came they should be
celebrated and shouted to the rooftops. Jorge's hand went to the
printing press and a small cloud scudded over his beaming countenance.
'Do you think there might be a printing press near where she lives,
which I'd be allowed to use?' 'I'm sure of it!' Lucy remembered what
she'd been told when she arrived in Spain. 'Every school has one. Your
new school will have one and be very glad to have a boy who knows how to
use it so well.' It was strange to say goodbye to Jorge knowing she
would probably never see him again, and as she walked away she thought
of all the others she'd left behind: Juan, Salvador, Alfonso, Juanita
and all the children at the White Villa. She knew it was always like
this in life, that you moved on and had to say goodbye, but the
relationships she'd formed in Spain seemed so much more brightly
coloured and vivid than any before, as though the nearness of death
forced you into a new appreciation of life and a new level of love. She
knew she would always carry these people with her, until the end of her
days. They had made the woman she had become.

It took a few days before Tom's anticipated letter arrived from Ripoll
where the International Brigades were encamped, awaiting the order to
leave Spain.

November 1938 Dearest Luce, Everyone's acting as though they are at a
holiday camp, with games and football and knobbly-knee contests. I
suppose we are finally free from the fear of dying at any moment, and
you can't imagine how that lifts the spirits. It's as if we are all
slightly tipsy, just on the elation of being alive. Most of the men are
full of plans to return home, but I'm sorry, Luce, I don't think that's
where I'm meant to be. Not just yet anyway. I've become very friendly
with men in the German, Austrian and Italian brigades who haven't got a
safe home like England to return to. For them the struggle against
Fascism is only just beginning. I'm sure you know that Herr Hitler has
annexed Austria and taken the Sudetenland back from Czechoslovakia. I
think England and France may regret not stopping him and Mussolini
breaking the non-intervention pact here in Spain. They've become so
strong and learned so much about this terrifying new kind of war from
the air. But I don't mean to be depressing. I am well, and full of good
spirits. I hope to see you in Puigcerdà before we finally leave Spain.
Tom Lucy tested her feelings, as if she was poking a bruise. She was not
the slightest bit surprised that Tom didn't plan to go home, but thought
she could forgive him anything now

she knew he was alive. She hoped she would be able to see him and at
least tell him about the baby. Eventually all the preparations were
complete and Lucy, Concha, Margarita and baby Dorotea left Barcelona for
Puigcerdà by lorry, taking with them a group of twenty orphaned children
from Barcelonian colonies. Their route passed through the medieval town
of Ripoll and it felt strange to be so close to Tom, but not able to see
him. All the way up the slow ascent into the Pyrenees the lorry
constantly sounded its horn to warn refugees to move out of the road
ahead of them. Bundles of belongings had been abandoned on the verges as
the incline increased and it became impossible to carry them any
further. Their lorry overtook families who couldn't walk another step
setting up makeshift camps for the night, with tarpaulins stretched over
sticks to give them some protection if it rained or snowed. The luckiest
people looked fat with the layers and layers of woollens they were
wearing against the November chill. But many shivered in clothing which
was completely inadequate for the altitude and time of year. A boy of
about ten was toiling up the road with his brother on his back. They
seemed to have no other family. Two women with bare feet in alpargatas
had sat down and pulled black shawls over their heads and shoulders.
They held out their babies to Lucy as the lorry passed, calling, 'Please
take them to France.' One of the babies lolled as though it was already
dead. Lucy clutched Margarita's hand as they drove past. There were too
many of them. It wasn't possible to help so many people in terrible
need. What could they do? Lucy frowned hard as thoughts leapfrogged over
each other, and then turned to Margarita, her eyes aglow. 'We could set
up a canteen. A mobile canteen which we can take to where they need it.'
Margarita nodded. 'That's a wonderful idea.'

All the rest of the way they talked about how it could be managed, until
it was time to deliver the orphaned boys and girls to the colonies at
Puigcerdà. Here they were safer from the bombing but the children were
quiet and huddled close together as they were introduced to yet another
new home. At the Quaker house backing on to the river, Norma had cooked
eggs and soup and the three women sat over their meal making lists of
what they would need for a mobile canteen. Lucy sketched images of how
they could convert a van. She was bubbling with enthusiasm and after
dinner she telephoned Luis Vives House and spoke to Kanty, reading out
their requirements in a way that brooked no resistance. 'You sound
well,' said Kanty with a smile in her voice. 'I'll see what I can do.' A
few days later, a grey Bedford van with the red and black Quaker star
painted on its side drew up outside their house, and honked its horn.
Lucy, Margarita and Norma ran down the steps to meet it. Kanty leaned
her head out of the driver's window and they crowded round, exclaiming
in wonder. 'At least let me get out then!' laughed Kanty, shoving them
aside. She flung open the back doors with some triumph, and they saw the
old van was loaded with sacks of porridge oats, dried milk, sugar and
cocoa. 'That's just to tide us over,' she said. 'And underneath all that
is a stove, a table and a sink. We got it out of a caravan. There's also
a trestle table you can set up, and you can keep the porridge and cocoa
warm on the rings. And there's two jam pans, two pails and three big
saucepans. I didn't bring the big vats from the canteens because I
didn't know if you'd be able to lift them if there

are just three of you and ...' she grinned at Lucy '... one is
"embarrassed and creating".' 'It's perfect!' declared Lucy, hugging and
kissing Kanty. Norma looked decisively at her watch. 'If we unload some
sacks here and take the rest to the storeroom, we could begin tonight.'
By nightfall they had heated up vats of porridge and cocoa and were
ready to set out, in a state of high excitement. All four of the women
wanted to go out on the first run, but someone had to stay home to put
the children to bed. 'It's right you go,' Margarita said to Lucy. 'It
was your idea.' Kanty drove because she was used to the idiosyncrasies
of the van, and they drew up on the roadside in a place they'd agreed
with the Mayor of Puigcerdà. As soon as they opened the doors and the
mouth-watering smells of cocoa and porridge wafted out into the cold
night air, people hurried towards them. Lucy, Kanty and Norma set up
their trestle table and asked the first two men to carry the bubbling
pans down from the van. The refugees queued with tin mugs, handing them
to Lucy to fill with a ladleful of cocoa, and held out bowls and plates
to Kanty for a large spoonful of porridge. As they shuffled past,
murmuring their thanks, Lucy looked into the eyes of young mothers
struggling to carry huge bundles of all their possessions. Most had
babies slung in shawls across them, or toddlers on their hips or small
children grasping their skirts. She gazed into the wrinkled faces of old
women and wounded men who had seen too much suffering, and wished each
of them a safe journey. When their supply of hot food and drink was
exhausted for the night it was heartbreaking to fold the trestle table
and close the doors of the van, telling the queuing people that there
would be no more till tomorrow.

Lucy, Margarita, Kanty and Norma worked out a rota. They needed two of
them in the van at any one time, with the others at home stirring up the
vats of milk and porridge, taking care of the children and trying to
stop them 'helping'. Lucy preferred being out on the road. She woke up
each morning before dawn with purpose blazing in her head, alert and
ready to go to work, knowing she had found her place in the world and
was doing what she had always been meant to do. Jamie was dead, and the
pain of that would never go away, but she was here and had to live for
both of them. As she lay in the dark, cold mornings her heart thrummed
out its beat, 'Begin! Begin! Begin!' She pulled on thick woollen
stockings under her serge trousers. Although she had become so thin
during her time in Spain and her pregnancy was not yet visible to anyone
who wasn't looking for it, her trousers wouldn't do up any longer. She
used a piece of elastic and two nappy pins to hold the opening together.
Her breasts were larger and hardly seemed to belong to her. She dragged
a woollen vest and two jumpers she'd pulled from the charity bag over
them. If she looked in the mirror she laughed at her shapeless body and
rounding face. Despite the loss of Jamie and failing to persuade Tom to
return home, she had never felt more alive, more necessary. Being needed
was a form of happiness. Day after day Lucy stood at the trestle table
of their mobile feeding station with her back to the van where one of
the others was stirring porridge. Her feet and lower legs were
permanently frozen despite the socks she wore over her woollen
stockings. She stamped to warm her toes, and turned her face up towards
the mountains, grey with mist and snow, knowing she would leave Spain
before long -- as soon as Tom was safely in France. And when her baby
was old enough perhaps she would resume fieldwork, finding Norma,
Esther, Francesca, Kanty or Margarita or women

like them wherever they were in the world, wherever there were people
who needed the help of one foolish girl. The snows began to fall
thicker, and every day they heard that refugees were dying of cold and
hunger beside the road. However hard they and the other relief agencies
worked, they could never keep up with the avalanche of need. Lucy
pressed another cup of cocoa into the hands of another hungry child. On
the morning of 6 December Lucy finally heard the news they'd all been
waiting for -- that the International Brigade troops had been moved up
to Puigcerdà, ready to cross into France. She came flying through the
town to the snowy field behind the railway station where the townspeople
had laid on a feast, plying the soldiers with wine, ham, bread and
butter smuggled over the border. As she approached the picnic laid out
on long tables, she saw Tom stuffing a huge baguette into his mouth and
laughing with his comrades. He hadn't seen her, intent on the food and
the joke being made by one of his friends. She stood and looked for a
few moments, pulling her coat and scarf a little tighter against the
cold, then turned where she couldn't be seen and sucked the wedding ring
from her finger, tucking it safely into her bra. Catching sight of the
ring would be too thoughtless a way for Tom to find out she had married
Jamie. She rubbed her finger to iron out the dent left by the ring. Tom
raised his head and spotted her, dropped the baguette he'd been holding
and ran towards her, lifting her off her feet in a great bear hug, and
kissing her resoundingly on the lips. The men cheered and she laughed.
'Let me down, you big oaf!' He slung an arm round her shoulders in a
proprietorial, brotherly way and as he led her to the feast Lucy noticed
he still walked with a slight limp, but when he indicated a

seat for her she thought he looked well, better than in Barcelona or
even at the White Villa. He grinned at her with the old boyish glint in
his eyes, as if here with his comrades he was completely himself. He
swung himself on to a bench opposite her across the trestle table, and
his friends crowded round, some looking Lucy up and down with frank
admiration. She pulled her coat around her to hide her swelling breasts.
'Look!' he said. 'Ham! Cheese! Wine!' He seemed much more interested in
the food than he was in her. She sat and watched him as he ate and
laughed. All the light which had gone out of him when he was in
Barcelona seemed to have returned, and she rejoiced to see it. He
suddenly reached out and twisted one of her curls around his finger in
his old gesture, as if reaching into a half-remembered past, and she
searched his eyes for anything which might have told her she meant more
to him than the comrades who jostled around him. But he dropped his hand
and picked up his wine. 'So what happened?' she demanded. 'They told us
you were missing, presumed dead.' He began to tell the story of the
battle, and his friends couldn't seem to help chipping in, eager to add
details about how calm, cheerful, courageous and selfless Tom was, to
show him off in the best possible light. Lucy thought they could almost
have been talking about Jamie. This all-for-one, one-for-all man they
knew was not her old selfish Tom. Lucy was eager to hear more, to find
out who Tom was when he wasn't with her, but he laughed it off as if she
was someone who shouldn't be bothered with such nonsense. '... Then I
woke up in a bed in a farmhouse, with my head stitched up like
Frankenstein's monster and no memory at all of the last two weeks.' He
was playing to the crowd

behind him as much as to Lucy and everyone listened with rapt attention.
That at least was like the old Tom. But Lucy hardly heard what he was
saying because she was concentrating on sensations in her own body. For
some weeks she'd been aware of fluttering movements like wind in the
rounded lower part of her stomach. Now she had a rush of excitement as
the flicking, fish-leaping feeling became more insistent. It was
fanciful to think that the baby had somehow recognised its father's
voice, but she caressed her belly with a cupped hand beneath the table,
acknowledging the presence of new life. '... And then we marched through
Barcelona, and Concha saw me.' She felt the flurry of kicks in her
stomach grow stronger. You are going to be such a handful if you are a
blend of us, she thought. 'Can we walk for a bit?' she asked, stamping
her feet in the snow. 'My toes are numb.' There were nudges and joshing
from his comrades as he led her away to where they were out of sight, in
the lee of the railway station. Tom pulled her into his arms, but it
seemed mechanical, as though his mind was on something else. 'Will you
go home?' she asked him. He looked away, up into the mountains. 'I don't
think so.' His eyes glanced off hers. 'There's still so much to do. Herr
Hitler has to be stopped, or there will be so many Guernicas.' She
thought, what about your mum? What about me? But she didn't say it.
Should she tell him about the baby? About marrying Jamie? She sighed. It
didn't seem the time or the place. Perhaps it would be easier to write.
Lucy could see clearly that this was who Tom really was now -- a
soldier, most at home with his comrades-in-arms. Just as she was most
herself when she was with her friends, focused and intent on helping
others and relieving

suffering. They were not so different, more like brother and sister than
the twin souls of her romantic invention. She'd held on to an idea of
him as the boy she'd grown up with, not the man he had become. Deep down
she had known, even from the first time they made love, that Tom's true
passion was the Antifascista cause and his brothers-inarms, not her. As
long as there was Fascism in the world, she would always play second
fiddle. She might have expected to feel sadness at coming to this
realisation, but strength and determination flooded through her and she
knew she had the courage to go on without him, reliant on nobody but
herself. They returned to the feast, but one by one the soldiers around
them fell silent, their faces turned a greenish pale, and they hurried
away to the makeshift latrine as their bodies rejected the rich food.
They had lived too long on rice and beans. 'Sorry, Luce,' said Tom,
growing a ghostly white, and shouting over his shoulder as he hurried
away. 'I've got to go.' It wasn't quite the farewell she'd imagined. The
following day huge crowds turned out in Puigcerdà, lining the road which
led to the bridge with the French border. School was closed for the
morning, and all the children were given red-and-yellow-striped
Catalonian flags. Lucy and Concha stood at the front of the press,
waving, cheering and crying as one after another the brigades marched
past them and out of Spain. The Batallón Inglés banner came into view
with Tom in the ranks behind it, scanning the clapping spectators for
Lucy and Concha, and a great grin spread almost from ear to ear when he
saw them. He passed close, within feet of them, and threw them a kiss.
Then, with a military 'eyes front', he turned towards France and didn't
look back. Tears rolled down Lucy's face as she watched his retreating

back disappear into the lines of those who followed him. They were
marching out of the country they'd fought so hard to save from Fascism,
leaving behind the bodies of thousands of comrades who would never
return home. Twenty minutes later, when Lucy and Concha returned with
their suitcases, the bridge to France had only a straggling queue of
people waiting to cross the border. An old couple ahead of them paused
for a moment as the man bent to scoop up a handful of Spanish soil and
dribble it into his pocket. Margarita, Kanty and Norma had come to wave
them goodbye. Kanty squeezed Lucy so hard she could barely breathe and
gruffly said, 'Don't worry, you haven't heard the last of me.' Then she
swung Concha off the ground, making her squeal with pleasure. Margarita
wept and blew her nose loudly before she hugged Lucy and Concha for the
last time. Bright tears stood in Lucy's eyes as she took leave of her
dear friends. 'I'll write,' she said. 'I promise I'll write.' Lucy
showed her passport to the Spanish border guard and they were waved
through. She took Concha's hand and smiled down at her as they walked
across the bridge to France. 'Come on,' said Lucy. 'We're going home.'

OceanofPDF.com

Author's Note In 1947 the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded jointly to the
Friends Service Council and the American Friends Service Committee (the
British and American Quakers) 'for their pioneering work in the
international peace movement and compassionate effort to relieve human
suffering, thereby promoting the fraternity between nations', which
included recognition of their efforts in Spain during the civil war. It
was given for their 'silent help from the nameless to the nameless'. But
my research soon revealed that the aid workers were not 'nameless'. In
this novel, I have tried to breathe life into some of them. The
Nicholson and Murray families and Concha are entirely imaginary, but
most of the characters they encounter were extraordinary real people.
Some of them are just names in the footnotes of history; others have
been written about more fully, or left their own memoirs. In particular
I have drawn heavily on the memoirs of Francesca Wilson and Kanty
Cooper. I have chosen to keep many people's actual names, even when I
have had to invent and expand on what is known about them. Most of the
acts attributed to Lucy in the novel were carried out by real people.
For example: Francesca Wilson single-handedly undertook all of the work
which Lucy helps her with in Murcia in this novel; Francesca also set up
a colony on the beach near Benidorm, though that was in 1938 not 1937;
Kanty ran all the canteens in Barcelona herself.

I would like to pay tribute to all the following real people and hope my
imaginary expansion of what is known about them does none of them any
disservice. Friends (Quaker Relief): Francesca Wilson; Domingo and
Margarita Ricart; Kanty Cooper; Alfred and Norma Jacob; Esther Farquar;
Barbara Wood; Elise Thomsen; Edith Pye; Audrey Russell. Minor
characters: the Mayor of Murcia; the coastguard at Benidorm; Juan the
fisherman; Harry Pollitt. International Brigaders: John Cornford; Miles
Tomalin; Ernest Mahoney; Charles Goodfellow; Frank Graham; Jimmy Shand.
Francesca Wilson had previously worked with displaced people in Holland,
France, Corsica, North Africa, Serbia, Austria and Russia. Following the
Spanish Civil War she went on to work with refugees in France and
Hungary. She died in 1981. Kanty Cooper went on to carry out relief work
in Greece, Germany, Jordan and Amman. Domingo and Margarita Ricart, as
well as Alfred and Norma Jacob, spent time with the Quakers in England
before moving to America. Norma continued to work for the American
Friends Service Council. \* Barcelona and Catalonia fell to the Fascists
in January 1939. Franco finally took Madrid in March 1939 and then all
Spain was his. There are tales of Republicans who remained in hiding
until Franco's death in 1975. During the three years of war, horrific
atrocities were committed, 500,000 people were killed and millions were
forced to flee their homes. It is estimated that between 40,000 and
59,000 volunteers from overseas served in the International

Brigades, including 15,000 who died in combat. Accurate numbers are
difficult to come by, but it is thought that by November 1938 there were
more than a million refugees in Catalonia, of whom about half fled the
country at the end of the war. The Republican refugees who flooded into
France were treated worse than animals by the French authorities. But
that's another story.

OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgements First and foremost, huge thanks to Professor Farah
Mendlesohn. In the middle of Brexit, I told her I was interested in
writing about divided nations and she said, 'You should read my PhD
thesis on Quaker relief in the Spanish Civil War,' and generously gave
me permission to use what I found there. This novel is the result. As
the book was written during 2020 and 2021 when it was impossible to
travel to Spain from England due to COVID-19, I am hugely indebted to
the gorgeous travel writing of H.V. Morton as well as the memoirs of
Francesca Wilson and Kanty Cooper, and the extraordinary help by email
of Josep Bracons Clapés, cap del departament de colleccions i centres
patrimonials Museu d'Història de Barcelona Mark Smith, the Man in Seat
61, for all my railway information Miquel Serrano, historiador i
conservador, Museu Memorial de l'Exili Erola Simon Lleixà, Arxiu
Comarcal de la Cerdanya, for all my information about Puigcerdà Grégory
Tuban, historian. I am particularly grateful to my first readers, Farah
Mendlesohn, Siân Lliwen Roberts, Rose Holmes and Erola Simon Lleixà, for
correcting historical and geographical errors and offering advice.

My wonderful agent, Millie Hoskins, and the gifted editor Selina Walker
have been at my side cheering me on as this novel took shape, and Selina
and her assistant editor Sophie Whitehead, plus copy editor Sarah-Jane
Forder and managing editor Rose Waddilove, have worked on the manuscript
with meticulous care to help me get it as good as we could make it. I am
indebted to them and everyone else at Penguin Random House who has been
involved in this project. I can't thank them enough. My darling family
have been endlessly patient as I've abandoned them and taken myself 'off
to Spain' in my head until the novel was ready for them to read and so
usefully comment. To Tim, Katie and Amy -- everlove. Finally, I owe a
huge debt of gratitude to the authors of all the Friends Service Council
publications and the many other books I have consulted, notably of
course Laurie Lee, George Orwell and Ernest Hemingway, but particularly
Bill Alexander, British Volunteers for Liberty (Lawrence & Wishart,
1982) Kanty Cooper, The Uprooted (Quartet Books, 1979) Ernest Hemingway,
For Whom The Bell Tolls (Charles Scribner, 1940) Rose Holmes, A Moral
Business: British Quaker Work with Refugees from Fascism, 1933--39
(DPhil thesis: University of Sussex, 2013) Farah Mendlesohn, Quaker
Relief Work in the Spanish Civil War (PhD thesis: Quaker Studies, Volume
1, The Edwin Mellen Press, Lewiston Queenston Lampeter, 2002) George
Orwell, Homage to Catalonia (Martin, Secker & Warburg, 1938) H.V.
Morton, A Stranger in Spain (Methuen, 1955) Siân Lliwen Roberts, Place,
Life Histories and the Politics of Relief: Episodes in the Life of
Francesca Wilson, Humanitarian Educator Activist (PhD thesis: University
of Birmingham, 2010)

Rosa Serra Sala, Ajuda Humanitària dels Quàquers als Infants de
Catalunya Durant la Guerra Civil 1936-- 1939:Humanitarian Aid from
Quakers for the Children of Catalonia During the Civil War 1936--1939
(doctoral thesis: University of Girona, 2006) Manuel de León de la Vega,
Los Cuáaqueros y Otras Organizaciones en la Ayuda Humanitaria Durante la
Guerra Civil de 1936 (M. de León, 2018) Francesca M. Wilson, In the
Margins of Chaos (John Murray, 1944) J.A.W. (ed.), They Still Draw
Pictures (The Spanish Child Welfare Association of America for the
American Friends Service Committee (Friends), 1938); foreword by Aldous
Huxley

OceanofPDF.com


