![](cover.jpeg)

[]{#titlepage.xhtml}

<div>

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" version="1.1" width="100%" height="100%" viewbox="0 0 488 751" preserveaspectratio="none">
`<image width="488" height="751" xlink:href="cover.jpeg">`{=html}`</image>`{=html}
</svg>

</div>

[]{#part0000.html}

![image](images/00001.jpeg){.calibre1}

[]{#part0001.html}

 

[Begin
Reading](#part0003.html_2RHM0-efb9bf54b3d547ce84da16865f66be31){.calibre2}

[Table of
Contents](#part0041.html_173720-efb9bf54b3d547ce84da16865f66be31){.calibre2}

[About the Author](#part0039.html_ata){.calibre2}

[Copyright
Page](#part0042.html_181NK0-efb9bf54b3d547ce84da16865f66be31){.calibre2}

 

[Thank you for buying this]{.epub-b}

[Flatiron Books ebook.]{.epub-b}

 

To receive special offers, bonus content,

and info on new releases and other great reads,

sign up for our newsletters.

 

[![image](images/00002.jpeg){.calibre4}](http://us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup?utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_newslettersignup_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre3}

Or visit us online at

[us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup](http://us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup?utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_newslettersignup_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre2}

 

For email updates on the author, click
[here](http://us.macmillan.com/authoralerts?authorName=sharonsalzberg&authorRefId=113755620&utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_authoralertsignup_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre2}.

[]{#part0002.html}

 

The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your
personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available in
any way. [Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the
copy of this e-book you are reading infringes on the author's copyright,
please notify the publisher at:
[us.macmillanusa.com/piracy](http://us.macmillanusa.com/piracy){.calibre2}.]{.epub-b}

[]{#part0003.html}

 

To my teacher, Nani Bala Barua (Dipa Ma), who went through so much loss
and came to the power of boundless love.

[]{#part0004.html}

 

[INTRODUCTION](#part0041.html_c_int){#part0004.html_3Q283-efb9bf54b3d547ce84da16865f66be31
.calibre2}

[[Looking for Love]{.epub-i}](#part0041.html_c_int){.calibre2}

[Love takes off masks that we fear we cannot live without and know we
cannot live within.]{.epub-i}

---JAMES BALDWIN

[S]{.cic}[INCE WE WERE CHILDREN,]{.cotx} we have been told a patchwork
of stories about love. We expect love to give us exaltation, bliss,
affection, fire, sweetness, tenderness, comfort, security, and so very
much more---all at once.

Our minds are too often clouded by pop-culture images that equate love
with sex and romance, delivered in thunderbolts and moonbeams. This idea
of love makes us say things and do things we do not mean. It makes us
cling frantically to relationships that are bound to change, challenge
us, or slip away. Major bookstores often have a love section that's
actually just a romantic relationship section---volumes on how to get a
relationship, how to keep a relationship, and how to cure a
relationship. As one publisher said to me, "The love market is
saturated."

Perhaps we think we're getting the portion of love we deserve, which is
not very much at all: "I'm just not lucky in love," or "I've been too
damaged to love." We may feel so cynical (sometimes as a mask to hide
heartbreak or loneliness) that we dismiss love as a sorry illusion. Some
of us decide we are through with love because it takes much more from us
than it ever gives back. At those wounded moments when we most need
love, a hardened heart can seem like the best defense.

Many of us have been told that if we loved others enough and sacrificed,
it wouldn't matter that we didn't love ourselves, and that we could keep
that up forever. Or if we loved a friend or a child enough, that love
itself could cure all ills, meaning no more painful setbacks or defeats.
If there is such pain, it implies we were bad at love. Or maybe it was
suggested to us that all we needed in this world was love and that we
didn't have to fight what is wrong or call out what is cruel or unjust.

But apart from all these stories, as human beings we naturally live our
lives wanting belonging, connection, a home in this world. We yearn for
warmth, for possibility, for the more abundant life that love seems to
promise. We sense there is a quality of real love that is possible
beyond the narrow straits we have been told to navigate, a possibility
that's not idealized or merely abstract. We have an intuition that we
can connect so much more deeply to ourselves and to one another.

One of my own turning points came in 1985 when I did a meditation
retreat in Burma. I was practicing intensive lovingkindness meditation,
offering phrases of wishing well to myself and others all day long,
like, "May I be happy; may you be happy." As I practiced, at one point
it felt as though I came to a threshold. On one side was the
conventional idea of who I had thought myself to be---that is, someone
completely dependent on another person to feel any love in my life. It
was as though I considered love to be like a package, in the hands of
the all-powerful delivery person, and if that person changed their mind
at my doorstep and walked away, I would be bereft---irredeemably
incomplete, lacking the love I so longed for. On the other side of the
threshold was the reflection of who I suspected I actually was---someone
with an inner capacity for love, no matter who was present or what was
happening, someone who could access love that another person might
enhance or challenge, but there was no one who could either bestow that
capacity on me or take it away. I stepped over.

I saw I couldn't flourish as a human being as long as I saw myself as
the passive recipient of love. (There's an awful lot of waiting in that
position, and then damage control when it doesn't work out, and also
numbness.) But I could certainly flourish as love's embodiment.

This book is an exploration of real love---the innate capacity we each
have to love---in everyday life. I see real love as the most fundamental
of our innate capacities, never destroyed no matter what we might have
gone through or might yet go through. It may be buried, obscured from
view, hard to find, and hard to trust ... but it is there. Faintly
pulsing, like a heartbeat, beneath the words we use to greet one
another, as we ponder how to critique others' work without hurting them,
as we gather the courage to stand up for ourselves or realize we have to
let go of a relationship---real love seeks to find authentic life, to
uncurl and blossom.

I believe that there is only one kind of love---[real
love]{.epub-i}---trying to come alive in us despite our limiting
assumptions, the distortions of our culture, and the habits of fear,
self-condemnation, and isolation that we tend to acquire just by living
a life. All of us have the capacity to experience real love. When we see
love from this expanded perspective, we can find it in the smallest
moments of connection: with a clerk in the grocery store, a child, a
pet, a walk in the woods. We can find it within ourselves.

Real love comes with a powerful recognition that we are fully alive and
whole, despite our wounds or our fears or our loneliness. It is a state
where we allow ourselves to be seen clearly by ourselves and by others,
and in turn, we offer clear seeing to the world around us. It is a love
that heals.

The how of this book is based on a tool kit of mindfulness techniques
and other practices cultivating lovingkindness and compassion that I
have been teaching for over forty years. Mindfulness practice helps
create space between our actual experiences and the reflexive stories we
tend to tell about them (e.g., "This is all I deserve"). Lovingkindness
practice helps us move out of the terrain of our default narratives if
they tend to be based on fear or disconnection. We become authors of
brand-new stories about love.

There are meditations, reflections, and interactive exercises designed
to be suitable for anybody. They outline a path of exploration that is
exciting, creative, and even playful. I draw from my own experience and
from that of the many meditation students I have guided, several of whom
have generously offered their stories here. The meditations in
particular are meant to be done more than just once---over time,
practicing them will create a steady foundation in mindfulness and
lovingkindness in our lives.

Our exploration begins with that often-forgotten recipient who is
missing real love: ourselves. We expand the exploration to include
working with lovers, parents, spouses, children, best friends, and work
friends, divorce, dying, forgiveness[---]{.epub-b}the challenges and
opportunities of daily life. And we move on to exploring the possibility
of abiding in a sense of profound connection to all beings, even those
around whom we draw strong boundaries or have tried in the past to
block. We may not at all like them, but we can wish them to be free (and
us to be free of their actions defining us). This vast sense of
interconnection, within and without, leads us to love life itself.

I am writing this book for all who find that yearning within to be
happier, who dare to imagine they might be capable of much, much more in
the matter of love. And I am writing for those who at times suffer in
feeling, as I once did, unloved and incapable of changing their fate. My
hope is that through this book I can help you cultivate real love, that
beautiful space of caring where you come into harmony with all of your
life.

[]{#part0005.html}

 

[SECTION 1](#part0041.html_c_pt1){.calibre2}

[]{#part0006.html}

 

[INTRODUCTION](#part0041.html_c_int1){.calibre2}

[[Beyond the Cliché]{.epub-i}](#part0041.html_c_int1){.calibre2}

[Y]{.cic}[OU ARE A PERSON WORTHY]{.cotx} of love. You don't have to do
anything to prove that. You don't have to climb Mt. Everest, write a
catchy tune that goes viral on YouTube, or be the CEO of a tech start-up
who cooks every meal from scratch using ingredients plucked from your
organic garden. If you've never received an award and there are no
plaques proclaiming your exceptional gifts hanging on your walls, you
still deserve all the love in the world. You do not have to earn love.
You simply have to exist. When we see ourselves and see life more
clearly, we come to rely on that. We remember that we do deserve the
blessing of love.

A lack of real love for ourselves is one of the most constricting,
painful conditions we can know. It cuts us off from our deepest
potential for connecting and caring; it is enslavement to powerful---but
surmountable---conditioning.

And yet, no matter what bravery we show to the world, most of us have
recurring doubts about our worth. We worry that we're not desirable
enough, good enough, successful enough. We fear we're not enough,
period. Intellectually, we may appreciate that loving ourselves would
give us a firm foundation, one from which we could extend love out into
the world. But for most of us this is a leap of logic, not a leap of the
heart. We don't easily leap toward things we don't trust, and most of us
don't trust that we are worth loving.

Nora expresses her confusion: "You always hear that you need to practice
self-love in order to love others. But no one tells you [how]{.epub-i}
to love yourself. On the one hand, it feels like a cure-all: I need to
love myself to find a lover. On the other hand, I think a lot of people
seek out romance as a way of not loving themselves. In some sense,
self-love is the most difficult. You're also the most convenient person
to hate."

Michelle describes a wake-up call: "One day, when I was in my late
twenties, a dear platonic friend said to me, 'Do you know how much I
love you?' I instantly felt a wave of sadness. 'No,' I said, 'I don't
know how much you love me.' 'I know,' he replied gently. At that moment,
I became aware that I had never even thought of myself as being lovable.
And I realized that it was not possible for me to receive love either."

Why is it so difficult for us to love ourselves? Why is it so much
harder to offer ourselves the same sort of care and kindness that we
readily dispense to our friends?

For one thing, the notion of loving oneself has gotten an undeservedly
bad rap, which goes something like this: self-love is narcissistic,
selfish, self-indulgent, the supreme delusion of a runaway ego looking
out for "number one."

In fact, just the opposite is true. When the airplane cabin pressure is
dropping, no one would call it selfish when a father secures his own
oxygen mask before turning to help his child. More broadly, to love
oneself genuinely is to come into harmony with life itself---including
all others. Psychotherapist and meditator Linda Carroll explained the
difference to me this way: "Loving yourself is holding yourself
accountable to be the best you can be in your life. Narcissistic love
has nothing to do with accountability." In other words, when we
cultivate tenderness and compassion for the whole of our
experiences---the difficult and hurtful parts, in addition to the
triumphs---we naturally behave more kindly and responsibly toward
others. Our hearts soften and we see that each of us is, in our own way,
grappling with this human life that Zorba the Greek called "the full
catastrophe"---replete with wonder and sorrow.

And so we begin with ourselves.

We are born ready to love and be loved. It is our birthright. Our
ability to connect with others is innate, wired into our nervous
systems, and we need connection as much as we need physical nourishment.
But we're also born to learn, and from our earliest days, we begin to
create our map of the world and our place in it. We form simple
expectations: if I cry, someone will come---or not. Soon we start to
weave fragments of our experiences into stories to explain what is
happening to us and in the world around us. When we're very young, most
of these expectations and stories are [implicit]{.epub-i}, encoded in
our bodies and nervous systems. But as we grow older, they become more
[explicit]{.epub-i}, and we may be able to recall where and when we
first received a particular message about our worth and about our
ability to love and be loved.

MESSAGES FROM OUR FAMILIES AND LIFE HISTORY

[EACH OF US]{.cotx} has our own individual histories, families, and life
events that broadcast messages like a twenty-four-hour cable news
channel. Some of these messages penetrate our conscious minds, while the
majority are received by our unconscious and may take years to retrieve
and articulate. Elliott recalls that, as a small boy, whenever he
expressed sadness or fear, his father tried to talk him out of his
feelings. "You're not sad," his dad would say. Or "You don't look like a
chicken, so why are you acting so scared?" Without being aware of it,
Elliott internalized the message that it was unsafe to reveal his
emotions. It wasn't until the near breakup of his marriage---averted by
a combination of psychotherapy and meditation---that he finally felt
free enough to express his true feelings.

For most of us, life experiences are a rich mix of positive and
negative, but evolutionary biologists tell us we have a "negativity
bias" that makes us especially alert to danger and threat, lest we get
eaten by a tiger (or so our nervous systems tell us). In order to ensure
our survival, our brains remember negative events more strongly than
positive ones (all the better to recall where the tiger was hiding). So
when we're feeling lost or discouraged, it can be very hard to conjure
up memories and feelings of happiness and ease.

While this default response is essential to our survival when we're in
real danger, it can also be the source of great suffering when we're
not. With meditation, however, we can actually retrain our nervous
systems away from this fight-or-flight response. We learn to identify
our thoughts and feelings for what they are, without getting swept away
by them.

MESSAGES FROM OUR CULTURE

[FRIENDS RAISED WITH]{.cotx} a notion of original sin often tell me that
guilt has shadowed them from the time they were very young. Common
thoughts include things like, [I was born bad; I was born broken; there
is something fundamentally wrong with me]{.epub-i}. Even if such
concepts weren't part of our religious or family backgrounds, they
persist in our culture and can result in a pervasive sense of defeat:
nothing I am or do will ever be good enough.

For some, the sin is being born the "wrong" gender, ethnicity, race, or
sexual orientation, all of which can lead to feelings of not belonging.
These cultural messages not only impede our ability to love and care for
ourselves but can inhibit our potential by causing us to lower our
expectations and rein in our dreams. At the same time, the opportunities
available to us may realistically be diminished because of society's
projections onto us. We may even become the target of outright hatred
and threats to our safety.

James Baldwin, the late, brilliant, gay African American author,
described his process of coming to terms with such messages in his essay
"They Can't Turn Back": "It took many years of vomiting up all the filth
I'd been taught about myself, and half-believed, before I was able to
walk on the earth as though I had a right to be here."

We may also be swamped by the pervasive messages of our materialistic
culture, which stresses competition, status, and "success" over
character and emotional intelligence. This makes it easy to fall into
the lose-lose trap of comparing ourselves to others. But, as
psychologist Sonja Lyubomirsky points out in her book [The How of
Happiness]{.epub-i}, "The more social comparisons you make, the more
likely you are to encounter unfavorable comparisons, and the more
sensitive you are to social comparisons, the more likely you are to
suffer their negative consequences ... No matter how successful,
wealthy, or fortunate we become, there's always someone who can best
us."

When we constantly hear that we should be smarter, better connected,
more productive, wealthier---you name it---it takes real courage to
claim the time and space to follow the currents of our talents, our
aspirations, and our hearts, which may lead in a very different
direction.

MESSAGES FROM THE MEDIA

[HAVE YOU EVER]{.cotx} wakened in the morning feeling contented and
quiet, and then, within fifteen minutes of checking your phone, felt out
of sorts and jealous? Longing for something more?

Many of us now spend as much time immersed in images on a screen as
participating in the world outside our devices. Whether subtly or
blatantly, ads tell us that our bodies need making over, our clothes
just won't do, our living room is a mess, and we're not invited to the
right parties---all as a way to sell us more and more. Along the way,
what might be a source of pleasure becomes infused with anxiety.

Social activist Jerry Mander hypothesizes that media is deliberately
designed to induce self-hatred, negative body image, and dejection, with
advertising drummed up---and sold---to offer the cure.

Regardless of the source of these messages, we can become more aware of
them. We can see which messages we've adopted as our own beliefs and
learn instead to hold them more loosely; in time, we can even replace
them with an inquiring mind, an open heart, an enhanced sense of
vitality. We may not be able to make the messages disappear, but we can
question them. The more we do so, the less intrusive and limiting they
become. In turn, we become freer to connect more authentically with
others, as well as to our own deepest yearnings.

START WHERE YOU ARE

[I HAVE NEVER]{.cotx} believed that you must completely love yourself
first before you can love another. I know many people who are hard on
themselves, yet love their friends and family deeply and are loved in
return---though they might have difficulty in receiving that love. But
it's hard to sustain love for others over the long haul until we have a
sense of inner abundance and sufficiency.

When we experience inner impoverishment, love for another too easily
becomes hunger: for reassurance, for acclaim, for affirmation of our
worth. Feeling incomplete inside ourselves, we search for others to
complete us. But the equation doesn't work that way: we can't gain from
others what we're unable to give ourselves.

It's important to recognize that self-love is an unfolding process that
gains strength over time, not a goal with a fixed end point. When we
start to pay attention, we see that we're challenged daily to act
lovingly on our own behalf. Simple gestures of respect---care of the
body, rest for the mind, and beauty for the soul in the form of music
and art or nature---are all ways of showing ourselves love. Really, all
of our actions---from how we respond when we can't fit into our favorite
pair of jeans to the choice of foods we eat---can signify self-love or
self-sabotage. So can the way we react when a stranger cuts us off in
line, a friend does something hurtful, or we get an unwelcome medical
diagnosis.

As Maya Angelou said in her book [Letter to My Daughter]{.epub-i}, "You
may not control all the events that happen to you, but you can decide
not to be reduced by them." I started meditation practice, as many do,
with the need to turn around that tendency to feel reduced by life.

Still, it takes a special courage to challenge the rigid confines of our
accustomed story. It's not that easy to radically alter our views about
where happiness comes from, or what brings us joy. But it's eminently
possible. We truly can reconfigure how we see ourselves and reclaim the
love for ourselves that we're innately capable of. That's why I invite
students to set out on this path in the spirit of adventure, instead of
feeling that real love is a pass/fail exam that they're scared to take.

Although love is often depicted as starry-eyed and sweet, love for the
self is made of tougher stuff. It's not a sappy form of denial. You
might still feel rage, desire, and shame like everyone else in the
world, but you can learn to hold these emotions in a context of caring.

Real love allows for failure and suffering. All of us have made
mistakes, and some of those mistakes were consequential, but you can
find a way to relate to them with kindness. No matter what troubles have
befallen you or what difficulties you have caused yourself or others,
with love for yourself you can change, grow, make amends, and learn.
Real love is not about letting yourself off the hook. Real love does not
encourage you to ignore your problems or deny your mistakes and
imperfections. You see them clearly and still opt to love.

THE COMPASSION MUSCLE

[WE BEGIN TO]{.cotx} cultivate real love for ourselves when we treat
ourselves with compassion. In a sense, self-compassion is like a muscle.
The more we practice flexing it, especially when life doesn't go exactly
according to plan (a frequent scenario for most of us), the stronger and
more resilient our compassion muscle becomes.

Katherine says: "The hardest part of this practice for me has been
listening to, feeling, and grieving the intense pain of my childhood and
teen years. Avoiding this pain gradually closed down my life and
awareness, but my heart has begun to warm back to life. I'm able to be
present in new ways for myself, my husband, my children, and my
grandchildren."

When Katherine says her heart has warmed, it's not just a metaphor. As
psychologist Kristin Neff
([Self-Compassion.org](http://Self-Compassion.org){.calibre2}) writes in
one of her blog posts, "When we soothe our painful feelings with the
healing balm of self-compassion, not only are we changing our mental and
emotional experience, we're also changing our body chemistry." She
reports on research that suggests while self-criticism triggers
increases in blood pressure, adrenaline, and the hormone cortisol---all
results of the fight-or-flight response---self-compassion triggers the
release of oxytocin, the "bonding hormone," which increases feelings of
trust, calm, safety, and generosity.

The starting place for this radical reimagining of love is mindfulness.
By sitting quietly and focusing on the steady rhythm of the breath as
you draw it in and release it, you create room to relate to yourself
with compassion. The breath is the first tool for opening the space
between the story you tell yourself about love and your capacity to tap
into the deep well of love inside you and all around you.

Nina grew up with rigid parents who thought play was frivolous, so they
kept her busy with assigned tasks. And though Nina loved to sing, her
mom and dad shamed her because she had less-than-perfect pitch. When I
first met Nina at a meditation class, she reported that her life was all
demanding work, with no time for play, including singing, her passion.
But over many months, she began to experiment with the very things that
she'd once been told not to do. She recently wrote me: "I am here to
stretch a toe into an area of fear ... Singing has become a joy---I am
learning to play."

Admonishment for play is a message that would cause anyone to approach
any feelings of love with fists readied and a clenched heart. It creates
fear. It blocks your voice, your life force, and prevents you from
showing yourself to the world as you truly are---off-key notes and all.

LOVINGKINDNESS MEDITATION

[FOR MANY OF]{.cotx} us, real love for ourselves may be a possibility we
pretty much gave up on long ago. So as we explore new ways of thinking,
we need to be willing to investigate, experiment, take some risks with
our attention, and stretch. We are going to try a new approach to this
matter of love we may have been closed to, assuming we already know it
inside and out.

The practice of lovingkindness is about cultivating love as a
transformative strength, enabling us to feel love that is not attached
to the illusion of people (including ourselves) being static, frozen,
disconnected. As a result, lovingkindness challenges those states that
tend to arise when we think of ourselves as isolated from everyone
else---fear, a sense of deficiency, alienation, loneliness. This
practice forcefully penetrates these states, and it begins, in fact,
with befriending---rather than making an enemy out of---ourselves.

Unlike our pop-cultural ideas of love as mushy, related to wanting,
owning, and possessing, lovingkindness is open, free, unconditional, and
abundant. Lovingkindness is the practice of offering to oneself and
others wishes to be happy, peaceful, healthy, strong.

We use the repetition of certain phrases to express these wishes and as
the vehicle to change the way we pay attention to ourselves and others.
There are three main arenas in which we experiment through
lovingkindness meditation:

[How do we pay attention?]{.epub-i} With the practice, we learn to be
more fully present and whole in our attention, rather than fragmented or
distracted.

[What do we pay attention to?]{.epub-i} If we are fixated on our flaws
and the faults of others, without falling into denial, we learn to admit
the other side, the good within us, the capacity for change still alive
in us even if unrealized or covered over.

[Who do we pay attention to?]{.epub-i} We learn to include those we have
tended to exclude, we learn to look at rather than right through those
we have previously unconsciously decided do not matter, do not count.
The spirit of these wishes is that they connect us all in our common
urge toward happiness.

Cultivating lovingkindness for ourselves is the foundation of real love
for our friends and family, for new people we encounter in our daily
lives, for all beings and for life itself. The classical progression of
lovingkindness meditation is that you start with offering lovingkindness
to yourself and move on to others with whom you have varying degrees of
difficulty. After ourselves, over time we will meditate on someone we
admire and respect, then a friend, then a neutral person such as your
dry cleaner or a shopkeeper, then a person who is somewhat challenging
for you, and then all beings. In this section, we will focus on
lovingkindness for ourselves and move on to complete the arc of the
practice in the following two sections.

---Traditionally, the phrases used are ones like, "May I be safe," "Be
happy," "Be healthy," "Live with ease."

---Some people prefer to say, "May I [feel]{.epub-i} safe,
[feel]{.epub-i} happy..." The last phrase, "May I live with ease," means
in the things of everyday life, like livelihood and relationships. "May
it not be such a struggle."

---Feel free to experiment with these phrases, or replace them
altogether with different phrases that might work better for you. Some
common replacements are "May I be peaceful" or "May I be filled with
lovingkindness" or "May I have ease of heart."

---The phrase needs to be general enough, open enough so that it can be
the conduit for paying attention to yourself and others in a different
way. The spirit is one of gift-giving, of offering. It's a sense of
blessing---we're not goal-setting or parsing areas of self-improvement,
like, "May I get better at public speaking." What would happen when we
then focused on our neighbor or grandmother? Instead, we're practicing
generosity of the spirit with each phrase.

The power of concentration we want to be developing is challenged by
constantly needing to think of new phrases for each new recipient. While
you shouldn't feel imprisoned by the phrases, it's good to mostly keep
the same phrases toward the varied recipients if you can. The
aspirations we repeat should be deep and somewhat enduring---rather than
something fleeting like, "May I find a good parking space."

INTRODUCTION PRACTICES

[Introducing lovingkindness]{.epub-i}

1\. Begin by sitting comfortably. You can close your eyes or not,
however you feel most at ease. You can set the time you plan to sit for,
using an app or an alarm. If you are newer to meditation, five or ten
minutes would be my suggestion. Choose the three or four phrases that
express what you most deeply wish for yourself, and begin to repeat them
silently.

2\. Repeat the phrases, like, "May I be happy," with enough space and
enough silence so that it is a rhythm that's pleasing to you. I have a
friend who thought he'd get extra credit for saying more phrases---you
don't need to be in a rush. Gather all of your attention around one
phrase at a time.

3\. You don't need to manufacture or fabricate a special feeling. The
power of the practice comes from our full, wholehearted presence behind
each phrase, from being willing to pay attention to ourselves and others
in truthful, though perhaps unaccustomed ways. If you fear
sentimentality or phoniness, this is an especially important reminder.

4\. This is different from affirmations that tell us we are getting
better and better, or insist that we're perfect just as we are. If it
feels phony, or like you are begging or imploring ("May I please, please
be happy already"), remind yourself that it is a practice of
generosity---you are giving yourself a gift of loving attention.

5\. You may decide it is helpful to coordinate these phrases with the
breath, or simply have your mind rest in the phrases.

6\. When you find your attention has wandered, see if you can let go of
the distraction gently, and return to the repetition of the phrases.
Don't worry if it happens a lot.

7\. When you feel ready, you can open your eyes.

[Receiving lovingkindness]{.epub-i}

An alternative practice to experiment with is imagining someone who
represents the force of love for you. Perhaps they've helped you
directly, or perhaps you've never met them but you've been inspired by
them from afar. Maybe they exist now or they've existed historically or
even mythically. It could be an adult, a child, or even a pet. See if
you can bring them here, get a sense of their presence---you might
visualize them or say their name to yourself.

Then experience yourself as the recipient of their energy, attention,
care, or regard as you silently repeat whatever phrases are expressive
of that which you would wish the most for yourself. But say them as
though from them to you: "May you be safe," "Be happy," "Be healthy,"
"Live with ease of heart."

All kinds of different emotions may arise. You may feel gratitude and
awe. You might feel shy or embarrassed. Whatever emotion arises, just
let it pass through you. Your touchstone is those phrases: "May you be
happy," "May you be peaceful," or whatever phrases you've chosen.
Imagine your skin is porous and receiving this energy coming in. There's
nothing special you need to do to deserve this kind of acknowledgment or
care: it is coming simply because you exist.

You can end the session by allowing that quality of lovingkindness and
care to flow right back out toward all beings everywhere. That which you
received, you can now transform into giving. The quality of care and
kindness that does exist in this world can become part of you and part
of what you express in return.

And when you feel ready, you can open your eyes and relax.

[Being love]{.epub-i}

When we opened the Insight Meditation Society in February 1976, we
didn't have any programming scheduled for the first month. Those of us
who were there decided to do a retreat ourselves. I decided to do
intensive lovingkindness practice, which I had long wanted to do. Even
though I didn't have a teacher to guide me, I relied on my knowledge of
the structure of the practice (beginning with offering lovingkindness to
yourself, etc.) and began.

I spent the whole first week offering lovingkindness to myself, and I
just felt nothing. No bolts of lightning, no great breakthrough
moment---it felt pretty dreary. Then something happened to a friend of
ours in Boston, so several of us suddenly had to leave the retreat. I
was upstairs in one of the bathrooms, getting ready to go, when I
dropped a large jar of something on the tile floor, and the jar
shattered. To my amazement, I noticed the first thought that came to me
was [You are really a klutz, but I love you]{.epub-i}. Look at that! I
thought. You could have given me anything in the course of that week to
persuade me something was happening, and I would have said no. Yet all
along, something deep and profound was shifting.

That's how we know if the practice is working or not. Our efforts likely
won't show results in the formal period we dedicate to meditation each
day; rather, they will show in our lives, which of course is where it
counts. When we make a mistake, when we feel unseen, when we want to
celebrate our ability to care. We will see the effects when we meet a
stranger, when we face adversity. The results reveal themselves both as
a result of our dedicated practice and because lovingkindness is an
accessible tool no matter what situation we are in.

The difference between a life laced through with frustration and one
sustained by happiness depends on whether it is motivated by self-hatred
or by real love for oneself. There are several specific factors that
either limit or increase our ability to come from a genuine place of
real love for ourselves.

Kaia wrote her thoughts about this to me: "Through experiences of fear,
rejection, and pain---the experiences that for most of us are part of a
'normal' childhood and adult life---I eventually shut myself off from
that pure love, at least part of the time. I believe that for most of
us, a great deal of the time, love feels painful, vulnerable, like a
golden nugget we know is contained deep inside of us, but that we feel
compelled to guard at all costs. And we're often doing this without even
noticing it."

[]{#part0007.html}

 

[1](#part0041.html_c_ch1){.calibre2}

[THE STORIES WE TELL OURSELVES](#part0041.html_c_ch1){.calibre2}

[We tell ourselves stories in order to live.]{.epub-i}

---JOAN DIDION

[O]{.cic}[UR MINDS ARE WIRED TO]{.cotx} create order, a cohesive
narrative, and our stories are our anchors. They tell us who we are,
what matters most, what we're capable of, what our lives are all about.

Something happens to us in childhood---say, a dog bites us---and
suddenly we have a story. We become terrified of all dogs, and for years
afterward, we break into a sweat whenever a dog comes close. If we pay
attention, one day we realize we've spun a story in our minds about an
entire species based on a single incident with a single animal---and
that our story is not really true.

The tales we tell ourselves are the central themes in our psyches. If
we're the child of an emotionally needy, alcoholic parent, we might
conclude---unconsciously---that it's our job to take care of absolutely
everyone, even to our own detriment. If as adults we're diagnosed with a
serious illness, we may believe it's our fault and create a story around
that: We didn't eat right. We stayed too long in a toxic relationship.
Until we begin to question our basic assumptions about ourselves and
view them as fluid, not fixed, it's easy to repeat established patterns
and, out of habit, reenact old stories that limit our ability to live
and love ourselves with an open heart.

Fortunately, as soon as we ask whether or not a story is true in the
present moment, we empower ourselves to reframe it. We begin to notice
that nearly all of our stories can be cast in various lights, depending
on our point of view. Sometimes we may be the hero of our story; at
other times, the victim.

I think of Jonah, who was the first in his family to attend college.
Even the first step of applying was daunting, and once he was admitted,
he had to find a way to finance his education himself. That meant
juggling long shifts at work and a heavy course load at school. He
struggled to keep up in his classes. Still, as he proudly tells his
story, the obstacles he overcame were a key to his success. Jonah
graduated and got a good job, where he met his partner. A decade after
graduation, Jonah says, "Look at me now."

But Jonah might tell his story in a different way, with pain taking a
more central role. There would be more memories of lonely nights,
feelings of exclusion, worries about being an impostor. Jonah might
describe how the world was stacked against him and linger over the
people who had slighted him. It would still be a hero's story, but one
marked by frustration and bitterness.

Many of the stories we tell ourselves about love are like the painful
version of Jonah's story. We're more inclined to regard past losses with
self-blame than with compassion. And when it comes to the present, we
tend to speculate and fill in the blanks: A friend doesn't call at the
appointed hour and we're convinced he's forgotten us, when in fact he
had to take his sick child to the doctor. Our boss asks to speak to us
and we're convinced we've done something wrong, when instead we're given
a new project. Since we're not aware that we're spinning a story, these
narratives can contribute to anxiety and depression, while constricting
our hope for the future and eating away at our self-worth.

One of my students attributes his painful marriage and divorce, as well
as other "failed" relationships, to his own feelings of unworthiness and
self-blame. "I am so thin-skinned because I'm beating myself up 24-7,"
he says. "Had I been more compassionate with myself in my past
relationships, perhaps I would've had better coping mechanisms." Through
psychotherapy and meditation, this student has learned to question his
negative storytelling and tune out the constant chatter of his inner
critic.

Diane, whose partner had recently broken off their engagement,
immediately blamed herself for being "unlovable," even though she, too,
harbored serious doubts about the future of the relationship. But
instead of pausing and investigating the source of her story of
unlovability with mindfulness and self-compassion, Diane leaped to a
negative conclusion carried over from childhood.

If we heard a friend say, "I'm not worth much. I'm not interesting, I've
failed at so much, and that's why no one loves me," we would probably
leap to her defense. "But I love you," we'd insist. "Your other friends
love you, too. You're a good person." Yet so often we don't counter the
negative statements that crowd our own minds every day.

Instead, we might ask ourselves: If I look at what's happening through
the eyes of love, how would I tell this story?

TAPPING INTO BURIED NARRATIVES

[OUR SENSES ARE]{.cotx} often the gateway to our stories, triggering
memories from long ago. We catch a whiff of fresh blueberry muffins,
which reminds us of our childhood---the blueberries growing wild in our
garden when the family had a beach house. And then we're gone: we smell
the sea, taste the clams we ate sitting on high stools at the boardwalk,
and are transported back to that horrible night when Dad got drunk. The
sharp memory of that night might bring up the sad thought that Dad
probably never really loved us, followed by a leap into the present:
[Maybe I'm spoiled for love. Maybe I'll never be loved.]{.epub-i}

This process is largely unconscious. The unconscious mind is a vast
repository of experiences and associations that sorts things out much
faster than the slow-moving conscious mind, which has to work hard to
connect the dots. Moreover, the unconscious mind operates with some very
powerful biases, and tends to underscore our pain.

In some cases, the limiting stories we have woven about ourselves don't
even belong to us. Unconsciously, we may be reliving our mother's
anxiety, our father's disappointments, or the unresolved traumas
suffered by our grandparents. "Just as we inherit our eye color and
blood type, we may also inherit the residue of traumatic events that
have taken place in our family," explains therapist Mark Wolynn, author
of [It Didn't Start with You]{.epub-i}. Wolynn tells the story of a
client who suddenly became paralyzed with the fear of being "suffocated"
when she turned forty. It was only when she investigated her family
history that she discovered that a grandmother whom she'd been told had
"died young" of vague causes had actually been put to death in the gas
chamber at Auschwitz when she was forty years old.

The idea that traumatic residues---or unresolved stories---can be
inherited is groundbreaking. Research in the rapidly developing field of
epigenetics---the biological science of alterations in gene
expression---shows that traits can be transmitted from one generation to
as many as three generations of descendants. For example, a landmark
study in Sweden found that a grandparent's experience of either famine
or plenty had implications for the life span of the next
generation---and the one after that. Another study, this one conducted
by Rachel Yehuda, a professor of psychiatry and neuroscience at Mount
Sinai Hospital in New York, found that offspring of Holocaust survivors
were three times more likely to respond to a traumatic event with
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) than children whose parents did
not survive the Holocaust. What's more, Yehuda and her team found that
the children of pregnant women who were near the World Trade Center when
the buildings came down were also more prone to PTSD.

If you think you may be unconsciously living out someone else's story,
Wolynn suggests asking yourself---or family members---some key
questions. These include: Who died early? Who left? Who was abandoned or
excluded from the family? Who died in childbirth? Who committed suicide?
Who experienced a significant trauma?

Whether the stories we tell ourselves arise directly from our own life
experiences or were unconsciously inherited from previous generations,
identifying the source of our personal narratives helps us to release
its negative aspects and reframe it in ways that promote wholeness.

REWRITING OUR STORY

[AS WE CONSTRUCT]{.cotx} our identities, we tend to reinforce certain
interpretations of our experiences, such as, "No one was there for me,
so I must be unlovable." These interpretations become ingrained in our
minds and validated by the heated reactions of our bodies. And so they
begin to define us. We forget that we're constantly changing and that we
have the power to make and remake the story of who we are. But when we
do remember, the results can be dramatic and turn our lives around.

For years, Stephanie struggled with insomnia. When she was in her early
thirties, her doctor prescribed a blood-pressure-lowering medication for
her persistent migraines. The trouble was, Stephanie already had low
blood pressure, and the drug made it drop even further, making her so
anxious that she felt as if she would die if she let herself fall
asleep. Instead of identifying the real source of the problem, her
physician prescribed sleeping pills. By the time Stephanie consulted
another doctor (who discontinued the blood pressure medication
immediately), she was hooked on sleeping pills---and remained addicted
to them for the next twenty years.

"I hated myself for taking them and tried so many times to stop, but I
just couldn't," she recalls. "I truly believed that there was something
inherently wrong with me and that my body no longer had the capacity to
sleep without chemicals. The nights I tried not to take the pills, I'd
lie awake for hours, panicking, drenched in sweat, until I finally just
gave up and reached for the drug."

But two years ago, when Stephanie started reading news stories about the
dangers of sleeping pills, she became determined to stop taking them.
She began meditating more regularly and tried every imaginable herbal
remedy; still, she struggled and relapsed off and on for months. It
wasn't until she identified---and questioned---the story she'd been
telling herself about how she couldn't sleep unaided by drugs that she
successfully weaned herself off them. "When I finally saw clearly that
I'd been held captive by this story that was just a story and not the
truth, it was as if a lightbulb went on. For the first time in twenty
years, I was able to trust my ability to let go and fall asleep on my
own," she says.

Ultimately, we're the only ones who can take a familiar story, one that
is encoded in our bodies and minds, and turn it around.

Nancy Napier, a trauma therapist, talks about working with people who
have been through what she calls "shock trauma," a huge life
disruption---from dangerous situations, like a terrible car accident or
plane crash, to more everyday events, like getting laid off or a break
up in a relationship that are perceived as huge. The key piece, Napier
tells me, is that people's ordinary lives have been destabilized, and
their expectations feel like they have been ripped apart. One of the
first things she often says to her clients who have experienced trauma
is [You survived]{.epub-i}. "You'd be amazed at how many people for whom
that is a real surprise," she explains. "It's a news flash to the
nervous system and psyche."

If I were choosing captions for snapshots of my early life, they would
look like this: "Motherless child," "Abandoned," "My mentally ill
father," "Raised by first-generation immigrants," "I don't know how to
be like everyone else." Pain, upheaval, and fear brought me to seek a
new story through meditation.

One of my meditation teachers was an extraordinary Indian woman named
Dipa Ma. She became my role model of someone who endured crushing loss
and came through it with enormous love. Her whole path of meditation was
propelled by loss---first, the deaths of two of her children, then the
sudden death of her beloved husband. She was so grief-stricken that she
just gave up and went to bed, even though she still had a daughter to
raise.

One day her doctor told her, "You're going to die unless you do
something about your mental state. You should learn how to meditate."
The story is told that when she first went to practice meditation, she
was so weak that she had to crawl up the temple stairs in order to get
inside.

Eventually, Dipa Ma emerged from her grief with enormous wisdom and
compassion, and in 1972, she became one of my central teachers.

One day in 1974, I went to say good-bye to her before leaving India for
a brief trip to the United States. I was convinced I'd soon return and
spend the rest of my life in India. She took my hand and said, "Well,
when you go to America, you'll be teaching meditation."

"No, I won't," I replied. "I'm coming right back."

She said, "Yes, you will."

And I said, "No, I won't. I can't do that."

We went on this way, back and forth.

Finally, she held my gaze and said two crucial things. First, she said,
"You really understand suffering, that's why you should teach." This
remark was an essential catalyst that enabled me to reframe my story:
The years of upheaval and loss were not just something I had to get over
but a potential source of wisdom and compassion that could be used to
help me help others. My suffering might even be some kind of credential!

The second thing Dipa Ma said was this: "You can do anything you want to
do. It's your thinking that you can't do it that's stopping you." What a
different slant on my usual story of incapacity, incompleteness, and not
being enough! I carried Dipa Ma's farewell message with me back to the
States. It set the course for the rest of my life.

To say I am grateful for the things I went through in childhood is a
bridge too far for me. But I know those experiences are what allow me to
connect to people, heart to heart.

In a similar spirit, Zen teacher Roshi Joan Halifax cautions against
trying to convince ourselves to regard childhood traumas as gifts. In a
recent talk, she suggested, "Think of them as givens, not gifts." That
way there's no pretense or pressure to reimagine painful experiences. If
something is a given, we don't deny it or look the other way. We start
by acknowledging it, then see how we can have absolutely the best life
possible going forward.

TO TRULY LOVE OURSELVES

[TO TRULY LOVE]{.cotx} ourselves, we must treat our stories with
respect, but not allow them to have a stranglehold on us, so that we
free our mutable present and beckoning future from the past.

To truly love ourselves, we must open to our wholeness, rather than
clinging to the slivers of ourselves represented by old stories. Living
in a story of a limited self---to any degree---is not love.

To truly love ourselves, we must challenge our beliefs that we need to
be different or inherently better in order to be worthy of love. When we
contort ourselves, doggedly trying to find some way to become okay, our
capacity to love shrinks, and our attempts to improve ourselves fill the
space that could be filled with love.

Maybe we don't need to correct some terrible deficiency. Maybe what we
really need is to change our relationship to what is, to see who we are
with the strength of a generous spirit and a wise heart. St. Augustine
said, "If you are looking for something that is everywhere, you don't
need travel to get there; you need love."

[]{#part0008.html}

 

[2](#part0041.html_c_ch2){.calibre2}

[THE STORIES OTHERS TELL ABOUT US](#part0041.html_c_ch2){.calibre2}

[Ultimately ... it's not the stories that determine our
choices,]{.epub-i}

[but the stories that we continue to choose.]{.epub-i}

---SYLVIA BOORSTEIN

[J]{.cic}[UST AS THE STORIES WE]{.cotx} tell ourselves shape our
experiences, so do the stories others tell about us. They can come with
either a positive or a negative spin, undermine us or support us. And
sometimes they aren't even stories at all, but ideas conveyed by
nonverbal signals, such as body language or facial expressions, or even
by a single word or phrase: [shy]{.epub-i}, [withholding]{.epub-i},
[generous]{.epub-i}, [self-absorbed]{.epub-i}. It's a gift when these
stories lift us up. They remind us that we matter, and they reinforce
real love for ourselves.

For Melody, the reminder came from a security guard at her high school.
Melody had been fighting with her mother, who was on her back because
her grades had been falling, and when Melody ended some old friendships
to join a rougher crowd, it created even more friction between them. The
security guard noticed Melody with her new friends while patrolling the
edge of campus where they hung out. One day Melody was walking back to
class when he quickened his steps to catch up with her.
"[Mija]{.epub-i}," he said, "don't you know you're better than that?"

This was pretty much what her mother had been trying to tell her, but
her cutting, accusatory tone caused her message to fall into the
widening chasm between them. But the security guard's voice was caring,
and his words stayed with Melody all that day. Did she want to argue
with the idea that she was better? No. In fact, before the guard spoke
up, she'd been feeling that no one really saw her---how good she was and
how hard she was trying---so why bother anymore? When the security guard
showed her that people did see and expect good things from her, she was
lifted up. Not long after, Melody pulled away from the rough crowd.

There are so many different ways we can interpret our experiences, based
on the cues we internalize from others. Gus was the middle of five
brothers and, almost from birth, seemed to have been born in the wrong
place. His Montana family loved the outdoors, camping, hunting, and
fishing. Gus loved reading and music and hated hiking and roughhousing.
As the boys grew older, Gus was the odd kid out, and he could have had a
very lonely childhood. But his uncle Don saw him clearly and admired the
boy's sensitivity. If he heard someone put Gus down, Uncle Don would
intervene: "Don't be so hard on Gus. Gus has a gift." The family came to
view Gus as someone unique who should be celebrated for his difference,
and Gus grew up seeing himself that way, too.

When our loved ones mirror our goodness and strengths, and their stories
cast us in a positive light, we naturally feel more love for ourselves.

THE WEB OF FAMILY

[FAMILIES OFTEN ASSIGN]{.cotx} us roles that shape our stories. We may
not even remember how we acquired these labels or recall if we chose
them for ourselves. And if you have had one bestowed on you, you know
that even positive labels can become confining. Someone who has always
been "the responsible one" can find herself in deep internal conflict
when, on a particular occasion, she doesn't feel like being so
responsible. Or "the funny one" who's having a bad day may feel he's
letting humanity down because he's not up to fulfilling his role.

My friend Billie talks about the narrative she absorbed as she was
growing up: "What is [wrong]{.epub-i} with you?" her father often asked.
Although Billie's home provided the opportunity for "a lot of wonderful
disclosure," she describes it as a place where "a lot of bullying banter
took place, as well." As a result, Billie developed her own brand of
self-ridicule. She now refers to her dad's characteristic question
("What's wrong with you?") as her "first heartbreak, followed by deeper
blows and losses" throughout her teens and young adulthood.

After internalizing this negative self-image, Billie resorted to
substance abuse to relieve her pain. It was only after many years that
she joined a recovery program where she found a new community---one that
told a very different story about her. "One fortunate day, in my
thirty-second year on earth, providence blew a blessing all the way
across the universe, and it landed squarely on me," she recalls. "I fell
in with some people who had found a better way to live; a community of
recovering addicts who had experiences that reflected my own. The value
of them sitting with me, day after day, was without parallel. They
reached out, reached in, and helped me heal. They paid quiet, dedicated
attention to me, and that taught me to pay the same kind of attention to
myself."

In the group, Billie was a person with innate value, someone who could
help others. She found that this new story helped strengthen her growing
appreciation for herself. As with any new habit, adopting a revised view
of oneself can be difficult and takes practice. But by committing to the
group and the day in, day out work of recovery, Billie says, "I learned
tenderness toward myself and was able to reach out tenderly to others
who were suffering. I have been able to find contentment and gratitude
in many things and for many years now."

Sometimes the story a family member tells about us reflects only a
single aspect of our character, yet unconsciously, we embrace it as the
whole truth. Kathy's mother started calling her a "tough old broad" when
she was a teenager. It was true that the circumstances of their life
together had been tough and that Kathy had responded with grit and
discipline beyond her years. But the label always felt like an insult to
Kathy---a limitation, not a compliment. How could she allow herself to
be vulnerable or tender? How could she love herself? Who would want to
love a "tough old broad"?

Yet there was another, equally true story that I could tell about
Kathy's vulnerability and empathy. A single oft-repeated phrase ("tough
old broad") had led Kathy to define herself with---or defend herself
against---a very limited set of characteristics. Her identity had
solidified around that story, even though the world did not always call
on her to be tough---and even though she in fact did not respond to all
situations with toughness.

At one time in Kathy's life, being a young "tough old broad" had been a
brilliant adaptive mechanism, but it wasn't a healthy way for her to see
herself forever. That's why we must repeatedly test the limits of our
story, to prevent it from becoming solid, to create some give, some
stretch, some room for revision. When our narrative is flexible, each
and every moment offers a fresh opportunity to welcome all aspects of
our being. Kathy came to appreciate that she had been tough when
necessary---and she could be tough again if it was required---but that
toughness was not the whole of her.

THE JUDGMENT OF FRIENDS

[BEN TELLS THE]{.cotx} story of a second-grade playdate that shattered
his confidence and changed his narrative about his family. "At recess, I
was friendly with a kid named Justin, so my mother suggested inviting
him over one day after school," Ben recounts. "I didn't know much about
his family background---when you're seven, you don't really pay
attention to such things. But it turned out that Justin came from a very
wealthy family and lived in a big house in a fancy neighborhood. The day
he came over, he just stood outside our modest rented brick duplex and
said, with a look of horror on his face, 'Ugh, [this]{.epub-i} is where
you live?'

"I'll never forget it," Ben says now. "I was devastated. Until that
moment, I believed my home and family were perfect. We were happy. We
had plenty of food on the table. My father worked for the post office,
and my mother taught kindergarten. But after Justin's remark, doubt and
shame crept in. I felt as if there was something fundamentally wrong
with us, especially me, which took years to get over."

When we believe a wounding story, our whole world is diminished. It's as
though someone suddenly turns off all the lights, and we lose faith in
our dreams, as well as in our capacity to love and be loved. If we
accept it as true, that one story can plant seeds of jealousy,
resentment, anxiety, and depression that we struggle with for years to
come.

Sometimes, though, the perspective of a friend can help us see our
behavior more clearly and restores our foundering faith in ourselves.
One of my students, Julia, feels profound gratitude for her friend's
caring but honest assessment of Julia's relationships with men.

"One of my female friends has been honest with me in how she perceives I
behave romantically," Julia explains. "She wants me to treat myself
better. Seeing her insight and pain on my behalf has pushed me to regard
myself differently. She's not trying to guilt-trip me. She just wants me
to care for myself in the way she thinks I deserve. Seeing how deeply
she loves me and wants to protect me makes me want to love and protect
myself more."

Taking in another's criticism, even when it's offered out of love,
requires courage. Had Julia reacted to her friend's comments
defensively, not only would the friendship have likely suffered, she
might have continued to relate to men in ways that were disrespectful to
herself.

Today, with social media as a primary tool of communication, there's
more opportunity than ever before to learn what others think of us.
Sometimes what we hear is positive and affirming, but too often it's
not. Internet bullying and smear campaigns spread like wildfire and can
do irreparable harm: 52 percent of kids report having been bullied
online, while about 20 percent of those who've been targeted contemplate
suicide, and one in ten attempt it. Given the proliferation of cell
phones and social media usage among young people (the average age for
obtaining a mobile phone is between eleven and twelve), the viral spread
of damaging rumors and accusations has become a disturbing social
phenomenon. And of course many adults are flamed and shamed, too.

If we truly love ourselves, do we avoid sharing anything that is deeply
personal, or do we publicly stand up for who we are and what we believe?
What approach best reflects your care and concern for yourself?

SOCIETY'S CHILDREN

[OUR RACE, RELIGION,]{.cotx} social class, ethnicity, or gender and
sexual identity are all constructs that imply different things about us
to others, depending on their conditioning. That's why it's so
meaningful---and essential for the growth of our society---when
limiting, negative stories undergo revision on a mass scale.

Sometimes a dramatic shift in a society's projections can confer a sense
of legitimacy and belonging that once seemed unimaginable. Such was the
case with the Supreme Court's landmark 2015 ruling on same-sex marriage,
which has liberated gay men and women in ways that far surpass the
freedom to walk down the aisle and legally say "I do." [New York
Times]{.epub-i} columnist Frank Bruni movingly described his own
response, at age fifty, to the ruling:

Following a few extraordinary years during which one state after another
legalized same-sex marriage, the Supreme Court rules that all states
must do so, that the Constitution demands it, that it's a matter of
"equal dignity in the eyes of the law," as Justice Anthony Kennedy
writes.

    I can speak for a 50-year-old man who expected this to happen but
still can't quite believe it, because it seemed impossible when he was
young, because it seemed implausible even when he was a bit older, and
because everything is different now, or will be....

    And that's because the Supreme Court's decision wasn't simply about
weddings. It was about worth. From the highest of this nation's perches,
in the most authoritative of this nation's voices, a majority of
justices told a minority of Americans that they're normal and that they
belong---fully, joyously and with cake.

Around the same time that the Supreme Court issued its ruling, Paul
Brandeis Raushenbush, a gay clergyman who had already been with his
partner for thirteen years and married for almost two, commented on the
ambivalence of religious authorities who had inched toward support, only
to later withdraw it. "The idea that some random people are debating my
life and my love now seems strange and insulting," he wrote in [The
Huffington Post]{.epub-i}. "While I will continue to pay professional
attention to these debates, as a member of the media and a person who
cares about justice for all people, on a personal level I couldn't give
a shit what these people think about my life. I'm not going to give them
that power ... I know I was beautifully made by God and that my
relationship ... is blessed."

Still, whether gay marriage is denounced by religious leaders or upheld
by the Supreme Court, the conversation never would have taken place
without decades of prior struggle by members of the LGBT
community---often at great risk to their safety---to openly identify as
gay. Only then could the issue of marriage equality be put forth.

For any marginalized group to change the story that society tells about
them takes courage and perseverance. I've seen low-wage workers in the
United States bravely face the possibility of losing the only jobs they
have (however poorly compensated), standing up to their bosses and
telling them, "We're human beings with innate worth who deserve to be
treated as such and paid a living wage." For many of these workers, it
has been both frightening and empowering to take action.

Sometimes the stories we internalize originate not just in our family,
our community, or the wider social sphere but a combination of all
three. When the messages are negative, they can result in an emotional
pileup of pain and suffering that requires time, awareness, and an
intentional practice of self-love to disentangle.

Trudy Mitchell-Gilkey, an African American Buddhist lay disciple and
mindfulness-based psychotherapist in Takoma Park, Maryland, grew up the
youngest of thirteen children in a relatively poor household in rural
Arkansas. Early in life, Trudy says she absorbed the message from her
early childhood suffering: "I had little worth compared to those from
better homes and gardens," she explains. Although within her family
Trudy says she felt plenty invisible at times, when she entered first
grade at her town's newly integrated elementary school, she was too
visible---in a bad way. Trudy suffered from blatant discrimination and
physical assault, and after being cast in a role in the school play, she
was told she wouldn't be allowed to participate. She knew it was because
she was black. "The first story I was told when I ventured out into the
world was, 'You're not really a whole person,'" she reflects.

It wasn't until she got an A[+]{.span-symbols-sym} on a writing
assignment in tenth grade that she caught a glimpse of her inherent
worth. "My teacher wrote in bright red pen, 'I love the way you write!'"
Trudy recalls. "That teacher was the first white person who gave me a
lasting, positive reflection of myself, and those six words changed the
course of my life." Yet she still needed to qualify her experience:
"When you've had so much hatred festering in your heart from
adventitious forces, it takes more than one person saying you matter to
clear up all the darkness inside."

Trudy had other important mentors along the way, including a friend from
church who helped her see that she "could confront all this suffering
and get beyond it. Talking to her blew open the door," Trudy says, "and
I saw that I had the capacity to be somewhat present with suffering---my
own and the suffering of others---and to transform it." She earned a
master's degree in social work a few years later and, soon after, began
practicing psychotherapy.

Still, early in her psychotherapy career and without a refuge that was
yet secure, one year, in the throes of loss and grief, she felt
suicidal. In a moment of grace, when she was sitting in her car in a
garage with the motor running, she received a phone call from a caring
therapist. Trudy turned off the engine so she could hear what the woman
had to say. Later on, another moment of grace occurred when Trudy was
writing a suicide note. She says, "I had given myself about thirty days
off work to finish the suicide note, which somehow went from lines to
paragraphs to chapters in a book that I decided I needed to write in
order to adequately explain my death to my very young daughter. Oddly
enough, by the time I had finished the first draft, I felt a deep sense
of peace and calm, as if my life suddenly had become just a little more
workable. I was fortunate that a good friend had introduced me to yoga,
and while in the corpse pose, I had felt a similar sense of peace and
calm unlike I'd ever experienced before in this life. And so, having
gone from feeling suicidal to writing the suicide note that saved my
life, I was ready to find a way to live again."

Seeking the same sense of peace she'd felt during yoga, Trudy found a
meditation class and began practicing in earnest. "Going to the class is
what lit the match. The Buddha's teachings were the fuel," she says. In
time, a teacher---Tara Brach---invited Trudy to train to become a
meditation teacher herself.

She adds that her sense of "little worth" was further transformed
through the skillful means of working with therapy clients. "By seeing
the universal suffering in others and reaching in deep to help them love
themselves better, I was healed by the same meditation on lovingkindness
that I was offering them."

It's not easy to know who we are underneath the stories others tell
about us and the labels society heaps upon us. To do so implies a
willingness to take risks, to step into the unknown and choose courage
over fear. When we do, as Trudy discovered, a door blows wide open. We
can free ourselves from the old stories that have reduced us and allow
real love for ourselves to blossom.

REFLECTION

[TRY RETELLING YOUR]{.cotx} story as a hero's journey, where you
survived hard times and failures to become the stronger and wiser person
you are now. Try telling it as a series of random events over which you
had no control. Then rewrite the story. How did your choices shape who
you are now?

Are you living someone else's story? What would happen if you declared
independence? Are you fighting someone else's fight? Does loyalty to
that person keep you from choosing happiness now?

Does the situation bring up parts of your story? Does your story help
you in the present, or does it make things harder?

[]{#part0009.html}

 

[3](#part0041.html_c_ch3){.calibre2}

[WELCOMING OUR EMOTIONS](#part0041.html_c_ch3){.calibre2}

[R]{.cic}[EAL LOVE FOR OURSELVES BY]{.cotx} definition includes every
aspect of our lives---the good, the bad, the difficult, the challenging
past, the uncertain future, as well as all the shameful, upsetting
experiences and encounters we'd just as soon forget. This doesn't mean
we have to celebrate everything that's ever happened to us or write
thank-you notes to people who have hurt us. But, like it or not, the
emotional residue of our experiences is part of who we are. If we resist
any aspect of it, we feel like impostors, unreal and split off from
ourselves.

If we neglect our authentic selves, we risk being dominated by others,
instead of being in loving relationships with them. But when we open our
hearts to the breadth of our experiences, we learn to tune into our
needs, unique perceptions, thoughts, and feelings in the present moment,
without being trapped by judgments based on the expectations of others.
That is how we eventually sense our own worthiness.

This kind of integration arises from intimacy with our emotions and our
bodies, as well as with our thoughts. It arises from holding all that we
know and want and fear and feel in a space of awareness and
self-compassion. If we reject or resent our feelings, we won't have
access to that kind of intimacy and integration. And if we define
ourselves by each of the ever-changing feelings that cascade through us,
how will we ever feel at home in our own bodies and minds?

When I first began my meditation practice, I was only eighteen years
old, and although I knew I was deeply unhappy, I wasn't aware of the
separate threads of grief, anger, and fear at play inside me. Then,
through meditation, I began to look within more clearly and to detect
the various components of my sorrow. What I saw unsettled me so much
that at one point I marched up to my teacher, S. N. Goenka, and said
accusingly, "I never used to be an angry person before I began
meditating!"

Of course I was hugely angry; my mother had died, I barely knew my
father, I felt wrenchingly abandoned. Meditation had allowed me to
uncover the strands of that pain. When I blamed Mr. Goenka and
meditation itself as the causes of my pain, he simply laughed---then
reminded me of the tools I now had to deal with the difficult feelings I
used to keep hidden, even from myself. I could begin to forge a new
relationship with my emotions---to find the middle place between denying
them and being overwhelmed by them.

TAKING REFUGE INSIDE

[MINDFULNESS MEDITATION CAN]{.cotx} be a refuge, but it is not a
practice in which real life is ever excluded. The strength of
mindfulness is that it enables us to hold difficult thoughts and
feelings in a different way---with awareness, balance, and love. This,
rather than trying to annihilate painful feelings or eradicate negative
patterns of thinking, is what heals us. Actress Daphne Zuniga came to a
realization similar to mine during a ten-day silent retreat.

Before arriving at the retreat center, Daphne had been meditating on her
own and experiencing, in her words, "a very heightened state of
happiness and openheartedness." But by day four, she recalls:

"I was sure something was going wrong. Reeling with insecurity and
loneliness, I thought maybe our esteemed teachers were not so talented.
I remember sitting in the room where we put on our shoes; jackets hung
on the walls, shoes in cubbies below, water bottles and hat-filled
shelves above. All of a sudden, I had a flashback to being a little girl
in elementary school, at those same cubbies, and I was overwhelmed with
shame. My parents had divorced when I was six, so Dad left, and it made
sense to me then that I was not good enough to have both a mommy and a
daddy, because there were many things wrong with me.

"Tears came to my eyes. My body felt just like it did back then, a rock
of immovable shame in my stomach. I looked around with my head lowered
at people's feet, legs, and jackets. I wondered if they felt what I was
feeling? Then I thought, what if all along it was true? I wasn't worthy
of what others had. What if I will always be alone because I'm not
worthy of more? I left the meditation hall feeling the dread that the
retreat couldn't help me with my faulty-at-the-core self.

"I went to bed crying, facing the wall with the blanket pulled around me
tightly, the way I had in my bunk bed when my mom and dad were fighting
in the other room."

The next day, Daphne asked to see me. "How are you?" I asked. Daphne was
only too ready to let me hear it!

"I have never been so lonely in my life! This is crazy. All these
loving, trusting people around me, we all came here trusting you, and I
just keep having painful negative feelings about myself! I am a happy
person! Before I came here, I was waking up smiling! I was in a state of
real joy and love for everyone." She was crying now, letting it all pour
out of her. "I mean, you can't just take all these people and make us
feel this way. It really hurts."

I gently pushed the box of Kleenex across the table toward her. "You're
right on course," I said.

Daphne was incredulous. "What do you mean? I was meditating every day
and feeling this flow of ecstasy, like I've never felt before. I had so
much love for all of life."

So I told her, "If you think of meditation practice as building a house,
you began in the attic. Now you're starting at the foundation."

Daphne wasn't too sure, but I encouraged her to just keep going.

She stayed at the retreat. She stayed with the feelings and kept
bringing her attention back to her breathing and to her feet as she
walked, one step in front of the other. Daphne told me, "And I began to
notice something remarkable. The quality with which I noticed my
thoughts and feelings arise and disappear became very gentle and
compassionate, like a mother watching her beloved child. A mother
interested in each barely perceivable breath, a mother who wasn't going
anywhere. Apparently, I [was]{.epub-i} enough, I was worthy of attention
by just breathing. That presence became stronger as the loneliness
faded. Even when memories or sensations of a familiar loneliness would
come, they were just memories. I lovingly noticed them come, then pass.

"[I'm going to protect you, precious one]{.epub-i}, I thought. [I'm
going to protect you]{.epub-i}."

OPENING THE DOOR TO FEELINGS

[IF WE TRY]{.cotx} to block off or deny a big part of what we
experience, our wakeful, connected relationship to ourselves gets
sharply whittled down. How then can we possibly feel alive?

Awareness and love are qualities we can rely on moment to moment. They
help us find ourselves when we've lost our way. They protect us during
whatever storms or blowouts we undergo. And they help us let go of our
preconceived notions of what we should feel or how life should be at any
given time.

In June 2015, shortly after the massacre of African American churchgoers
in Charleston, South Carolina, I co-led a retreat for people of color.
One evening in a question-and-answer session, a woman named Erika spoke
to the group about her experience during meditation. "I imagined I was
having a dinner party and decided to invite all the different parts of
myself that I usually try to avoid," she said. "It was hard, but I just
had to let profound sadness sit at that table and fully acknowledge it
was there, not just try to get on with my life." As she spoke, a chorus
of soft weeping rippled through the meditation hall.

When, like Erika, we welcome every emotion with mindfulness, we can live
with our feelings as they move through us, without getting defined by
them.

Interestingly, a recent study underscores the importance of letting
ourselves feel [all]{.epub-i} of our emotions, including those we
usually consider "negative," such as anger and sadness. Using the
biodiversity of ecosystems in the natural world as a model, the
researchers found evidence for the notion that
[emodiversity]{.epub-i}---their word for the whole spectrum of human
emotions---plays a key role in our overall health and well-being.

This idea was beautifully rendered in the Pixar animated film [Inside
Out]{.epub-i}, in which the emotions of an eleven-year-old girl named
Riley are personified by avatars who live in the girl's mind and reflect
her moods. They are: Joy, Fear, Anger, Disgust, and Sadness. At the
start of the movie, Joy dominates the action. But when Riley's family
moves across the country and she must adapt to a new school, as well as
the loss of her best friend, the other emotions start to jockey for
power, especially Sadness. It isn't until Riley allows Sadness---who
trudges around in a blue dress---a chance to express herself that she
begins to heal and enjoy the promise of her new life.

Many years ago, during an intensive retreat at the Insight Meditation
Society (IMS), I had my own experience of waking up to the importance of
welcoming all emotions as they arise. A few months earlier, a close
friend had committed suicide, and I was filled with sadness and grief.
Still, I was reluctant to let myself experience the full force of my
feelings or share them with the Burmese monk leading the retreat,
Sayadaw U Pandita. In my mind, I saw him as an ascetic who had left the
world of messy emotions behind. I believed I should be stoic, too, the
way I imagined him to be, and tried to refrain from feeling the depth of
my sorrow.

One day during an interview, after I shyly told him about my sadness,
Sayadaw U Pandita asked me if I'd been crying.

I tried to contour my response to what I thought he'd want to hear.
"Just a little bit," I said.

His reply shocked me: "Every time you cry, you should cry your heart
out. That way you'll get the best release."

After that conversation, I let myself cry fully. Eventually, the sadness
moved through me. Once I allowed it in, I was no longer held captive by
it.

HEALING IS AN INSIDE JOB

[WHEN EMOTIONS ARE]{.cotx} long held and extremely complex, it sometimes
takes years for them to enter fully into awareness. Until then, they
cannot be released and healed.

This was true for my friend Barbara Graham, whose memoir, [Camp
Paradox]{.epub-i}, describes coming to terms with an experience that had
taken place decades earlier.

"It took me thirty years to understand that what took place between my
camp counselor and me the summer I was fourteen---and she was
twenty-eight---was sexual abuse. It took another decade for me to
forgive her for touching me and---hardest of all---to stop blaming
myself," Barbara told me.

"When at last I understood what had happened, I was stricken by a grief
that had been there all along but which I never knew I carried," she
added. "I wept uncontrollably. After a time, grief gave way to rage that
had also gone undetected. Before then, I had felt only great shame,
believing there was something intrinsically wrong with me. The shame was
accompanied by a kind of numbness whenever I thought about that summer
at camp, but mostly I tried not to think about it.

"It's clear to me now that both the grief and the rage were necessary. I
needed to experience the internal hurricane that had been bound up
inside me for so long."

As Barbara later discovered, experiencing the raw power of her emotions
was a critical step toward realizing love for herself. Sometimes, we
find that we must go further---by speaking the truth not only to
ourselves but to others, as well. We may feel the need to take action,
pursue justice, or seek to make amends of some kind. But even when
opening to our emotions is just the first step, it is the foundation of
real love and happiness.

CHAPTER 3 PRACTICES

[RAIN: An exercise for welcoming your emotions]{.epub-i}

Most people who come to meditation are looking for respite from what is
sometimes called the "monkey mind"---the perpetual, hyperactive (and
often self-destructive) whirl of thoughts and feelings everyone
undergoes. But the truth is that meditation does not eradicate mental
and emotional turmoil. Rather, it cultivates the space and gentleness
that allow us intimacy with our experiences so that we can relate quite
differently to our cascade of emotions and thoughts. That different
relationship is where freedom lies.

RAIN is an acronym for a practice specifically geared to ease emotional
confusion and suffering. When a negative or thorny feeling comes up, we
pause, remember the four steps cued by the letters, and begin to pay
attention in a new way.

[R: RECOGNIZE.]{.span-symbols-sym} It is impossible to deal with an
emotion---to be resilient in the face of difficulty---unless we
acknowledge that we're experiencing it. So the first step is simply to
notice what is coming up. Suppose you've had a conversation with a
friend that leaves you feeling queasy or agitated. You don't try to push
away or ignore your discomfort. Instead, you look more closely.
[Oh]{.epub-i}, you might say to yourself, [this feels like
anger]{.epub-i}. Then this might be followed quickly by another thought:
[And I notice I am judging myself for being angry.]{.epub-i}

[A: ACKNOWLEDGE.]{.span-symbols-sym} The second step is an extension of
the first---you accept the feeling and allow it to be there. Put another
way, you give yourself permission to feel it. You remind yourself that
you don't have the power to successfully declare, "I shouldn't have such
hateful feelings about a friend," or "I've got to be less sensitive."
Sometimes I ask students to imagine each thought and emotion as a
visitor knocking at the door of their house. The thoughts don't live
there; you can greet them, acknowledge them, and watch them go. Rather
than trying to dismiss anger and self-judgment as "bad" or "wrong,"
simply rename them as "painful." This is the entry into
self-compassion---you can see your thoughts and emotions arise and
create space for them even if they are uncomfortable. You don't take
hold of your anger and fixate on it, nor do you treat it as an enemy to
be suppressed. It can simply be.

[I: INVESTIGATE.]{.span-symbols-sym} Now you begin to ask questions and
explore your emotions with a sense of openness and curiosity. This feels
quite different from when we are fueled by obsessiveness or by a desire
for answers or blame. When we're caught up in a reaction, it's easy to
fixate on the trigger and say to ourselves, "I'm so mad at so-and-so
that I'm going to tell everyone what he did and destroy him!" rather
than examining the emotion itself. There is so much freedom in allowing
ourselves to cultivate curiosity and move closer to a feeling, rather
than away from it. We might explore how the feeling manifests itself in
our bodies and also look at what the feeling contains. Many strong
emotions are actually intricate tapestries woven of various strands.
Anger, for example, commonly includes moments of sadness, helplessness,
and fear. As we get closer to it, an uncomfortable emotion becomes less
opaque and solid. We focus less on labeling the discomfort and more on
gaining insight. Again, we do not wallow, nor do we repress. Remember
that progress doesn't mean that the negative emotions don't come up.
It's that instead of feeling hard as steel, they become gauzy,
transparent, and available for investigation.

[N: NON-IDENTIFY.]{.span-symbols-sym} In the final step of RAIN, we
consciously avoid being defined by (identified with) a particular
feeling, even as we may engage with it. Feeling angry with a particular
person, in a particular conversation, about a particular situation is
very different from telling yourself, "I am an angry person and always
will be." You permit yourself to see your own anger, your own fear, your
own resentment---whatever is there---and instead of spiraling down into
judgment ("I'm such a terrible person"), you make a gentle observation,
something like, "Oh. This is a state of suffering." This opens the door
to a compassionate relationship with yourself, which is the real
foundation of a compassionate relationship with others.

We cannot will what thoughts and feelings arise in us. But we
[can]{.epub-i} recognize them as they are---sometimes recurring,
sometimes frustrating, sometimes filled with fantasy, many times
painful, always changing. By allowing ourselves this simple recognition,
we begin to accept that we will never be able to control our
experiences, but that we can transform our relationship to them. This
changes everything.

[]{#part0010.html}

 

[4](#part0041.html_c_ch4){.calibre2}

[MEETING THE INNER CRITIC](#part0041.html_c_ch4){.calibre2}

[A]{.cic}[N ARTIST NAMED JOSEPHINE DESCRIBED]{.cotx} a recent rendezvous
with her inner critic this way: "Some mornings when I look in the
mirror, I feel my inner critic standing on my shoulder pointing out my
many physical flaws and how poorly I am aging. And my appearance is just
the starting point. I picture her holding a great long list written in
thick calligraphy on ancient parchment, a list so comprehensive that it
includes my moral lapses, blown opportunities, weaknesses, and
embarrassing moments stretching back to grade school. The recitation of
flaws is an oral tradition in my family, passed down across the
generations like family heirlooms."

The inner voices that tell us, "You aren't good enough," are a huge
obstacle to connecting fully to ourselves and feeling fully loved. We
may sometimes argue with those inner voices, but when we feel
disconnected from ourselves or suffering from loneliness, it's easy to
fall prey to them. What's more, resisting their hurtful messages can be
especially challenging in a culture that emphasizes individualism,
ambition, competition, striving, greed, and perfectionism. But
regardless of whether we believe or resist these messages, our in-house
critic can keep us imprisoned by our own limiting thoughts.

Josephine hasn't banished her inner critic, but practicing mindfulness
has loosened the critic's hold on her. Mindfulness has opened up the
space between her authentic self and her critic, enabling her to give
less credit to the critic's incessant negativity. Like Josephine, we can
change our relationship to our experiences and feelings simply by
becoming aware of them. We can begin to let go.

Lilah likes to think of working with the critic as a kind of ongoing
experiment. "When I meditate regularly," she says, "I'm better at
noticing when self-deprecating or critical thoughts come. Then I ask
myself, 'Would I talk like that to a friend?' Or, 'What would I say if a
friend was being so self-critical?' Or, 'How would I treat a younger
version of myself?'" In each case, Lilah's investigation of her habitual
negative thinking helps her to identify and disengage from her inner
critic.

RECOGNIZING THE CRITIC

[THIS PRACTICE IS]{.cotx} really about communicating with the inner
critic, and, as for Lilah, the first step is to catch that voice when it
appears. We notice that the critic lives in a world of absolutes, with
little room for nuance or gray areas. Her favorite words are
[should]{.epub-i}, [always]{.epub-i}, and [never]{.epub-i}, and blame is
her operating system. "You've blown it, you [always]{.epub-i} do." "You
[should]{.epub-i} just give up." "You're so different, no one will
[ever]{.epub-i} love you." "You're so flawed, you'll [never]{.epub-i} be
able to help yourself, let alone anybody else." Instead of creating a
wide and open space for embracing our lives, the inner critic causes us
to question our worth and collapse in on ourselves.

For some, the inner critic is a specific voice from the past---your
mother, your aunt, a child, the boss who fired you. My friend Joseph
Goldstein still remembers the first-grade teacher who gave him a big red
F in cutting and pasting. (This was in the days when you mixed flour and
water to make paste, and Joseph's work was apparently very messy.)

A friend or stranger may make an offhand remark that we take so deeply
into our bodies and minds that they become part of our identities. And
if, as in Josephine's case, the critical voices have been passed down
"like family heirlooms," the identification goes even deeper. I have a
friend who hears the scornful voice of her long-dead mother---a woman
who revered thinness above all human attributes---when she gains even a
few pounds. Paradoxically, at times, such critical voices may even
comfort us by linking us to our past and to the most important people in
our lives. The judgments of those we loved or admired are part of our
story, and, if we don't spot them when they arise, they become the
judgments we project on others, as well as ourselves.

Mindfulness helps us see the addictive aspect of self-criticism---a
repetitive cycle of flaying ourselves again and again, feeling the pain
anew. The inner critic may become a kind of companion in our suffering
and isolation. As long as we judge ourselves harshly, it can feel as if
we're making progress against our many flaws. But in reality, we're only
reinforcing our sense of unworthiness.

Yet when we start to pay attention, we notice how quickly the critic
jumps in, even when something good happens. If people befriend us, our
critic may whisper that if they only knew how insecure and defective we
are, they wouldn't stick around for long. Or say you've just run a
marathon. Are you celebrating the fact that you trained, ran, and
finished? Or are you upbraiding yourself for being the last person to
cross the finish line?

One student told me that shortly after the birth of her second child she
went into a tailspin of self-judgment because her house was messy and
she wasn't keeping up her appearance or getting to the ironing. The
noise of her self-abuse was so loud that it was more than a week before
she realized she was comparing herself to her mother, a woman who always
looked put together and kept a spotless home despite having two
children---but she also happened to have a housekeeper who came in every
day. Comparison is one of the critic's favorite weapons. Luckily,
mindfulness is so much wiser and more robust than our inner critic.

THE POWER OF STARTING OVER

[STILL, WHILE UNDER]{.cotx} the tyranny of the critic, we believe that
self-love depends on constant striving, success, and the love and
admiration of others. In other words, we'll be lovable only when we get
that promotion, master public speaking, drop fifteen pounds, and never
lose our temper, exhibit fear, or cry in front of our children.

Burdened by such impossible standards, learning to treat ourselves
lovingly may at first feel like a dangerous experiment. Students ask me,
"If I constantly practice self-acceptance, aren't I just allowing myself
to be lazy?" The key here is to recognize the difference between
self-preoccupation and love. Often when we believe we are practicing
self-control or self-discipline, we're actually confining ourselves
inside an overly analytical, self-conscious mental chamber. This
precludes us from giving and receiving love both from others and
ourselves.

Though it may seem productive to cling to the voice of the inner critic
in a culture that extols self-discipline and control, it turns out that
the reverse is true. Studies show that just as stress causes our
cortisol levels to rise, catalyzing our fight-or-flight response,
self-criticism initially can make us feel revved up and motivated. But
we're not energized sustainably, not connected to our creativity and
self-trust. Over time, the critic's voice saps our energy, leaving us
depleted, frozen, and afraid.

I remember a daylong class on lovingkindness I taught shortly after the
recession hit in 2008. Many of the students attending had lost their
jobs, and their worlds had been shattered. But it was hard for them to
see this as anything but a personal defeat brought on by some failing of
their own. One man's sense of humiliation was so overwhelming that it
was as if there was no such thing as a worldwide recession.

This is not to say that he, or any of us, could not learn or do things
differently. But self-blame and humiliation lead to passivity, not
intelligent awareness and resolve. Taking responsibility for ourselves
doesn't mean ignoring the circumstances of our lives. Instead, it
inspires us to recognize a situation for what it is, then plot a new
course of action.

The highly competitive world of sports models the difference between
punishing blame and the wise use of energy. Although many coaches have
famously berated their players to get them to perform, that approach
simply doesn't work: in his book, [The Mindful Athlete]{.epub-i},
mindfulness teacher George Mumford writes, "I came to realize that you
couldn't solve problems with the same consciousness that you created
them ... It's only in changing your consciousness that you can solve
problems and transform your game, whatever it is and wherever you're
playing it." Mumford has taught mindfulness to the championship Chicago
Bulls and Los Angeles Lakers, and now teaches the New York Knicks in
addition to individual athletes. He recalls a golfer who "would lose it
every time he made a mistake, his performance going from bad to worse
because of his own internal negative self-talk." Fortunately,
mindfulness taught him to relax on and off the golf course.

Mindfulness allows us to shift the angle on our story and to remember
that we have the capacity to learn and change in ways that are
productive, not self-defeating.

MANAGING YOUR INNER CRITIC

[WHEN I TALK]{.cotx} about the inner critic, people often say their goal
is to silence it or knock it out of their heads. Although this is
natural, it's not the most realistic or skillful approach. It sounds so
violent, as if the only way to handle criticism is to tape the critic's
mouth shut or banish him or her to solitary confinement. Yet when we
direct a lot of hostile energy toward the inner critic, we enter into a
losing battle.

My colleague Mark Coleman, meditation teacher and author of the book
[Make Peace with Your Mind]{.epub-i}, recounts, "Sometimes in my work
with meditation students I find they need remarkably little nudging to
make a radical shift in relation to their critic. One student comes to
mind, a successful attorney in her forties. She was in a healthy
relationship, financially stable, and living a relatively balanced and
engaged life. Yet she felt deeply troubled. She lived with the nagging
feeling of dissatisfaction, as if she wasn't doing enough, trying
enough, succeeding enough.

"As the weeks went by, it became clear that she'd never really
identified the fact that there was an insistent critical voice in her
head. Although she was flourishing in her personal and work life, she
was still living with an unacknowledged inner judge. No wonder something
was casting a gray cloud over all her achievements! When I brought this
to her attention, it was as if a lightbulb had suddenly switched on. The
woman behind the curtain was revealed and she realized she could bring
discernment to her constant inner criticism, and not be so caught in it.
The voice had become so familiar it was like white noise, except that
drone had a detrimental impact on her well-being.

"I suggested she could use her mindfulness training to identify the
critic and see her remarks for what they were: just thoughts,
unconnected to the reality of her life. Several months later, she
reported that the critic still twittered away at times, but the volume
was much lower, and she had ceased to care about what he had to say. She
had found some genuine freedom and was able to enjoy the blessings in
her life.

"When students ask me how to handle their inner critic, I often suggest,
'Make her a nice cup of tea and suggest she take a nap. She's tired, and
it's been a long day. Going over and over those negative thoughts must
be exhausting. She's beginning to repeat herself, a sure sign she needs
a rest.'"

This gentle approach to the critic immediately diminishes her power.
Does this mean that you are going to forever silence your negative
thoughts? No, that's not likely. But you are going to be able to deal
with them differently.

When you lull the inner critic into taking a nap, you're in charge---not
her. You might still feel some anxiety arising and be stung by her
critical voice, but you won't be tensing for a fight. You will
strengthen your trust that you can learn from your mistakes and start
over. This helps to convey a sense of peace or wholeness despite
imperfection.

Another useful technique is to give the inner critic a persona---a name
and perhaps a wardrobe. (Josephine gave her critic a "stern, black,
schoolmarmish dress.") I named my own inner critic Lucy, after a
[Peanuts]{.epub-i} cartoon I saw years ago. In it, Lucy was telling
Charlie Brown, "The problem with you is that you're you." Ah, yes.

That Lucy-dominant voice had been so strong in my early life. Through
meditation practice I've learned to respond with, "Hi, Lucy," or, "Chill
out, Lucy." This way I avoid overreacting ("You're right, Lucy, I'm
worthless," or, "Oh my God, I've been meditating for so long, I've spent
so much money on therapy---how appalling that she's still here!")
Instead, I give Lucy a nice cup of tea and she just sits there calmly.

I told that story to a group I was teaching, and a man responded that
he'd adopted a similar technique through work in Al-Anon. He'd
personified his inner critic as a punk rocker, a character he wouldn't
take so seriously. Another man told me his inner critic was a forbidding
judge in full regalia. Have some fun with this! See your inner critic as
a crabby old relative coming for a visit. Sigh at his antics, or settle
her down with tea, and spend a moment wishing that they themselves were
more able to enjoy their lives.

REFLECTION

[THE NEXT TIME]{.cotx} your inner critic starts on you, take a step back
to inquire:

--Does your critic have a voice or face? Whose?

--What happens if you thank your critic for worrying about you, but say
you're just fine for now?

--Is your critic keeping you from trying something you might enjoy?

CHAPTER 4 PRACTICES

[Remembering your goodness]{.epub-i}

If you find yourself ruminating on the things you regret and the
mistakes you've made, try this exercise. It will help you redirect your
attention and remember goodness within. The point is not to deny your
mistakes, but if you keep rehearsing them, analyzing them, creating
stories around them, you're simply reinforcing the pain and alienation
they've already caused you. When you recognize and reflect on even one
good thing about yourself, you are building a bridge to a place of
kindness and caring. Standing in that place increases your ability to
look honestly and directly at whatever is difficult and gives you the
energy and courage to move forward.

Sit comfortably in a relaxed, easy posture and close your eyes. Now
bring to mind one thing you have done or said recently that you feel was
kind or good.

It does not have to be newsworthy! Maybe you smiled at someone or
listened to their story, maybe you let go of your annoyance at a slow
checkout clerk, maybe you were generous, maybe you sat down to meditate,
maybe you thanked a bus driver. It's not conceit or arrogance to
consider these things. It's nourishing and replenishing to take delight
in the good that moves through us.

Or you might think of a quality or skill in yourself that you like or
appreciate: perhaps you are enthused about helping others learn or
committed to practicing patience toward your irascible neighbor.

If you still find yourself caught up in self-criticism, turn your
attention to the mere fact that you have an urge toward happiness. There
is kindness and beauty in that. Or simply recall that all beings
everywhere want to be happy, everybody wants to be happy.

Never feel ashamed of your longing for happiness. Recall that this is
your birthright. Seeking happiness is not the problem. The problem is
that we often do not know where and how to find genuine happiness and so
make the mistakes that cause suffering for ourselves and others. But
that urge toward happiness itself is correct, and when we support it
with mindfulness, it can become like a homing instinct or a compass
pointing us toward freedom.

If any impatience or judgments emerge during this meditation, don't feel
as though you have failed. This is entirely natural. Simply allow the
negative reaction to ebb as a wave on the beach, and see if you can
return to the positive contemplation without self-criticism.

[]{#part0011.html}

 

[5](#part0041.html_c_ch5){.calibre2}

[LETTING GO OF PERFECTION](#part0041.html_c_ch5){.calibre2}

[If you don't love yourself, that's just weird.]{.epub-i}

---CALISSA GRACE PARROTT, AGE SIX

[H]{.cic}[OW DO WE RELATE TO]{.cotx} perfection? With caution. We tend
to handle things we think of as "perfect" with reluctance---gingerly
keeping our distance. Perfection is fragile; interacting with something
that seems perfect puts it in peril.

Think of a perfect arrangement of flowers in a vase. As soon as they
were cut, the flowers started to wilt. Or slice into a perfect cherry
pie hot from the oven, and watch the lattice crust crumble. Then you
take the first bite, and it is perfect. Three bites later, its sweetness
may already be starting to cloy. Moment to moment, perfect passes into
imperfect.

This is why clinging to our ideas of perfection isolates us from life
and is a barrier to real love for ourselves. Perfection is a brittle
state that generates a lot of anxiety, because achieving and maintaining
unwavering standards---whether they're internal or external---means
we're always under threat. We become focused on avoiding failure, and
love for the self cannot be a refuge because it has become too
conditional, too dependent on performance. As Oscar Wilde said in his
play [An Ideal Husband]{.epub-i}, "It is not the perfect, but the
imperfect, who have need of love." And that means every last one of us.

The illusion that supports perfectionism is the notion that, with
superior self-control, we can sustain a perfect life. But of course this
is impossible. We may believe self-criticism will help make us "better,"
or more lovable, or even liberate us from suffering. But this is a
displaced---and unproductive---use of our energy and attention.

As an internationally renowned yoga teacher, Kathryn Budig deals with
the pressure of perfection on a daily basis. In a recent conversation,
she explained to me, "It's common for people to start their day with the
habitual negative narrative---to be unhappy with what you see---focusing
on what needs to change about yourself." In order to not only survive
but also thrive in her work, Budig has had to totally reframe what it
means to be perfect. "Perfection is just a societal norm," she says.
"During meditation, I constantly tell myself, 'I am perfect ... I am not
my body.'" By disconnecting the idea of perfection from her body (which
the media tells her must match some fashionable ideal), she has been
able to reach a place of self-acceptance and self-love. Like meditation,
reframing our perspective in this way can become a practice.

Loving ourselves calls us to give up the illusion that we can control
everything and instead focuses us on building our inner resource of
resilience. When we learn to respond to disappointments with acceptance,
we give ourselves the space to realize that all our experiences---good
and bad alike---are opportunities to learn and grow. This itself is an
act of love.

Elaine, a student of mine, actually defines self-love as the opposite of
perfectionism. "Finding love for myself is letting go of the need to
find the culprit for something that's wrong, in myself and with others,"
she says. And, she adds, "constantly assessing things in terms of
success and failure means that [someone]{.epub-i} must be at fault." But
Elaine says she's learned to "change the channel" on this way of being,
moving from a stifling and fundamentally noisy state of mind to one that
is more expansive and forgiving.

THE FREEDOM OF IMPERFECTION

[WHEN I FIRST]{.cotx} started to co-lead meditation retreats, my
perfectionism caused me a lot of suffering. Our retreats included an
intensive day of meditation, with time for instruction and meetings with
a teacher, followed by a formal discourse in the evening. I was thriving
on interaction with the students, and I had much I wanted to say, but I
was terrified of giving that evening discourse. I worried that I would
lose my train of thought or state something so ineptly that my mind
would freeze. The image of me sitting there speechless was so vivid that
I refused to teach. I was silenced by my own perfectionism. One of my
colleagues would just have to speak instead.

Months went by like that. Eventually, I decided I could try to give a
talk on lovingkindness and lovingkindness only. I figured that if my
mind went totally blank, I could launch into the traditional
lovingkindness meditation, and maybe no one would notice my imperfect
performance.

Then one day I realized that all our talks were basically about
lovingkindness. The point wasn't to give a perfect performance, it was
to connect with the people gathered to listen and to extend a sense of
inclusivity and care to them. My ability to share my insights with more
freedom came about when I started to connect to myself and to that space
of care from within. I shifted my attention away from self-protection
and needing to be perfect and focused instead on giving what I had to
offer. It was a big shift in intention, a move away from the lonely self
to a space of connection. And when I came to this recognition, I found
my voice.

Many years later, I was one of the Western meditation teachers invited
to speak at a weeklong event where the Dalai Lama was teaching about
patience. It was the largest crowd I'd ever addressed, and my fears
about getting it right resurfaced. Fortunately, the Dalai Lama gave us
all a profound teaching about "getting it right." He was seated on his
throne before about 1,200 people, explicating an eighth-century text.
Following the usual format for such talks, he would read a passage in
the original Tibetan and give his commentary, and while it was being
translated, he'd flip ahead to the next passage he was going to discuss.
At one point, something in the English translation caught his attention.
He looked up from his manuscript and told the translator, "That's not
what I said."

"Yes, it is," the translator replied. They argued back and forth for a
while, until the Dalai Lama went back to the passage in dispute. He
looked at it and burst into peals of laughter. "Oh, I made a mistake!"
he exclaimed, as though he'd made a delightful discovery. The Dalai
Lama's laughter amplified the love in the room. I'd guess many of us in
the audience imagined that if we were as evolved as the Dalai Lama, we
would never make a mistake. His comfort with himself, his easy admission
of error, drew us all into the openness and light of the love available
when we accept life as it is.

Though it may seem counterintuitive to our inner perfectionist,
recognizing our mistakes as valuable lessons (not failures) helps us lay
the groundwork for later success. In an interview with David Letterman
reported in [The New York Times]{.epub-i}, filmmaker Spike Jonze said,
"I made a lot of bad stuff and each time I learned from mistakes and got
a little better." And in a study of students in a neurosurgery program,
a sociologist found that those who ultimately failed claimed that they
rarely made mistakes, while those who succeeded not only admitted their
mistakes but also revealed what steps they would take to avoid repeating
those mistakes in the future.

PAY ATTENTION TO WHAT YOU LOVE

[IF WE STOP]{.cotx} setting impossibly high standards and punishing
ourselves for failure---or what we perceive as failure---how will our
lives improve? Getting curious about the origin of these standards is
the first step to achieving more freedom from them.

First, ask yourself whose standards you're trying to meet. My student
Charlotte talks about how her habitually critical father had instilled
in her a pattern of profound self-criticism. But once she recognized
this dynamic with her dad, she felt much more empowered and was able to
make changes in their relationship and in her relationship with herself.

Often it's our peers who set the standard. Raina, a young meditator I
know, was determined to create the perfect birth experience for herself
and her baby. She planned to give birth exactly the way her best friend,
Laura, did: in a deep Jacuzzi tub at a birthing center staffed by
midwives and accompanied by a doula, with celestial music playing in the
background. Everything was going according to plan the day Raina went
into labor---that is, until the baby's fetal heartbeat began to drop
dangerously low and the midwife had Raina rushed to the hospital for an
emergency C-section. At first, she felt like a complete failure, having
let down everyone important to her: her husband, the midwife, the doula,
Laura, and especially her baby and herself. But as distraught as she was
at first, the moment Raina cradled her infant daughter in her arms, she
was able to let go of her disappointment. "It was a huge teaching moment
for me," she recalls. "I learned once again that life calls the shots,
not me or my plans for the way life should be."

If you can't put a name to the source of your perfectionism, try
examining the social messages that surround you. Have you somehow bought
into the notion that you should be the perfect (select all that apply):
hostess, mother, son or daughter, partner, boss, employee, meditator,
athlete, fashion plate? As soon as you begin to notice the messages
you've internalized as distinct from [you]{.epub-i}, you can begin to
set healthy boundaries.

Next, get even more curious: Do you agree with the expectations you've
identified? Do they reflect your innermost values? Mindfulness allows us
to balance our drive for self-improvement with a healthy skepticism
about external standards. Do you really want to maintain a spotless home
just like your late grandmother, or are you willing to let that go to
spend more relaxed, enjoyable time with your children? Loosening the
grip of other people's goals lets you focus on what you love.

The wholesome pursuit of excellence feels quite different from
perfectionism. Think of something you've made an effort to master,
whether it's lap swimming, getting higher grades, or gardening, and then
try to remember when you started feeling a strong inner push to do it.
Did you take pleasure in making progress, even when it was incremental?
Did you feel a strong desire to do it well, even when you knew no one
else would notice? When we approach the journey acknowledging what we do
not know and what we can't control, we maintain our energy for the
quest.

I've heard this again and again from writers and artists. I have one
author friend who compares writing his books to climbing Mt. Everest. "I
always start out with a vision of making it to the top or, in my case,
creating my perfect dream of a book. Sometimes I get pretty close and I
feel like, maybe if I kept tinkering forever, my manuscript would indeed
achieve perfection, only it never quite does. Still, at a certain point
I have to decide it's good enough, say [Basta!]{.epub-i}, and move on.
Otherwise I'll go nuts." But, my friend adds, "Actually, I think this is
a good thing. If one of my books was perfect, what would be the point of
writing another? It's the gap between my aspiration and what I've
actually created that gives me energy and fuels the next project. Which,
of course, will be [perfect]{.epub-i}." He laughs.

My friend has the wisdom to realize that perfectionism is the enemy of
creativity. It is unforgiving and rife with fear. When we cling to
unrealistic standards, we undermine our abilities and obsess
unnecessarily over disapproval and rejection.

Yet it's also important to remember that pursuing excellence is not a
problem. In fact, focusing on what we most care about, whether it's our
work, our relationships, or collecting butterflies, can be a genuine act
of self-love, but only if we're not fixated on the outcome of our
efforts or on perfecting [ourselves]{.epub-i}.

Fortunately, when we relate to ourselves with lovingkindness,
perfectionism naturally drops away. We may realize we'll never sing an
aria at the Met, but we can continue to love opera, follow our favorite
singers, and perhaps join a local chorus. There's no frustration,
bitterness, or self-criticism in this kind of loving acceptance. It
doesn't mean we're complacent, but rather we stop resisting the way
things actually are. Wholehearted acceptance is a basic element of love,
starting with love for ourselves, and a gateway to joy. Through the
practices of lovingkindness and self-compassion, we can learn to love
our flawed and imperfect selves. And in those moments of vulnerability,
we open our hearts to connect with each other, as well. We are not
perfect, but we are enough.

CHAPTER 5 PRACTICES

[Self-acceptance]{.epub-i}

1\. Bring something you did or said that you regret very clearly into
your mind and get in touch with your feelings about it.

2\. Now imagine you are listening to a friend whom you care about deeply
express regret, guilt, and self-blame to you in conversation. What would
you say to console your friend?

3\. Begin to look at yourself through the eyes of a caring, supportive
ally.

4\. Recognize that imperfection is a part of all human experience. We
are no worse than anyone else because we have made particular mistakes.
We can be complete in this moment just as we are.

REFLECTION

[Step back to]{.epub-i} [inquire]{.epub-i}: Are there particular areas
of your life where perfectionism emerges most often? Appearance?
Personality? Job performance? Social life? Parenting? What would "just
okay" look like in these areas?

[Try to catch yourself in the moment]{.epub-i}: When the anxiety of
control arises, take time to breathe and repeat, "Let go, let go."

[Follow the Dalai Lama's example]{.epub-i}: If you make a trivial but
embarrassing mistake, admit it cheerfully and move on.

[]{#part0012.html}

 

[6](#part0041.html_c_ch6){.calibre2}

[BECOMING EMBODIED](#part0041.html_c_ch6){.calibre2}

[I]{.cic}[N HIS SHORT STORY "A]{.cotx} Painful Case," James Joyce
introduces us to a Mr. Duffy, who "lived at a little distance from his
body." So, too, do most of us, and at times we may even feel we're
dragging a hostile stranger around. There is something profoundly
healing about reengaging with our bodies, remembering and rejoining who
we are. Just as we need to integrate our emotions in order to love
ourselves more fully, so, too, do we need to be reunited with our
bodies. The Ben Harper song "You Found Another Lover (I Lost Another
Friend)" talks about how the heart never lies to us. I often think about
how, for so many of us, the body never lies. Our stomachs are called our
second brains for a reason, and there is a growing amount of research on
the mind-body connection. How can we feel a genuine connection to the
world if we do not feel our own bodies?

The journey to loving ourselves doesn't mean we like everything about
our bodies (or our personalities, for that matter). But it does mean
stepping away from conventional obsessions about everything we have been
told is wrong with us by parents, partners, our social group, the media,
or the mean girls in high school. If we can feel and appreciate our
bodies from within, we are not in bondage to the messages coming from
without. When we contemplate the miracle of embodied life, we begin to
partner with our bodies in a kinder way.

REFLECTION

[Appreciating your aliveness]{.epub-i}

This reflection is adapted from the teaching of one of my colleagues,
Kate Lila Wheeler.

We get only one body in this life, the one we are each endowed with
right this moment. Please begin by giving yours the respect it deserves.
Did you realize every atom in it is 14.5 billion years old? All bodies
are part of matter, created at the big bang, 10 billion years before the
earth appeared. Yes, your overall body is composed of about 7 octillion
venerable atoms (that's a 7 with twenty-seven zeros after it), mostly
produced by exploding stars. You are literally stardust; so is
everything around you.

The water in this body seems to flow into your mouth from a fountain or
a glass, then out again through pores and orifices. But like all the
waters of the earth, no one knows where it came from. Perhaps a comet's
tail, it's said. And if you have gold fillings, your teeth carry a share
of all the gold that exists in the universe, for the number of gold
molecules is finite.

Your body is not just mineral and elemental. No, it's vividly alive, as
anyone knows who's ever danced, had a sore throat, made love, or stubbed
a toe.

Try to sense the skin around your body. Feel how alive it is! For this,
you can thank a single-celled creature. All the baroque variety of life
on earth is considered to come from a common tiny ancestor who appeared
about 4 billion years ago (again, no one knows quite how). And still
today, on a cellular level, basic functions like respiration look
similar in plants and animals. So does our DNA---we humans share about
half our genetic information with plants. We truly aren't very far away
from anything.

Our salty blood remembers oceanic origins; the structure of our spines
and ribs was first developed by fish. Population geneticists agree that
all of us are literally one human family. What would our world be like
if everyone acted on this truth?

Yet as connected as we are, there is astonishing diversity even within
being human. Each person is utterly distinct. Our fingerprints,
toeprints, and tongueprints will never be reproduced.

But surely it is the brain that is our most fabulous body part.
Scientists believe the human brain is the most complex object in the
universe, capable of making one hundred trillion neural connections. Lay
all your neurons end to end, and they'll reach to the moon and back.
Awake, asleep, or dreaming, your brain is active night and day, a magic
lantern. Its neurons interact in constantly shifting patterns of
electrical energy and are deeply attuned to others and the outside
world. Not only that, but your brain is capable of self-awareness.

Brain and body are inseparable collaborators, producing the symphony
that fully absorbs us. This is the wonder of a life. How amazing that we
can even be amazed.

CHAPTER 6 PRACTICES

[Meditation: Lovingkindness for your body]{.epub-i}

I learned this meditation from a Sri Lankan monk who came to visit us at
the Insight Meditation Society in the early 1990s. At age ninety-four,
the Venerable Ananda Maitreya seemed to have more energy than the rest
of us put together, and he was learning to use a computer, something I
was struggling with at the time. How much of his vigor came from his
repeatedly offering love to his body?

Focusing on different parts of the body in sequence, he had us repeat
silently, "May my head be happy. May it be peaceful," or "May my eyes be
happy. May they be peaceful." And on through the whole body.

We repeated this with our shoulders, our backs, our stomachs, parts we
might normally term "bad," as in the case of a sore knee we call a "bad"
knee, those parts we would love to hide more than anything if clothing
manufacturers could only get more inventive, those parts we are usually
neatly distanced from. Ending with, "May my toes be happy. May they be
peaceful." Try it.

\*   \*   \*

I met Phil at a daylong seminar I was teaching in the Midwest. At one of
the breaks, he approached me, eager to describe how he had recently
started to practice meditation when a friend gave him a book that
offered a guided meditation on the body, moving attention from the top
of your head slowly down to your toes.

Phil told me that the guided meditation was not calming him down. The
focus on the body made him restless, and his inner critic filled up the
space with abuse. When he felt a twinge in his ankle, he lectured
himself that this would not be a problem if he'd just get off his ass
once in a while and take a walk, just down the street. He had to start
somewhere. He was wasting his life. When he dwelled on his knees, he
noticed some tenderness there. Hadn't Grandma had both of her knees
replaced when she was about his age? That would be terrible if he was
laid up for weeks. When he focused his attention on his body with
judgment, he wanted to jump out of his skin!

We can let go of the judgments or at least put them to one side as we
continue to awaken awareness of our bodies, and we can also actively
work with offering lovingkindness to whatever we discover.

Since Ananda Maitreya's visit, I have taught this meditation to many
with serious diseases, with scars or injuries, with chronic pain, and
with deep-seated hatred toward their bodies. It has been wonderful to
see how feeling badly betrayed by one's body, and the alienation and
humiliation born of that, can transform into a sense of alliance. A
newly minted friendship with our bodies brings genuine peace to us,
laced through with love.

[]{#part0013.html}

 

[7](#part0041.html_c_ch7){.calibre2}

[MOVING BEYOND SHAME](#part0041.html_c_ch7){.calibre2}

[T]{.cic}[HE STIMULUS FOR SHAME IS]{.cotx} something we did, or failed
to do, and all too often about things over which we had no
control---like a parent's behavior or our family's economic status.
Wherever the responsibility lies, shame creates a solid and terrible
feeling of unworthiness that resides in our bodies: the storehouse of
the memories of our acts, real or imagined, and the secrets we keep
about them.

The heart contracts when our bodies are overcome by shame. In its
powerful grip, our ability to feel love for ourselves shrivels, too.

Clara writes, "When I'm ashamed, my stomach gets tight, queasy, and
cold, but the rest of my body burns. I'm told my cheeks flame with a
brighter intensity than a blush. Of the fight, flight, and freeze
options, many times I just get frozen. I hope against hope no one
notices, but just in case, I start looking for the exit. I want to
disappear, but in a moment of deep shame it can be difficult for me to
move at all."

The root meaning of the word [shame]{.epub-i} is "to cover," which
suggests our longing to hide---even from ourselves. To avoid the
excruciating feeling of shame, we may start acting in compulsive and
harmful ways. Shame can make us eat too much, shop to excess, drink or
use drugs inappropriately, often in a deliberate effort to quiet the
turmoil within. Shame is usually out of proportion to the thing we're
ashamed of. Small defects and minor lapses, barely noticeable by others,
can generate overwhelming feelings of shame.

A difference becomes us. An illness becomes us. A blemish becomes us. A
mistake becomes us. Our mentally ill parent becomes us.

Maria writes: "When my father thought that I had a weak teacher, he
would go to the school and make such a fuss that I would always be
moved. I was embarrassed, of course, and didn't feel that I deserved the
place in the better class. When I wanted to get a summer job---maybe
scooping ice cream like all the other kids---my father insisted it was
beneath me. I was a great painter, he said, and I should spend my time
painting and selling my paintings. I was a kid trying to fit in and
learn kid things, like how to make a living. I have always been
unrealistic in my choices of livelihood, and I blame (yes, blame) this
on my father's unwillingness to let me be ordinary.

"I understand better now why he aspired to be larger than life,
important, successful, rich, and always right. By most people's
definition, he [was]{.epub-i} handsome, wealthy, and successful, but in
his own mind he was a failure and never good enough.

"I remember:

---my father screaming at my mother and hitting her in front of my
brother and me

---my father driving head-on into another car because it was in his way

---my father stepping on a parking attendant's hands so that he would
release a key

---my father having lovers and not really trying to hide them

---my father telling me, 'Don't fall in love. Just have sex.'

---my father on a trip with me, being delighted that people thought we
were a couple and continuing to laugh about it no matter how enraged I
became."

There is much glib celebration in pop culture of those who go their own
paths: the dreamers, the mavericks. For many, feeling so distinct from
those around them is not a comfortable place to rest. And if this sense
of distinction arises from a parent we cannot govern or subdue, there is
a huge potential for shame to fortify the walls of isolation.

Many children raised in dysfunctional homes carry with them the feeling
that if they had been better people, their parents would have been
better parents. Patty says, "I was raised by drunks and believed if
others knew, they would shun me or bully me. I didn't invite schoolmates
home because I was frightened that those friends would see how we really
lived and spread that shameful secret to others at school. My secret
became the most alive thing about me. Everything else went into a kind
of death spiral.

"While I was a good student and loyal friend, I absorbed my parents'
shame, as well as my own feeling of worthlessness, as central to my
identity."

Shame weakens us. It can make us frightened to take on something new. We
start to withdraw from whatever might give us pleasure, self-esteem, or
a sense of our value. Comedian and activist Margaret Cho describes its
effect: "When you don't have self-esteem you will hesitate before you do
anything in your life. You will hesitate to go for the job you really
wanna go for, you will hesitate to ask for a raise ... you will hesitate
to report a rape, you will hesitate to defend yourself when you are
discriminated against ... You will hesitate to vote, you will hesitate
to dream. For us to have self-esteem is truly an act of revolution and
our revolution is long overdue."

Lost in shame, we withdraw from the world and those who might love and
support us. If we want to hide, we cannot easily feel or receive love.
And it is increasingly hard to remember that we deserve to.

SHAME ABOUT ILLNESS

[I WORRY ABOUT]{.cotx} friends and students who seem to take on
responsibility for absolutely everything, as though their thoughts could
control the universe. I've known people who even feel ashamed that they
have cancer or an autoimmune disease because they believe they brought
it upon themselves by not living a sufficiently pure life.

While I think we're right to acknowledge the power of our minds to
affect our bodies, it's an illusion to imagine we have total control. To
imagine the way we think is the singular causative agent of all we go
through is to practice cruelty toward ourselves. If you get cancer and
all you can think of is that your thoughts caused it, it's your entire
fault, you are to blame, I would first check out if you live near a
toxic waste dump or maybe had a genetic predisposition.

Or perhaps a clear, direct cause might remain unknown. Not everyone with
lung cancer smoked, for example, and not everyone who feels stressed has
a heart attack. Can we acknowledge and nurture the power of our minds
without turning that into a cudgel to beat ourselves up with? There may
well be lessons to be learned in an illness; maybe we should consider
that last spare rib we ate to be the last for this lifetime or recognize
we'd do better physically if we learned to manage our anger better. But
if we think we will be able to dominate the streaming rapids of life
through our efforts at control, we are destined to fail, and we will be
ashamed at our failure. If we add shame to what is already massively
challenging, we can become cut off and isolated when we most need to
feel connected, and when we most need to deepen our love for ourselves,
just as we are.

SHAME ABOUT SUFFERING

[IN MY BOOK]{.cotx} [Faith: Trusting Your Own Deepest
Experience]{.epub-i}, I wrote about the suffering of my own childhood
and my years of feeling isolated and unhappy. When he read it, my friend
Bob Thurman said to me, "You should never be ashamed of the suffering
you've been through." His comment really surprised me. In that moment, I
realized how much subtle shame I had been carrying without realizing it.

Bob was passing along a message he'd received many years earlier, after
he lost his left eye in an accident. His teacher at the time, a
Mongolian monk named Geshe Wangyal, had told him, "Never be ashamed of
what happened to you. You have lost one eye but gained a thousand eyes
of wisdom."

I do think it's too simplistic to say that such awful experiences should
be considered gifts. But acknowledging that a gift can emerge from pain
does not mock the pain itself. It's affirming that we can look at any
experience from the fullness of our being and that we can get past the
shame we carry. Bob still lost an eye. I still had a really unhappy
childhood. Patty's parents were still alcoholics, and Maria's father was
still disconnected and hurtful. But if we use our experiences to care
for and love ourselves more, and if we use them to connect more deeply
with others, then losing an eye can indeed lead to a thousand eyes of
wisdom.

REFLECTION

[Exploring shame with RAIN]{.epub-i}

Once you acknowledge a difficult emotion, inquire whether shame is one
of the feelings that is appearing. Explore what happens in your body
when you are caught up in feelings of shame.

[Embracing what is]{.epub-i}

We're conditioned to believe that painful feelings are "bad" and that
pleasurable ones are "good." It's often easier---though not
healthier---for us to avoid grief and sorrow, while only embracing
sensations like happiness, confidence, and love.

But by accepting and learning to embrace the inevitable sorrows of life,
we realize that we can experience a more enduring sense of happiness.

Of course this is difficult and requires practice. The following
meditation is an invitation to experiment with what it feels like to
meditate with an uncomfortable feeling or experience as the object of
your attention, rather than just your breath, an anchoring phrase, or a
mantra. So often we assume meditation is exclusively meant to be a tool
for relaxation, stress relief, clearing the mind. And it often is. But
this exercise shows that we can actually use meditation as a way to
experiment with new ways of relating to ourselves, even our
uncomfortable thoughts:

1\. Sit comfortably with your back straight but not strained. You may
choose to close your eyes or settle a soft gaze on the floor in front of
you.

2\. Bring to mind a painful conversation, situation, experience, or
distinct feeling you have experienced. Call to mind what the emotion
felt like in your body. As you tap into a more visceral experience of
the discomfort, begin to deepen your natural inhales and exhales.

3\. With each inhale, envision opening up to all of the discomfort and
pain associated with the experience you've brought to mind.

4\. With each exhale, release any pressure you may feel to react to the
pain in a particular way.

5\. Other thoughts, memories, and experiences may come up, drawing you
away from the original anchor of your meditation. As different thoughts
emerge, take the opportunity to be mindful of each one. This is a
practice of embracing what is in each moment.

[]{#part0014.html}

 

[8](#part0041.html_c_ch8){.calibre2}

[TAKING A STAND ON HAPPINESS](#part0041.html_c_ch8){.calibre2}

[G]{.cic}[EORGIA IS A FREELANCE WRITER]{.cotx} who works at home in a
two-story loft space with tall windows that let in beautiful light. Some
time ago, she was under tremendous financial pressure and took on too
much work to compensate. With deadlines for projects following one right
after the other, she started to slump.

Georgia is a good cook, but when the pressure hit, she began eating only
junk. She didn't feel like exercising, so her life became confined to
her four walls, where her dark mood closed in. Her housekeeping fell
off, and of course, so did her meditation practice. She'd pledge to
meditate forty-five minutes under the covers while in bed, but would
then promptly fall asleep. And she began drinking more than she had at
any other time in her life.

Georgia was devoting all her waking hours (and much of her sleep time)
to the goals and demands of others. Her motivation was partially
self-protective, as she needed the money. But the way she acted on it
was not, and she burned out. She felt disconnected from her body and
from everything that nourished her. And the way she spoke to herself
became quite self-punishing.

For a while, Georgia couldn't see a way out of this downward spiral. And
then, in a moment of awareness, she did. "I wasn't taking a stand on my
right to be happy," she told me later. "I realized I had to do that in
order to find a way back to self-love."

As a first step, Georgia drove to the supermarket to replenish her
kitchen with healthy food. The store was brightly lit, music was
playing, and as she wandered down an unfamiliar aisle, she came across a
display of tall Mexican votive candles dedicated to the saints. Georgia
is not Christian, but she loves candles, and her hand reached out to
pull one off the shelf. On the front was the image of San Judas Tadeo,
the patron saint of difficult and desperate cases. On the back was a
traditional prayer in Spanish and English: "Pray for me. I am so
helpless and alone." That summed up how Georgia had been feeling, so she
brought the candle home. She showered and lit the candle.

Then she felt a bit silly, because she was not really such a difficult
or desperate case. She reminded herself that she was healthy, enjoyed
her work, and had many strong, close relationships. She just hadn't been
acknowledging those things. [I need to remember my blessings]{.epub-i},
she thought.

So Georgia took a walk down to the riverfront, and upon arriving home,
she pulled up the blinds to let the light in and put on some music. Step
by step, Georgia gradually reentered the world. She returned to her
meditation practice, and with it as a foundation, she regained a kind of
balance.

In order to restore love to her life, Georgia had to start with
forgiveness: with forgiving herself for falling so low, and compassion
for the pain that had kept her there. Lovingkindness, too, for the part
of her that sought to be happy but chose the wrong tools when she
reached for the wine bottle or the junk food, and then seemed to forget
that she had a right to be happy at all.

It is fascinating to me that she phrased her turnaround insight as "I
wasn't taking a stand on my right to be happy," because the particular
form of meditation she found most helpful to her recovery was standing
meditation.

She later wrote me: "As I stood at the top of the loft, I closed my eyes
and imagined the strong connection I had to the world through my
vulnerability, the desire to be happy, to be free from mental or
physical suffering, and to live a life of ease, which we all share. How
could I have felt so alone?

"I felt the earth supporting me. I felt my legs making those
micro-adjustments to help me stay upright in a constantly moving,
changing world. I thought, [My body knows how to do this]{.epub-i}."

As Georgia continued her meditation, she says she felt herself freeing
her heart from a cage.

She concluded, "Breathe in the connection to all things, to the
beautiful world that is just beyond the window, to the birds I saw in
the marshes by the river, to my neighbors and to myself. Breathe out to
spread that awareness, to share it, with the little cities nearby and
the big ones out in the distance, and all the places in between and
beyond. Light pouring into me and light pouring out from me in a
grateful relationship with the world."

Standing meditation remains the mainstay of Georgia's meditation
practice. When she puts her body in a posture that expresses innate
dignity, when she feels the support of the earth, when her chest opens
with the breath, Georgia takes a stand on the rightness of her being and
on her connection to all others.

CHAPTER 8 PRACTICES

[Standing meditation]{.epub-i}

Georgia did this meditation barefoot, which is a good way to engage all
of your muscles and experience fully how you maintain your balance in
space. But feel free to wear socks if you'll be more comfortable.

Standing upright, close your eyes and feel the earth supporting you.
Spread your toes wide, feeling the solidity of the floor under your feet
or noting how the fibers of the carpet press into your soles. Start
making micro-movements to distribute your weight broadly, testing the
arch of the foot as you slowly roll the pad of your foot back and forth
to loosen your ankles.

Now begin to experiment with restacking your skeleton bone by bone to
form the foundation of a more solid and confident posture. Standing with
your knees a little bent, let your ankles adjust to a straighter line,
like a column. Then slowly straighten your knees without locking them, a
movement of about an inch.

As your legs extend fully, feel how your pelvis lifts your spine as your
shoulders pull back. This takes a lot of pressure off the small of your
back and allows your lower back to elongate. Pause there for a while
playing with this minor adjustment at the knees, enjoying how the more
you straighten your legs, the taller you stand and the deeper you
breathe.

The pelvis is the next place for investigation. Tip your tailbone down
an inch, and the shoulders pull farther back. Moving your tailbone back
and forth, feel how your ribs spread slightly with each tip.

Without forcing the movement of your ribs, feel your lungs rising and
falling as you take each breath. Try breathing into the bottom of your
lungs, where they press against the diaphragm. Then explore how they
expand sideways. Then feel the breath moving into your back, under your
shoulder blades. Visualize yourself freeing your heart from a cage.
Continue to enjoy the rhythm of the breath and the expansion of your
bones, taking a stand on your right to be happy.

[]{#part0015.html}

 

[9](#part0041.html_c_ch9){.calibre2}

[FOLLOWING YOUR ETHICAL COMPASS](#part0041.html_c_ch9){.calibre2}

[W]{.cic}[HAT DO ETHICS HAVE TO]{.cotx} do with loving yourself? After
all, ethics is a Big Topic, while self-love seems more individualized,
more intimate. We tend to equate being free and happy with doing as we
please. But if we really look at our actions with eyes of love, we see
that our lives can be more straightforward, simpler, less sculpted by
regret and fear, more in alignment with our deepest values.

Paying attention to the ethical implications of our choices has never
been more pressing---or more complicated---than it is today. Our
options, many of them unimaginable one hundred years ago, have nearly
spiraled out of control in today's global, digital world. Is it okay to
eat meat, or should we be vegan? Why commit to one person when you can
experience the rush of meeting someone new every day just by swiping on
Tinder? To what lengths should we---can we, as individuals---go to
protect our troubled planet?

How [do]{.epub-i} we make choices when the possibilities appear
limitless?

The Buddha offered this: "If you truly loved yourself, you'd never harm
another." This is not a sanctimonious or repressive frame for morality,
nor is it an invitation to deny our desires or judge them. It's not even
a frame that focuses solely on compassion for another---refraining from
stealing or lying because we don't want to cause someone else pain.

Causing harm is never just a one-way street. If we harm someone else,
we're inevitably also hurting ourselves. Some quality of sensitivity and
awareness has to shut down for us to be able to objectify others, to
deny them as living, feeling beings---those who want to be happy, just
as we do. We don't relate to kicking a table as a moral issue. For a
person or animal to, in effect, become a table in our minds takes a lot
of numbing (hard to shake off), a significant set of blinders (hard to
see around later), and a lot of armoring (hard to remove at will). We
grow a skin of indifference.

Yet even when we do our best to treat others with kindness, it's often a
struggle to determine which actions best express our love and care for
ourselves. We may, for instance, believe fervently that eating animals
is ethically wrong. But what choice do we make when our physician
diagnoses us with anemia and tells us we should eat red meat for our
health? I have a friend in drought-stricken California who tries to
monitor every drop of water she uses and worries over whether to let her
daughter go to school in her favorite---but stained---dress, or run the
washing machine when she doesn't have a full load. How do we know what's
right for us when there are so many gray areas, so many imperfect
answers?

LISTEN TO YOUR BODY

[WHEN WE FEEL]{.cotx} conflicted about a particular decision or action,
our bodies often hold the answer---if we take the time to stop and tune
in. Our minds tend to race ahead into the future or replay the past, but
our bodies are always in the present moment. A tightness in the chest or
a squeamish sensation in the gut may signal harm---even when reason may
suggest that a given choice is perfectly ethical. A feeling of calm or a
sense of expansiveness throughout the body sends us a very different
message.

My student Sarah wasn't much of a drinker, but she enjoyed the
occasional glass of wine at social gatherings. The problem was that once
in a while---unpredictably---she'd get a raging migraine from just a
single glass. Sarah knew from the constriction she felt in her throat
when she even contemplated taking a drink that she'd be causing herself
harm if she went ahead. Still, sometimes she chose to ignore her body's
SOS. But recently, after years of playing Russian roulette with her
health, Sarah decided to stop drinking wine altogether---and is now
migraine-free. As she said to me, "Not drinking feels like a profound
act of self-love."

RELY ON GUIDING PRECEPTS

[WHEN WE CAN'T]{.cotx} slow down enough to hear the body's message or
when that message is unclear, we can protect ourselves by following a
few essential precepts that are remarkably similar across the world's
wisdom traditions.

My colleague JoAnna Harper derived the following precepts from Buddhist
teachings. They are both simple and accessible, while also elegantly
covering the basics:

[Knowing how deeply our lives intertwine, I undertake the precept to
protect life.]{.epub-i}

[Knowing how deeply our lives intertwine, I undertake the precept to be
generous.]{.epub-i}

[Knowing how deeply our lives intertwine, I undertake the precept to
protect the sexuality of myself and others.]{.epub-i}

[Knowing how deeply our lives intertwine, I undertake the precept to be
careful with my speech.]{.epub-i}

[Knowing how deeply our lives intertwine, I undertake the precept to be
free of intoxicants for a clear mind and heart.]{.epub-i}

These precepts demand that we pay attention to what we're feeling and
what we most deeply want. They ask us to learn how to let go of desires
gracefully, without judging ourselves. They also require that we
recognize when we do or say something not in the spirit of the precepts,
and resolve to begin again.

I've had students and friends who have worked hard to replace the harsh
moral strictures imposed during childhood with their own set of values.
One friend, describing her new understanding of strength and freedom
gained through meditation, said, "If you really want to be a rebel,
practice kindness." Or you might put it this way: "If you want to live
on your own terms, breaking free from old habits and stories that no
longer have any meaning, be different---practice love."

NOTICE YOUR SECRETS

[I OFTEN USE]{.cotx} secret-keeping as a kind of personal moral compass.
I've seen it take a toll on the keeper of the secret, on the person left
out of the knowing, and on all who are enlisted to isolate that person
from knowledge of what is actually going on. We may pursue it blithely,
but that doesn't mean it isn't consequential. As architect Christopher
Alexander said, "Making wholeness heals the maker." In other words, the
environment we create can help heal us or fracture us. This is true not
just for buildings and landscapes but also for interactions and
relationships. What does adding to fragmentation rather than wholeness
yield? What happens within us when we increase division and isolation?

I think of my childhood, laden with secrets. When I was eleven, I was
told that my father had been hospitalized after an "accidental" dose of
sleeping pills. He lived in psychiatric hospitals from that time on, but
it wasn't until five years later, when I was already in college, that I
put the pieces together and realized that the overdose was not an
accident. All those years, that vital, aware part of me lived in
emotional and physical lockdown because my inner knowing didn't
harmonize with the version of reality offered to me. Of course, my
family was motivated by wanting to spare me pain, but even so, keeping
secrets is a consequential act for all involved.

The more we practice mindfulness, the more alert we become to the cost
of keeping secrets. John told me this story: "I was offered an apartment
in New York City at a reasonable rent, in my desired neighborhood. It
seemed too good to be true---and in fact it was. According to the rules
of the co-op board that governed the building, the owner wasn't allowed
to rent it out.

"I was hugely tempted. This wasn't contravening the laws of God or even
the state! Who were these people on the co-op board, anyway? Probably an
officious, power-hungry bunch. Talk about a victimless crime! I really
wanted that apartment! My friends urged me on: 'Do you know how many
people violate co-op laws every day! Go for it!'

"But then I imagined walking into that lobby every day, feeling furtive,
hoping the 'right' doorman was on duty, the less observant one, the one
less likely to ask after my supposed 'cousin,' the owner of the
apartment. I knew I would start to worry that someone was calculating
how long I'd been there, that I'd plan on staying away at times so I'd
look more like a visitor than a resident. I saw my future: paying rent
for an apartment where I could never live in peace and happiness."

Even if we're never found out, as the old adage warns, "It's not the
crime, it's the cover-up that will get you." The costs of keeping
secrets include our growing isolation due to fear of detection and the
ways we shut down inside to avoid feeling the effects of our behavior.
We can never afford to be truly seen and known---even by ourselves.

The price of keeping secrets can literally weigh people down, according
to research conducted by Columbia University professor Michael Slepian.
In one study, he asked gay men to help him move some boxes. The result?
Those whose sexual preference was locked in the closet moved fewer
boxes. Another study revealed that people who had recently had affairs
felt more burdened by daily tasks, such as carrying groceries upstairs.
In an interview in [The Atlantic]{.epub-i}, Slepian commented, "The more
preoccupied people were with their secrets, the more effort they thought
was required to keep their secrets, and so other things seemed more
challenging."

I don't mean to imply that we need to disclose everything about
ourselves to everyone. There is such a thing as discretion or lifestyle
choices that aren't really anyone's business. But the fear of getting
found out can start permeating our days and even our dreams. To me,
that's a big clue that we're creating more suffering than wholeness.

MONITOR YOUR SELF-RESPECT

[ANOTHER KEY BAROMETER]{.cotx} to help us weigh the rightness of our
actions is self-respect. I have found that my ability to accept whatever
challenges life sends my way is largely connected to my degree of
self-respect. When my self-respect has been strong, I've been able to go
through difficult times without being disheartened---that is,
difficulties did not reflect a lack of basic self-worth, and I could
enjoy good times without trying to get a death grip on them, for fear
that they would end and leave me feeling bad about myself. For me,
self-respect definitely seemed to be key to maintaining happiness. And
it became clear that my level of self-respect was rooted in how I
behaved.

When we have that kind of self-regard, we're not grabbing onto
experiences or relationships to make us feel better. We don't feel a
deep hollowness inside that needs to be filled. Self-respect enables us
to love ourselves more fully. And the self-respect that comes from
loving ourselves enhances our ability to love more broadly.

Psychologist Barbara Fredrickson, a professor at the University of North
Carolina--Chapel Hill, a leading scholar in the field of social
psychology, and author of [Love 2.0]{.epub-i}, developed the "broaden
and build" theory of positive emotions. The idea is that cultivation of
positive emotions, including self-love and self-respect, strengthens our
inner resources and opens us to a broader range of thoughts and actions.
In turn, we gain trust in our resilience and the ability to face
whatever surprises life may throw our way. Indeed, life can be
stressful, with periods of peril, but we can have confidence in our
capacity to meet it, instead of being torn apart by it.

Following our ethical compass helps to support this new, more nimble
response. Increasingly, we trust ourselves to behave ethically, speak
thoughtfully, and act responsibly. We're not burdened by carrying a
shameful secret that, if exposed, would ruin our reputation. In everyday
life, we pay attention to how our actions line up with our values. This
is another piece of the confidence that allows us to expand love.

HONORING OURSELVES

["IF YOU TRULY]{.cotx} loved yourself, you'd never harm another." These
words from the Buddha suggest that we're capable of much more than
mediocrity, much more than merely getting by in this world. As human
beings, we're actually capable of greatness of spirit, an ability to go
beyond the circumstances we find ourselves in, to experience a vast
sense of connection to all of life. To settle for walling ourselves off
through indifference, or the temporary high of getting what we want by
whatever means, or the petty excitement of besting someone however we
can is actually quite sad.

If we recognized all that we could be and honored ourselves for that, we
wouldn't compromise our integrity and wholeness for the superficial
sense of power that can come from lying to someone ("I know something
you don't") or the fleeting rush and more enduring objectification and
distance that come from exploitation. If we thought we were capable of
much more than mediocrity, we'd envision more for ourselves than
skulking though a building's lobby, hoping the doorman won't ask us what
we're doing there.

If we truly loved ourselves, we'd never harm another. That is a truly
revolutionary, celebratory mode of self-care.

REFLECTION

[IS THERE ANYONE]{.cotx} in your life whom you think of as a model of
integrity in some area? Do you identify with that person, or do they
seem too rigid to you?

Do you have disagreements with friends or colleagues about right and
wrong behavior? Who would you talk with if you were trying to solve a
moral dilemma? How do you decide what is right for you?

If you have a secret about an important area of your life, how is that
affecting your relationship with others? With yourself?

[]{#part0016.html}

 

[SECTION 2](#part0041.html_c_pt2){.calibre2}

[]{#part0017.html}

 

[INTRODUCTION](#part0041.html_c_int2){.calibre2}

[[Love as a Verb]{.epub-i}](#part0041.html_c_int2){.calibre2}

[I]{.cic} [HAD A DREAM ONCE,]{.cotx} and in it, someone asked me, "Why
do we love people?"

Still dreaming, I responded, "Because they see us." I woke up thinking,
[That's a really good answer]{.epub-i}.

To see and be seen---this very notion might fill us with an expansive
sense of satisfaction and ease. We might feel joy at the prospect of
being affirmed because of who we are, rather than as a result of any
achievement or effort on our part. Too, the thought of seeing and
accepting another person for who he or she is might also make us happy.
Such mutual recognition feels good, solid, balanced, authentic, and
real.

Take Ellen and Gil, who recently celebrated their twenty-fifth wedding
anniversary. "I work in an office with a lot of young people who come to
me for dating advice," Ellen wrote to me. "I always tell them to look
for unconditional love. They ask me how they'll know when it is present.
Here's the story I tell that always gets a lot of 'Ohhhh ... I get it
now!' responses.

"When Gil and I were first dating, I was living in Brooklyn, and he'd
pick me up at the train when I went out to Long Island to see him. One
time, he was driving when I started telling him about my parents'
divorce when I was seventeen---and all the before, during, and after of
that. He slowed the car down and pulled over to the side of the road.
When I asked him what was wrong, he said, 'You are telling me something
important, and I want to listen and give it my full attention.'

"That was the big IT for me. He still listens to me ... amazing!"

He sees her; she sees him. It's clear and it's real. If our close
relationships actually felt like this day to day, we'd have a wonderful
life.

The skills available to us through mindfulness make it absolutely
possible to bring this kind of love to our connections with others. What
we learn in meditation, we can apply to all other realms of our lives. A
friend of mine suggested that the title for this book be [Real Love:
Simple, but Not Easy]{.epub-i}. That's a great description of the
challenges we face.

UNLOADING OUR CULTURAL BAGGAGE

[THE FIRST CHALLENGE]{.cotx} is to slough off some limiting notions of
love perpetuated by our culture. For example:

[Love is an object or state to be attained, some kind of fixed
ideal.]{.epub-i}

In reality, love is fluid; it's a verb, not a noun. Love is a living
capacity within us that is always present, even when we don't sense it.
And there are many kinds of love. Sanskrit has different words to
describe love for a brother or sister, love for a teacher, love for a
partner, love for one's friends, love of nature, and so on. English has
only one word, which leads to never-ending confusion.

[The height of love is romantic love---ecstasy and torment.]{.epub-i}

As playwright Oscar Wilde wrote in [The Importance of Being
Earnest]{.epub-i}, "The very essence of romance is uncertainty." It's a
journey filled with peril; we're at the mercy of outside forces. We're
shot through with arrows. We fall hopelessly. We lose ourselves. We're
struck by lightning. We ask flower petals to reveal whether he or she
"loves us or loves us not." In reality, when our eyes are fixed on
romance, we can miss the deep, sustainable love right before us. I'll
always remember overhearing a young woman tell a friend, "You know, I
was telling my brother that I love my fianc[é]{.span-symbols-sym}, but I
miss how intense my last relationship was. And he said to me, 'Yeah, and
all you're missing is the aggravation.'"

[Love will rescue us and complete us.]{.epub-i}

This dictum tells us that without the love of another, we're
insufficient, unable to live fully on our own. This kind of magical
thinking fills old-fashioned bodice-ripper novels and Hollywood movies,
the land of achy breaky hearts and blue eyes crying in the rain. But it
doesn't have to shape our lives.

In a conversation we had, Linda Carroll explained to me that if we don't
question these messages, we may unconsciously accept two extreme visions
of love: "There's stage one, where everything is perfect, and stage
three, where everything's horrible, rather than good-enough love or
quiet love or
we-had-a-good-day-and-sat-peacefully-and-supported-each-other
(but-not-too-much) love. That's not a hot song. Who would buy it? It's
the drama of love that we're hooked into in our culture, not the
peacefulness of love."

Or as Molly, a woman I met at a meditation center, told me, "When I was
younger, the only topic that interested me was heartbreak. I was
constantly heartbroken and fed off of it. I was always trying to capture
that feeling of just being scraped out, raw, and desperate."

I'm not knocking passion or fireworks, but when our focus is on seeking,
perfecting, or clinging to romance, the charge is often generated by
instability, rather than by an authentic connection with another person.
Then, as novelist Zadie Smith has written in her novel [White
Teeth]{.epub-i}, "The object of the passion is just an accessory to the
passion itself."

RECOGNIZING REAL LOVE

[REAL LOVE MAY]{.cotx} run on a lower voltage, but it's also more
grounded and sustainable. From our first breath to our last, we're
presented again and again with the opportunity to experience deep,
lasting, and transformative connection with other beings: to love them
and be loved by them; to show them our true natures and to recognize
theirs. In concert with them, we open our hearts to give and receive. We
share joy and compassion, struggles and sorrows, gains and losses. And
we learn in our bones what it means to be part of something bigger than
ourselves.

Centuries ago, the Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu described a profound and
empowering love: "Being deeply loved by someone gives you strength,
while loving someone deeply gives you courage." And though the earth has
spun on its axis countless times since then, we can still hear that
truth if we listen for it. As a character in Toni Morrison's novel
[Jazz]{.epub-i} says, "Don't ever think I fell for you, or fell over
you. I didn't fall in love, I rose in it."

My student Samantha wrote to me about the expansive, reverberating love
she witnessed in her own family. "This past year, my father had heart
surgery," she said. "During his stint in the hospital, he pressed the
call light for the nurse multiple times, which went unheeded. He ended
up wetting the bed. My mother and I found him soaked and embarrassed
when we returned from having lunch in the hospital cafeteria. My mother,
who's a former nurse, went to work immediately---removing his soiled
clothing, taking him to the bathroom to clean him, and changing the bed.

"As I watched her work with such determination and humility, I thought,
[Now, that's what love is]{.epub-i}. We are bombarded with media images
of weddings, engagement rings, parties, and flowers, but this is not
love. Love is defined by difficult acts of human compassion and
generosity. I felt so proud of both of them that day (and always) for
what they accomplished. They would be embarrassed by the telling of this
story, but they are my heroes."

In Samantha's account, we see not only the depth of love between her
parents but also how its power radiates outward to all who witness it.
People often speak to me about feeling enlarged by their regard for
another, stirred by mutual generosity and devotion. When I ask them to
describe their experience of being loved, they talk about feeling at
home in the world, cherished and recognized, affirmed and encouraged.

No connection is always easy or free of strife, no matter how many
minutes a day we meditate. It's how we relate to conflict, as well as to
our differing needs and expectations, that makes our relationships
sustainable. Even when we do our very best to treat those close to us
with utmost respect and understanding, conflict happens. That's life.
That's human nature.

But what's also human nature, and what keeps us coming back to each
other, is the fundamental desire to connect. "Human beings are social
creatures," wrote author and surgeon Atul Gawande in [The New
Yorker]{.epub-i}. "We are social not just in the trivial sense that we
like company, and not just in the obvious sense that we each depend on
others. We are social in a more elemental way: simply to exist as a
normal human being requires interaction with other people."

THE ATTACHMENT PARADOX

[THAT URGE TO]{.cotx} connect persists from the cradle to the grave,
according to the late British psychoanalyst John Bowlby. Bowlby is the
architect of attachment theory, which credits our early connections,
especially with our mothers, as shaping our relationships throughout our
lives. If our caregivers were able to meet our most important emotional
needs, we gradually learn emotional regulation and self-care. We also
develop the ability to form secure connections with others. If not, our
attachment orientation will likely tend toward anxiety or avoidance.

I see both expressions of attachment difficulties in students all the
time. For example, Nick's mother lost a baby a year before Nick was
born, and she was still drowning in grief during his infancy. Today,
Nick tends to worry obsessively that the people who matter most to him
will suddenly abandon him. On the other hand, Elaine, whose mother was
hospitalized for several months soon after Elaine was born, tends to
withdraw as soon as a potential partner gets close. During the course of
psychotherapy and meditation retreats, both Nick and Elaine identified
these early disruptions in attachment as a source of their challenges in
relationships.

But are strong attachments really a good thing?

Those who are familiar with the language of Buddhist teachings are often
puzzled by our human need for close connections and worry that such
relationships represent an unhealthy form of clinging. [Aren't I
supposed to practice just the opposite?]{.epub-i} they wonder. [Isn't
non-attachment the preferred, more enlightened state?]{.epub-i} As one
perplexed meditator said to me, "I want to be like the Dalai Lama, but I
also want to love my husband."

In reality, there is no conflict between loving others deeply and living
mindfully.

There are particular people with whom we have strong connections, and
this is a good thing: Our babies. Our beloveds. Our parents, siblings,
and other family members. Our teachers. Our BFFs. In fact, the Dalai
Lama often mentions special relationships in his life, notably with his
mother, whom he credits with instilling in him the seeds of kindness and
compassion.

The Dalai Lama has also said that we can live without religion and
meditation, but cannot survive without affection. At the same time, the
Buddhist teachings discourage us from clinging and grasping to those we
hold dear, and from trying to control the people or the relationship.
What's more, we're encouraged to accept the impermanence of all things:
the flower that blooms today will be gone tomorrow, the objects we
possess will break or fade or lose their utility, our relationships will
change, life will end.

When we look closely at how the word [attachment]{.epub-i} is used in
both psychology and Buddhist thought, what we discover is more paradox
than contradiction. As Baljinder Sahdra and Phillip Shaver, a psychology
professor emeritus at the University of California--Davis, have pointed
out in [The International Journal for the Psychology of
Religion]{.epub-i}, the terms may confuse, but the underlying intentions
are quite similar: "Both systems highlight the importance of giving and
receiving love and of minimizing anxious clinging or avoidant aloofness
and suppression of unwanted mental experiences."

In my own teaching, I find it helpful to describe the parallels this
way: the secure attachment of Western psychology is actually akin to
Buddhist non-attachment; avoidant attachment is the inverse of being
mindful and present; and anxious attachment aligns with Buddhist notions
of clinging and grasping.

A WHOLE-BODY EXPERIENCE

[WHATEVER LANGUAGE WE]{.cotx} use to describe healthy relationships,
when we're in them, we feel nourished by them, in body as well as mind.
Roger, one of my students, writes: "I have love for my wife, my
daughter, myself, my experiences, my friends. But what's the
commonality? For me, it's a physical sensation that arises when I'm in a
loving state. It's not a lustful state or a friendship state. It's that
warm quality we know from practicing lovingkindness and compassion. For
me, real love occurs when I'm experiencing that physical sensation."

In fact, scientists have begun to document the far-reaching physical
implications of connectedness, which range from relieving pain to
enhancing the function of our nervous systems.

Richard Davidson, a neuropsychologist at the University of
Wisconsin--Madison, investigated the effects of touch and companionship
during stressful experiences. In a 2006 study, he and his colleagues
used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to monitor the levels of fear and
pain experienced by women when they were given mild electric shocks.
When left completely alone, the women felt both fear and pain, and the
areas of their brains responsible for emotion were particularly active.

However, if a member of the lab team held their hands, the women's
brains showed less fear, even though the physical pain remained. And
when the women's husbands held their hands during the shocks, their
brain activity calmed down markedly at every level. It turned out that
the calming effect was directly proportional to the connection they felt
with their comforter.

Science tells us that love not only diminishes the experience of
physical pain but can make us---and our beloveds---healthier. Barbara
Fredrickson has studied what she terms [micro-moments of
connection]{.epub-i}. "It's when you share a genuine positive feeling
with another living being," she explained to the audience at a talk in
New York. "It could be laughing with a friend, or hugging your neighbor
with compassion, or it could be smiling at a baby. It doesn't even need
to be your baby. It could be the baby on the plane."

Fredrickson shared that science suggests these micro-moments may be more
powerful than we think. Research found that when one person's smiles,
gestures, and postures began to be mirrored by the other person, the
synchronization was more than skin deep.

"When you're really connecting with somebody else," Fredrickson said,
"your heart rhythms come into sync; your biochemistries come into sync.
Even your neural firings come into sync." What's more, that biological
resonance of good feeling and goodwill has lasting effects. Increasing
the quantity of micro-moments supports the function of the vagus nerve,
the long cranial nerve that wends its way from the brain to the abdomen,
enhancing the body's ability to slow a racing heart and regulate
inflammation and glucose levels.

"This isn't just about your health," Fredrickson said, "because when
you're really connecting with someone else, your heart is getting a
mini-tune-up and so is theirs. The more you connect, the more you
fortify this wiring to connect, and the more you lower your odds of
having a heart attack and increase your odds of living a long, happy,
and healthy life."

Fredrickson says it gives her goose bumps to realize that merely smiling
at someone can have significant health consequences. In her own life,
she now sees every interaction as an opportunity to make those
micro-moments happen, whether it's through playing with her cats and two
sons or smiling at the toddler on the plane. "It's all part of a magic
that keeps our bonds strong and our hearts healthy," she said. "So stop
waiting for the cupid's arrow or the lightning bolt to choose you.
Choose love. Choose to connect with the people in your midst."

In this part, we'll explore real love with our partners, our children,
our parents and siblings, as well as our dear friends, close colleagues,
and spiritual teachers. How do we love another skillfully? How do we
take our beautiful and pure intentions and find expression for them? How
do we contend with loss, disappointment, and hurt? And how do we stay
vulnerable enough to experience real love, knowing that it's
impermanent?

In a nutshell: one moment at a time. But of course there's more to it
than that: simple, but not easy.

[]{#part0018.html}

 

[10](#part0041.html_c_ch10){.calibre2}

[BARRIERS TO FINDING REAL LOVE](#part0041.html_c_ch10){.calibre2}

[Love does not begin and end the way we seem to think it does.]{.epub-i}

---JAMES BALDWIN

"[P]{.cic}[ULL THE THORNS FROM YOUR]{.cotx} heart. Then you will see the
rose gardens within you," wrote Rumi, the thirteenth-century Sufi poet
and mystic.

Why focus on the "thorns"---all of those barriers to love we may feel
within---instead of cultivating it directly? And what are these thorns,
anyway?

Though it may sound paradoxical, identifying our thoughts, emotions, and
habitual patterns of behavior is the key to freedom and transformation.
If we don't acknowledge the places where we're stuck, we inevitably
twist ourselves into knots to bypass certain feelings and perceptions,
and the love that would otherwise be available to us also becomes tied
up in knots. But when we set an intention to explore our emotional hot
spots, we create a pathway to real love.

For example, no matter what we think we [should]{.epub-i} do, I don't
think you can coerce yourself into loving your neighbor---or your
boss---when you can't stand him. But if you try to understand your
feelings of dislike with mindfulness and compassion, being sure not to
forget [self]{.epub-i}-compassion, you create the possibility for
change. Your neighbor or your boss may still do things that annoy you,
but the anger and tightness you feel in your chest whenever you see him
is bound to diminish, leaving you freer and more available for love.

Instead of exclusively searching outside of ourselves for the source of
our difficulties with others, we also look within. This is true for all
relationships. Our longing for closeness brings us face-to-face with
those inner blocks. And so we begin at home.

THE GREAT BALANCING ACT

[YOU DON'T HAVE]{.cotx} to love yourself unconditionally before you can
give or receive real love. This turns the quest for self-love into yet
another self-improvement project---an additional barrier to feeling
whole and deserving of love.

The good news is that opportunities for love enter our lives
unpredictably, whether or not we've perfected self-compassion or
befriended our inner critic. When we develop our ability to love in one
realm, we simultaneously nourish our ability in others, as long as we
remain open to the flow of insight and compassion.

Just as a prism refracts light differently when you change its angle,
each experience of love illuminates love in new ways, drawing from an
infinite palette of patterns and hues. We gaze at an infant and feel our
hearts swell, and when we notice it's not the result of anything the
baby has done, we can begin to imagine regarding ourselves the same way.
We learn from any relationship in which we've made a heartfelt
connection.

Yet this balancing act between self-regard and love for others is
delicate; we suffer when our sense of worthiness relies too heavily on
what we give or receive. Some of us give away too much of ourselves and
call it love. Perhaps we've been told that if we love others enough and
sacrifice more, we will ultimately be fulfilled. Some of us try to
possess others in order to feel whole. Perhaps we've been told that if
we feel control in our relationships, we are more empowered. But when we
come from a place of inner impoverishment, love becomes merely hunger:
hunger for reassurance, for acclaim, for affirmation of our being.

For my student Emma, love was a lofty vision of idealism and
self-sacrifice. The pattern began the summer after her freshman year of
college, when she went to Italy to study Dante. "The professor focused
on St. Francis as he's shown in Dante, and we visited Assisi," Emma
recalls. "Francis was a hero of the [Divine Comedy]{.epub-i} because of
his ideal vision of love. He humbles himself completely, puts his face
in the dirt, and renounces everything. The image our professor
emphasized was that St. Francis emptied himself out like a cup---that he
became an empty vessel to be filled with God.

"My idea of love was just being a steady, reassuring, utterly forgiving,
and kind background, in front of which my brilliant significant other
could play out his brilliance. I wanted to be selfless." What's more,
she says, "I was drawn to men I perceived as deeply troubled genius
types. I was an English major, and historic literary relationships, like
that of V[é]{.span-symbols-sym}ra and Vladimir Nabokov, seemed to
justify my notion of love, though my friends were horrified by how much
autonomy I was willing to give up. Still, giving in entirely to another
felt holy, pure, and essential.

"I remember once going on what seemed like a perfectly normal date to
Boston's Museum of Fine Arts with my first serious boyfriend. It was
springtime, and we went on a walk after, and he just kept repeating, 'I
can't do this ... I can't ... I can't...' I panicked," Emma says in
retrospect. "I couldn't figure out what he was so upset about. Finally,
he said, 'I can't tell what you want, what you're thinking...'"
Suddenly, Emma realized they were in actuality two separate people
rather than her idealized vision of how a relationship must be: never
two, only as one.

So often we operate from ideas of love that don't fit our reality. It
was only after Emma unpacked her assumptions about intimate
relationships that she was able to start treating herself with the kind
of care and respect she'd bestowed on others---and her relationships
gradually became more mutual and satisfying.

Ultimately, as Jungian psychologist James Hollis writes in [The Eden
Project]{.epub-i}, "The best thing we can do for our relationship with
others ... is to render our relationship to ourselves more conscious."

UNPACKING OUR ASSUMPTIONS

[I ONCE GAVE]{.cotx} a talk about equanimity, and afterward, a woman
approached me. At first she mentioned the beauty of the church where the
lecture took place; then she thanked me for coming. But the whole time,
she seemed to be squirming inside her skin, her eyes darting around, not
looking at me. "What would you say to someone you knew was being
physically abused?" she asked finally, her gaze directed up at the
ceiling. I didn't challenge whether her question was hypothetical or
autobiographical, and I thought carefully about how to answer, sensing
that a lot might be at stake.

"Well," I replied, "it's really important to have lovingkindness for
oneself. When we talk about equanimity in the context of abuse, we're
talking about boundaries. Sometimes people in abusive situations think
they're responsible for the other person's happiness or that they're
going to fix them and make them feel better. The practice of equanimity
teaches that it's not all up to you to make someone else happy." She
seemed to thoughtfully consider what I was saying, we looked deeply into
each other's eyes, and she thanked me and left.

In fact, the practice of equanimity also makes us realize that it's
[never]{.epub-i} up to someone else to make [us]{.epub-i} happy either.
This can be a bitter pill to swallow, especially when you're lonely.
Singer Janis Joplin famously said, "Onstage I make love to 25,000
different people, then I go home alone." It's not bad to go home alone
if you feel whole. But if you go home alone thinking you're not enough
without another person next to you, that can be a source of great pain.

My student Dan, who is vulnerable to depression, used to dream that once
he became a parent, his demons would somehow magically disappear. "Maybe
because I always felt so harshly judged by my own father, I believed
that the only way for me to heal was to have a child of my own," he says
now. "After my son was born, my most cherished hopes were realized.
Being a stay-at-home dad gave my life meaning. My kid needed me and I
was there, unlike my own dad. As Jake got older, we went to baseball and
basketball games and on all sorts of father-son outings. I mean, we were
a [team]{.epub-i}, even after he started elementary school."

But once Jake hit third grade and became more interested in playing
LEGOs with his friends than spending all his free time with his dad, Dan
sank into a deep depression. "It was very painful, but the only way to
climb out of that dark place was to really see the burden I'd laid on
this little kid for my own happiness," Dan reflects. "For his sake as
well as mine, I had to let go and let him develop into his own person."
A combination of psychotherapy and mindfulness, with a strong emphasis
on self-compassion, lifted Dan out of his codependent and depressive
state, and ultimately saved Dan's relationship with his son.

In order to free ourselves from our assumptions about love, we must ask
ourselves what those long-held, often buried assumptions are and then
face them, which takes courage, humility, and kindness. Do we believe,
as Dan once did, that someone else is responsible for our happiness? Or
that we're responsible for someone else's happiness?

Our unconscious expectations take many forms. Kathryn explained what she
learned when a significant relationship ended: "I realized that one of
the underlying assumptions of this relationship that I had not
communicated with him was this transaction: I'm going to take care of
him and try to heal him, and then he was going to take care of me. When
I went to therapy, I recognized that I, like my ex-partner, was also
suffering from my own acute trauma. My father is an alcoholic. He was a
difficult person and abusive in various ways. But what I wanted from my
ex-partner was to fix him and then fall apart and have him fix me. We
invest in these relationships with so much of our own personal pain and
hopes. But this is deeply unfair to oneself and to the other person."

Perhaps we've believed that if we loved a friend or child or sibling or
spouse enough, our love would cure all ills. We'd suffer fewer painful
setbacks, as would our loved ones. No more desperate midnight phone
calls or interventions. Do we believe that we're at fault because
someone we care for is suffering deeply? Do we expect another person to
complete us or fix us?

MAKING PEACE WITH FEAR

[WHEN WE PAY]{.cotx} attention to sensations in our bodies, we can feel
that love is the energetic opposite of fear. Love seems to open and
expand us right down to the cellular level, while fear causes us to
contract and withdraw into ourselves. Yet so often, fear keeps us from
being able to say [yes]{.epub-i} to love---perhaps our greatest
challenge as human beings.

Close relationships ask us to open our hearts and expose our innermost
thoughts and feelings. Yet if you felt unseen or unappreciated in
childhood, the risk of self-disclosure can seem almost life-threatening.
Or if you were valued only as a "good kid" and not encouraged to express
your individuality, intimacy may feel suffocating. How we felt in
relation to our caregivers in childhood is the (often unconscious)
prototype for our connections later in life. Becoming more conscious of
those early feelings can make us less fearful of dropping our protective
masks.

This fear of loss is natural, especially if you've had a big loss early
in life. But it can also keep you from savoring the love that's
available to you right now.

WORKING WITH THE BARRIERS

[AS WE EXPLORE]{.cotx} new ways of loving and being loved by others, we
need to equip ourselves with open, pliant minds; we need to be willing
to investigate, experiment, and evaluate as we approach a topic we
thought we knew so much about.

I imagine an internal version of a position taught in tai chi, in which
the knees are always slightly bent. Sometimes called the Horse Stance,
it is thought to increase the flow of energy throughout the body. It
also lowers the center of gravity, increasing stability in the event of
an unexpected blow.

In the practice of mindfulness, the counterpart to the Horse Stance
might be called the Stance of Inquiry. We attend to the present moment.
We gather in our attention, again and again, and open to whatever comes,
humbly accepting it. In doing so, we begin to peel back the layers of
conditioning and unconscious expectations. We can't judge whether
they're realistic or not until we know we have them. We start to discern
what, in actuality, is available to us, both in terms of what we can
give and what we can receive. And at a deeper level, we realize that
love simply, perpetually exists and that it's a matter of psychic
housekeeping to make room for it.

As psychoanalyst and philosopher Erich Fromm said in his book [The Art
of Loving]{.epub-i}: "Love is not a relationship to a specific person;
it is an attitude, an orientation of character which determines the
relatedness of a person to the world as a whole..."

CHAPTER 10 PRACTICES

[Loss and gain meditation]{.epub-i}

This practice is one of neutralizing our fears when it comes to love for
others. We can recognize that all of life's conditions are constantly
changing, which naturally includes our relationships. In any moment, we
may encounter some element of change, which can be triggering for some,
particularly those who have developed certain fears around intimacy.

1\. With our inhalations, we allow ourselves to engage with the pain of
fear, especially surrounding the potential for change in any moment.
Rather than pushing the feeling away, we welcome it with each breath.

2\. With our exhalations, we recognize the capacity we have in each
moment to gain perspective, even amid discomfort. We recognize the space
we have for acceptance and gratitude, and see the constant changes of
our relationships with curiosity and flexibility.

This practice is one of dis-identifying with our self-preoccupations
around love for another, and empowering our fears into growth.

[Inner abundance practice]{.epub-i}

In this exercise, we'll examine the feelings of deficiency and
self-contraction that often get confused with love for others---when we
become lost in feeling like we are responsible for the happiness of
others, and lose sight of our inner abundance in the process.

1\. Throughout the day, notice moments when you become overwhelmed with
feelings of responsibility for others---be it a parent, significant
other, child, student, or friend. You may be convinced that it's your
job to give more of yourself to this person, or perhaps you feel a sense
of resentment---that this person should feel the same way and doesn't.

2\. Try connecting to the weight of this feeling with more spaciousness,
and explore what happens both in your body and to your mood as you
relax.

3\. Take as long as you need to describe your experience of relating to
the feeling in different ways---with self-judgment, resentment, fear of
permanence, and/or fear of loss versus that state of adopting a "big
mind" perspective. Look for moments of:

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [Anger]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [Desire]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [Judgment and/or self-judgment]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [Restlessness/impatience/frustration]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [Uncertainty]{.epub-i}

This practice is completely portable, meaning you can try it out during
any experiences of overwhelm. It particularly helps strip away those
confusing and restrictive assumptions about love for others---such as
the all-too-common notion that love is about recognizing our
responsibility to fix others or be fixed by others in return. It is a
practice of cultivating open awareness, which makes us become more
curious and creative in the ways we relate to others and ourselves.
Through recognizing the space we have within ourselves, and the
availability of the feeling that we are enough, we make room for real
love.

[]{#part0019.html}

 

[11](#part0041.html_c_ch11){.calibre2}

[CULTIVATE CURIOSITY AND AWE](#part0041.html_c_ch11){.calibre2}

[O]{.cic}[NE FOUNDATION OF LOVING RELATIONSHIPS]{.cotx} is curiosity,
keeping open to the idea that we have much to learn even about those we
have been close to for decades. I think of the night when an old friend
of mine stood up at a dinner party and launched into a rousing German
drinking song. I looked at her in wonder as her hands swept the air. She
had most of the table singing along with her by the second refrain. And
this from a shy and soft-spoken woman who had always run from the
spotlight. All these years, and she could still surprise me.

Who knows what capacities lie dormant in those we hold dear? We have a
history together that has set a tone between us, and we've bonded
through common interests and shared experiences. We may even say to
mutual friends that there's nothing about him or her that would surprise
us.

But think for a minute. Do your children, your spouse, your closest
friend know everything about you?

Jenny was a high-powered corporate lawyer. She'd never found a partner
she thought was a "fit," even though she'd dated with deliberation for
months at a time. She had never wanted children. She was brilliant,
funny, generous, a great friend and traveling companion who, as she
neared middle age, didn't seem to have a shred of a nurturing instinct.

When a mutual friend was diagnosed with Stage 4 ovarian cancer, Jenny
used her formidable advocacy skills to get our friend into a promising
clinical trial. That was impressive---and just the kind of skillful
effort that Jenny was famous for.

But as our friend was hit by the side effects of multiple powerful
drugs, I saw a new side of Jenny. She went to our friend's house every
day, anticipating provisions or gear that would give her some comfort,
smoothed communications with her doctors, and stayed close as her cancer
gradually went into remission.

One day I thanked Jenny for her tender caregiving and said I was amazed
at how she'd stepped into this role. Jenny then told me something I
hadn't known: right after high school, she'd spent three years as a
volunteer at the hospice where her beloved grandmother had died.

Suddenly I understood: this part of Jenny had been set aside as she
focused on work, but it was there when she (and our friend) needed it.
After our twenty-two years of friendship, Jenny had caught me by
surprise, I was in awe of her and in awe of all the things about her I
might yet discover.

What makes awe such a powerful call to love is that it's disruptive. It
sneaks up on us. It doesn't ask our permission to wow us; it just does.
Awe can arise from a single glance, a sound, a gesture.

Say you're sitting with a relative and you tell him something that makes
him laugh. He has a great laugh, loud and long and free. That laugh is
an aspect of his generosity in its most outward manifestation. And
because you're paying attention, even though you've heard this laugh
countless times before, now you hear it with awe.

SEEING WHAT'S RIGHT IN FRONT OF US

[FRITZ PERLS, THE]{.cotx} co-founder of Gestalt therapy, said, "Boredom
is lack of attention." Our tendency, of course, is to seek out intense
experiences in order to feel alive. If our attention is not trained to
notice routine or subtlety, we simply wait for the next big hit and
switch off until then. It often requires a conscious effort to take an
interest in the person before us, to look past our assumptions about
them, but it's an effort that keeps us open to connection.

I've met many people who have tremendous power and resources in
conventional terms, people who seem to have it all, who elicit envy from
almost everyone they meet. It is only by not buying into some projected
persona (it could be my projection or theirs, or sometimes both) that
I've been able to see them more deeply and to discover their
vulnerability. It's only by being fully present that I've been
emotionally available to hear about their alcoholic brother or troubled
teen, their immense frustration and anxiety, and the beauty of their
undying love for their family member.

I've also met many people with very few resources, who are really broke
or depressed, but who reveal surprising strengths. They are buoyed up by
helping their disabled neighbor or the troubled kid down the block or
other people in their community who are hurting. It's all too easy to
slot someone into the category of "needing help" and not to recognize
the tremendous help they are offering to others.

THE POWER OF AWE

[IT'S TOUGH TO]{.cotx} have an authentic relationship with awe in the
age of "awesome," a word that has become so overused as to be drained of
its meaning. These days when someone says that something is "awesome,"
they usually mean it ironically: "I had to wait for three and a half
hours at the DMV. That was awesome." Or perhaps they're just
complimenting us on the appetizer we order: "Awesome choice." But
genuine awe connects us with the world in a new way.

A student of mine comes from a family that prizes self-sufficiency. She
was brought up to be able to do things for herself; asking favors was
frowned upon. When she met her husband, self-sufficiency was something
they had in common. They were drawn to each other's competence. "We've
been married a dozen years now," she says, "and we definitely get stuck
in routines, but there are aspects of him that still blow me away.
Whenever I come home from a trip, he just assumes he'll pick me up at
the airport or train station. I don't even have to ask." She's reminded
each time of his generosity, made even sweeter because both of them know
she could easily make her way home on her own. "Each time I'm a little
surprised. It always feels as if I've stumbled upon this tender gift."

LETTING GO OF FANTASY

[WHEN IT COMES]{.cotx} to finding a partner or even a close friend, most
of us carry within us an idealized image of "the one." We search for
that perfect person, often projecting our fantasy ideal onto others. And
when, inevitably, the people on the receiving end of our personal
Hollywood movie don't measure up, we're left feeling lonely, frustrated,
and pessimistic about our chances of ever finding our match.

Whatever the source of our imagined ideal---whether we've conjured it
from books, songs, movies, real-life role models, or all of the
above---it's essential that we bring our notions into the light of
awareness. It's only when we start to distinguish reality from fantasy
that we can humbly, with eyes wide open, forge loving and sustainable
connections with others.

In the past, Yvonne had always fallen for tall, handsome, and powerful
but withholding men. Alejandro, on the other hand, was shortish, pudgy,
nurturing, and playful. And though his interest in her was keen, Yvonne
had long delayed getting involved with him because he didn't fit her
"type." Then one day she got lost---literally.

Yvonne had a terrible sense of direction, and getting lost had always
been a problem. This brain glitch of hers was so severe that she got
lost even when using her GPS. Her previous boyfriends had been critical
and insulting when she called them from the road, so she was afraid to
telephone Alejandro, whom she had started dating despite her initial
resistance. Since she'd been driving around in an increasing frenzy for
more than half an hour trying to find his house, she finally broke down
and called.

"Pull over as soon as you can," Alejandro advised. Even after she
stopped the car, she was still agitated, waiting for a negative putdown.
"I love you," Alejandro assured her. "Just tell me where you are." He
found Yvonne's location and guided her turn by turn, staying on the line
the whole time. When she arrived at his house, he greeted her with a
loving embrace and dinner on the table.

Being welcomed this way came as a shock to Yvonne, who was used to being
with men who regarded her vulnerability with disgust. But Alejandro made
her feel cherished and safe. He loved her for the person she was, not
for some idea of the person he thought she should be. And Yvonne, too,
came to love him for the person he was, leaving behind her romantic
ideal.

When we identify the thoughts that keep us from seeing others as they
truly are, instead of hoping they'll magically live up to some idealized
image, we prepare the ground for real love.

SET AN INTENTION

[IN RECENT YEARS,]{.cotx} many teachers and therapists have been talking
about relationship as a path of awakening. This vision of love is not
confined to achieving psychological wholeness; looked at in this way,
personal connection becomes a spiritual practice.

In [Embracing the Beloved]{.epub-i}, authors Stephen and Ondrea Levine
wrote: "If another person is the most important thing in your life, then
you're in trouble and they're in trouble because they become responsible
for your suffering. But if consciousness is the most important thing in
our lives and relationship is a means toward that end ... Ah! then we
are approaching paradise. We are approaching the possibility of actually
becoming a human being before we die."

The place to begin is with intention, say the Levines: "When one commits
to practices that clear the mind and expose the heart---such as
mindfulness, forgiveness and loving kindness---what once seemed
unworkable may well become the very center of the relationship ... Our
intention itself has considerable healing potential."

And so we begin with an intention: to stay open to the present,
available to curiosity and awe, and to pay attention to the beings the
universe sends our way, knowing that we might come to deeply cherish
them.

CHAPTER 11 PRACTICES

[Attention]{.epub-i}

Feelings of apathy as they relate to our relationships often stem from
insufficiently paying attention to those around us. Remember: everyone
we interact with has the capacity to surprise us in an infinite number
of ways. What can first open us up to each of our innate capacities for
love is merely to recognize that.

But how?

This exercise is about finding creative ways to pay attention to our
relationships with greater intention---to open up, to cultivate
curiosity, to recognize the infinite potential to feel awe in our lives.

1\. Start by paying attention to each of your interactions with more
focus. Notice if the intentions you bring to different interactions vary
depending on who it is you are engaging with. Are you more closed off to
some? Carrying certain assumptions with others? Try to notice any urges,
expectations, yearnings, and judgments you may have as they come up. You
don't have to push them away, but recognize how they might be affecting
your perspective.

2\. Within each interaction you have, try to notice something
surprising, or to try a new mode of interacting. Maybe you had never
made such deliberate eye contact with a given person before---and doing
so makes you see them in a new way. Perhaps you tend toward steering
conversations with friends; maybe you commit to practicing more
restraint, allowing your friend to take the lead. You may find you see
your friend in a new light.

3\. Consider the following open-ended questions to ask friends, family
members, significant others, and acquaintances. Surely there are some
situations that may not be ideal for these questions, but even
considering in your own head how different individuals may answer them
can help us sustain a sense of curiosity.

Questions:

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [What's one of your most poignant memories from
childhood?]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [Is there a certain poem, piece of music, or
work of art you've encountered that has moved you in a memorable
way?]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [What experiences do you associate with each of
the seasons?]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [Have you ever had a job you don't often think
about?]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [What's your favorite time of day?]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [Who was the person you felt closest to during
your early childhood? Adolescence?]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [Where in the world do you feel warmest and
safest?]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [How do you relax?]{.epub-i}

Asking questions is an opportunity for creativity and personal
expression, both for the person asking and the person answering. Feel
free to come up with some of your own questions to help bring more
attention and curiosity to your interactions, but make sure to recognize
your intentions consistently. Resolve to bring more mindfulness to the
connection between your larger aspiration to find deeper connection and
awe in your relationships at large, and the small gestures that comprise
your everyday encounters.

[Meditation: Lovingkindness toward a benefactor and friends]{.epub-i}

We start with offering lovingkindness to someone who has been of help to
us. This person is known as a benefactor---maybe it's someone who's been
directly generous to us or kind to us, or maybe they've inspired us even
though we've never met them. They symbolize the power of love for us.
The benefactor is the one who when we think of them, we smile. It could
be an adult, a child, a pet.

As you call to mind a benefactor, you can get an image of them, say
their name, and begin to offer the phrases of lovingkindness to them.
"May you be safe, be happy, be healthy, live with ease."

Then, after some time, move on to offering lovingkindness to a friend.
You can start with a friend who's doing well right now. They're enjoying
success or good fortune in some aspect of life. You can get an image of
them, say their name to yourself, and offer the phrases of
lovingkindness to them: "May you be safe, be happy, be healthy, live
with ease."

And then a friend who's having difficulty right now, they're
experiencing some kind of loss, or pain, or fear; bring them to mind.
Get a feeling for their presence, as though they were right in front of
you, and offer the phrases of lovingkindness to them.

You can end the sitting with a spontaneous offering of lovingkindness to
whoever comes to mind.

[]{#part0020.html}

 

[12](#part0041.html_c_ch12){.calibre2}

[AUTHENTIC COMMUNICATION](#part0041.html_c_ch12){.calibre2}

[P]{.cic}[LAYWRIGHT LILLIAN HELLMAN FAMOUSLY SAID,]{.cotx} "People
change and forget to tell each other." Though I'm guessing she made that
comment with tongue pressed firmly against cheek, it contains a
priceless nugget of truth. When we don't tell those we love about what's
really going on or listen carefully to what they have to say, we tend to
fill in the blanks with stories. For example, we might conclude that a
friend who appears sullen or distracted is angry with us, when in fact
she's depressed or overwhelmed. Or we might worry that our partner
doesn't love us anymore when he seems to snap at us for no reason, only
to discover that he's terrified of being downsized from his job and is
afraid to tell us.

Very often in close relationships, the subject being discussed is not
the subject at all. As psychologist Virginia Satir put it, "The problem
is not the problem; coping is the problem."

So how do we identify what's really going on between us and those we
love? How do we train ourselves to communicate the truth of our
experiences and listen without judgment to theirs? How do we avoid
falling into the trap of repetitive, predictable, and frustrating
patterns of communication and behavior?

From both a Buddhist and Western psychological perspective, the place to
start is with kindness. This may sound simplistic, but studies conducted
at the Gottman Institute in Washington State confirm kindness as the key
predictor of successful marriages. Although many people regard kindness
as a nice general quality, it's not generally perceived as the
cornerstone of healthy relationships.

But setting the intention to practice kindness toward one's partner or
family members or friends does [not]{.epub-i} preclude getting angry or
upset. It doesn't mean sugarcoating the truth. Practicing kindness is
about getting real, but in ways that are constructive and support the
growth of the relationship. As Julie Gottman, co-founder of the Gottman
Institute, said in an interview with [The Atlantic]{.epub-i}, "Kindness
doesn't mean that we don't express our anger, but the kindness informs
how we choose to express the anger. You can throw spears at your
partner. Or you can explain why you're hurt and angry, and that's the
kinder path."

My friend Carolyn recently reminded me that she and her partner
consulted a therapist early in their relationship to deal with conflicts
arising from the frequent presence of Carolyn's ex, with whom she shared
custody of her son. At the end of the first session, the therapist
remarked that she believed the couple would be successful in resolving
their difficulties because they exhibited such "goodwill" toward one
another. In other words: kindness. That was thirty-five years ago.

Kindness is not a fixed trait that we either have or lack, but more like
a muscle that can be developed and strengthened. We exercise kindness in
any moment when we recognize our shared humanity---with all the hopes,
dreams, joys, disappointments, vulnerability, and suffering that
implies. Such simple but profound awareness levels the playing field. We
are all humans doing the best we can.

SELF-DISCLOSURE AND NON-JUDGMENTAL LISTENING

[IN CONSCIOUS RELATIONSHIPS,]{.cotx} we set the intention to investigate
the old stories we tell ourselves and our habits of thinking and
behavior. Practically speaking, this means that we take responsibility
for our actions and reactions, as well as for defensive strategies such
as withdrawing, keeping secrets, or blaming someone else for our
suffering.

"People thrive in a climate of 100% accountability, where nobody blames
or claims victim status," explain relationship experts Kathlyn and Gay
Hendricks in a blog post for [The Huffington Post]{.epub-i}. "From this
empowered position, problems can be solved quickly, because time and
energy are not squandered in a fruitless attempt to find fault."

Taking responsibility for oneself is by definition an act of kindness.
Yet, though 100 percent accountability is a worthy ideal, we're
imperfect beings, and at times, it may take some struggle to get there.
My friend Jonah, a committed meditator, told me about an experience he
had with his best friend, Peter. Ever since they met in college, the two
men have been like brothers, sharing just about everything. In fact,
most people who meet them for the first time assume that Jonah and Peter
[are]{.epub-i} brothers. They even look alike. What's more, their
birthdays are two days apart, and they always celebrate together. Last
year, however, when Jonah phoned Peter to make a plan, Peter dodged the
subject, claiming he was too busy to think about it, and promised to get
back to Jonah the next day. But after not hearing from Peter for a week,
Jonah called him and was shocked and hurt to learn that Peter's new
boyfriend had invited him to go skiing the week of their birthdays---and
that Peter had accepted, without telling Jonah.

Jonah's mindfulness went right out the window. He flew into a rage,
accusing Peter of deliberately deceiving him, then slammed down the
phone. Peter, aware that he'd behaved thoughtlessly, called Jonah
several times to make amends, but Jonah refused to pick up or return
Peter's calls. Finally, Peter waited outside Jonah's building for his
friend to get home from work and followed him inside.

He apologized profusely, admitting that he'd been afraid to share his
plans with Jonah for fear of upsetting him. Instead of telling the
truth, Peter had avoided confrontation and disappeared---a strategy he'd
adopted as a kid when his alcoholic father went on one of his rampages.
For his part, Jonah acknowledged that Peter's behavior triggered old
feelings of being unseen and unimportant in his large family. Though
painful, the conversation proved healing for both men. Not only did they
come up with an alternative plan to celebrate their birthdays, they
agreed that a conflict that could have destroyed the friendship ended up
deepening their bond.

"As tough as it was at first to open up, being vulnerable and saying
what was true made all the difference," reflects Jonah. "Peter and I
both came through trusting that if we can be honest and keep it real,
even when it's hard, our friendship will survive just about anything."

In their book [And Baby Makes Three]{.epub-i}, psychotherapists and
Gottman Institute co-founders John and Julie Gottman describe good
communication between partners when issues arise---which I think applies
to dear friends, as well: "They ask, 'Is there a story behind this for
you, maybe some childhood history that makes this so crucial for you?'
They want to uncover not just the topmost feelings, but the deeper
layers as well."

LIVING WITH YOUR TEACHER

[WHEN WE LIVE]{.cotx} together in a committed relationship, we live with
our teacher, says George Taylor, a therapist who specializes in working
with couples. "We're tested daily, and every day we have the opportunity
to meet our own resistance and reactivity. Moment to moment, what's
going on inside us is reflected in our body language and our response to
our partner, and vice versa. We're incredible mirrors for each other."

The good news, Taylor adds, is that we're highly trainable. "In my own
marriage as well as in my work with couples, I've seen how paying
attention to our often unconscious reactions and judgments enables us to
choose to respond differently. Even small moments of mindfulness can be
powerfully transformational."

When we are willing to explore our own experiences, we open the doorway
to deeper connection and intimacy, he explains. We grow to love and
appreciate our partner for who she or he truly is, and he or she loves
and appreciates us for who we are, unmasked and whole. In the light of
one another's gaze, we are [seen]{.epub-i}.

Daniella and Rayne fell in love and married on a California beach in
2010. After the Supreme Court upheld same-sex marriage legislation in
2015, the couple held a second ceremony to legalize their union. But by
then, their relationship had been tested nearly to the breaking point.

That happened after they decided to open a caf[é]{.span-symbols-sym}
together. Although both women had previously run businesses, only
Daniella had restaurant experience. Still, the early dreaming phases in
which the couple experimented with recipes and envisioned their
caf[é]{.span-symbols-sym} inspired them both and brought them closer. It
wasn't until they signed a lease that they began to fight over every
decision. Daniella is wildly creative but has difficulty limiting her
options, while Rayne has ADHD and gets flustered when things don't
happen quickly. They reached a crossroads when it became clear that
either they could continue to be enraged by each other's quirks and
deficiencies, or they could embrace them and help each other grow. They
consciously opted for the latter path.

Now, says Rayne, "We reflect on how much we've accomplished together."

Adds Daniella, "If there are any struggles, we try to do better. We're
constantly trying to learn more about ourselves. Our life together has
been a complete eye-opening rebirth."

Although much of the work we do in committed relationships we do with
our partners, sometimes it's necessary to start with ourselves.

Clara learned this during a difficult passage in the seventh year of her
marriage to James, when their two children were young. She'd left her
job to care for them, and most days she was content. But often, by the
end of the day when she was feeling tired and the children were cranky,
she resented her husband, especially his TV habit.

Every night when he got home from work, he'd grab the dinner she'd made
for him and plant himself in front of the TV. Clara felt angry and
frustrated by his lack of interest in her. She worried that their
marriage had reached an unhappy stalemate, and it was clear that James
felt it, too. One night when she greeted him after work with her usual
scowl, he remarked, "Just once I'd like to come home to someone who was
happy to see me."

That statement went straight to Clara's heart. She didn't want to hurt
James, yet she wasn't sure how to handle her distress. Then she
remembered the practice for working with difficult emotions that we
reviewed in section 1: RAIN---Recognition, Acknowledgment,
Investigation, and Non-Identification. (Detailed instructions are
[here](#part0009.html_pg52){.calibre2}.)

Clara began with Step 1, Recognize, and let herself fully experience her
feelings. She stood in the doorway looking on as James watched TV. She
noticed that her arms were tightly crossed, with one hip pressed against
the doorjamb in a closed, angry posture. Staring at her husband, she
thought, [He doesn't give a damn about me]{.epub-i}. Before they had
kids, things were different. Sometimes Clara would put on music and
dance with James; sometimes they'd sit and talk. Usually these thoughts
raced through her mind, unnoticed and unchallenged. But when she stopped
to recognize them, as well as the bitterness and self-pity wrapped up in
them, she experienced a startling moment of awareness.

Sitting in the kitchen, Clara moved on to Step 2, Acknowledge. She
acknowledged how sad she was to have such negative, unloving thoughts
about James, while also acknowledging how lonely and taken for granted
she felt. She missed her job, too. She didn't regret her choice to stay
home, but she allowed herself to feel how much she longed for aspects of
her professional life that had given her joy.

Paradoxically, allowing her sadness was a relief for Clara, and she felt
less defensive and angry. As she moved into Step 3 of RAIN, Investigate,
she began to probe why she felt the way she did. She realized that at
the core of her loneliness was a sense of abandonment that echoed her
feelings when her parents divorced. After their breakup, life had become
busier and harder for her mother, and Clara didn't want to be a bother,
so she put a lid on her feelings---just as she'd done with James.

Clara came to see things from James's perspective, too: putting in long
hours on the job, feeling the pressure of supporting the family. Her
resentment softened. She realized that she and James had made choices
together, and she no longer needed to identify herself as the injured
party. She had arrived at Step 4 of RAIN, Non-Identify. This was simply
a phase in their lives. In a few years, the kids would be in school, and
both her marriage and work life would offer new possibilities.

By exploring the truth of her experience, Clara was able to reconnect
with James. She chose quiet times for short talks, and her honesty
created an opening for him to share his own feelings of missing Clara
while also being frustrated by having so little time for himself. "We
initiated a dialogue that is a work in progress," says Clara. "And that
feels very good. Very alive, compared to the stuck place we were in
before. We're much more loving, and trying our best to deal with my need
for connection and his need for space. Now, when we get into tangles, we
[talk]{.epub-i} about what's going on."

"In the hothouse atmosphere of committed relationships, our defenses
arise again and again," says George Taylor. "But the tools of
mindfulness allow us to work with them and to fulfill our own vision of
becoming a loving person, with all the care, forgiveness and generosity
that suggests."

THE PRESSURE COOKER OF FAMILY

[COMMUNICATION AMONG FAMILY]{.cotx} members is often as volatile as it
can be between couples. Adult siblings, children, parents, and other
close relatives may harbor intense feelings like hurt and
resentment---yet often these feelings become buried and then expressed
in unskillful ways. Though partners and close friends may aspire to more
honest dialogue, many families shut down around recognizing differences.

There are many good reasons for this: self-protection or the desire to
protect others; the need to individuate and separate; rivalries; strong
emotions, such as fear and shame; mental or physical illness; parental
conflict and divorce; remarriage; economic instability; generational
differences; the early death of a parent. The causes of familial discord
and distance are countless, but the results are often the same: secrecy,
blame, sadness, hurt, confusion, and feelings of loss and grief.

At some point in our adult lives, we may recognize the love that lingers
beneath the pain, and yearn to heal. But even then, we can't assume that
a family member will have a mindfulness practice or be comfortable with
self-disclosure and non-judgmental listening. That doesn't matter:
remarkable openings can occur when one person sets out to transform an
old, unhappy dynamic.

In his book [It Didn't Start with You]{.epub-i}, therapist Mark Wolynn
recounts how he repaired his damaged relationships with both of his
parents. After traveling to the far corners of the globe, he realized
that the peace and spiritual healing he sought could be achieved only by
reconnecting with his mother and father back home in Pittsburgh.

Wolynn started with his father. His parents had divorced when he was
just thirteen years old. Wolynn and his father rarely got together after
the divorce, even though his father didn't live terribly far away. But
now Wolynn invited him to have a weekly lunch with him, and his father
agreed.

"I had always craved a close relationship with my father, yet neither he
nor I knew how to make it happen. This time, however, we kept talking. I
told him that I loved him and that he was a good father. I shared the
memories of things he did for me when I was small. I could feel him
listening to what I was saying, even though his actions---shrugging his
shoulders, changing the subject---indicated he was not. It took many
weeks of talking and sharing memories. During one of our lunches
together, he looked directly into my eyes and said, 'I didn't think you
ever loved me.' I could barely breathe. It was clear that great pain
welled in both of us. In that moment, something broke open. It was our
hearts. Sometimes, the heart must break in order to open. Eventually, we
began to express our love for each other."

Wolynn went on to find a new connection with his mother, as well. "For
the first time I could remember," he writes, "I was able to let myself
receive my parents' love and care---not in the way I had once expected
it, but in the way they could give it."

CHAPTER 12 PRACTICES

[Experimentation with RAIN]{.epub-i}

Earlier in this chapter, we saw Clara use the RAIN method as a way of
becoming less reactive and impetuous during a conflict with her husband.
As explained more comprehensively in section 1, RAIN is an instructional
acronym used to summarize a mindfulness practice geared toward helping
us adopt a more expansive and flexible relationship with emotional
suffering. Recognize. Acknowledge. Investigate. Non-Identify.

Now to review a more detailed explanation of the process once again ...

When a thorny emotion comes up, we can simply remember RAIN. The first
step, [Recognize]{.epub-i}, is about noticing what is coming up. The
next step is an extension of the first: we [Acknowledge]{.epub-i} the
feeling, allowing it to just be. Next, we [Investigate]{.epub-i} the
emotion by asking questions. We can find freedom in allowing ourselves
to move closer toward the feeling with curiosity, rather than away from
it.

The final step of RAIN---[Non-Identify]{.epub-i}---means that we
consciously don't allow ourselves to be defined by a given emotion,
despite having explored it more deeply.

Now let's try it.

1\. Recall a tough situation or conflict in which the intensity of your
emotions kept you from communicating in a way that felt direct,
authentic, and from a place of integrity.

2\. Next, with the benefit of some perspective, comb through the
emotions you felt during the conflict. This step precedes the RAIN
method and is meant to immerse you in the memory. Did you start out
angry? Resentful? Did you say hurtful things out of guilt?
Disappointment?

3\. After determining some specific emotions that came up, think about
an alternative situation in which you [could have]{.epub-i} practiced
RAIN. This is not an invitation to look back with regret but to feel the
power of self-reflection. What happens when you simply
[Recognize]{.epub-i} how you were feeling? When you
[Acknowledge]{.epub-i} the situation for what it was? How does it feel
to [Investigate]{.epub-i} the situation and your emotions with
curiosity? Does [Non-Identifying]{.epub-i} help expose the places where
we may become blinded by fear or anxiety?

4\. Now that you've familiarized yourself a bit with the RAIN technique,
feel free to write a short reflection about your reactions to the
exercise. You may even want to try actually rewriting the story of the
situation in question in the present tense, as though you are actually
using the RAIN steps as a guide. This can be an empowering exercise for
showing us how capable we are of communicating with greater mindfulness.

[Lovingkindness for a family member]{.epub-i}

One of the reasons that authentic communication can be so difficult with
family is that our family members are often the people we are both
closest to and also those from whom we feel the greatest need to
separate and individuate. These underlying dynamics create paradoxes and
tensions that we may not always be conscious of, but that can contribute
to the reactive communication style that mindfulness so powerfully helps
to shift.

In this exercise, we practice a simple lovingkindness meditation on
behalf of a particular family member. This person may be someone with
whom you've had conflict, someone from whom you've received tremendous
generosity, or someone with whom you have a more complicated and
variable dynamic. Either way, the idea is the same---to open up to the
possibility of transforming a relationship we often think of as set in
stone.

1\. Sit (or lie comfortably on your back) with your eyes closed or your
gaze lowered.

2\. Offer lovingkindness to a family member of your choice by silently
saying, "May this person be safe. May she be happy. May she be healthy.
May she live with ease."

3\. Repeat the phrases at a pace that works for you, focusing your
attention on one phrase at a time.

4\. If your attention wanders, remember you can gently begin again.

5\. As you end the session, consider whether or not you want to reach
out in some way to that person.

[Keeping it real]{.epub-i}

Recall the wisdom from psychotherapists and Gottman Institute
co-founders John and Julie Gottman in their book [And Baby Makes
Three]{.epub-i}: "\[Couples\] ask, 'Is there a story behind this for
you, maybe some childhood history that makes this so crucial for you?'
They want to uncover not just the topmost feelings, but the deeper
layers as well." In my mind, this kind of radical honesty is productive
for our closest friends, as well.

In this exercise, reflect on difficulties you may face in a current
relationship (romantic, professional, platonic, or any other type),
perhaps one that has resurfaced as a pattern. Without overidentifying
with these difficulties, take note of them and explore them.

1\. Begin by asking yourself some questions. Here are a few to get you
started: Do you have trouble voicing your needs? Are you afraid of
expressing anger? How do you react when someone else expresses a need
from you? Even if you identify certain things as personality traits,
remember that you have the power to become more mindful of them, and
communicate the difficulties you have in an effort to work on them.

2\. The second step here is to explore [why]{.epub-i} these patterns may
have come to be. Perhaps there is no reason you can think of, but often
we channel dynamics we are familiar with from childhood in our adult
lives. This can be a very personal exercise that you do in your mind,
simply by thinking. You may choose to write about it, or you may, as the
Gottmans' quotation suggests, discuss it with a loved one. In all of
these ways, this practice of becoming more conscious of ourselves opens
us up to become more conscious of others.

[]{#part0021.html}

 

[13](#part0041.html_c_ch13){.calibre2}

[PLAYING FAIR: A WIN-WIN PROPOSITION](#part0041.html_c_ch13){.calibre2}

[To love well is the task in all meaningful relationships, not just
romantic bonds.]{.epub-i}

---bell hooks

[W]{.cic}[ITH OUR CLOSE FRIENDS, FAMILY]{.cotx} members, and lovers, we
hope to create a special world, one in which we can expect to be treated
fairly, with care, tenderness, and compassion. We hope to trust that the
commitment we've made to each other is mutual and that we'll work
actively to keep it alive.

B. Janet Hibbs, Ph.D., is a family psychologist whose clinical approach
involves relational ethics---what we owe and deserve in family
relationships. In her book, [Try to See It My Way: Being Fair in Love
and Marriage]{.epub-i}, she describes a radical rethinking and
thoughtful negotiation of the fundamental aspects of fairness at the
center of good relationships. She writes about the challenges of
fairness, even though she notes it's a lesson most of us feel we learned
by kindergarten. "We all think we know what's fair, but we don't always
agree---with a spouse, or a partner, or a child (growing or grown) ...
and then what? Fairness is a muddled mix of beliefs, traditions and
multiple and sometimes opposing truths. Yet you need to learn how to be
fair to keep your relationships healthy and make love last."

Her advice requires a willingness to let go of long-held positions and
to approach issues from a fresh perspective. I call this a willingness
to begin again, as we do in meditation. Stop keeping score, Hibbs
suggests. Stop needing to be right. Stop doing things the way you used
to just because that's what you know. Be open to the possibility that
there are other paths available to you in relating to yourself and to
another.

If we are really thinking about the "relational ethics" of our
relationship, that means I'm sponsoring you to have the best life you
can, and you're sponsoring me. We are co-sponsors. We regard our time
together as a collaborative effort to make life better for each of us.

It also means that we don't keep a ledger. I've done three good things
for you, so when are you going to do three good things for me? Real love
doesn't keep score. We're aware that from time to time one person's
needs will take precedence or another person can't contribute as much as
before. A friend becomes ill and needs extra help for a month or two; a
close colleague needs a place to stay after breaking up with his
partner. Yet each person must feel seen and respected, with his or her
needs taken into account. Mutuality is one of life's great balancing
acts.

In the very first discussion group I held to help me explore the topic
of real love, a man said, "Most people think of a good relationship as
fifty-fifty. My dog and I, we're one hundred--one hundred." I've kept
that story in mind looking at love between partners, parents and adult
children, friends, and others.

Hibbs and I recently had an e-mail exchange about score-keeping.
"Ideally in love relationships," she wrote, "reciprocity is a seesaw of
turn-taking, which has a generous feel. People recount quid pro quo
accountings of who owes what to whom when there is a felt (or real)
violation of give-and-take. The trick of course is 'what counts' to
whom, a largely unspoken deal which requires renegotiation when things
go awry, and the seesaw gets stuck in a power play (you owe me and I'm
in control, or I owe you but on what terms of repayment?)."

What might "count" as a gesture of kindness or generosity to one person
in a relationship might be something that would go unrecognized by the
other. There's nothing fundamentally wrong with having different
emotional value systems. What does matter is establishing a secure and
mutual vocabulary within the relationship, to know the kinds of things
that "count" to you and that "count" to your loved ones---not in order
to maintain a transactional system but to give authentically with the
intention of merely giving, rather than, for instance, giving something
[we think]{.epub-i} counts.

REFLECTION

[THINK OF A]{.cotx} few relationships in your life, and simply note what
counts for you in that dynamic, what is your strongest value in that
circumstance. To the degree possible, see if you can discern (or, where
appropriate, resolve to ask) what counts for the other person.

The idea of repayment is firmly rooted in a vocabulary of transaction
and ultimately doesn't engender organic reciprocity. We can't give with
the intention to be given back to, to be repaid; rather, we recognize
the unpredictable ebb and flow of each person's emotional needs in any
relationship, and don't seek to control it by establishing a rigid
currency for emotional availability. We trust the other person, and the
other person trusts us.

MUTUALITY IS CRUCIAL

[I RECENTLY GOT]{.cotx} to know a young woman named Jackie who broke off
her engagement after an incident with her fianc[é]{.span-symbols-sym}.
The day I met her, she was sobbing in the living room of a friend's
house. She'd just come from lunch with her fianc[é]{.span-symbols-sym}
at a restaurant where nothing on the menu had appealed to her. She asked
the waiter if it was possible for the chef to make her a simple pasta
dish that would be easy to prepare but wasn't on offer. With that, her
fianc[é]{.span-symbols-sym} lit into her with fury.

"You are so demanding. You are such a bitch!" he snapped.

After she'd caught her breath, she said, "You know what I want? I want a
partner who will look at the waiter and say, 'She's really special.
Could you see if it's possible to get her what she wants?'"

As Jackie understood intuitively, we each deserve to be cherished and
seen as special in the eyes of our beloved. "To love and to cherish" is
part of traditional wedding vows. I thought Jackie was very
clear-sighted to grasp the significance of her
fianc[é]{.span-symbols-sym}'s reaction to her request. It wasn't just
that her wishes were trivial to him. The very fact that she had asked
had triggered his hostility. I admired her healthy sense of her own
value, something that's not easy to hold on to when we're under attack.
She didn't try to soothe her fianc[é]{.span-symbols-sym} or worry that
she was embarrassing and demanding. Instead, she looked down the long
arc of years that lay before them, and didn't like what she saw. She
didn't like that her simple needs and requests for a little extra
something would be shouted down. She didn't like that she might end up
suppressing her needs just to keep the peace.

A psychologist friend of Jackie's happened to be sitting with us in the
living room that afternoon. She said to her, "I'm going to offer you one
word to guide your future relationships---[mutuality]{.epub-i}."

FAMILY OBLIGATIONS

[IF YOU HAD]{.cotx} siblings, you probably remember protesting to your
parents, "That's not fair!" And unless you're lucky, those old fairness
wars can reignite when elderly parents start to require care and
support.

Gone are the days when Nana lived around the corner, Mom and Dad didn't
hightail it to Florida, Arizona, or a cute little village in Mexico, and
all the adult children in the family stayed put.

Today's sandwich generation juggles multiple pressures, from finances
and demanding jobs to child-rearing. Adding to the pot, many older
adults who need help suffer from a mixture of shame and anger at their
loss of independence. And when old unresolved feelings of hurt, anger,
and injustice get provoked, you've got a surefire recipe for bringing
tensions to a boil.

I hear so many stories: the sister who, whether by choice or by simple
geographic proximity, becomes the primary caregiver for aging
parents---and feels burdened and angry; the brother who foots the bill
for assisted living and smarts with resentment; the siblings who go to
the mat over every detail related to their parents' care and, later, the
disposition of money and family heirlooms; and parents who rage against
any interference by their adult children.

Happily, I've also known many families who've worked things through
successfully. The key is usually a willingness to view the situation
from each family member's perspective, ultimately arriving at a common
understanding that takes into account each person's skills, resources,
and life circumstances. In other words: awareness, flexibility, and
generosity. Even if just one family member initiates open, mindful
dialogue, it often turns out to be wonderfully contagious.

About a year ago, my student Max hit a wall of exhaustion. Between
caring for his ailing mother, his busy pediatric practice, and home life
with his wife and two kids, he knew something had to give. But he wasn't
sure what, since his younger brother and only sibling, Tim, lived
halfway across the country with his family. Tim kept in touch and came
to visit once or twice a year, but only for a few days at a time. The
more stressed Max became, the more fury he felt toward Tim. Yet he knew
that trying to shame Tim into stepping up over the phone would backfire.
So he waited until Tim's next visit to have [the talk]{.epub-i}.

"I knew Tim would get defensive and shut down if I blamed him for not
being more involved," reflects Max. "So when we got together, I simply
told him how alone I felt, how physically and emotionally drained. Up
until that moment, I don't think Tim fully grasped the situation. That
was partly my fault, because I'm so good at playing the silent suffering
martyr. As a doc, it's part of my job description. But I think because
he didn't feel attacked, he really heard me. He promised to spell me one
week out of every month, which, luckily, he can do because he's able to
work remotely. He's kept his promise, and I trust that if at some point
we need him more, he'll show up. Most important, his presence hasn't
been just a relief for me; it's been a great gift to my mom---and to
Tim, as well. Of course, it's true," Max adds, "that our involvement
with our mother isn't exactly quid pro quo, and it never will be. But
that's okay. In this scenario, we all win."

THE DANCE OF CARING

[RECENTLY, A WOMAN]{.cotx} wrote to me about the love she shares with
her adult children. "When I see my children, my whole body feels joy,"
she said. "I want to touch them. I want to hug them because they are so
precious to me. I feel relaxed and at ease because they know all the
different ways I behave. They have seen me in more situations than
anyone else. Now that they're adults, I don't have to hide anything from
them. I'm no longer the ambassador for the way one is supposed to
behave. They're old enough to make their own choices, and I can be more
candid about mine; also I can admit more weaknesses, be more vulnerable.
We've been through some big crises together and come out the other side.
My children are protective of me now. I feel the mutuality. I feel
fluidity, meaning the power between us is shifting in their direction as
I get older. Last year, I borrowed money from my son. My daughter sat at
my side and read to me when I woke up from surgery. More and more in the
future, they will be caring for me. But I feel safe because there is a
central core than has been tested. I feel free."

Clearly, this woman hadn't cared for her children with a payoff in mind.
She did so because she loved them, and she wanted their home to feel
safe and happy. The flow of giving and receiving nurtures them all.

CHAPTER 13 PRACTICES

[What is fairness?]{.epub-i}

Hibbs defines fairness as a "muddled mix of beliefs, traditions and
multiple and sometimes opposing truths." And of course, the idea of
"playing fair" in our relationship is complicated by the fact that we
all have our own definition of what it means to be fair. When we are
clinging to our own definition of fairness during a conflict with a
loved one, it's not that we are not being fair, but we may not be as
open as we could be to the notion of this "muddled mix of
beliefs"---essentially a compromise.

In a notebook, consider the qualities of fairness you value in
relationships. You may find that certain qualities are more important
than others---or even that a particular behavior or lack thereof might
be non-negotiable. Here are some questions to get started:

--What does fairness mean to you?

--What behaviors or ways of communicating do you value in others?

--Did you experience any issues with trust or notions of "fairness" in
your childhood or in certain past relationships?

--What has been your experience with generosity in relationships? Do you
feel that you tend to give more than you get? Do you keep track of these
dynamics or find yourself drawn to people who keep score?

Too often, we believe certain things about ourselves and our
relationships without assessing whether or not we are focusing on the
presence of certain long-held assumptions, judgments, or reactions to
past wounds. This exercise is one of gaining clarity---in creating a
vocabulary for your own value system of fairness. That way, when the
time comes for you to talk about fairness in a conflict, you can use "I
statements" and speak from [your]{.epub-i} experiences and belief
systems, rather than assuming what you think is a universal truth.

[Letting go of right and wrong]{.epub-i}

Hibbs's related belief of "relational ethics" in a relationship refers
to the creation of a world in which we can expect to be treated with
care, tenderness, and compassion. We may have different beliefs about
fairness than those with whom we interact---but we are both
fundamentally committed to supporting one another.

Being ethical---"fair"---in our relationships is really about being able
to approach things from a new perspective---constantly. We don't cling
to a set idea of what we think is "right versus wrong" or "virtuous
versus unjust" or even "kind versus cruel"---but are open to co-creating
a system with those we love to ensure we are both heard, seen, and
recognized.

This practice is a basic meditation, but one that shows us the
relationship between "beginning again" in meditation and seeing things
with fresh eyes again and again in a relationship. The overarching
practice of letting go is also one of gaining resilience and insight.

1\. Sit comfortably, with your back straight. Close your eyes or not; if
you feel sleepy, you can open your eyes and gaze softly downward to stay
awake.

2\. Bring your attention to your body. Notice any sensations you may
feel in your hands (heat, cold, pressure). Notice where you are most
conscious of your breath---at the nostrils, chest, or belly. Breathe
naturally, noticing each inhalation and exhalation. Feel one breath, and
then let it go.

3\. Some may choose to make a mental note of [in, out]{.epub-i} or
[rising, falling]{.epub-i} to support awareness of the breath. But let
your awareness rest on the sensations, rather than the words that
accompany them.

4\. As images, thoughts, emotions, and concerns come up in your mind,
notice them and let them pass. You will not clear your mind when you
meditate---but rather develop the practice of noticing distraction and
then beginning again and again (and again), each time without rumination
or regret.

This process of noticing distraction and then letting go, and coming
back to the breath, is often a catalyst for judgment and guilt among
meditators, myself included (it's a practice!). But the moment when we
notice ourselves veering away from the present moment is the most
important. We see where we've become lost and begin again.

This is similar to how we can expand our perspective in relationships.
Any time we find ourselves relying on the ideas of an absolute, frozen
state of right and wrong---or fairness versus unfairness---that we are
used to, we can compare the habit to distraction during meditation. We
are relying on something that we are habitually conditioned to do; then
we make the intentional choice to let go and begin again as much as we
need to---each time without rumination or regret.

[]{#part0022.html}

 

[14](#part0041.html_c_ch14){.calibre2}

[NAVIGATE THE SPACE BETWEEN](#part0041.html_c_ch14){.calibre2}

[Certainly there are very real differences between us ... But it is not
those differences between us that are separating us. It is rather our
refusal to recognize those differences ...]{.epub-i}

---AUDRE LORDE

[W]{.cic}[HEN SHE WAS IN HER]{.cotx} early twenties, Diana believed that
the only way she would ever find her soul mate was to have sex with
prospective partners soon after they met and then to spend every
possible minute with them. In her mind, they would experience such an
exquisite blending of body and soul that the man in question would never
want to leave her side.

"I wanted us to be so attuned to each other, we'd be like one person in
two skins," she says now. "I even remember saying to my true love du
jour that I couldn't tell where I stopped and he began. Needless to say,
my designated soul mates were terrified of my dependency and headed for
the hills. It took me years to unpack my neediness and see that I was
trying to heal my lonely childhood by trying to merge with my lovers.
Thankfully, I learned that in order to truly see and be seen by another
person, there has to be differentiation and space between you. We
[cannot]{.epub-i} be one."

In every intimate relationship, there are three elements: us, our loved
one, and the space between us. That space is rich with possibility, but
it can also become a battleground or an inhospitable no-fly zone. How do
we balance privacy and intimacy, self-protection and vulnerability, fear
and longing? Can we love without trying to possess? If we're hurt or
betrayed, can we trust in love again?

Mindfulness practice gives us a way to explore the space between and to
discover safe ways of navigating it. When we meditate, we hope to create
space---whether it's a step away from our chattering minds where we can
gain perspective, or a new opening to tenderness and goodwill. We come
to realize that we can fill that space between with generosity, respect,
support, and fairness---or anxiety, resentment, anger, and silence. How
we traverse the space between us is critical. How do we remain open when
it makes us feel vulnerable?

We humans suffer from a porcupine problem, trying to live with bodies
that combine a soft underbelly and a back bristling with spiky quills.
The German philosopher Schopenhauer invented this metaphor to describe
the dilemma of relationships. In the cold of winter, his porcupines
tried to huddle together for warmth. But when they got too close, they
stabbed one another, so they'd move off to a safe distance until they
got cold again.

The psychotherapist Deborah Luepnitz investigated this tension in her
book [Schopenhauer's Porcupines: Intimacy and Its Dilemmas.]{.epub-i}
"Definitions of love, aggression, intimacy, and privacy vary enormously,
of course---by culture, historical moment, and social class," Luepnitz
wrote. "Without making universal claims, we can assume that people in
the contemporary West ... live lives bedeviled by the porcupine dilemma.
That is, we struggle on a daily basis to balance privacy and community,
concern for self and others, sexual union and a room of our own."

HOW WE CONNECT

[IF OUR TENDENCY]{.cotx} is to be anxious and grasping, we might try to
fill the space between with whatever we think will hold others to us. We
try to become indispensable. We're determined to be the most helpful,
the sexiest, the most perfect, the smartest, the kindest, the most
interesting. Of course, not only are we being inauthentic but also we're
often wrong about what the other person really wants from us. We're
making assumptions based on our own needs, and we may even be
trespassing on the other person's autonomy.

One of the most poignant ways that many people, historically women, try
to bridge the gap between themselves and their loved ones is to
disappear, to make their own needs and desires invisible. Gina told me
about the awakening she had as she worked on healing from cancer: "I
used to be the kind of woman who would be driving in the car with my
husband, feeling boiling hot, and the most I could bring myself to say
was 'Are you warm, dear?'"

We can also attempt to erase the space between by keeping the focus on
our own needs. Another student, Bill, says that he found a "liberation
of the heart" only when he stopped needing to be completely center stage
in his wife's life. That realization came when she told him she wanted
to leave home for a three-month trip with her sister following the death
of their mother. His honest response: "That doesn't really suit me, but
if it's what you really need, you should go." Her gratitude helped him
see that honoring the difference in their needs was a way of
strengthening their love. As Eleanor Roosevelt once said, "The giving of
love is an education in itself." We learn as we go.

For both Bill and Gina, until they recognized within themselves the
anxious desire to fuse, they were unable to grow as individuals or with
their partners. Rainer Maria Rilke described the sacred space between
people beautifully in his book [Letters to a Young Poet]{.epub-i}:

"The point of marriage is not to create a quick commonality by tearing
down all boundaries; on the contrary, a good marriage is one in which
each partner appoints the other to be the guardian of his solitude, and
thus they show each other the greatest possible trust ... Then a
marvelous living side-by-side can grow up for them, if they succeed in
loving the expanse between them, which gives them the possibility of
always seeing each other as a whole and before an immense sky."

MOVABLE BOUNDARIES

[IN ALL LONG-STANDING,]{.cotx} committed relationships, whether between
partners, spouses, relatives, or friends, the space between will wax and
wane over time, pushed and pulled by circumstance, changing as each
person moves through life. Barbara writes about how she learned to
tolerate the expansions and contractions in her lifelong relationship
with her cousin Sue.

"Sue and I used to be such close friends," says Barbara, who is now in
her fifties. "But we've grown and changed. When we were younger, I gave
her these two hugging monkeys that were attached to one another with
Velcro. But I think my idea of being best friends was smothering for
her. Her way of being is different---she needs more space. She told me
that best friends didn't have to mean 'Barb and Sue' on a plaque. That
really stung me, and it still hurts to this day. But it was also a
lesson that other people aren't always going to reciprocate love the way
that I want them to."

Between parents and children, the boundaries are always moving;
preparing children to become independent is the number-one job of
parents and their greatest gift of love. But that doesn't mean it's easy
to see your child walk to school for the first time, or get behind the
wheel of a car and wave good-bye as he drives away, or head to
college---in each instance, leaving you behind. Joyful and afraid for
what may lie in store for their beloved children, parents cheer and cry
and worry all at once.

I've always believed that a particularly difficult line to navigate is
the one between fear and love, especially for parents, who want more
than anything to protect their children from suffering.

Claudia, a longtime meditator, ran head-on into her fears during a
vacation on a Caribbean island. Her nine-year-old was excited about
hiking a famous trail that wound precipitously through the tropical
forest down to the ocean below; Claudia's anxious mind filled with the
guidebook's warnings about jagged rocks and scorpions, conjuring up
images of broken ankles, venomous bites, and heat exhaustion. But she
also loved her son's eagerness and wanted him to have the adventure he
craved. And so they set out.

"He dashed ahead down the path like a baby mountain goat," she wrote me,
"stumbling but staying upright. I lagged behind, calling out reminders
to be careful, to slow down, to watch his step, to steer clear of wasps
and webs." For Claudia, this was not fun, and she realized she was
tipping into panic.

Claudia told herself what she'd said so often to anxious friends:
Breathe. Relax. Soften into the moment. Exactly what might bring her
into mindfulness. But she was breathing too hard to shift gears quickly.
A few breaths passed. And then, as she recalls, "Up from the depths of
my belly, I heard a voice whispering a Buddhist teaching: 'Rest the
fearful mind in the cradle of lovingkindness.'"

[Yes. Of course. I can do that!]{.epub-i} she thought. She began by
silently offering lovingkindness toward herself, a mother filled with
love but rocked by fear. "May I be safe and protected from harm," she
whispered. "May I be peaceful and at ease." Next, she sent love and
wishes for well-being to her son as he scrambled down the trail. Some
hikers appeared, heading uphill. They looked tired and sweaty. Claudia
sent goodwill their way. And by the time she and her son neared the
trail's end, she felt so happy that she was wishing peace and safety to
everything around them, the trees and the rocks and even the scary,
scuttling creatures that had thankfully left them alone.

Without intending to, Claudia had worked her way through all of the
traditional phases of the lovingkindness meditation, from herself, to
her son, to strangers, and to all the beings she encountered. Most
important, by managing to control her fear, she gave her son the space
he needed to fulfill a dream and flourish. That was her gift of love.

THE DIFFERENCE IS THE BOND

[HOW WE TRAVERSE]{.cotx} the space between us when conflict arises has a
profound effect on the health and longevity of our relationships. Over
the past four decades, psychologists John and Julie Gottman have studied
thousands of couples, sometimes focusing on how they discussed a current
problem in their relationship, and at other times observing them during
ordinary everyday interactions. They discovered that a few measurements,
focused on what they call "emotional safety," enabled them to predict
with more than 90 percent accuracy whether couples would be happy,
together but unhappy, or broken up several years later.

Couples who responded to a conflict with contempt, criticism,
defensiveness, or stonewalling were on the path to unhappiness. Not just
their words but also their bodies told the story; when their
physiological signs were recorded, they were in fight-or-flight mode.
Even in less stressful moments, their physical tension was measurable,
and they often ignored or cut short their partner's bids for attention.

The couples who remained together did not suppress their conflicts, but
also took a specific approach to them. They found ways to express their
needs clearly, without attacking or belittling each other. Each partner
assumed that the other's overall intentions were good, even if their
actions had been hurtful. And they created a background of safety by
everyday small acts of kindness, attention, and generosity.

Candace told me a wonderful story about the day when she and her husband
finally accepted their differences. As she recalls, she'd recently read
an essay by the renowned Thai teacher Ajahn Chah in which he wrote, "If
you want a chicken to be a duck, and a duck to be a chicken, you will
suffer."

She thought about her last fight with her husband, and the metaphor
clicked. So the next time conflict loomed, she said to him, "I really
think when we get into these binds, it's because you're a duck and I'm a
chicken, and we're trying to change each other." She continued, "We both
liked that. A few days later, we got into an argument when he had a
rash. I wanted him to go to a doctor, and he refused. So I said, 'How
come whenever I want you to do something, you want to do the opposite?'
And he said, 'Because I'm a duck.' Ever since that time, we've been
working with that image."

In [No Man Is an Island]{.epub-i}, Trappist monk Thomas Merton declared,
"The beginning of love is the will to let those we love be perfectly
themselves, the resolution not to twist them to fit our own image."

Bottom line: We have to know ourselves to know where we end and another
person begins, and we have to develop the skills to navigate the space
between us. Or else we will seek wholeness through false means that
honor neither us nor those we love.

CHAPTER 14 PRACTICES

[Balance is the answer]{.epub-i}

Whether we fear the existence of boundaries with others or crave more of
them, there's no denying that individuation and separation are
inevitable parts of loving relationships that become the site of
tension. And of course, navigating these questions is an ever-changing
process.

What is a key ingredient in this process of navigation is balance or
equanimity. Equanimity can be hard to talk about, as the idea of
"balance" doesn't feel that [rich]{.epub-i} or [vibrant]{.epub-i}, words
we definitely think about when it comes to love (along with others like
[passion]{.epub-i}, [fervor]{.epub-i}, [desire]{.epub-i}). Some
associate balance with a kind of apathy or withdrawal. The idea of
feeling love for a person in a "balanced" way may even seem like an
oxymoron. But the irony is that approaching love from this expansive
state of wisdom and insight creates a more hospitable and sustainable
environment within which real love can thrive.

Without equanimity, we might give love to others only in an effort to
bridge the inevitable and healthy space that always exists between two
people. Or we might give love to others because we think it's what they
want---and end up feeling self-judging as a result. Equanimity is the
ingredient that brings us clarity and calm in relationship to navigating
the space between, as we are able to release the idea of rejection and
clinging as the only two possible modes of engaging in a loving
relationship.

In this equanimity practice, we begin by thinking about a relationship
in which space has come up as an issue.

1\. Bring this person to mind. Perhaps it is a teacher upon whom you've
become dependent for affirmation, and any space leaves you feeling
insecure or lost. Perhaps it's a lover who is far more interested in
spending all of his time with you, and you are at a loss for how to
articulate your need for space kindly.

2\. Begin repeating honest phrases to yourself silently about the person
you have in mind. Possible phrases could be: Things are as they are. I
care about you, yet I know we are two different people. We are both the
owners of our actions, and we are each whole unto ourselves. Both of our
happiness depends on our individual actions.

3\. Feel free to experiment with phrases that resonate for the
particular questions you are encountering in your relationship. Keep the
phrases simple and oriented around the practice of
equanimity---accepting things as they are.

[]{#part0023.html}

 

[15](#part0041.html_c_ch15){.calibre2}

[LETTING GO](#part0041.html_c_ch15){.calibre2}

[Even as I hold you / I am letting go.]{.epub-i}

---ALICE WALKER

[S]{.cic}[OME YEARS AGO, A GOOD]{.cotx} friend was in extreme
psychological distress, punctuated by lengthy psychiatric
hospitalizations. I wanted so badly to help him but felt powerless. I
asked one of my Tibetan teachers for guidance. He advised me to "stop
trying"---an extremely subtle teaching. He wasn't suggesting that I
withdraw or stop caring, but was telling me to just "be with" my friend,
without needing to fix him. And that's what I did.

I'd sit in his hospital room and see other friends offer advice. Just
take fifteen drops of this tincture and you won't be depressed anymore.
Or see this healer or try that supplement and you'll be cured. Their
advice was given out of love, but my sense was that my friend felt
somewhat pressured by it. [What if I don't take their advice? What if it
doesn't work?]{.epub-i} I could imagine him wondering. [Will they stop
showing up or caring about me?]{.epub-i}

When Ram Dass had a stroke, it took focused intention for me to apply my
Tibetan teacher's wisdom and simply [be with]{.epub-i} my friend. We'd
been close for decades, and I felt devastated. I could see the impulse
to fix things arising in my mind; I wanted him to get better and recover
fully. But then I'd visit and see his living room piled high with gifts
from concerned friends. [Just take this tincture]{.epub-i}---and so on.

It was genuinely beautiful that so many people cared, but I could tell
that Ram Dass did feel pressured by it all. I wondered if he would be
abandoned by those whose tinctures didn't have him walking and talking
fluently again. One day a package arrived while I was there, containing
a bottle of Ganges water with a note assuring him that if he drank it,
he would walk again. "Don't drink that!" I said. "It will give you
cholera!" That was one instance in which I couldn't help but put in my
two cents.

I don't mean to suggest that we shouldn't offer our loved ones help in
the spirit of generosity; of course we should---and it's most loving if
our offerings are made freely, without strings attached. Letting go is
the opposite of clinging to our hopes or ideas about how things should
be and allowing them to be just as they are.

For me, it was invaluable to see the difference between wanting to help
out of my own need to make things better and simply [being
with]{.epub-i}. I came to understand that healing has its own rhythm, as
does any life transition. Of course, it's not easy to step back and let
go; it's human nature to want to seize control when the people we love
are suffering. But trying to impose our personal agenda on someone
else's experience is the shadow side of love, while real love recognizes
that life unfolds at its own pace.

THE ART OF RECEIVING

[PARADOXICALLY, LETTING GO]{.cotx} sometimes means allowing ourselves to
receive the love and care of others. Our can-do culture has made many of
us believe that we should always be self-sufficient. Somewhere along the
way, we also got the message that asking for help is a sign of weakness.
We often forget that we're interdependent creatures whose very existence
depends on the kindness of others, including---with a bow to Tennessee
Williams---strangers.

When Sebene was diagnosed with breast cancer at age thirty-four, she
recalls that she was fortunate to be surrounded by many loving friends
and family members who were ready to support her. But, she says, "I
didn't think I needed much. I was already a meditator with a healthy
self-care routine. Although friends played a big part in supporting me
emotionally, there was a way in which I kept people (and myself) distant
from my experience of fear, sadness, and despair. I spent a lot of my
time with people showing them just how very together I was."

She adds that it wasn't until things started falling apart that she
began to be able to take in the love that was offered to her. "No one
knew exactly what was wrong with me, but I ended up extremely sick," she
explains. "I was totally dependent on my friends for everything: walking
the dog, doing my laundry, filling prescriptions, preparing food, drying
my tears. And in a sense, that's when everything became easier. Letting
go of control (or having it ripped away) helped me open to the love all
around me. The late Zen teacher Charlotte Joko Beck said, 'Joy is
exactly what's happening, minus our opinion of it.'

"When I ended up in the hospital with kidney failure, weak and in pain,
with tubes down my nose, I got into a hysterical laughing fit with my
dear friend Ahmad," she continues. "I dropped my opinion about the
situation, which I disliked, and found a moment of pure laughter, of
joy, in the absurdity of it all. I think love and joy come from the same
place---the ability to be with what is happening with an open heart and
mind. So if joy is whatever is happening minus our opinion of it, maybe
love is whatever is happening minus our attempt to control it.

"I realize now how much I resisted opening to what was happening to me,
mostly because I didn't want to feel the pain and fear or burden others
with it," she reflects. "But in trying to control what was happening, I
couldn't be in any moment wholeheartedly. I couldn't open to the joy and
love that were already there, waiting to be received."

FREEING OURSELVES FROM THE IMPOSSIBLE DREAM

[SO MANY RELATIONSHIPS]{.cotx} are built on the hope that the
unconditional love of another will somehow, magically, heal our wounds
and restore us to wholeness. Even when our rational selves recognize
that this is a fantasy, we may continue to nurture it, if only in our
unconscious. In his book [The Eden Project: In Search of the Magical
Other]{.epub-i}, Jungian psychologist James Hollis writes that the
"great false idea that drives humankind is the fantasy of the Magical
Other, the notion that there is one person out there who is right for
us, will make our lives work, a soul mate who will repair the ravages of
our personal history; one who will be there for us, who will read our
minds, know what we want and meet those deepest needs; a good parent who
will protect us from suffering and, if we are lucky, spare us the
perilous journey of individuation." Hollis adds that the paradigm for
our relationships is formed from our earliest experiences and is
actually hardwired into our neurological and emotional network.

Although on the one hand we may be terribly disappointed to discover
that the Magical Other we've been seeking is a phantom, this awareness
can also usher in relief. By recognizing that each of us is in charge of
our own wholeness, we pave the way for satisfying and reciprocal
relationships. But that takes awareness and the intention to let go of
our fantasies of the one who will set us free.

In a blog post on the Greater Good Web site, psychologist Christine
Carter wrote: "I've found that releasing my fantasies around my
relationship requires acknowledging a loss, and then grieving it. I
really, really, really wanted to be with someone who was deeply
romantic, in that poetry-writing and song-singing kind of way. But
realizing that my romantic fantasies were created by the film industry
(and perhaps the flower industry, and the greeting card industry---not
to mention the diamond industry) and not by any actual needs of my own
helped me release those fantasies. I felt saddened by the loss of my
fairytale hopes for a little while. If you're sad, grieve," she advises,
"but then move on."

For Julia and her husband, accepting that neither of them can give to
the other what only they, as individuals, can give to themselves has
been a central theme of their marriage.

"I'm married to a good and kind man," Julia says. "We love and care
about one another. He's emotional and sensitive, and so am I. We're both
wounded and we can acknowledge that." Yet, she adds, they each struggle
with their own [shenpa]{.epub-i}---a Tibetan word that literally means
"attachment," but also suggests a state in which old triggers get
activated and make people feel uneasy, then cause them to seek relief.
In her relationship with her husband, Julia explains, "He wants so much
to feel that I hold him in high regard so that he can feel good and
confident about himself. I want so much to feel protected, that he has
my back in the way I feel no one ever has. This is our edge."

However, in a recent couples therapy session, she reports, "Our
counselor told us that my husband can give this regard to himself and
doesn't need to wrest it from me on all occasions. He also told me that
I no longer need to be protected because I can protect myself just
fine."

Julia is clear that her longing for protection has its roots in her
relationship with her father, an authoritarian man prone to violent
outbursts. In particular, she recalls a night when he exploded, pinned
her down, and hit her in the head. Yet even knowing this, she says she's
still primed to be disappointed when her "sweet and caring husband fails
to be protective in the way I long for, a way, in his world of
experience, he doesn't even see or recognize."

As Julia learned, there are fissures and cracks in each of us, carved
from our early experiences. And there may always be a gap between what
we yearn to find in another and what's actually available. But when we
let go of our hope that someone will come along to close the gap, we see
that it's just waiting to be filled with love and compassion for
ourselves.

TAKING REFUGE IN YOURSELF

[JUSTIN, A SOCIAL]{.cotx} worker, tells the story of making a pilgrimage
to see a Hindu teacher whom many people view to be an incarnation of
divine love. A number of Justin's friends had already visited the ashram
where she teaches and described the experience of spending time with her
as [ecstatic]{.epub-i}, [life-changing]{.epub-i}, and [profoundly
healing]{.epub-i}. Justin, who describes himself as wired for anxiety,
had high hopes that when this teacher looked into his eyes and saw his
pain, she would immediately relieve him of his suffering. He believed
that his friends' transformations were genuine and prayed for the same
for himself.

In fact, he became convinced this would happen the night before his
first group meeting with her, when he had his worst recurring nightmare,
of being suffocated to death. "I believed the nightmare, which left me
feeling panicky, was an auspicious sign," Justin says now. "When I woke
up, my terror was so raw and exposed, I was certain that she would
recognize the depth of my pain and, with her infinite love, free me from
my fears once and for all."

But when it was his turn to be with her, Justin felt absolutely nothing,
and after the encounter, he experienced the same level of discomfort as
before. He was devastated.

"I felt unseen, alone, rejected, and trapped inside my own pain," he
says. "It was as if my suffering was too much even for this magnanimous
and loving teacher. I was hurt beyond description."

It took time to unpack his experience, but a few years later, Justin
realized that what at first he had perceived as abandonment was in fact
a gift, a hard but essential lesson. "I see now that regardless of my
friends' experiences, what I needed was to take refuge in myself and
learn to trust my own capacity to heal. When I finally met my own fear
with compassion, I was able to let go of the fantasy that some all-wise,
all-knowing being would swoop down and save me."

Letting go of the belief that we're powerless to help relieve our own
suffering not only enhances our ability to heal but also to genuinely
love and receive the love of others, whether they're spiritual teachers
or partners or beloved friends.

BETWEEN PARENTS AND CHILDREN

[ALTHOUGH I'M NOT]{.cotx} a parent, it's easy to see how the letting go
that life asks of parents toward their children as they gain
independence is profound, poignant, and one of the greatest movements of
real love. As Barbara Kingsolver wrote in [Animal Dreams]{.epub-i}: "It
kills you to see them grow up. But I guess it would kill you quicker if
they didn't."

The balancing act between taking charge and letting go starts early for
parents, the day their toddler takes her first step away from them and
out into the world. The path shoots off from there, through adolescence
into young adulthood and beyond. Fortunately, in most families, the
trajectory follows a fairly standard course. There are growing pains for
both parents and children, followed by tender, bittersweet, but
inevitable separations. Letting go---then more letting go.

But for parents whose children are diagnosed with mental or physical
illness, the course is rockier and studded with unimagined twists and
turns. For these parents, letting go of preconceived ideas about their
child's health, behavior, or future can be immensely challenging and is
often stymied by a hefty dose of self-blame.

Jack, a filmmaker I met through a friend, describes his journey after
his son began hearing voices five years ago. "One night when he was
thirty years old, Noah told me that he was hearing strange, angry
voices," Jack says. "They were telling him what to do, and he was
hearing them all the time." Over the next few weeks Noah, who was then
in law school, became increasingly paranoid, anxious, and out of
control. Though there were periods when he was better and the voices
diminished, he was in and out of psychiatric units for the next two
years.

"It was a living hell for me as well as for Noah," says Jack. In fact,
he was so distraught he felt as if Noah's experience was happening to
him, too. When Noah was confined, Jack visited him every day and felt as
if he couldn't live his own life as long as his son was suffering. "I
tried to reassure him, talk him down, just love him, but nothing
helped," he says. "I kept thinking that if only I did this or that, he
would get better. I felt so responsible, it literally made me sick."

Jack wound up with a blocked artery in his heart. "If I hadn't stopped
trying to take on Noah's pain, it probably would have killed me," he
says. "It was the biggest letting go I've ever had to do. I was too
entangled, and I had to separate myself from him. I had to remind myself
that this was happening to Noah, not to me. It wasn't doing him any good
for me to be a wreck." Jack's strong bond with his wife, Cathy, helped
him through, as did his meditation practice and the loving support of
his Zen community.

Things have improved for Noah, too. As of this writing, he hasn't been
hospitalized in three years and is living in a studio apartment on his
parents' property. Working with his psychiatrist, after much trial and
error he's found the right medication to help quiet the voices. What's
more, he's been able to hold down a job for the past year. Noah may not
be the human rights attorney he'd hoped to become, but he seems to have
made peace with his "new normal." And though Jack and Cathy, too, have
had to let go of their once-cherished dreams for their son's future, by
meeting him where he is, they've been able to reclaim their own lives
and help him reclaim his.

With mindfulness, lovingkindness, and self-compassion, we can begin to
let go of our expectations about how life and those we love should be.
Letting go is an inside job, something only we can do for ourselves. But
at times, as we'll see in the next chapter, our commitment to living
mindfully may also require us to take direct action in our relationships
with others.

CHAPTER 15 PRACTICES

[Looking back, letting go]{.epub-i}

In more ways than any of us can name, love is wrapped up with the idea
of expectation. We expect things from the people we love, we expect them
to expect things from us. We expect things from the feeling of love
itself. And while these expectations differ from person to person, there
is a sentiment common among most of us when it comes to love---letting
go can feel scary.

The idea of letting go of control when a loved one is suffering feels
unimaginable; letting go of our desire to appear okay to those who love
us might make us feel weak; and letting go of our universal expectations
around love can feel like a recipe for disappointment.

The key in letting go is practice. Each time we let go, we disentangle
ourselves from our expectations and begin to experience things as they
are. We can [be with]{.epub-i}. We can show ourselves repeatedly that
letting go is actually a healthy foundation upon which we can open up to
real love---to giving, receiving, and experiencing it authentically and
organically.

1\. Bring to mind (or write down) a situation in which you felt afraid
of letting go. Perhaps you wanted to help someone feel better and were
frustrated by your inability to change certain circumstances. Perhaps
you were afraid to let go of a certain self-image you sought to project.
Perhaps you had an expectation in mind for a particular interaction or
experience.

2\. Based on the ideas about letting go in this chapter, try to ask
yourself some new questions about this situation. Were you responding
only to the incident, or were there other contributing factors that
created more tension? What other factors might have influenced your
feelings, thoughts, and behavior?

3\. Now let's consider the other person in the dynamic. Were there
consequences for you or the other person based on the difficulties you
experienced? Did you try to offer help in a situation, and then express
impatience or frustration when you were not able to fix it? Explore how
the other person may have been responding to your behavior.

4\. Now imagine yourself in the same situation with a sense of calmness,
openness, and warmth, allowing yourself to exist in the present moment
with acceptance. How do you behave differently? Have you developed new
insights about the situation? Feel free to write down any reflections
you have.

For some, this practice is an internal dialogue; for others, a formal
writing exercise. Others may want to think of this practice as a more
abstract visualization or meditation about the situation they have
called to mind---and an exploration of what "letting go" feels like in
their bodies. Be creative!

[]{#part0024.html}

 

[16](#part0041.html_c_ch16){.calibre2}

[HEALING, NOT VICTORY](#part0041.html_c_ch16){.calibre2}

[Nobody has ever measured, not even poets, how much a heart can
hold.]{.epub-i}

---ZELDA FITZGERALD

[A]{.cic} [FRIEND OF MINE HAS]{.cotx} been seeing the same
psychotherapist for more than two decades. In the face of divorce,
remarriage, serious illness, and the death of a parent, her therapist
has been so insightful that my friend refers to her as "the Rocket
Scientist." "I have no intention of ever stopping," my friend says. "I
plan to see her until one of us dies."

After so much time and so much support, my friend knows that when she
introduces a new emotional entanglement or problem in her
multigenerational family, the Rocket Scientist will listen carefully,
pause thoughtfully, and then respond with the same opening phrase.
Sometimes, my friend jumps in and says it for her:

"I know, I know---you're going to tell me that 'this is a fabulous
opportunity!'" She and the therapist share a laugh, and then they get
down to work.

To look at painful marital and parent-child conflicts, in-law dustups or
friendships run aground as opportunities may seem counterintuitive. But
when we can step back even briefly from our hurt, sorrow, and anger,
when we put our faith in the possibility of change, we create the
possibility for non-judgmental inquiry that aims for healing rather than
victory.

This is the promise of mindfulness. Mindfulness won't ensure you'll win
an argument with your sister. Mindfulness won't enable you to bypass
your feelings of anger or hurt either. But it may help you see the
conflict in a new way, one that allows you to break through old
patterns.

DISMANTLING THE BARRICADES

[SAM AND LUCY]{.cotx} have been having the same argument for years. She
gets angry at him for not doing more around the house. However, from
Sam's perspective, Lucy is so critical of how he does things that he
feels anxious about what her response will be whenever he completes a
task. As a result, Sam often checks out and doesn't follow through on
many projects he takes on. But his withdrawal only fuels Lucy's anger
and frustration. Now, with the help of a therapist, Sam and Lucy
recognize the repetitive nature of their conflict and are taking steps
to address it in a more productive and caring way. Yet at times they
still reach a heated standoff.

When things approach the boiling point, a time-out is in order, counsels
couples therapist George Taylor. We may have told ourselves to be
understanding, and we may aspire to speak more consciously, but
sometimes we're simply flooded with emotion. "This flooding is usually a
signal that some childhood issue has been triggered," he writes in his
book, [A Path for Couples]{.epub-i}. "Couples need a clear way to stop
the escalation and to calm themselves down. It's hard to practice
authentic communication when our biology is going haywire. Our bodies
are saying to us, urgently, 'Flee or fight.'"

Taylor notes that many of us practice unconscious time-outs when our
systems get overwhelmed with anger or anxiety, and like Sam, we withdraw
into ourselves. But, he says, "This method of ending an argument works
to de-escalate the feelings, but it doesn't bring any transformation.
There is no closure, no understanding." Instead of changing a painful
pattern, withdrawal may simply reinforce it.

In order to help couples shift the energy, Taylor recommends that they
practice deliberate time-outs. At a time when they are not fighting
(perhaps with their therapist's help), Sam and Lucy agree to pause when
either of them gets triggered or defensive. (Maybe Lucy can identify
when her voice is rising or she's going into attack mode. Maybe Sam can
recognize when he wants to escape.) They also agree on a signal, verbal
or nonverbal, to stop right away and, in a few words, decide when they
will come back to their discussion. Range of time for the pause varies
depending on the severity of the conflict. During the pause, they might
do a practice like RAIN or any other technique that helps them get calm
enough to explore their thoughts and physical reactions. Once they feel
stabilized within and safe with each other, they are much more likely to
find common ground---a solution that works for both.

Taylor says that he and his wife, Debra---"both passionate, outspoken
people with our own histories of emotional turmoil"---have found taking
time-outs extremely beneficial. "I often feel some level of shame, for
example, when Debra says what she wants. Part of me thinks, [I should
have read her mind and known that]{.epub-i}," he writes. "In this moment
of self-judgment, I can escalate into defensiveness. Shame is one of the
hardest feelings for me to know and describe. I have an internal
conflict: I want to protect myself from feeling the shame, and I want to
acknowledge her needs. This conflict is hard for me, so I get
emotionally confused. This is a good time for me to time myself out,
before I react angrily or withdraw."

Taylor adds that although at first time-outs may seem awkward and
artificial---after all, we're adults, not four-year-olds who snuck more
than our fair share of cookies[---]{.epub-i}the practice helps to heal
recurring, painful patterns of reactivity and eventually becomes second
nature.

ENLARGING THE PICTURE

[AT TIMES, HOWEVER,]{.cotx} a relationship becomes so broken that it
seems we have nothing to build on. Then it can help to view our
suffering through a wider lens.

In a private meeting during a lovingkindness retreat, Megan told me that
she couldn't stop thinking about her ex-husband. They'd had a
contentious divorce following her husband's affair with a co-worker, a
woman he was due to marry that week. Megan's daughter was the designated
flower girl and her nine-year-old son was the best man. This had Megan
so agitated that she'd signed up for the retreat to help her get through
the week of the wedding.

Alas, neither the meditation nor the silence was having a soothing
effect. As Megan sat on her cushion, her mind bombarded her with images.
She envisioned her ex and his bride blissfully walking down the aisle
accompanied by her children, which aroused her sense of betrayal,
sorrow, and rage, along with a generous helping of revenge fantasies.
She imagined her children crying every night because they wanted to be
with her. In this context, she kept trying to offer lovingkindness to
her ex-husband, but each time she silently invoked the phrase [May he be
happy]{.epub-i}, her next thought was, [Not while I'm
miserable!]{.epub-i}

When we met, she told me how unsettled she felt.

I asked, "But don't you want your children to be happy?"

"Of course I do," she replied. "What kind of mother would I be if I
didn't want my children to be happy?"

When I saw Megan a few days later, her face was much more open and free
of scowls. Despite her initial resistance to my question, it became the
focus of her meditation. She'd switched her attention from trying to
wish her ex happiness to affirming, without hesitation, that she wanted
her children to be happy. Along the way, she realized that previously
she'd wanted her children to be happy only when they were with her, a
bitter and restricted wish for their happiness.

It became clear to her as she meditated that a truly loving wish would
be broader and allow her children to be happy with all of the people in
their lives, not just her. She wanted them to live in a world where
their relationships were solid and sustaining, and the people they
encountered were kind. Her question became, "Don't I want my children to
be loved and accepted wherever they are?" She knew she did, which meant
that she wished her ex to be happy in his new marriage, too.

Not deliriously happy, however. Just happy enough so that being with him
would be good for her children. Deliriously happy would be asking too
much, and concepts such as lovingkindness should never be used as
weapons against our real feelings. For Megan, the challenge was to hold
her own pain alongside the wish for her children to live a life as
friction-free as possible. This did not come easily; expanding her focus
and reframing her story took intention and practice. Yet because she
wanted her children's lives to be graced by love, she recognized that as
long as she did battle with her ex---either in reality or in her
heart---her son and daughter would pay a steep price.

A PLACE FOR PLEASURE

[WHEN I ASKED]{.cotx} for stories for this book, a friend sent this one
with the caveat that it might be [too]{.epub-i} real:

"My husband and I married in our late thirties and rushed to have a baby
right away. I was so proud to be pregnant that nothing fazed me for nine
months. But once our son was born, my body seemed to feel its job was
done. My husband was tender and patient, but the more he advanced, the
more I pulled back. After work, it was all I could do to make dinner,
get the baby to bed, and collapse myself.

"The pattern got more and more painful. I could tell when he wanted to
have sex, and I would just shrink into myself, trying to make myself
disappear. I hated feeling pursued. I knew he felt rejected, sad as much
as angry, and that made me feel worse about myself. We got along pretty
well on the surface, but he was going to bed drunk many nights, and
there was an undertow of unhappiness in our lives.

"I think it was an article I read in a magazine---that some couples made
dates to have sex. Maybe that could be us. If we could agree on one
night a week, I'd have six nights a week to myself. I didn't have to
feel turned on, I just had to be willing. The first surprise was that he
was okay with that. The second was that once we started, I began to
enjoy myself. Things relaxed between us.

"It was still a long haul to where we are now. His drinking didn't
magically go away, and neither did my depression. But our bodies had
made a deal to be together, to live skin to skin. Once a week, we
acknowledged that we were at home with one another.

"I sometimes imagine how pathetic this might seem to a hot young couple.
But we have gotten better through the years, past cancer, past joint
replacements, more playful, more creative, more celebratory in how we
give each other pleasure. There is a green shoot at the center of our
marriage, and we are both grateful for it."

CHAPTER 16 PRACTICES

[Time out!]{.epub-i}

We learn from conflicts only when we are willing to do so---if we can
open ourselves up to recognize why certain emotions are coming up, and
be willing to negotiate with someone else's feelings. After all, a
relationship is the union of two psychological systems. While
mindfulness may help you gain insight into your role in conflicts with
others, it won't single-handedly help you resolve them.

This practice builds upon George Taylor's notion of a time-out. Of
course, both people in a given relationship must agree to participate in
the time-out system in order for it to work.

1\. Get to know the indications that you've been triggered and are
slipping into a mode of regression, self-defense, or resentment. Are you
raising your voice? Are you being provocative for the mere sake of
provoking the other person? This first step is a practice of mindful
self-awareness---of thoughts, patterns of behavior, and bodily
sensations. Getting to know these signals is the first step in
developing a time-out system that works.

2\. Get to know the other person's trigger points. Odds are, you know
this person fairly well---and there is a certain dynamic at play during
the conflict that contributes to your reactions. By getting to know your
own behaviors in Step 1, it becomes easier to notice the signals in the
other person that trigger you. You may even want to find a time to
discuss these dynamics with the other person during a non-conflict time.

3\. In the moment of a conflict, determine a mutually agreed upon
signal, verbal or nonverbal, that indicates it's time for a time-out.
Essentially, this step can be likened to choosing to meditate or close
your eyes and breathe during a time of stress. Rather than allowing the
situation to spin out of control, we take a step back to give ourselves
space for insight, reflection, openness, and healing.

4\. Before taking the time-out, make a clear agreement on when the
time-out will be over. Depending on the conflict at hand, perhaps it's
only an hour. For other conflicts, maybe a few hours---or even an entire
day. Be realistic, and know that the time-out isn't a gesture of
withdrawal but actually one of opening up to seeing what is.

5\. During the pause, take some time to reflect. You may want to
practice the RAIN method (explained in chapter 3), to explore why you
were set off or why your feelings became exacerbated in response to the
other person. This is a time for real investigation (Step 3 of RAIN), so
that you can eventually come back to the other person with a clearer
sense of why things went the way they did and what you need and would be
willing to give in order to avoid conflicts like that in the future.

[Anger's kaleidoscope]{.epub-i}

While the previous exercise focused on really exploring the particulars
of a given conflict, this practice is more about noticing the ways in
which our habits of mind can contribute to the way most of us tend to
relate to anger. In this practice, rather than investigating the nuances
of your feelings or the situation and how it unfolded, we will explore
the role of perspective in conflict---and how we can release the grip of
anger even in the midst of feeling it.

1\. Bring to mind the person who you are angry at---during the height of
your conflict. Really get in touch with your feelings, as much as you
may feel guilty or distasteful toward the negativity.

2\. Now imagine that person sitting across from you, looking at you.
Feel what it feels like to have that person mirror your feelings of
anger, hurt, resentment. Look at yourself through these feelings.

3\. Once you have felt the anger from both sides, you may find you feel
angrier with the other person as a result of recognizing that they may
feel angry with you. But part of the practice is recognizing the choice
we have when it comes to perspective. We can see ourselves and others in
a different way.

4\. Next, try imagining how the other person's mother, father, sibling,
or teacher sees them. You may even want to recall a time when you saw
the other person with such joy and warmth. This may have been as
recently as a few hours before the conflict!

In practicing these shifts in perspective, you may find that your
feelings of anger are wrapped up with vulnerability---worries about
being the object of the other person's anger or frustration.

You may try sending phrases of lovingkindness to the other person during
this exercise or afterward for a short meditation. In this practice, you
silently repeat phrases of lovingkindness ("May he be happy, be
peaceful, be healthy...") to the other person, in an effort to recognize
your oneness, despite the temporary feeling of separation and
alienation. Or you may find that you're not quite ready to do that, and
that's okay, too.

[]{#part0025.html}

 

[17](#part0041.html_c_ch17){.calibre2}

[THE HEART IS A GENEROUS MUSCLE](#part0041.html_c_ch17){.calibre2}

[Thousands of candles can be lighted from a single candle, and the life
of the candle will not be shortened. Happiness never decreases by being
shared.]{.epub-i}

---BUDDHA

[A]{.cic} [WOMAN I KNOW COMMITTED]{.cotx} to a six-hundred-mile,
seven-day bike ride to raise money in memory of a friend who had died of
AIDS. The fund-raising scared her more than the physical demands of the
trip, but as it turned out, raising money was effortless. So many other
people had loved her friend that she became one of the top fund-raisers
that year. When she crossed the finish line, glowing from the sun, her
whole family and many of her donors were waiting to cheer for her. All
had something to celebrate: her achievement in finishing the long ride;
the months of training that preceded it; the generosity that brought
them together; a chance to honor and remember their lost friend. My
friend still draws on the joy generated on that day.

Buddhism has a term for the happiness we feel at someone else's success
or good fortune. [Sympathetic joy]{.epub-i}, as it is known, invites us
to celebrate for others. We stand up and cheer when, after some
struggle, a promising teenager graduates from high school. We dance late
into the night at a dear friend's wedding. At other times, sympathetic
joy can come as a gasp of relief. A friend is sick and waiting for some
crucial test results and they come back fine! There may be complications
ahead, but for this moment, we can share one of the flashes of
connection that hold our lives together.

These are times when sympathetic joy comes naturally, but in a complex
relationship, with all its unspoken comparisons and personal
disappointments, the heart may not leap up so easily.

After a recent talk I gave on sympathetic joy, a woman I didn't know
asked to meet with me privately. When we sat down, she confessed that
although she felt terribly guilty, she was so upset that her best friend
was getting married that she could hardly sleep at night. "I know I
should be happy for my friend," she told me, her voice quivering, "but I
haven't been in a relationship for three years, and every time I see
her, it feels like pouring salt into a gaping wound. I know she really
cares about me, but a big part of our bond has been being single
together, each other's Saturday-night date. I know it's crazy and
irrational, but somehow I think that because she's found someone, I
never will. I'm supposed to be her maid of honor, only I can't imagine
how I can make it down the aisle on her big day."

So often we react from feelings of scarcity, as if there were rations
for things like love and success. Our individualistic society often
leads us to believe we're alone in this world and must scramble for
every morsel we can grab. When we believe there isn't enough to go
around, we cling to what's ours and respond begrudgingly if someone
close to us gets something that we, too, might like to have. Like the
woman distressed by her friend's marriage, we may recognize that our
feelings are irrational. We may even be able to trace them back to some
source in childhood. But that doesn't necessarily free us to leap for
joy on our friend's behalf.

DISCERNING THE BLOCKAGES

[YEARS AGO, I]{.cotx} used to spend winters in California to escape the
harsh weather on the East Coast. One March, as I was about to return,
New York was hit by a huge late-winter snowstorm. I decided to postpone
my trip home, and I called my doctor's office to cancel an appointment
I'd made. The assistant kept saying she could barely understand me---was
the connection going down?

"Oh, I know what's happening," I said. "I'm walking on the beach in
Malibu, and the waves are so loud they're drowning out my voice."

"You're on the beach at Malibu?" she said. "I hate you."

Of course, she was joking, but it was the kind of joke that felt like a
little slap. She and I shared the same desire---to escape winter in New
York, but now it seemed like a zero-sum game. I was up; she was down. My
good fortune diminished her.

There is a word, originally in German, that refers to delight at the
misfortune of others---schadenfreude. It's the companion of looking at
someone's success and thinking, "Oooh, I would be happier if you had a
little bit less going for you." Envy and jealousy are almost inevitable
when we focus on what we lack---and on what others have.

A friend recently told me about her tendency to measure herself only
against everyone else's best. If she thought of Amanda, she didn't think
of Amanda's disastrous cooking; she thought of her perfect yoga poses.
If she thought of Susan, she didn't think of Susan's chaotic household;
she thought about her title at work. When we feel incomplete, when we
don't notice what we have, and most especially when we feel less than
fully loved, we need to be especially mindful to catch those tendencies.

I was once co-leading a retreat with my friend Krishna Das, who leads
Hindu devotional chanting, plus a yoga teacher. We teachers got along
wonderfully, but there was a small contingent of retreat participants
who didn't like meditation and therefore didn't like me much. The yoga
practice released long-held tensions in his body, one told me. The
chanting brought him to a state of bliss. The meditation, in contrast,
brought him face-to-face with his impatience, self-judgment, and
wandering mind. Rather than thinking of it as a time to develop a more
loving relationship to himself in the face of those very things, he was
just annoyed and brought along his friends to complain.

One day, I was just worn out by this, so I took a nap after lunch. I was
awakened by a loud knock. I opened the door to find a young staff person
holding a beautiful bouquet of flowers. She handed it to me, and I
thought, [Someone loves me after all]{.epub-i}. Then she said, "You're
Krishna Das, right?" Sighing, I handed the bouquet back and said, "No,
he's in the next cabin."

Fertile ground for jealousy, for sure, but Krishna Das and I are very
old, close friends. So I laughed when I told him the story, and I said I
hoped he enjoyed his flowers. And when I traveled on to the next place I
was teaching, the first thing I saw in my room was a dozen roses from
him.

WHERE DOES YOUR HEART GET BLOCKED?

[ARE WE MOST]{.cotx} vulnerable around work? Relationships? Finances? Do
we shut down when our partner gets promoted and starts bringing in more
money than we do? When our best friend gets pregnant after years of
trying? What thoughts, emotions, and body sensations accompany our
resistance to feeling joy for someone else's happiness?

I know a number of writers and artists who admit to wrestling with
difficult feelings when a friend wins a coveted award or gets a great
book deal or a rave in [The New York Times]{.epub-i}. "I know I should
be happy for so-and-so," they might say. "But their success makes me
feel insecure---like I don't measure up." They may also confess to
secret relief when a friend gets a negative review or is turned down by
the gallery of their dreams.

But, oh boy, can that ill will bubble up when we see them happy.
Apparently, they eat at better restaurants than we do, have gym
memberships they actually use, and have the most photogenic children on
the planet. The comparing mind can soar into the stratosphere,
stimulated by these announcements. [Why does she get to be so happy and
adored, while I still live alone with my cat?]{.epub-i} Without fail,
other people's meticulously chosen images will surpass the entirety of
our uncurated offline lives.

Or we can be in a bad mood when we log on and decide that whatever this
"friend" is celebrating is so below our standards as to be laughable.
Upon seeing images from a couple's twenty-fifth anniversary cruise to
Alaska, we dismiss their enduring commitment, their spirit of adventure,
and their success at accumulating the resources---time, money---that got
them to this point. [Ach]{.epub-i}, we think, [I would hate to be
trapped on a cruise ship. I'd lose my mind]{.epub-i}.

When we're caught up in our own suffering, sympathetic joy is a real
stretch. But it's actually a practice that can make a difference even
when you're going through difficult times. First, you need to be
realistic about your own capacities and let go of any "should"---as in,
"I should feel good about their good fortune"---that you hold as some
impossible ideal. We need to start with compassion for ourselves and be
very kind and patient with our actual internal experience.

Even as we recognize our resentment, bitterness, or jealousy, we can
also honor our own wish to be happy, to feel free. When a friend of mine
catches herself operating from a constricted, negative place, she can
often release herself from it by announcing the resentment or envy and
then proclaiming, "I'm embracing the petty within!" Laughing at your
pettiness probably works better than scolding yourself for it.

The more we identify and acknowledge those moments when we're unable to
genuinely share in someone else's pleasure and ask ourselves whether
another person's happiness truly jeopardizes our own, the more we pave
the way for experiencing sympathetic joy.

EXPERIMENTING WITH SYMPATHETIC JOY

[WHEN BICYCLISTS (LIKE]{.cotx} my friend who raised all that money) are
riding together, they form a pack loosely shaped in a V. Cyclists take
turns being at the front. It's a position of extra labor more than of
prestige, as all the riders pedaling behind are drafting off the leader.
Just so, when we open our hearts to sympathetic joy, we draft off the
happiness of others, taking a little bit of benefit for ourselves. We
know that, in the normal order of things, we will get our own turn at
the front, but for now, as a member of the pack, we can relax and let
the vibration from another's happiness be a sustaining undercurrent in
our lives.

So often we are taught to arm ourselves with cynicism and irony, to cut
ourselves off, dismissing displays of kindness or generosity as phony or
self-serving. It takes a lot to say, "I am going to conduct an
experiment to look at things another way."

That is why sympathetic joy is a practice. It takes time and effort to
free ourselves of the scarcity story that most of us have learned along
the way, the idea that happiness is a competition, and that someone else
is grabbing all the joy. By experimenting with sympathetic joy, we break
from the constricted world of individual struggle and see that joy
exists in more places than we have yet imagined.

SHARING JOY AT HOME

[MOST OF US]{.cotx} make a real effort to support a friend or partner
when bad news strikes, even if our attempts sometimes misfire. But some
interesting research suggests that how we respond to good news is even
more important.

Shelly Gable, professor of psychology at the University of
California--Santa Barbara, has studied hundreds of couples to discover
what goes right in relationships. In a 2006 study, she and her
colleagues described a crucial moment when one partner tries to share
his or her excitement over news like getting a promotion or being
accepted to med school or winning an award.

Let's look at a situation my writer friends will appreciate. Imagine
coming home elated and telling your partner, "I got an offer to publish
my book today." How would you feel if the response was "That's
nice---it's about time. How much are they paying you?" Or, "Well, I have
some good news, too," signaling a 180-degree pivot away from you. Or a
casual "That's great, babe," with eyes barely lifted from the cell
phone. Gable and her colleagues have actually catalogued responses like
these to show how many ways there are to shut down joy---and ultimately
undermine the relationship itself.

The generous response, of course, is to give your complete attention to
your partner and amplify the pleasure for both of you. "Wow---that's
fantastic! Oh my God, you've worked so hard! When did you get the call?
What did they say? Is that the person you told me about last week?"
Gable calls this an "active constructive" response, where the partners
join in savoring the good news---and in the process build their
relationship.

In fact, when she followed up with the couples in her study, Gable found
that partners' reactions to each other's good news were better
predictors of whether the relationship would last than their reactions
to bad news. Trust, intimacy, satisfaction---all were built on the
everyday kindness and generosity of sympathetic joy.

THE CRITIC TAKES A VACATION

[GEORGIA HAS KNOWN]{.cotx} Dan since he first picked up the saxophone in
high school. She remembers his slobbery bleats as he tried to get his
mouth around the reed, and she also remembers how he put aside his
rock-and-roll dreams when the girls didn't seem all that impressed. Then
when Dan was in his thirties, after the breakup of a long relationship,
he picked the saxophone up again and managed to get into a band.
Georgia, who's a longtime jazz fan with a discerning ear, thought Dan's
playing was not very good and sometimes downright bad, but she went to
his gigs anyway. Being on stage made Dan happy, especially when people
in the audience danced, and she loved seeing the boyish joy he radiated
after a show.

"I wanted to be there to see Dan fulfill his dream," Georgia told me
with a grin. "And when we're senior citizens, I'll be able to remind him
how he got people dancing, and we'll share it all again." This may seem
like a small gesture, but Georgia was filling the space between them
with love and generosity. If she had chosen to make jokes about Dan's
dream, or to give him advice about his playing, or to compare his band
to one she liked better, that space would start to fill with judgment
and perfectionism. Instead, Georgia took her own expertise out of the
picture. She saw Dan clearly enough to know he needed a friend, not a
coach.

To celebrate someone else's life, we need to find a way to look at it
straight on, not from above with judgment or from below with envy. It
isn't someone else's pleasure that causes our unhappiness; we make
ourselves unhappy because our negativity isolates us. When we feel most
satisfied with ourselves, when we look with compassion on the totality
of other people's lives, we are most able to greet their triumphs with a
sincere and robust cheer.

CHAPTER 17 PRACTICES

[Roots of sympathetic joy]{.epub-i}

The practice of sympathetic joy is rooted in inner development. It's not
a matter of learning techniques to "make friends and influence people."
Instead, we build the foundations of our own happiness. When our own cup
is full, we more easily share it with others.

Before we get into the practice itself, here are a few of the essential
benefits:

1\. We nurture our sense of connection with the larger whole, noticing
that the whole is only as healthy as its smallest part. One day, I
overheard a woman in my neighborhood talking with a street person who
was usually on our corner. "I had a terrible winter," she said. "I was
sick with pneumonia for a long time. But now spring is coming, and I
feel so much better. So today I want to share the joy." And she put a
roll of bills into the other woman's hand.

2\. We develop awareness of our inner abundance. This is the foundation
of generosity. When I studied in Burma, I saw that even the poorest
people freely made small offerings of food to support meditators, and
they seemed delighted to watch us eat. Giving enlarged them. If we have
nothing material to give, we can offer our attention, our energy, our
appreciation. The world needs us. It doesn't deplete us to give.

3\. We learn to notice our moments of happiness and the happiness of
others. When I was studying with the great teacher Munindra in Burma,
someone in our group asked him why he practiced mindfulness. His answer
that day (for there were many others): "So that when I'm walking down
the road, I won't miss the little purple flowers growing by the
wayside."

The practice of sympathetic joy is something we can call upon in our
everyday lives, although it can also be practiced more formally in
meditation. The meditation on sympathetic joy is quite similar
structurally to lovingkindness meditation, although the phrases are
different. You may try something like, "May your happiness and good
fortune increase further." We start the sequence with a particular
person who is doing well in some area of their life---and it may be an
area of our lives where we are seeking more success. We skip ourselves
in the sequence, as the practice is about rejoicing in the happiness of
others. We may decide to move on to others in our lives who are
experiencing happiness or good fortune, or stay with one individual.

The more we practice sympathetic joy, the more we come to realize that
the happiness we share with others is inseparable from our own
happiness.

[]{#part0026.html}

 

[18](#part0041.html_c_ch18){.calibre2}

[FORGIVENESS AND RECONCILIATION](#part0041.html_c_ch18){.calibre2}

[This is the world I want to live in. The shared world.]{.epub-i}

---NAOMI SHIHAB NYE

[C]{.cic}[ARLOS TOLD ME,]{.cotx} "After two divorces and several painful
breakups, I finally met the woman of my dreams. She was everything I had
hoped for; nonetheless, I found myself cynical about relationships. I
was carrying around so much resentment, anger, and blame toward my past
partners that it was standing in the way of fully embracing this new
relationship that I really wanted to be in.

"I decided to focus my meditation on a practice of forgiveness. I
focused my sittings on seeing my past relations more clearly. At first
it felt like nothing significant was happening. Until one day, while on
a long airplane flight, I had a breakthrough. On the back pages of a
book I was reading, I made a time line of my life. I included all the
painful relationships and alongside them I chronicled the life events I
considered successes.

"I saw the need to more honestly grieve the loss of a couple of those
relationships before I could feel free. For another, I watched my
resentment, fully acknowledged, transform to a feeling of gratitude for
her contributions to my life. And for yet another, my biggest regret,
and my resolve to let go, came from seeing just how much rent-free space
she (long gone in real life) still occupied in my mind. It was
considerable!

"Seeing the relationships and the successful life events side by side
showed me how they might be interconnected, how each relationship and
partner could have played some role in helping me get to where I was at
that moment. That moment, the forgiveness, the gratitude for my life in
total, opened my heart to fully embrace my new partner, whom I married
and deeply love."

When we forgive someone, we don't pretend that the harm didn't happen or
cause us pain. We see it clearly for what it was, but we also come to
see that fixating on the memory of harm generates anger and sadness.
Those feelings then prevent us from savoring the love and joy available
to us right now. Forgiveness is the way we break the grip that long-held
resentments have on our hearts.

But real forgiveness in close relationships is never easy. It can't be
rushed or engineered. The spike of defensiveness we feel when someone
advises us to "forgive and forget" shows just how deep our pain has
burrowed. And though people who advise us to do so may have good
intentions, forgiveness cannot be achieved on command. That kind of
coercive denial could never be healing. When we're told we should simply
let go of our genuine feelings of hurt and anger, we may find ourselves
defending our pain and our right to continue feeling it.

FORGIVING IS A PROCESS

[FOR THOSE WHO]{.cotx} acutely feel an injury, the pain isn't in the
past. The wound is still fresh. When our minds alight on the memory, it
rips through our bodies and infiltrates our thoughts. In order to
release the anger and hurt we carry, we must first acknowledge the
painful things that happened to us. We can't change the past, but we can
grieve what was lost.

To forgive, we may need to open our minds to a fuller exploration of the
context in which the events occurred, and feel compassion for the
circumstances and everyone involved, starting with ourselves. Grief
helps us to relinquish the illusion that the past could be different
from what it was. We're in charge of our own forgiveness, and the
process takes time, patience, and intention.

For Michelle, one of my students, it took years for her to work through
a constellation of difficult feelings before she was able to finally
forgive her former husband. "My now-ex-husband and I went through an
excruciatingly painful, messy separation," she recalls. "The distress
and anger and sense of loss were visceral and all-consuming. We didn't
even speak for the first six months after we parted, except to pass our
three children back and forth at the door. In that space of anger and
avoidance, there seemed to be no passageway into peace."

A few years after they separated, Michelle attended a meditation retreat
with the goal of releasing the "toxic" energy that continued to possess
her. "First, I had to forgive and let go of the past and cultivate
compassion for myself, for him, and for us," she says. "I did a lot of
screaming and crying. Afterward, I felt exhausted, but hardly better."

The surprise came on her way home when she stopped by her ex's house to
pick up their children. He quietly took her aside. "I've been thinking
that I have to get over us," she remembers him saying. "I don't want to
turn into one of those bitter, angry people who at eighty years old
still complains about something that happened in the past. We have three
children together. The things that we liked and loved about each other
are still there, so maybe we can build on that."

"It's difficult to convey just how profound that moment felt to me,"
Michelle says now, considering that the two had hardly been speaking.
"It was the first time in my life I had the experience of shared
consciousness, a raw certainty that my internal processes had somehow
been part of his consciousness, too. In any case, it was a beginning,
and we took baby steps from there."

Now, Michelle reports, she and her ex are very good friends. They
recently decided that their kids should live full-time in one house and
that the two of them would take turns going between the children's home
and another shared house. The arrangement is working smoothly, she says,
adding, "We enjoy our friendship, our co-parenting. We laugh together,
we complain together, we are very supportive of each other's goals, and
that includes our own separate romantic lives.

"We both saw through the layers of the past and pain to something
greater that we shared, and we cultivated it," she concludes. "That is
love."

TO FORGIVE DOES NOT MEAN TO FORGET

[WE'VE ALL HEARD]{.cotx} the idiom "Forgive and forget," as if
processing pain inflicted upon us by others is a quick and easy job. The
phrase is an imperative and renders the idea of forgiveness compulsory;
in order to heal, we must enter a state of denial and effectively avoid
the pain that we have been experiencing.

But, of course, forgiveness is a process, an admittedly difficult one
that often can feel like a rigorous spiritual practice. We cannot
instantaneously force ourselves to forgive---and forgiveness happens at
a different pace for everyone and is dependent on the particulars of any
given situation. What we can do is create space for ourselves to
forgive---and, perhaps ironically, part of that involves allowing
ourselves to wrestle with our feelings of anger and pain to begin with.
Once we are honest about our feelings, we can invite ourselves to
consider alternative modes of viewing our pain and can see that
releasing our grip on anger and resentment can actually be an act of
self-compassion.

Telling the story, acknowledging what has happened and how you feel, is
often a necessary part of forgiveness. Without that, we live in an
artificial reality that is frozen in time, and sometimes woven from
fabrication. I have a friend who believes that a central reason for her
divorce is that she spoke the truth after her ex-husband's parents died
and he waxed on about his perfect, idyllic childhood. "But you put your
drunken parents to bed each night," she would point out. "You dropped
out of college to do that." Her words undermined the story he was
telling, and his need for a rosier past took precedence over the love
between them. It also took precedence over his ability to forgive his
parents, and the chance for love alongside the pain of his broken
dreams.

At times, reality is love's great challenge. When our old stories and
dreams are shattered, our first instinct may be to resist, deny, or
cling to the way things were. But if we loosen our grip, often what
fills the space is a tender forgiveness and the potential for a new and
different kind of love.

Helen Whitney, director of the documentary [Forgiveness]{.epub-i}, has
said, "We talk about forgiveness as if it were one thing. Instead, we
should talk about forgivenesses. There are as many ways to forgive as
there are people needing to be forgiven." In other words, there are an
incalculable---even infinite---number of situations in which we can
practice forgiveness. Expecting it to be a singular action---motivated
by the sheer imperative to move on and forget---can be more damaging
than the original feelings of anger. Accepting forgiveness as
pluralistic and as an ongoing, individualized process opens us up to
realize the role that our own needs play in conflict resolution. We
cannot simply "forgive and forget," nor should we.

Recognizing that there are many possible forms of forgiveness enables us
to explore the possibilities for forgiveness, and what we need to
forgive. When we respond to our pain and suffering with love,
understanding, and acceptance---for ourselves, as well as others---over
time, we can let go of our anger, even when we've been hurt to the core.
But that doesn't mean we ever forget.

A student of mine had been molested by her father when she was younger
than seven years old. He had been arrested and jailed after that, and
now, as an adult who had had no contact with him for years, she
struggled with the idea that to be a good person she had to go see him.
She came to me privately and asked if I thought it was necessary for her
to meet with him. She was frightened at the prospect, but thought it
might be obligatory, a necessary step in her healing. I told her I
didn't think she should feel compelled or coerced to do anything.

Confrontation might be right for some people, but not for others. Only
the person who has been harmed can know what's right for her---and
achieving clarity can take a long time. In my student's case, there were
many possible reasons for her feeling that confrontation was obligatory.
Perhaps she wanted to feel more empowered or realize firsthand that the
little child inside of her was not to blame for what happened. Since her
father had been jailed, perhaps she was also dealing with some level of
guilt for his suffering. But the bottom line is that no one should feel
pressured to confront an abuser. Healing comes in many ways, and no one
formula fits all. Some people write letters to an abuser and mail them,
while others write letters and burn them to ashes. Still others may
prefer to role-play their confrontation scene with a therapist or
trusted friend.

Forgiveness is a personal process that doesn't depend on us having
direct contact with the people who have hurt us. We don't have to meet
them for coffee or invite them to Thanksgiving dinner. We don't have to
engage with them in any way.

Understanding this came as a relief to Marjorie. After attending one of
my talks, she described how the practice of lovingkindness had helped
her to forgive a once-close friend who had sent her a cruel, damning
letter. But just as important, Marjorie said, the practice of
self-compassion had enabled her [not]{.epub-i} to include the friend in
her current life.

A decade earlier, Marjorie's teenage daughter had attempted suicide and
was admitted to a mental hospital. The friend, who had been Marjorie's
closest confidante for many years, had been an important person to
Marjorie's children, as well. After the suicide attempt, the woman wrote
a letter blaming Marjorie for her daughter's problems. She criticized
Marjorie's child-rearing, her performance at her job---even the way she
hugged. At a time when Marjorie most needed kindness and compassion, her
friend only added to her pain. After a short, tense conversation,
Marjorie and the woman stopped speaking.

Six years later, when Marjorie's daughter was well and succeeding in
college, the friend e-mailed Marjorie. Even the sight of the woman's
name in her e-mail queue caused Marjorie's blood pressure to spike.
Bristling with anger, she opened the message, expecting it to contain
more hurtful remarks. She was stunned when she read how much her friend
missed her and how sorry she was for what she'd said. But Marjorie was
still so angry, she was unmoved by the note. She was furious that this
person had the nerve to ask for reconciliation after having caused her
so much pain.

Yet over the next few weeks, Marjorie began to remember how close her
friend had been to her daughter, including the special times they'd
shared. She came to appreciate that her friend, who had no children of
her own, had experienced her daughter's crisis almost as profoundly as
Marjorie had. As she allowed more and more space for the fullness of
this event to unfold in her mind, Marjorie's ill will diminished, and
she made her friend the focus of her lovingkindness meditation. Marjorie
began to wish her friend well and hope that she would prosper.

At the same time, she wasn't prepared to include the woman in her life;
she knew she couldn't again trust her with the intimate secrets they'd
once shared. A month later, Marjorie wrote back thanking her for her
e-mail, adding: "Know that I forgive you completely and hold no bad
feelings for you. I wish you well. Forgiveness leaves us both free to
move on."

Ultimately, we forgive others in order to free ourselves. What happens
in our hearts is our field of freedom. As long as we carry old wounds
and anger in our hearts, we continue to suffer. Forgiveness allows us to
move on.

Like Marjorie, we may forgive someone who has hurt us, yet choose not to
resume a relationship with that person. There is no need to think,
[Well, I've got to get over this so you can be my best friend
again]{.epub-i}. But if we can find a way to forgive and free our
hearts, in effect we're saying, [Life is bigger. We're bigger and
stronger than the hurt we've suffered.]{.epub-i}

Forgiveness can also be bittersweet. It contains the sweetness of the
release of a story that has caused us pain, but also the poignant
reminder that even our dearest relationships change over the course of a
lifetime. Regardless of the decision we reach about whether or not to
include someone in our present-day life, in the end, forgiveness is a
path to peace and an essential element of love for ourselves and others.

ALL IN THE FAMILY

[WE ALL ARE,]{.cotx} or have been, sons and daughters. In an ideal
world, we have warm, loving relationships with our parents or those who
raised us. We feel seen, supported, and loved unconditionally by them.
As we grow older, they respect our choices and accept us for the people
we have become.

Yet for many of us, our families of origin didn't provide the sort of
safe harbors we might fantasize about or hope to create for our
children. So often we carry the scars of our early experiences into
adulthood. In his book [Telling the Truth]{.epub-i}, the American
theologian Frederick Buechner wrote: "You can kiss your family and
friends good-bye and put miles between you, but at the same time you
carry them with you in your heart, your mind, your stomach, because you
do not just live in a world but a world lives in you."

It took me years of meditation practice to realize that forgiveness
would need to play a role in my coming to terms with my childhood: my
mother's sudden death when I was nine, my father's disappearance when I
was four, and his reappearance, brought down by years of mental illness,
when I was eleven. Though neither of my parents deliberately deserted
me, nevertheless, I was, in effect, abandoned by them, and to me, it
felt like cruel rejection.

My opening to forgiveness first took the form of being able to connect
to something bigger. Years into my practice, I was sitting a retreat and
the despair of my childhood loneliness and fear surged up and filled me.
But as I sat, trying to accept what I was feeling, I also suddenly knew
that no matter what I might have gone through or might yet go through, I
was capable of love that was big enough to hold whatever sorrow or
brokenness might arise.

Rilke wrote, "So you must not be frightened. If a sadness rises up
before you larger than any you have ever seen, if restiveness like light
and cloud shadows passes over your hands and over all you do, you must
think that life has not forgotten you."

I was rocked by the sense of not having been forgotten by life itself.
From that understanding, I saw so much more deeply that my parents would
have done anything to protect me and couldn't. Sometimes parents or
caregivers are unable to protect their children because of ignorance,
circumstances, illness, addiction, their own history of abuse, or just
really bad luck. But I saw that there [is]{.epub-i} love in this
world---not of my making or contrivance, or my parents', but raw,
natural, present---no matter what.

That's what gave me the strength to not feel so impoverished and to look
at my mother and my father not through the lens of abandonment but with
much deeper compassion and forgiveness.

OPENING TO CHANGE OVER TIME

[I MEET MANY]{.cotx} adults who have long histories of tense, fractious
relationships with their mothers or fathers---or both. In some cases,
contact between these adult children and the older generation remains
sporadic and strained for decades, with bitterness and resentment on
both sides. For as long as she remembers, my friend Ellen had a hard
time with her mother, Charlotte, a woman she describes as angry,
narcissistic, and extremely judgmental.

"For most of my life, she was so disapproving of me, I cut off contact
with her for long periods of time," Ellen says. "I was a child of the
sixties, and she just never got me. Even after I started practicing
lovingkindness meditation, it felt impossible for me to open my heart to
her. I stayed away from her as much as I could."

Eventually, however, life intervened. Ellen's father passed away;
Charlotte, who was living on her own in Florida, fell and broke her hip;
and Ellen's brother and only sibling refused to get involved. "At first,
the idea of becoming my mother's caregiver seemed like a sick joke, one
of those crazy, karmic twists of fate I might have found amusing if it
hadn't been happening to me," recalls Ellen. "Every cell in my body was
screaming[,]{.epub-i} 'No!' I'd never felt safe around my mother. Still,
there she was, ninety years old, all alone, with a broken body. I had to
ask myself: Even if I don't feel love for this woman, what kind of human
being would I be if I turned my back on her? How could I live with
myself? After all, even though she was a lousy mother, she did give me
life, and I was grateful for that." Ellen wound up arranging Charlotte's
move to a retirement home a few miles from her house in Boston.

"I have friends, also the daughters of difficult women, who had major
rapprochements with their mothers, but I never dreamed that such an
opening could take place between Charlotte and me," Ellen says now. "I
didn't even want it to happen. I didn't want to forgive her, because
that would mean letting her into my life, and that felt too dangerous."

Ellen need not have worried---at least not initially, because Charlotte
was furious with her. She yelled at Ellen and called her a bully. She
accused her of stripping her of her independence and turning her into an
invalid. Once again, Ellen became the target of her mother's rage. And
though she did what was necessary---taking Charlotte to doctors'
appointments, seeing that she was well taken care of, making perfunctory
visits---she says she did it all with a shuttered heart.

Psychologist and author Mary Pipher once said that it's human nature to
love who and what we care for. And, much to her surprise, that's what
happened to Ellen. Slowly, almost imperceptibly, over the few years
Charlotte had left, Ellen let down her guard and grew to genuinely love
her mother.

"I don't know if it was her increasing frailty and awareness that she
wasn't going to live forever or my ongoing practice of lovingkindness,
but a seismic shift took place in both of us," Ellen reflects. "For the
first time, I began to feel truly seen by my mother. On Mother's Day a
few weeks before she died, she wrote me a card telling me how much she
loved me and she thanked me for taking such good care of her. I don't
think I'd felt that depth of love coming from her since I was very
young, and maybe never at all."

As Charlotte lay dying, Ellen realized that all her life she had
regarded her mother only in relation to herself, not as a separate
person---a woman who was fiercely creative and intelligent but
unfulfilled, and who came of age at a time when so little was expected
of women. "As I sat by her side not trying to do anything but be
present, everything that had divided us came unhooked, and we forgave
each other for everything," says Ellen. "Even though I resisted becoming
my mother's caregiver, I shudder when I think of what a terrible loss it
would have been for both of us if we hadn't had that chance to find our
way home to each other. In the end, Charlotte and I---and the great
mystery of life itself---were so much bigger than our differences, there
was nothing left but love."

"DON'T GET AHEAD OF YOURSELF"

[OUR RELATIONSHIPS ARE]{.cotx} also deeply impacted by our ability to
forgive life for being as it is: ever changing, outside of our control.
Even as we live with the knowledge that each day might be our last, we
don't want to believe it. It's human nature to want to do all we can to
stave off the inevitable. Our resistance to accepting the truth that we
and those we love will someday die is deeply rooted in us and the source
of some of our greatest suffering. Yet when we're able to open to the
truth of our most shattering losses, at times we find moments of
unimagined grace.

Mary, a writer in New York, and Jack, her television producer husband,
live and swear by that phrase. "It may sound simplistic, but we're
constantly saying it to each other," she reflects. "I don't know how we
would have gotten through the last forty-six years if we hadn't
deliberately practiced not looking ahead, because so often, the future
has been terrifying." In 1970, a year after they met and two months
before they planned to be married, Jack, then thirty-six, and Mary,
twenty-four, went body-surfing off the coast of Long Island. When a
giant wave rolled in, Mary dove under it while Jack took the wave and
was flung hard against the shallow beach. He broke his neck, and the
doctors predicted he'd never walk again. Thankfully the doctors were
wrong, and eventually Jack did walk, first with crutches, then canes,
and eventually on his own until years later, he needed a walker. The
couple's wedding took place one year after the original date.

But, Mary says now, "I had to let go of the old Jack. I was still in
love with him, but he wasn't the same man as before. In many ways, the
accident defined our life, but at the same time, we chose not to let
it." Jack and Mary were determined to live as close to a normal life as
possible, and they raised two daughters, traveled widely, and worked
hard at their respective professions. Over the years, however, Jack's
physical challenges became more pressing and limited what they could and
couldn't do. "At each stage, even as life got more constrained, we both
managed to maintain a certain amount of independence and look at the
glass as half-full," says Mary.

"Our life now is just like meditation. No expectations. Which is not to
say we never get depressed, because we do. Still, I wouldn't trade
places with couples who are physically intact but can't stand each
other. If Jack and I didn't communicate as well as we do and have such
deep love for one another, ours would be a completely different story."

Through it all, she says, "Three things have kept me relatively
sane---my daily meditation practice, yoga, and therapy. Meditation
doesn't change the fact that the situation sucks, but it has given me
the capacity to deal with it and to stay in the present as much as
possible. Jack and I both know that we don't know what lies ahead. We're
not in control. We just need to remember to remember."

CHAPTER 18 PRACTICES

[Forgiveness meditation]{.epub-i}

Meditating on forgiveness is not terribly different from lovingkindness
or sympathetic joy practices, as all of them invite us to be with our
emotional states without judging them and to use the meditation as the
anchor of our attention. These practices require courage, as we are not
denying our suffering or the harmful actions we've taken.

Forgiveness is not passive, but an active gesture of releasing feelings
like anger, guilt, and resentment, all of which deplete us if we become
lost in them. Forgiveness demands presence, reminding us that we are not
the same as the feelings we possess in a given situation, nor is the
person who we've harmed or who has harmed us.

Traditionally, the meditation is done in three parts: first, you ask
forgiveness from those you have harmed; next, you extend forgiveness to
those who have harmed you; and the final practice is that of
self-forgiveness, for all of those times we harm ourselves with
judgmental habits of mind.

1\. Sit comfortably, and allow the breath to be natural. Begin by
silently (or audibly) reciting phrases of forgiveness for those you have
harmed. You may try, "If I have hurt or harmed anyone knowingly or
unknowingly, I ask their forgiveness."

2\. Notice what comes up. You may find that offering forgiveness to one
person may catalyze memories of another tough situation or person. Don't
push these feelings or thoughts away---but maintain your focus on the
practice, and don't get lost in guilt or self-blame about your
distraction. As other thoughts arise, send your forgiveness in these new
directions.

3\. Next (after however long you want to spend on the first part of the
reflection), you can begin to offer forgiveness to those who have harmed
you: "If anyone has hurt or harmed me, knowingly or unknowingly, I
forgive them."

4\. Once again, thinking about past painful experiences may trigger
emotion. As these feelings, images, and memories bubble to the surface,
you may simply recite, "I forgive you."

5\. Finally, we turn our attention to forgiveness of ourselves. Most of
us have experienced self-blame---at work, in relationships, or simply
because we have habitually kept ourselves in cycles of perfectionism.
"For all of the ways I have hurt or harmed myself, knowingly or
unknowingly, I offer forgiveness."

[Creating space]{.epub-i}

One of my students tells me that she often asks herself, "Am I opening
or am I closing?" when she gets into arguments with close friends,
family members, or her significant other.

To her, "opening" in this case is the act of allowing dialogue, of
seeing others' perspectives, of moving toward resolution; "closing," by
contrast, may be withdrawing, seeking to perpetuate an argument. The
very idea of contraction makes me think of how New Yorkers literally
contract their bodies during winter---shoulders hunch forward and arms
clench in an effort to stay warm. It is our nature to "close" when we
want to protect ourselves.

But as we saw in Marjorie's story, creating more space around pain is
fruitful. When we expand in the face of suffering, we can feel
more---such as where the pain registers in our bodies, or what might
have been going on for the other person. We may even wonder about our
roles. This exercise is one of self-exploration. Consider the following
questions as tools for staying open, expansive, and spacious during or
after conflict.

--Where in my body do I feel anger? Sadness? Resentment? Guilt?

--When I try to relax my body, how do my emotions respond?

--What do I know about the other person's experience that may have
contributed to this conflict? Childhood wounds? Past relationships?

--What are some of my past experiences that resonate with this one? What
did I learn last time?

--How would I react to myself if I were the other person during this
conversation? What was my tone of voice like? My body language?

--What might have happened if I expressed myself differently? (Here you
may want to consider various alternative scenarios.)

Note that these questions aren't meant to send you into a rabbit hole of
rumination and regret about the past; rather, you can think of them as
exercises in curiosity and creativity. Visualize each question as a way
of creating more space and perspective.

[]{#part0027.html}

 

[SECTION 3](#part0041.html_c_pt3){.calibre2}

[]{#part0028.html}

 

[INTRODUCTION](#part0041.html_c_int3){.calibre2}

[[The Wide Lens of
Compassion]{.epub-i}](#part0041.html_c_int3){.calibre2}

[I]{.cic}[N THIS FINAL SECTION, WE]{.cotx} consider whether we can learn
to see and feel the love that is waiting to be born between ourselves
and all others---from the salesperson we know only peripherally to
strangers we see only once and even to those whose behaviors may oppose
us, near or far. What would it look like to bring greater attention and
compassion to these more remote---or perhaps seemingly inconsequential
or even negative---relationships?

The love we develop for ourselves keeps this aspiration from being
shallow idealism or martyrdom. The love we may have for another is a
testing ground for giving and receiving, another strength we take into
love for all. And the love we develop for all of life helps us shape a
practice of love for life itself.

I have a good friend who looks at me like I'm crazy whenever I talk
about loving everyone. "Are you kidding me?" she asks. "Love everybody?
I have enough trouble loving the people I already love! And now I'm
supposed to love people I don't care about, not to mention people who do
terrible things?"

I get her point. We live in a world punctuated by horrifying acts of
violence, in which entire groups of people are marginalized by virtue of
race, class, religion, nationality, and sexual preference. How is it
even possible to imagine loving all? And what about the truly difficult
people in our daily lives---the colleague who takes credit for our
ideas, the spendthrift relative who's always asking for a loan, the
neighbor who cut down our tree. Not to mention the random thorns in our
side who spike our blood pressure and pull into parking places that
should have been ours. There are days when we can feel good simply about
staying calm.

I find myself inspired by the perspective my friend and fellow author
Jason Garner offers: "At times it can seem glib,
na[ï]{.span-symbols-sym}ve, or perhaps even stupid to talk about loving
all beings. When we look around our world, with wars, terrorist attacks,
people killing each other over things like race, religion, and
gender---so many incidents of beings inflicting pain on one
another---how can we possibly hold a space for loving everyone? But this
is, in fact, exactly why we must ... We're called to practice a love
that is more courageous than all the terror we see in our world, because
if we aren't bold in our love, then the hate wins out. And there is
nothing more stupid than that. So we love one another even when it's
seemingly impossible; we look for the humanity behind the acts of
hatred; we find our own pain in the pain of the world; and we meet it
all with an intensity of love that is fitting of our intense times."

ENLARGING THE PICTURE

[JACQUELINE NOVOGRATZ, BESTSELLING]{.cotx} author of [The Blue Sweater:
Bridging the Gap Between Rich and Poor in an Interconnected
World]{.epub-i}, recounts how the story of her beloved blue sweater,
given to her by an uncle when she was a little girl, inspired her to
start Acumen, a non-profit social venture fund that addresses global
poverty. One day while jogging in Kigali, Rwanda, Novogratz spotted a
small boy wearing the blue sweater---still bearing her name tag---that
she'd donated to her local Goodwill a decade earlier, more than five
thousand miles away. "I've held that story as a metaphor for how
interconnected we are, how our action and our inaction can impact people
we might never know and never meet, every day of our lives, all around
the world," she says.

For that, we need to set an intention, even at times when we're not
[fully inhabiting]{.epub-i} what we know to be true. There's no denying
that it takes effort to set the intention to see our fundamental
connectedness with others. In a certain sense, the path of least
resistance in life is survival, getting by---doing the least to complete
what's necessary to put food on the table and stay safe.

If we stretch ourselves to open our minds, to see our shared humanity
with others, we allow ourselves to see the existence of community and
generosity in unexpected places. We just need to challenge ourselves to
opt for the path that may take a little more effort but actually helps
us let go of our conditioned resistances.

Yet it's also true that we miss a lot when we push for unity at the
expense of understanding the differences in context, experience, hopes,
and fears we each may have. It's all too easy to slip into a "we're all
alike at the core, so we should all get along" kind of statement. It's
not real love if we don't also honor our differences---as long-term
couples and friends find out, and as communities and workplaces also
find out.

Just think about what it's been like when you are in a place---a group,
an event, a training session---where you have the feeling "I belong
here," in contrast to what it's like when you are in a place where you
sense you don't belong---the uneasiness, the uncertainty about social
cues, the dread of inevitable humiliation.

What about being in an environment where you've been told outright you
don't belong? Then our anxiety wouldn't seem so much about the
flight-or-fight syndrome built into our biology from long, long ago ...
it would feel (and in fact be) awfully current.

So the question arises---along with our oneness, can we also recognize
the vast relativity of experience and make room for it? The combination
of realizing our distinctiveness along with our unity is seeing
interdependence.

Today, with unprecedented threats to our planet and divisions among
people, awareness of our interdependence is no longer optional. It's
critical that we widen our attention to include those we encounter as we
go about our daily lives, including our dry cleaner and the stranger
sitting next to us on the subway. We extend our sense of inclusion even
further to people we may have disagreements with, people whose actions
we disapprove of, even those who may have harmed us or those we care
for. We don't have to like what they've done, and we might take very
strong action to try to prevent their doing it ever again, but as our
experiences of the universality of suffering grows, our sense of
interconnectedness deepens, and we begin to wish others could be free in
a new way---in spite of their actions, their beliefs, or their positions
in the world.

GETTING TO COMPASSION

[AS MODERN NEUROSCIENCE]{.cotx} has discovered, we're wired for empathy.
We literally have brain circuits focused on "feeling with" others. "It's
a genetic imperative for us to care," says James Doty, M.D., a professor
of neurosurgery at Stanford University. It's essential to the survival
and flourishing of our species.

But the neural circuits related to empathy aren't always activated,
especially when we're feeling anxious or stressed. And at other times,
we may feel so much empathy for another's pain that we lose our own
sense of equilibrium.

In 2004, neuroscientist Tania Singer and her colleagues published an
important paper showing that pain-sensitive regions in the brain get
activated when we empathize with someone else's pain. In other words,
when we say, "I feel your pain," we're voicing the literal truth. But
this is not always a good thing.

Singer, who is director of the Department of Social Neuroscience at the
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences in Leipzig,
Germany, now calls empathy a "precursor to compassion," but notes that
too much of it can have negative consequences. In an interview with the
Cognitive Neuroscience Society, she explained, "When I empathize with
the suffering of others, I feel the pain of others; I am suffering
myself. This can become so intense that it produces empathic distress in
me and in the long run could lead to burnout and withdrawal. In
contrast, if we feel compassion for someone else's suffering, we do not
necessarily feel their pain, but we feel concern---a feeling of love and
warmth---and we can develop a strong motivation to help the other."

What's more, Singer said, even the neural networks underlying empathy
and compassion are different; the former increases painful emotions,
while the latter is associated with positive feelings.

This has a lot of implications for burnout, a distinct kind of
exhaustion often characterized by loss of motivation, stress, anger,
depression, and dissatisfaction. As a meditation teacher, I often lead
retreats for caregivers---mothers, fathers, sons, daughters, spouses,
nurses, doctors and hospice workers, therapists, chaplains, and many
others. People in positions or professions of caregiving can be
particularly vulnerable to burnout, as they tend to empathize with and
take care of others without necessarily refilling their well with
self-care.

Ellen, who works at a school for students diagnosed with mental
illnesses---spanning mild anxiety to severe schizophrenia---is prone to
burnout at her job. "I am often in a classroom full of emotional
expressions, including anger, anxiety, muteness, screaming, throwing
chairs, tuning out with an iPod, tears, and more tears," she tells me.
Ellen is passionate about her work and committed to her students, but
describes herself and her fellow teachers as getting "pummeled" by the
student body's resistance to rule enforcement.

Unsurprisingly, Ellen explains that she feels not only frustration and
fatigue on the job but often also a sense of hopelessness. When I asked
Ellen how she finds meaning each day or if she relies on any self-care
routines to replenish her energy, she responded by telling me that she
is renewed by the sense of emotional openness between her and her
students. "The only real hope I could see is when those kids sincerely
felt that you cared about them and believed they could be better and saw
some potential in them."

And in addition to offering students encouragement and support, Ellen
admits vulnerability of her own: "And we also told them, 'I feel that
way, too, sometimes'; 'It is really hard for me to get to work some
days, too' ... Telling them the truth, showing them that we can share
the same feelings ... has made a difference to them and, I think, given
them hope. And it gave me hope to give them hope."

The authenticity that Ellen brought to her relationships with
students---and that they gave her in return---helped nourish her,
despite the exhaustion and frustration she felt. Her meditation practice
fostered that emotional openness, helped her not to be engulfed by the
pain of her students, and taught her how to return to a place of
steadiness in those times she did get overwhelmed. Like Ellen, we can be
compassionate while also strong; understanding while also savvy. Healthy
boundaries require balance.

While we discussed the importance of healthy boundaries in close
relationships throughout section 2, here we will go on to explore how we
can be more skillful with compassion and empathy when it comes to
challenging relationships and groups of people that we may not know
intimately.

We see that compassion is not just a feeling but a skill that can be
learned and applied in our lives in surprising ways. While we typically
think of this skill as benefiting others, compassion can also be thought
of as an attitude toward living, one that fosters self-care. As I've
mentioned before, there's a strong link between compassion and both
physical and mental health. When we act compassionately, our vagal
tone---or the neural connection between the brain, heart, and other
organs---increases. This, in turn, leads to the release of oxytocin, the
feel-good neuropeptide that calms the sympathetic nervous system,
including the fight-or-flight---that is, fear---response. As a result,
our heart rates and blood pressures drop, inflammation is reduced, our
immune systems are strengthened, we're less prone to stress---and we may
even live longer. Researchers have actually proven that strong social
relationships predict a 50 percent increased chance of longevity. What's
more, the greatest advantages come not from receiving love but from
offering it to others.

Until we can relate to our own pain with kindness and acceptance, we're
more likely to defend ourselves against the pain of others. This
self-defense may mean we shut down when we perceive others are in need,
acting out of a self-protective impulse to numb ourselves to any pain at
all.

Or perhaps we do, in fact, engage with the pain of others, but are
inclined to offer support out of a desire to receive validation, praise,
or love to soothe our own pain. If we turn away from our own pain, we
may find ourselves projecting this aversion onto others, seeing them as
somehow inadequate for being in a troubled situation. And,
paradoxically, when we truly allow ourselves to feel our own pain, over
time it comes to seem less personal. We start to recognize that what
we've perceived as [our]{.epub-i} pain is, at a deeper level,
[the]{.epub-i} pain inherent in human existence. In fact, it is
awareness of both our shared pain and our longing for happiness that
links us to other people and helps us to turn toward them with
compassion.

Kevin Berrill, a clinical social worker and bereavement counselor who
teaches mindfulness to oncology patients and their families, says that
he's able to sense the difference between empathy and compassion in
himself when working with clients. "I'm aware that I'm best able to
serve when I'm in a compassionate place," he says, noting that, over the
course of his career, there's been a shift from a tendency to feel
another's pain to simply be present with it. "I love my work the most
when I'm in that state of flow. I don't try to offer solutions or fix
anything prematurely. I feel calm and peaceful and fully engaged. I can
hold another's pain without drowning in it," he explains, adding that he
can go through a wrenching session and come out feeling awake and alive.
Berrill attributes the movement from empathy toward compassion to his
own practice of mindfulness. And, he says, "When I'm in that place of
compassion, I feel a deep sense of kinship and affection for the people
I'm working with. I find myself loving them."

Yet when we talk about compassion and love for others, we must also talk
about love for ourselves. This isn't simply because opening ourselves up
to others feels good (which it does). Rather, we need to think of the
relationship between loving ourselves and loving others. Unless we
remember to take care of our own needs and respect our own boundaries,
we may end up feeling depleted, exhausted, and so burned out that we
endanger our physical and psychological well-being.

Alas, this lesson is often overlooked. During a discussion following a
recent talk I gave on compassion, Eileen raised her hand. Eileen, a
second-grade teacher and single parent who is the primary caregiver for
her ailing mother, described her constant feelings of guilt with a look
of worry on her face. "There's so much suffering in the world, I feel
like I should be doing more all the time," she began. "But between
caring for my mom and my kids, and teaching all day, I just don't have
the time or energy."

I was grateful to Eileen for sharing her concerns. So often,
well-intentioned students interpret the teachings on compassion to mean
that they must be helping others rigorously, 24-7, regardless of the
toll that may take on them. But most of us, including me, are
[not]{.epub-i} saints, nor should we expect ourselves to be. We all have
our limits. In order to avoid burnout and practice true compassion, it's
important to remember that we can only do what's possible for us; when
we strain to do more, we risk feeling resentful or making ourselves ill.
What's more, the capacity to give to others varies from person to
person, depending on multiple factors, such as availability, energy, and
resources. Ultimately, compassion has more to do with the attitude we
bring to our encounters with other people than with any quantifiable
metric of giving.

US VERSUS THEM

[ALTHOUGH A GLOBAL]{.cotx} society in which lovingkindness and
compassion rule is a worthy aspiration, our common tendency is to see
the people around us as "other," fundamentally different from us. So
often out of our fears, we find ourselves relating to particular
individuals or entire groups of people with antipathy, prejudice, or
just indifference.

In fact, a recent body of research shows that people with the most
wealth and social status pay scant attention to those with less power.
The [haves]{.epub-i} tend to lack compassion for the hardships the
[have-nots]{.epub-i} endure. Writing in [The New York Times]{.epub-i},
psychologist Daniel Goleman said, "Social distance makes it all the
easier to focus on small differences between groups and to put a
negative spin on the ways of others and a positive spin on our own."
But, he added, "In contrast, extensive interpersonal contact counteracts
biases by letting people from hostile groups get to know one another as
individuals and even friends." This kind of camaraderie is far more
common among people who live in proximity and, out of necessity, come to
rely on one another.

Ultimately, there are a whole host of cultural assumptions that
encourage us to act according to this mentality. For one, we live in a
competitive, individualistic culture, where success is often seen as
triumphing over others; alternatively, we think that repressing parts of
ourselves that are culturally undesirable (such as emotional states like
anger and anxiety) will lead to happiness. So rather than doing what
social psychologist Jonathan Haidt refers to as stepping outside of our
"moral matrix" and seeing ourselves as fundamentally related to everyone
else, we think we have no choice but to meet anger with anger, or
separate ourselves from others in order to feel a sense of freedom.

Of course, the opposite often becomes true. Seeing others as an
objectified "them" makes us feel stuck. If we think of others in such a
static way, we also keep ourselves from ever accessing a fresh
perspective---a new way of relating to our experiences, to ourselves,
and to them. Respecting differences while gaining insight into our
essential connectedness, we can free ourselves from the impulse to
rigidly categorize the world in terms of narrow boundaries and labels.

AN INTENTION TO STRETCH

[THE FIRST STEP]{.cotx} toward feeling compassion for others is to set
the intention to [try it out]{.epub-i}. Regardless of whether we have
certain fears or feelings of aversion when considering this idea, we can
relish the experience of exercising our minds and hearts. While we may
be biologically wired to look for differences between ourselves and
others, we can also accept that there is validity in experimenting with
new habits, wisdom that results from encouraging ourselves to learn and
expand.

This works for groups we may harbor resentment toward, as well as
individuals. The process requires patience, though; opening our
shuttered hearts has its own timetable. Often we may spend a while just
going through the motions, feeling as if we're getting nowhere fast. Yet
with a clear intention and a willing spirit, sooner or later we
experience the joy and freedom that arises when we recognize our common
humanity with others and see that real love excludes no one.

There's no need to begin this process with judgment or a harsh sense of
discipline. I've had students tell me that they feel bad or inadequate
upon realizing that love for others doesn't spring forth from their
hearts like water in a babbling brook. Finding this boundless love isn't
the result of a goal-oriented search, but a practice. We experiment with
what it feels like to treat ourselves with kindness when we "succeed" as
much as when we "fail." We open our eyes to the suffering and joy of
those we see in line for security in the airport as much as we do to our
family members. We challenge ourselves to see that kindness is really at
the core of what it means to be and feel alive.

None of this is easy. As I said, learning the practice of lovingkindness
meditation for the first time challenged my emotional fabric in ways I
didn't expect. As I practiced offering phrases of lovingkindness to
myself, then to benefactors and to acquaintances, to difficult people,
and---finally---all beings, I began noticing just how much I was
conditioned to entangle myself in judgments, assumptions, fears, and
stories. This act of noticing itself is part of real love. We see that
we can set the intention to stretch past these habits we've gotten used
to---both internally and as the result of familial, circumstantial, and
overarching societal factors. Not because we are doing something phony
or because we are trying to force ourselves to be hypocritical or
pretentious. We stretch because, as human beings with capacity for real
love, we can. We learn to move and breathe in a new way, until we
realize one day how much stronger we are.

[]{#part0029.html}

 

[19](#part0041.html_c_ch19){.calibre2}

[PRIMING THE PUMP](#part0041.html_c_ch19){.calibre2}

[Healing yourself is connected with healing others.]{.epub-i}

---YOKO ONO

[A]{.cic} [FRIEND WHO SHOPS AT]{.cotx} the same small grocery store as I
do recently mentioned how shocked he was to realize that he never paid
much attention to the woman who rings up his purchases day after day.
"She might as well be a cash register with arms," he said. He determined
that the next time he went into the store, he would give the clerk his
full attention.

He reported back a few days later. "The first thing I noticed was that
she was singing along to something on the radio and that she has a
beautiful voice. And when I told her that, she gave me a radiant smile."

Listening to my friend, I realized that I, too, hardly noticed the
woman---did she often look a bit sad? I began to imagine my next trip to
the store: I'd tell her I'd heard she had a beautiful singing voice and
make her day. But when I actually went in and looked for her, she was
already smiling broadly.

Of course, not everyone we encounter in our everyday lives---whether
it's passersby at the grocery store or a colleague at work---will have a
beautiful voice or a warm smile to convince us immediately to love
others. But there is immense power in the act of showing up for
life---in paying attention to other people, to experiences, sounds, and
sights. Loving others, whoever they may be, is about seeing and
recognizing the basic wish to be happy, in ourselves and in others. This
wish to be happy is something we share, and simply acknowledging that is
the foundation of real love.

OPPORTUNITIES AROUND EVERY CORNER

[OFTEN WE'RE SO]{.cotx} caught up in the stories playing out in our own
minds that we miss precious opportunities to connect with others that
would enrich our days, as well as theirs.

Sometimes we think of compassion as a gift---something we're either born
with or not---and/or that it's something we have to work very hard to
attain. But I think of compassion as the natural result of paying
attention. Attention is the doorway to true compassion.

Yet attention is certainly not automatic---it takes intention and
effort. Sometimes, we don't even realize our own inattention until we
start tuning into our lives with greater awareness. Only then can we see
clearly and make more intentional choices about how to move forward with
greater compassion.

My friend Jason tells a story about a sudden realization he had about
the man who helps him tend his family's garden. "We were grateful for
his work but never really engaged with him beyond it," Jason explains.
"One day I accompanied him on a trip to the dump. As we drove, he
informed me that he was going to be gone for a month. When I asked him
where he was going, he told me that he was going to India to promote his
book. It turned out that he was an author of spiritual books, that he
studied as a young person in ashrams in India and the United States, and
that we had several friends in common. I was embarrassed that I had
failed to see him as a person. Here I was, writing and sharing about
spirituality and love, while failing to see the person right in front of
me who was doing the same. It was a great reminder for me to see people,
not labels or preconceived judgments." Jason's writing and spiritual
work are both built on his deep interest in learning about,
understanding, and practicing love, compassion, and mindfulness. He was
able to realize his lack of attention toward his family's gardener by
really tuning into his process of awareness. Recognizing our
interdependence, the idea that we all count and deserve to be happy, is
a practice---something every single one of us must do again and again.

We are all vulnerable to moments of forgetting---failing to see the
intricacies of others, their virtues, interests, and other qualities.
This typically has nothing to do with a deliberate lack of compassion;
instead it's related to the fact that we're conditioned to keep to
ourselves, to notice "strangers" only when they threaten or oppose us.
Many of us find it easier to focus on problematic situations and
troublesome relationships---a picture assembled with blinders on. We
favor these blinders, though. We think blinders are the smart choice
because we don't want to be distracted by what is going well. It can
feel foolish to our vigilant minds if we rest in reflecting that our
friends and family are, for the most part, healthy, have homes, eat
well, and are doing what they can to improve their lives. When we're
feeling low, it is especially hard to cast aside that problem-centric
tunnel vision to find peace. At such times, paying attention to the good
requires both intention and creativity, an interest in seeing things in
a new way.

WHEN EFFORT IS EASY

[PRACTICING KINDNESS DOESN'T]{.cotx} require us to add extra items to
our daily to-do list. It's simply a matter of learning to be where we
are at any given moment with an open heart. When we're truly present,
the occasions for expressing care and compassion emerge spontaneously.
And, rather than adding more stress to our lives, they have a way of
calming us---and everyone around us.

Paying attention helped my Irish friend Bart lighten a situation that
could easily have become a travel nightmare. "I was on my way home to
Ireland with three friends," he recalls. "Our plane from the West Coast
was delayed in Chicago, and we didn't get to New York until after
midnight. We had missed our connection, our luggage was nowhere to be
found, and we were exhausted. But as bad as we looked---and we looked
bad---I thought that the woman behind the airline service desk looked
even worse.

"I had a banjo with me, and it occurred to me that it had probably been
quite a while since this woman had been serenaded," he says. "Seeing
from her badge that her name was Irene, I broke into a rendition of
'Good Night, Irene.' My companions started singing along, as did some of
her co-workers. By the time the song was over, Irene was beaming. She
told us, 'I am the best person in the whole company at finding luggage.
Never fear, I will find yours!' My friends and I went off happily to get
some rest."

Instead of becoming angry and lashing out at the airline representative,
as many frustrated and weary travelers might have done, Bart's awareness
and sensitivity to others changed the emotional energy of the situation
for all concerned. The result was relief and goodwill in the
moment---not to mention the prompt return of the group's missing
luggage.

NO GESTURE IS TOO SMALL

[WE HAVE COUNTLESS]{.cotx} opportunities every day to practice random
acts of kindness that express our common humanity: holding the door open
for someone entering a building right behind us, giving up our seat on a
bus to a mother with a small child, making friendly eye contact with the
receptionist at a doctor's office. A simple smile exchanged with the
driver in the lane next to ours can make sitting in rush-hour traffic
less onerous. Stopping to help someone in need to cross the street
instead of racing to our next destination is a way to acknowledge that,
at times, we are all vulnerable.

Such small, seemingly insignificant offerings can make a big difference
in people's lives, including our own. Scientific studies have shown that
acts of kindness and generosity are linked to greater life satisfaction
and stronger relationships, as well as to better physical and mental
health. "People who engage in kind acts become happier over time," says
Sonja Lyubomirsky, Ph.D., a psychology professor at the University of
California--Riverside and author of [The How of Happiness]{.epub-i}.
"When you're kind to others, you feel good as a person---more moral,
optimistic, and positive," she says.

She also assures us, "No particular talent, measure of time, or amount
of money is required. The deed need not be grand or complicated.
Moreover, if you're ever at a loss about [what]{.epub-i} act of
kindness, generosity, or charity to carry out, you need to look no
farther than your home, your workplace, or your community."

My student Chloe told me a story about a time she was unable to stop
crying in a crowded subway car, en route to midtown Manhattan. Chloe was
visiting New York City and was in the midst of going through a
devastating breakup from a five-year relationship. It was rush hour, and
Chloe was riding uptown to meet her mother, who was also in town for the
weekend. The subway was densely packed, and people on board were
palpably grouchy from a long day of work and the humid, crowded train.
Chloe was embarrassed---even ashamed---about her public emotional
display. And yet when she got off the train, a quiet woman sitting by
the door offered her a tissue and a gentle smile. "It changed my entire
mood," she told me.

Often, it seems that we reach out to those we don't know with kindness
when we are able to see their vulnerability come to the surface. Growing
up, we're not taught that it's socially acceptable to disclose emotional
information to others---and yet sometimes a tear streams down your cheek
in the subway or at work. I've found that situations like these help
catalyze compassion in others---which can be a helpful reminder of our
shared humanity, no matter how isolated and infrequent they may be.

REAL LOVE WELCOMES CONFLICT

[MORE OFTEN THAN]{.cotx} not, however, we find ourselves confronted by
other people who remind us how difficult it can be to feel a sense of
universal love. Even when people who challenge or oppose us aren't out
to hurt us or threaten us directly, they can still make us feel
attacked, criticized, and combative rather than calm. After all, we're
conditioned to regard self-defense as virtuous. Responding with kindness
to tough everyday situations---from the person who cuts you off in line
to the competitive co-worker---doesn't quite feel like the most
reasonable answer. And yet situations of conflict can be the greatest
opportunity to tap into a more universal feeling of love.

Evelyn, a pharmacist, tells the story of an irascible customer, a Mr.
Smith, whose abusive outbursts she dreaded. "It got to the point where I
heard myself say, 'I hate him,'" she recalls. "I was disturbed that such
strong feelings were being triggered, so I decided I had to send him
lovingkindness. This became my practice for several months. When he came
in ranting, I was respectful and tried to hold the space for him to be
heard. It came to my attention that he was an alcoholic and living in
his car. There was definitely compassion growing in my heart, but here's
how I really learned the power of lovingkindness.

"It was Mother's Day, and I was running into my local CVS to buy a card
for my mother. I saw Mr. Smith in the parking lot and, worst of all, he
saw me. He came over to talk and said he would be waiting for me to come
out. What did he want? It was my day off. I saw him in the store and
started slinking around so he wouldn't see me. I was stalling, hoping he
would just go away. Finally, I had to leave.

"He found me as I was walking to my car, and he reached out to give me a
box of Russell Stover chocolates and wish me a happy Mother's Day. I was
shocked. I wanted to say, 'No, you can't afford this. You can't spend
your last few dollars on me.' But I knew that if I refused his
generosity, I'd be committing the greatest insult to his humanity, so I
accepted the gift and thanked him.

"To this day, whenever I think of this exchange, my eyes fill up with
tears. This is how I came to understand the true meaning of
lovingkindness, which is meant to open our hearts. When our hearts are
open, there's space for everyone and everything. My encounter with Mr.
Smith made me feel that any one of us could be living in our car. I was
no longer separate from him. I could relate to him as an equal human
being, and I felt an interconnectedness with others that I had never
felt before."

As Evelyn discovered, the first step toward feeling compassion for
others is to set the intention. Regardless of our fears or feelings of
aversion, we can take joy in the possibility of stretching
ourselves---not in a coercive way in which we judge ourselves as bad,
but gently, with kindness and self-acceptance.

CHAPTER 19 PRACTICES

[Considering the neutral cast of characters]{.epub-i}

As I wrote in the introduction to this section, I realize the idea of
love for all others can be off-putting to some. Often when I teach about
practicing lovingkindness for all others, I hear a chorus of reactions
something like this: "How can I possibly make a difference? I'm too
\[take your pick: insignificant, busy, old, young, exhausted,
overcommitted, stressed out\]. I know I should meditate and exercise,
eat a healthful diet, and get plenty of sleep while also meeting
deadlines at my high-pressure job. Sorry, but I just don't think I have
it in me to love everybody, too!"

It's true that the word [everybody]{.epub-i} or the phrase [all
others]{.epub-i} can feel overwhelming. So for this exercise, I invite
you to get more specific in thinking about who some of these omnipresent
others are. Consider those individuals we encounter every day in our
lives, but who we may not consider essential to us---or even necessarily
good or bad.

1\. Draw a vertical line down the center of a piece of paper.

2\. In the left-hand column, write down the names of neutral people in
your life, or descriptions of people whose names you don't know.
Examples include the dry-cleaning clerk, the delivery person from your
favorite takeout restaurant, a person you see often on your morning
commute, and so on.

3\. In the right-hand column, write down a short intention for how you'd
like to shift your behavior toward this person. Perhaps you choose to
smile casually at your subway companions rather than look away or down
at your cell phone. And on occasion, you may forget your intention or
act absent-mindedly. There's great importance in forgiving yourself so
that you can gain resolve and begin again. Remember that connecting with
others, even in these small ways, is proven to boost our own quality of
life.

[Street meditation]{.epub-i}

Many associate the word [meditation]{.epub-i} with a formal
practice---sitting in lotus pose, incense wafting, perfect quiet, and
dim lighting. Yet one of my favorite ways to practice meditation is on
the move---sitting in the back of a cab, walking around New York City,
waiting in line to buy groceries at the supermarket.

At every moment, we can integrate the practice of paying attention with
a little more focus and intention---to the breath, to our sensations, to
others, to ourselves.

The practice of lovingkindness is a wonderful way to practice in
everyday life. While traditional lovingkindness meditation practices
begin by directing lovingkindness to the self and then move gradually
outward---first to a benefactor, a friend, then to a neutral person, a
difficult person, and finally all beings---you can begin the street
practices here with neutral people.

1\. As you walk around, wait in line, shop at the mall or grocery store,
silently repeat phrases of lovingkindness to those you encounter along
the way. These may be people you have short conversations with such as a
cashier, or people who pass you by and may not notice you're there.

2\. Note that you needn't focus on one person for several minutes. You
may choose to direct one, two, or three phrases of lovingkindness to a
specific individual in your surroundings and then shift your focus to
another person you encounter next.

3\. As you go about your normal activity, stop intermittently to take
stock of how you're feeling. Do these street practices expand your sense
of perspective? Do you feel lighter, happier? You may even want to
reflect on this at greater length later in the day.

Some phrases to consider are:

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [May you be healthy.]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [May you be strong.]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [May you live with ease.]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [May you have mental happiness.]{.epub-i}

[■]{.span-symbols-sym}   [May you be free of struggle.]{.epub-i}

[]{#part0030.html}

 

[20](#part0041.html_c_ch20){.calibre2}

[CHALLENGING OUR ASSUMPTIONS](#part0041.html_c_ch20){.calibre2}

[It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential
is invisible to the eye.]{.epub-i}

---ANTOINE DE SAINT-EXUP[É]{.span-symbols-sym}RY

[N]{.cic}[OT LONG AGO, A WRITER]{.cotx} friend was shocked to realize
how quickly and unconsciously he sizes up other people. His aha moment
came over dinner at a restaurant following a talk he'd just given at a
midwestern university. He was enjoying his meal with friends from the
English department when a woman approached their table.

"She was rather dowdy looking," my friend recalls. "I automatically
assumed she lived in a rural area, probably on a farm. I also pegged her
as someone who hadn't had much education.

"She told me how much she'd enjoyed the lecture, especially the part
about Proust. I thanked her and was turning back to my friends when she
blew my preconceptions right out the window. This plain-looking woman,
about whom I had rushed to judgment, announced that although she thinks
there are some decent translations, she much prefers reading
[Remembrances of Things Past]{.epub-i} in the original French."

We all do it. We hastily judge every day of our lives, without even
being aware that that's what we're doing. It can take an encounter like
the one my friend had with the Proust maven to wake us up to our habit
of automatically labeling others and plugging them into categories of
our own devising. We fabricate stories about them based on little or no
information. This is how our species tries to manage the world around
us. When we know (or think we know) that someone is one of
[us]{.epub-i}, as opposed to one of [them]{.epub-i}, we rest more easily
at night.

BIAS IS REAL

[RATHER THAN BEAT]{.cotx} ourselves up for labeling others (or deny that
we do), we need to understand bias in order to be able to work with it.
Bias is a basic human trait that's part of our wiring for survival. Bias
helped early humans size up strangers quickly and decide who was a
threat and who could be safely admitted to the cave. Those who made the
right choice survived, reproduced, and passed the trait on to their
children. Bias continues to be our human inheritance, and we're strongly
conditioned to think of others in terms of stereotypes.

At times, snap judgments do protect us from danger---we sense we're
being followed as we walk down a dark street at night, so we change our
route home. If we are part of a particular group---because of our
ethnicity, sexual preference, appearance---we can wisely understand our
vulnerabilities in certain situations. For example, I don't have a
single African American friend, of any socioeconomic class, who has not
spoken to their male child about being very, very careful if stopped by
police---and increasingly, their female child, too.

Yet we can also see that automatically and perpetually fearing strangers
can be a hurtful and damaging habit. A strong sense of justice and
ethics helps to tamp down unwarranted fear of those whom we reflexively
view as somehow different, and stops us from overreacting. And rather
than flatter ourselves that we can become completely bias-free, we can
find ways to work more skillfully with our evolutionary programming and
cultural conditioning.

But sometimes our primitive fear response takes over, and we may
overreact without even being aware of it. This may provide us with a
fleeting sense of control in a chaotic world, but it also isolates us
and narrows our experience of life. We start to inhabit a world of
mental projections, filled with shadows and ghosts bred in the mind. In
other words, we're brainwashed by our knee-jerk reactivity.

HOW WE JUDGE OTHERS

[RESEARCH SHOWS THAT]{.cotx} most of us make split-second assumptions
about people based on superficial differences in appearance. The U.S.
epidemic of tragic killings of unarmed black men by police officers
starkly underscores the point.

This is not just a white-versus-black issue. Rhonda Magee, a professor
of law at the University of San Francisco, tells this story on the
Greater Good Web site: "When I was promoted to tenured full professor,
the dean of my law school kindly had flowers sent to me at my home in
Pacific Heights, an overpriced San Francisco neighborhood almost devoid
of black residents. I opened the door to find a tall young African
American deliveryman who announced, 'Delivery for Professor Magee.' I, a
petite black woman, dressed for a Saturday spent in my own home, reached
for the flowers, saying, 'I am Professor Magee.'

"The deliveryman looked down at the order and back up at me." Magee
explains that while she was not exactly sure what caused the deliveryman
not to believe she was the gift recipient, she was sure that her looks
had something to do with it. "It seems inescapable that his confusion
had something to do with features of my social identity," she
elaborates. Magee recalls feeling like the man perceived her social
identity as a black woman to be "inconsistent with the identity of
'professor' and 'resident' of a home in an upscale neighborhood."

More often than not, we hear about racial biases in the United States
within the context of white-versus-black racism, police brutality, and
the relationship between race and mass incarceration. But there are also
everyday, insidious ways that race clouds our judgment and determines
our decisions and reactions. Of course, as shown by Magee's story, bias
is not just experienced by white people. "As the story of my encounter
with the black deliveryman indicates," Magee concludes, "none of us is
immune: Black people may be as conditioned as anyone else by stereotypes
and unconscious expectations."

RECALIBRATING HOW WE RESPOND

[BECAUSE WE LIVE]{.cotx} in a richly diverse world in which, more and
more, we depend on one another, isolating ourselves is simply not an
option. "We are social creatures and need to be in relationship with
others," john a. powell, a law professor and researcher on race at the
University of California--Berkeley, told [Mindful]{.epub-i} magazine.
"Yet we have ways of denying our interconnectedness, different ways of
marginalizing each other. A lot of times we do things we aren't
consciously aware of. It causes suffering all around." And, he adds,
"Perhaps most damaging of all, bias can be internalized and make the
subjects feel and perform as if the biases about them are true."

Though bias may be most obvious with regard to race or ethnicity, our
assumptions affect all areas of our lives, from gender inequality in the
workplace to discrimination against members of the LGBT community to
flagrant ageism---all well-documented examples. But we may also judge
others on factors hidden even from ourselves.

This was an important discovery for a student at a lovingkindness
retreat I taught in downtown Oakland some years ago. She had decided to
practice walking meditation by going to the nearby railway station and
sending lovingkindness to random passengers getting off a train. Once
there, she noticed a man heading in her direction, and for reasons she
could never pinpoint, she took an instant dislike to him. But before she
was able to get away, he approached her and began speaking.

"I've never done anything like this in my life," the man said. "But you
look like such a kind person, and I'm having a hard time; I'd like to
ask you to pray for me."

My student was stunned by the gap between her negative projections and
the actual flesh-and-blood human being who stood before her. Of course,
she readily agreed to pray for him---and now remembers him as one of her
most valuable teachers.

Sometimes our sense of being threatened grows out of a feeling of
deficiency in our own lives. Carolyn was a struggling single mother of
two young children when she found herself getting angry with a newcomer
in her yoga class. It all began when the woman arrived early and took
Carolyn's usual spot in the front row. The next week, she did it again,
and by the third week, Carolyn was silently seething at this woman, who
appeared to be at least ten years younger and twenty pounds thinner than
Carolyn, and, judging by the large diamond ring flashing on her finger,
as rich as Croesus.

"I hated her," Carolyn recalls. "I knew it was wrong, but I just hated
her. Not only did she have what I imagined to be the perfect life, she
had a perfect body and could hold the hard poses much longer than I
could. And though at the time I was practicing lovingkindness, I decided
that this was one person I did [not]{.epub-i} have to love."

After about six weeks, the woman stopped coming to class, and Carolyn
more or less forgot about her until she showed up several months later.
That morning, Carolyn was back in her old spot in the front row and the
woman set her mat down right next to Carolyn's.

"I couldn't even look at her," Carolyn says. "I felt myself stiffen and
spent the whole class obsessing about how unfair it was that her life
was so easy and I had to work so hard just to feed my kids. But then, at
the end, while we were doing corpse pose, I heard her weeping. I looked
over and saw that her whole body was shaking. After class, she came over
and apologized. 'I'm so sorry if I disturbed you,' she said. 'I've been
having kind of a rough time.'

"Her face was all splotchy, and she looked so drawn and thin that I
asked her what was wrong. She told me, between sobs, that her
four-year-old daughter had died of leukemia three weeks earlier.

"I was stunned. I'd made up this whole story about her and her perfect
but shallow life, when the reality was so incredibly sad. Everyone
suffers, no exceptions. We'll never know what other people's life really
is like until we put ourselves in their shoes. Looking back, it was
crazy that in my mind I was so mad at her, when in reality I knew
absolutely nothing about her."

Simply disliking someone because of your own sense of deficiency is also
a strong tendency. Theresa says, "I remember taking a visceral dislike
to a guy who used to wait with his group for the other therapist who
shared my therapist's office. He was always regaling the other group
members with his troubles, his hypoglycemia, whatever. I never exchanged
a word with him, but I would seize up with judgment just seeing him. It
was quite a while before I realized I was jealous because he felt so
free to seek the attention and care of the group."

Sometimes our stereotypes hit even closer to home. As Mother's Day
approached, my friend Doris couldn't help imagining a celebration that
matched her own Hallmark ideal: she and her daughter, Cora, would get
dressed up and go out for brunch at a table adorned with spring flowers.

The reality was that Cora had dropped out of college to join a punk band
and was scraping by as a barista. And Cora had invited her to a crummy
theater in a bad neighborhood for a special Mother's Day showing of an
eighties movie called [Repo Man---]{.epub-i}all arranged by her punk
friends. Doris regretted it the minute she said yes.

But to her surprise, they had a wonderful day. Cora made a sumptuous
breakfast for the two of them at her tiny apartment, and they sat around
talking until movie time. The theater was filled with tattooed and
pierced young people---and their mothers. There were even flowers and
free beer for the mothers, and Doris was delighted to meet some of the
other punk-rock moms. She found herself filled with joy. Because Doris
had not insisted on her own preferences, Cora had invited her into her
own world and expressed her love in a way that felt authentic and real.

TEARING DOWN THE WALLS

[FOR MORE THAN]{.cotx} half a century, social scientists have been
testing ways of breaking down the barriers between potentially hostile
groups. "Intergroup contact" has emerged as the most powerful way to
reduce bias---specifically, prolonged opportunities for people to get to
know one another as individuals, rather than as faceless members of a
group. According to a 2006 analysis led by Thomas E. Pettigrew, a
professor of social psychology at the University of California--Santa
Cruz, more than five hundred studies have shown that even in areas where
ethnic groups were in conflict and held negative stereotypes of one
another, individuals who developed close friendships in the other group
exhibited little or no prejudice. They seemed to recognize that people
once seen as [other]{.epub-i} are in many ways [just like me]{.epub-i}.

Some of these studies have documented that such friendships also
contribute to "self-expansion." Whenever we learn or experience
something new, our minds literally grow, and we begin to include aspects
of our friends into our own sense of ourselves. Researchers caution that
this does not apply to casual contact---if we simply have a Muslim
co-worker or "know a trans man," for instance. The growth comes from
ongoing cooperation and meaningful communication.

However, one study showed that even using our imagination creatively can
begin to break down unconscious biases. A group of white participants
watched a five-minute video of two men---one black, one white---in which
the men performed identical activities, but where the black man was
clearly the target of discrimination. Those who were asked to imagine
the perspective of the black man showed less automatic bias than others
who were asked to remain objective. The results underscore the value of
"putting oneself in another person's shoes," according to psychologist
Andrew Todd, the study's lead author.

Ultimately, in order for us to get a handle on our biases and fears,
both conscious and unconscious, we must become intimately familiar with
the stories we tell ourselves about other people. Mindfulness "is an
excellent strategy for recognizing and softening the harmful effects of
unconscious bias---that and learning to be at ease with uncertainty,"
UCLA professor of psychiatry Daniel Siegel told [Mindful]{.epub-i}
magazine. "For the human brain, being uncertain can often be interpreted
as danger. With mindfulness training, the brain can learn to rest in
uncertainty without freaking out."

Vinny Ferraro, a meditation teacher in the San Francisco Bay Area who
works with young people and the adults who care for them---teachers,
social workers, correction officers, parents---discovered the power of
mindfulness the hard way. The son of an incarcerated father and a mother
who died young, Vinny spent time in prison and suffered from addiction
before turning his life around, largely through meditation. He has now
taught mindfulness to more than one hundred thousand young people.

"The beginning of the conversation is if we can imagine at least for a
minute that we do not know what is going on for other people, to suspend
our belief that our truth is the only/whole truth, and to realize that
all beings see through a lens of their own conditioning," Vinny also
told [Mindful]{.epub-i} magazine. When people really open up to one
another, the walls come down. "If we all got real, basically we would
all fall in love with each other," he added.

Think about a time when you had a negative first impression of someone
that changed as you got to know the person. A friend, Rachel, admitted,
"I was horrified the first time I met my friend Judy in the ladies' room
at work: 'Why on earth did they hire this loud, wildly dressed woman
with the shrieking laugh?' Turned out she was just what I needed, and we
now have almost forty years as BFFs."

I have seen this, too, again and again. When we start to look beyond our
conditioned responses and recognize that many of our perceived
differences are built on social constructs forged in the mind, we clear
a pathway to love.

CHANGING HOW THE STORY ENDS

[ON SEPTEMBER 11, 2015,]{.cotx} performer, storyteller, and stand-up
comedian Aman Ali posted an entry on Facebook about what happened in his
high school classroom on the afternoon of the attacks on the Pentagon
and the World Trade Center. It was already clear that these were
terrorist acts, and there was talk about which country the United States
should bomb in retaliation. When the teacher left the room, one of Ali's
classmates stood up and proclaimed, "We should bomb Afghanistan back to
the Middle Ages where they belong." Then he turned on Ali and said, "I
bet it was your father flying that plane."

"And as if it was some kind of Pavlovian reflex," Ali recalls, "I
grabbed him by his shirt and came inches away from punching him in the
face so hard that I probably would have altered the structure of his
face. The only thing that stopped me milliseconds before doing it was
the look he gave me.

"He had a smug smile on his face as if he was telling me, 'Yep, I knew
it.'"

Ali stopped short of reinforcing the kid's stereotype of violent
Muslims, but his reactivity haunted him for years.

"To this day I randomly have nightmares about this incident, thinking
about his smile telling me, 'Yep, I knew it,' again and again and again.
What if I was the only exposure to Muslims he ever had? What if that's
the opinion he carries about Muslims for the rest of his life?"

It was on September 11, 2015, that Ali awoke to find a Facebook message
from his high school nemesis, apologizing profusely for the hurtful
things he'd said back in 2001.

The two men spoke on the phone later that day for the first time since
they'd graduated. It turned out that during the intervening years, Ali's
former classmate had served two tours of duty with the U.S. Army in
Afghanistan. "The endless supply of love, hospitality and goodwill he
got from people there were a constant reminder of that hateful moment as
an ignorant teen \[when\] he wanted to bomb this country mercilessly and
the hurtful things he said about my dad," Ali wrote.

"I deserved to be punched," the classmate told Ali over the phone.
"Sometimes I really wish you did."

"And that's when I realized I'm really glad I didn't," said Ali.
"Because we never would have been able to have this conversation
fourteen years later."

REFLECTION

[A LOT OF]{.cotx} the way we look at and think about others---especially
those who are different from us---is encoded unconsciously. We adopt
behaviors and attitudes based on what we know, and oftentimes, we don't
push back on it.

A friend tells me, "Growing up in western Mass, I heard a lot more
anti-Catholicism than anti-Semitism. And I still shudder to think about
the experience of the lone black girl who was enrolled in my high school
senior year. We were all called together by the headmistress before she
came and lectured about behaving 'properly.' But she was given a single
room, and there was no discussion that I remember about including her or
making an effort to get to know her. Maybe she did make a couple of
friends, but I still imagine her surrounded by a wall of cool
politeness."

Today, consider the following: What did you hear about other groups
growing up? What was implied by the behavior of your family or school
toward other groups? Do you think that conditioning affects you now?

CHAPTER 20 PRACTICES

[Intentions as everyday practice]{.epub-i}

Each day in the morning, write down your intention for the day, built on
the foundation of challenging your assumptions with love. Perhaps your
intention is "I will notice every time I judge another." Perhaps your
intention is "I will notice every time I judge another, and explore
why." You may resolve to practice generosity by offering a small
possession to someone unexpected. The options are infinite, but some
helpful prompts are listed below:

--I will notice every time I judge another.

--I will send thoughts of lovingkindness to those who challenge me
today.

--I will notice my judgments of others and reflect on them.

--I will smile at someone on the subway / in the grocery store / on the
street.

--I will act kind toward someone at work who challenges me.

--I will make a list of my most common judgmental or biased thoughts and
spend time reflecting on them.

[Taking a walk in someone else's shoes]{.epub-i}

There are plenty of times in the day when we encounter people who are
different from us---checking out of a store, engaging with servers at a
coffee shop or restaurant, riding the subway, taking a taxi, giving a
ticket to the clerk at the mall parking lot. Often, many of us simply
don't engage with these people or even look them in the eye---not out of
ill will but because we don't take the energy to tune into our
interactions with intention.

This practice can be done every day, all day, as much or as little as
you want. The following "steps" are not meant to be done in one sitting
or session, but provide a guide to taking a metaphorical walk in someone
else's shoes with different levels of engagement.

1\. Start by noticing people you see around you each day, and take a
moment to consider their stories. Ask yourself questions about them. Be
curious---consider that all people have memories of childhood, foods
they may like and dislike, colors they prefer, or times of day that feel
evocative. Opening up to people who could otherwise be faceless
passersby is a powerful practice.

2\. As you consider the stories of others, you may want to offer them
phrases of lovingkindness: [May they be happy, peaceful, healthy,
strong]{.epub-i}. You can choose your own version of these sayings.

3\. As you look around in an everyday setting and take the time to
consider the shared human experience between yourself and others, even
those who are very different, you may find it both fun and useful to
imagine their lives. If you are sitting on the subway, for instance,
perhaps you choose to create an imagined life for the person across from
you rather than playing a game on your smartphone. We do this not to
form conclusions about someone but to remind ourselves that all lives
contain joys and sorrows.

[Meditation: Lovingkindness for someone that we find difficult]{.epub-i}

Offering lovingkindness to others who have behaved badly doesn't mean
that we condone their actions or that we're trying to pretend it doesn't
matter. It may matter very much, but we can have the courage and the
willingness to open, to remember the potential of change, to realize
that we ourselves are freed by wishing them well.

We usually begin with someone who is only mildly difficult for us,
somebody we find somewhat annoying or irritating, or someone we're a
little bit afraid of. We don't begin right away with the person who has
hurt us the most in this life. It's common to feel resentment and anger,
even toward a mildly difficult person, but we undertake this practice in
a spirit of adventure. What happens when instead of going over and over
our old grievance, we pay attention to this person in a different way,
wishing they could be free of some of the suffering that binds them,
wishing they themselves could be filled with the spirit of
lovingkindness and compassion?

So if there is a difficult person that comes to mind, you can visualize
them, say their name, see what happens as you offer the phrases of
lovingkindness to them, phrases like, "May you be safe. May you be
happy. May you be healthy. May you live with ease." Remember, you're not
trying to manufacture any emotion or feeling. And if you feel swamped or
strained, then go back to simply offering lovingkindness to yourself.
Think of yourself as deserving of love and care, and generate the
phrases for yourself. But over time, try to spend some time with this
difficult person, even if you need to change the phrases to seem less
jarring, like, "May you be filled with lovingkindness. May you find
clarity and well-being" (after all, they would be less difficult if they
themselves were happier!).

And for the last few minutes of this sitting, you can be spontaneous and
just see who comes to mind: someone you care about deeply, someone you
have difficulty with, a stranger, someone you just met. Allow them to
arise in your awareness one at a time and make the offering of
lovingkindness to them, people, animals, whoever it might be.

And once you have ended the session, pay attention throughout the day to
see how this meditation practice may be having an effect.

[]{#part0031.html}

 

[21](#part0041.html_c_ch21){.calibre2}

[LOVE EVERYBODY](#part0041.html_c_ch21){.calibre2}

[The more you understand, the more you love; the more you love, the more
you understand. They are two sides of one reality. The mind of love and
the mind of understanding are the same.]{.epub-i}

---THICH NHAT HANH

[A]{.cic} [FEW YEARS AGO, I]{.cotx} met Myles Horton, who founded what
was then called the Highlander Folk School (now known as the Highlander
Research and Education Center), a training center for the civil rights
movement, whose students included activist Rosa Parks. Myles asked me
what I did, and when I told him about teaching lovingkindness
meditation, he said, "Oh, Marty"---as in Martin Luther King, Jr.---"used
to say to me, 'You have to love everybody.' And I would say, 'No, I
don't. I'm only going to love the people that deserve to be loved.' And
Marty would laugh and say, 'No, no, no. You have to love everybody.'"

Sometimes when I tell this story, people reply, "Well, look what
happened. He got assassinated." As if this were a case of cause and
effect, and King would not have been killed if he hadn't tried to love
everybody. But how do we know that? If Martin Luther King had been
hateful, vicious, and small-minded, would he have been safer? Would we
be safer? How far would the movement have gotten if he hadn't insisted
on meeting hatred with love?

Neither Myles Horton nor the friend who raises an eyebrow whenever I
talk about love for all others is alone in their skepticism. A student
once told me that she hates lovingkindness practice because it seems so
phony: "It reminds me of a forced Valentine's Day when we're actually
angry or fearful, but cover over our true emotions with false
sentiment." I explained that true compassion requires honesty and
insight. It's not a matter of feeling sorry for someone or denying our
own emotions.

Many other people regard wholesale kindness and love as signs of
weakness. They think, [If I love indiscriminately, I'll lose my ardency,
my power. Other people will take advantage of me and I'll be seen as a
pushover. Worse, I'll]{.epub-i} become [a pushover]{.epub-i}. Why should
we send wishes for happiness to those who oppose us, disagree with us,
and stand in our way? Hasn't it been drummed into our heads that we
should stand up for ourselves, whatever other people think?

The answer is yes---because this is what we've been taught and
conditioned to believe. There are no popular TV shows, movies, or books
that depict heroes who respond to villains non-violently; we are taught
to think about ethics of good/bad, wrong/right in terms of force, power,
and often clear-cut violence. We don't have many contemporary role
models of cultural figures who have been able to come up with peaceful
models of opposition, ideological approaches to protest that are backed
by powerful forces, other than violence.

Loving everybody is part of the lovingkindness practice, and certainly
something we can think about when it comes to dealing with difficult
people in our everyday lives---a cranky boss, a demanding friend, an
unfriendly server at a restaurant. But this chapter is meant to show
outstanding examples of love for all, people who have found a new
vocabulary, approach, and set of behaviors for how to respond to urgent
and real instances of violence and threat. Happily, in forty years of
practicing and teaching lovingkindness, I've discovered that instead of
turning us into pushovers who lack clear boundaries, this practice makes
us stronger so that we live more in tune with our deepest values. Loving
all others asks us to open our hearts and embrace our shared humanity
with people we don't know well (or at all). However, it does
[not]{.epub-i} require getting personally involved with everyone we
meet. It does [not]{.epub-i} require us to agree with their actions or
views[---]{.epub-i}or to confess our love to strangers on the street. It
[never]{.epub-i} requires that we sacrifice our principles or cease
standing up for what we believe. The primary work is done internally, as
we cultivate love and compassion in our own hearts.

I'd also be the first to acknowledge that this work is never done. After
the publication of [Lovingkindness]{.epub-i}, people often said to me,
"It must be incredible to love everybody all the time!" I had to tell
them that although I believe that universal love is possible, I don't
live every day overflowing with love. I remember complaining to a friend
about someone we both knew, and she said, "Haven't you read your own
book?" Recognizing when our actions don't match our aspirations can also
be an act of love.

Inspiring figures don't have to be used as cudgels against our own sense
of worth, though we may veer toward that kind of conditioning and need
to be sensitive to that tendency. Inspiration points us to a bigger
world than the one we may have been inhabiting, where we suddenly can
see that human beings can go through so much and still be kind. They can
create, or care, or act in a way that belies an ordinary sense of
constriction or limitation. They can know love is a power, and work
toward being free. We can see a path, a way, and say, "If there is a
path, I, too, can walk on it."

CHOOSING LOVE OVER HATE

[MALALA YOUSAFZAI IS]{.cotx} the youngest ever winner of the Nobel Peace
Prize. The daughter of an education activist and school owner in the
Swat Valley of Pakistan, Malala began to speak and blog about education
for girls when she was twelve. In 2012, when she was just fifteen, she
was shot in the head by a Taliban gunman who boarded her school bus and
asked for her by name. The Taliban explained that their real target was
Malala's father, but her assassination attempt was still a part of their
larger plot to secure power in Swat by demoralizing advocates of
education and peace---such as the members of the Yousafzai family.
Fortunately, Malala ended up making a full recovery in England, and has
since become an inspiring advocate for the rights of women.

In 2013, Malala appeared on [The Daily Show]{.epub-i} with Jon Stewart
to tell her story. Stewart asked her to describe her reaction when she
first learned the Taliban wanted her dead. She replied: "I used to think
that the Talib would come, and he would just kill me. But then I said,
'If he comes, what would you do, Malala?' Then I would reply to myself,
'Malala, just take a shoe and hit him.' But then I said, 'If you hit a
Talib with your shoe, then there would be no difference between you and
the Talib.'"

Despite her young age, Malala's wise heart already knew that "an eye for
an eye" retaliation, even with those who sought to harm her, would only
hurt her further. When we think, speak, and act from a sense of
awareness and compassion, we see that there are many ways to respond to
threats and accusations. It's not as though Malala's instinctual
reaction to danger was necessarily to be loving and accepting of her
attackers; but she had the perspective to recognize that hitting the
Talib with her shoe would mean perpetuating the cycle of violence and
fear further, playing by the same rules as those who opposed and
endangered her.

By recognizing that retaliation would both fuel the cycle of violence
and cause her to carry the burden of pain, anger, and fear in her own
heart, Malala gave herself freedom and courage, reinventing the rules of
the game the Taliban tried to "play" with her. When we allow ourselves
to consider the consequences of our actions with a wider lens, we also
realize the profound link between how we relate to others and our own
sense of harmony and well-being.

What is perhaps ironic is that the resolve of Malala's non-violent
emphasis on dialogue and education proved to be more disarming than any
violent retaliation. Her goal was not to kill or harm those who were
threatening her life as a result of the cause she stood for but to
support the cause regardless of the outcome on her safety. Her peaceful
form of protest showed the Taliban---and the rest of the world---that
her activism had nothing to do with ego, but rather those who could
benefit from her sacrifices. With stories like Malala's, we have living
proof of how such acts of love can be fiercely powerful.

INCLUSION IS THE FACE OF LOVE

[SOMETIMES THE ACTIONS]{.cotx} committed against individuals or a group
of people are so agonizing that the idea of including the perpetrators
in those we wish to be free seems not only impossible but an outrageous
mockery of justice. Yet we can find people who show us that anger and
compassion are not mutually exclusive in the brave and willing human
heart. In these cases, a determination not to be defined by the actions
of others does not sacrifice a fundamental loyalty to justice---it
bolsters it.

South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission is a powerful example
of this in action on a historic scale. The commission was established in
1995 under Nelson Mandela's government to investigate the violations
that took place during apartheid, as well as to provide support and
reparation to victims and their families. The chair of the commission
was Archbishop Tutu. At the core of the commission's work was radical
honesty---victims told what had been done to them or their loved ones in
the presence of the perpetrators, and the perpetrators had to
acknowledge what they'd done with the victims present. Now most people
credit the commission with preventing a nationwide bloodbath of
retaliation.

On his Web site, the Forgiveness Project, Tutu explains how this kind of
letting go, or forgiveness, benefits those who have suffered: "To
forgive is not just to be altruistic. It is the best form of
self-interest. It is also a process that does not exclude hatred and
anger. These emotions are all part of being human..."

Tutu further clarifies that forgiveness can bring about
self-improvement: "If you can find it in yourself to forgive, then you
are no longer chained to the perpetrator. You can move on, and you can
even help the perpetrator to become a better person too."

The effect of allowing ourselves to connect with "the enemy," the Other,
is a radical act of love, and one that is as much about peace as it is
about self-love. I was moved recently by an article in
[Haaretz]{.epub-i} written by an Israeli mother, Robi Damelin,
reflecting on the murder of her son by a Palestinian sniper. Damelin
wrote her story in [Haaretz]{.epub-i} in response to outrage in Israel,
which was prompted by a national radio show host making a comparison
between the grief of Israeli mothers and Palestinian mothers when their
children are withheld by the other side. Damelin is a central member of
a grassroots organization called the Parents Circle--Families Forum,
which brings together Palestinian and Israeli families who have lost
loved ones due to the conflict. In the article, she asks powerful
rhetorical questions: "What makes you think that the tears on the pillow
of a bereaved Palestinian mother are of a different color or substance
than those of a grieving Israeli mother?" Her answer is that "grief
knows no borders." These kinds of organizations offer clues as to how we
might go about recognizing the power of reconciliation---rather than
revenge---amid real and urgent conflict.

Certainly, such brave acts of reconciliation shouldn't be used as a
substitute for social change or as a Band-Aid to help sustain the status
quo. Nor should we make overly idealized, unreal figures out of people
who are able to go there or blame those who are not so able. But these
stories show the hard work of justice when it is so much greater than
merely a more polite way of saying [revenge]{.epub-i}---and the role of
the hard work of love, feeding it all the while. It's our own work.

CHAPTER 21 PRACTICES

[Revisiting your role models]{.epub-i}

This exercise is about revisiting some of the role models you have had
throughout your life---and adding some new ones to your list.

Is there someone in your life who has inspired you, who has opened your
mind, perhaps gently or perhaps swiftly, so that you feel a different
sense of possibility?

See if you can bring that person here. Keep in mind that just because
you consider someone a role model doesn't mean that you necessarily
follow his or her worldview at all times. And although we owe a lot of
gratitude to those who have inspired us, it can also be an emotional
trap for us to expect ourselves to follow in their footsteps at all
times. To do so simply makes us feel inadequate---and goes against the
expression of self-love and self-respect that we've been cultivating.

For this practice, you may want to close your eyes and softly visualize
your role models, and feel the effects they have had on you. You may
also choose to write their names down and perhaps reflect on a few
admirable qualities that you associate with these particular
individuals.

These names need not exist in isolation in your thoughts or in your
notebook. By taking the time to reflect on the people who inspire you to
act with more love and compassion, you are taking strides toward greater
mindfulness in your own actions, thoughts, and words.

[Visualizing togetherness]{.epub-i}

Robert Thurman, professor at Columbia University, uses a powerful
(though admittedly humorous) image to teach how anyone can practice
living with compassion. "Imagine you're on the New York City subways and
these extraterrestrials come and zap the subway car so that all of you
in it are going to be together forever." If someone is hungry on the
subway car, we help get them food. If someone begins to panic, we do our
best to calm them down. The truth is that everyone on the subway car is
in it together---so coexisting peacefully and with a basic understanding
of shared humanity makes it more pleasant for everyone.

You may choose to close your eyes or rest your attention softly below
you as you consider this image. You may try introducing particularly
challenging people into your subway community, to see what difficulties
come up as you remind yourself again and again that you are all alike
and deserve love and compassion. If your focus begins to wander, you may
silently repeat phrases of lovingkindness to yourself, to all others,
and perhaps to specific difficult people as you visualize the scene.

[Meditation: lovingkindness for all beings]{.epub-i}

We offer lovingkindness to all beings everywhere in order to touch the
immensity of life. This is an expression of our capacity to connect to
and care for all of life, through focus on phrases like, "May all beings
be safe, be happy, be healthy, live with ease."

You can use these phrases or any phrases that are meaningful for you.
What would you wish for all beings everywhere? Remember the feeling tone
is one of offering or gift-giving.

We offer the phrases of lovingkindness to all beings everywhere, then
all creatures, all individuals, all those in existence. Each way of
phrasing this opens us to the boundlessness of life.

And when you feel ready, you can end the session. Notice if there is a
sense of spaciousness or expansiveness and how it affects you throughout
the day.

[]{#part0032.html}

 

[22](#part0041.html_c_ch22){.calibre2}

[CREATING COMMUNITY](#part0041.html_c_ch22){.calibre2}

[The moment we choose to love we begin to move towards freedom, to act
in ways that liberate ourselves and others.]{.epub-i}

---bell hooks

[A]{.cic} [FEW YEARS AGO, MY]{.cotx} friend David was severely
depressed. Like many people struggling with depression, he felt lonely
and disconnected from the world. I suggested that he might break through
his feelings of isolation by volunteering for a cause he believed in. He
immediately warmed to the idea and offered his services to an
organization that delivers meals to homebound people who are ill. But
when David showed up the first day and the manager handed him a sharp
knife for slicing sandwiches, there was a problem. David's hands
trembled, a side effect of the medication he was taking, and he had
difficulty doing even this simple task. The manager soon noticed and
switched David's assignment from slicing sandwiches to wrapping them, a
job he could handle easily. David was so touched to be seen and cared
for and given a job he could do with pride that he was motivated to keep
coming back. "I went from feeling lost in the dark tunnel of my mind to
being part of a loving community," David says now. "Working with this
wonderful group of people helping others was a critical turning point in
my recovery."

Like David, we all yearn for connection. Yet we often tend to withdraw
when we're suffering. Perhaps we feel we don't have the energy to be
with other people, or we wish to spare them our pain. But withdrawal
only adds to our sense of isolation. It can require enormous willpower
to reach out when the impulse is to turn off the lights and hide beneath
the covers, but it can also be an act of great self-compassion. So often
it's only when we connect with other people that our moods lift and we
start to come home to ourselves.

As Barbara Fredrickson has said, our daily moments of connection with
others are "the tiny engines that drive the upward spiral between
positivity and health."

And yet loneliness has become epidemic in our country. In his book
[Bowling Alone]{.epub-i}, published in 2000, political scientist Robert
Putnam documented our declining participation in once-popular community
groups from the PTA to civic and church organizations to, well, bowling
leagues---all of which he saw as the bedrock of a democratic society.
Since then, disconnection has continued to grow as our cable channels
proliferate, our moves become more frequent, our commutes longer, and
our neighborhood ties weaker. In a recent study published by [American
Sociological Review]{.epub-i}, researchers studying the existence (or
lack thereof) of community in America found that one in four people
reported not having anyone that they could really talk to.

DO-IT-YOURSELF COMMUNITIES

[EVEN AS OUR]{.cotx} social landscape changes, my own experience
suggests that religious institutions, meditation and other spiritual
centers, and twelve-step programs continue to provide a crucial sense of
belonging---and many people are also finding creative new ways to
connect that suit their needs and interests.

Sometimes it's a sense of need or shared vulnerability that brings
groups together. "Many years ago, when I was a single mom recovering
from alcoholism, the home my nine-year-old daughter and I were renting
had a gas explosion one week before Christmas," my student Matty writes.
"Fortunately, we were out at the time, but we returned to discover that
where we lived had been declared 'not fit for human habitation.' Unable
to lose any time from my minimum-wage job, I quickly located an
apartment in town and managed to move what could be salvaged. The little
money I'd put aside for Christmas presents was needed for a rent deposit
and moving expenses. There would be no holiday turkey that year.

"Then, on Christmas Eve, while I was cooking dinner, a police officer
knocked loudly on the door. Panic struck my heart. I feared that some
part of my past might have caught up with me. My daughter, so pleased by
my sobriety, gave me a look, as if to say, 'Oh, Mama, what have you done
now?' When I opened the door, a very gruff cop told me to put on my coat
and come downstairs. My daughter and I followed him down several flights
of stairs in silence. When we got to the police car, he said, 'I was
asked by Santa to make a special delivery.'

"The entire car was filled with presents! When I asked him who was
responsible, he just repeated, 'Santa.' I told him I hoped this blessing
would be returned to him many times over. My daughter was overjoyed. All
the toys were tailored to her interests. All the clothes were a perfect
fit.

"I knew the gifts had to have come from my AA group. No one else knew us
in our new town. It was just the most benevolent thing to receive such
kindness. At nine, my daughter no longer believed in Santa, but she had
to reconsider that year.

"The AA group had also arranged to have an open house over the holidays
for members without families. People volunteered to keep it going night
and day. My daughter and I took a shift in the middle of the night. We
served food and kept the coffeepot going.

"As the years went on, my finances improved and I became more secure in
my sobriety. We had all we needed: plenty of gifts, turkey dinners, and
friends to share them with. But once in a while, we looked back and
recalled our best Christmas was when we were loved by strangers and gave
love back to strangers. That love shown to me inspired me to remain
sober, and I have not had a drink for thirty years."

Matty's story shows the transformational impact community can have,
especially in trying times. And yet I also see rich communities being
created all the time in relatively everyday contexts: in book groups,
community gardens, writers' and artists' circles, progressive dinner
parties, and neighborhood associations for aging in place. I have
friends who meet monthly to read poetry aloud, another friend who has
started a meditation group to address environmental concerns, and still
others who have volunteered for rescue work in places like Haiti and New
Orleans.

One of the best things about the create-your-own-community movement is
its flexibility, and I recommend that people start small. Intention is
necessary, but formality and large numbers are not.

A few years ago, some friends and I decided to launch what we call the
Turn Left Community. It all started when my friend told a few of us that
he confronts two choices when he wakes up in the morning: the computer
to the right of his bedroom, and the meditation cushion in a room to the
left. If he turns to the right, he feels compelled to check his e-mail,
but if he turns left and meditates first, he says, he can deal much more
skillfully with the pressures of his high-powered job. There are five of
us Turn Lefters, and we check in with one another every day by e-mail.
The subject line is always turned left. Then, if you wish, "I just did
thirty minutes." Or, "I only did five, I have an 8:00 [A.M.]{.cotx}
meeting, mea culpa!" or maybe just "I'm in Seattle---it's raining." It's
all said in a lighthearted, conscious way, and our responses and
interactions provide endless grist for our own unfolding awareness.

Somewhat more formal than my Turn Left posse, [Kalyana mitta]{.epub-i}
(KM)---or spiritual friends---groups have taken off throughout the
mindfulness world. Not everyone can get to a meditation center
regularly, but they can gather locally to sit, discuss books, and share
their own spiritual journeys. My friend Barbara and her husband recently
relocated from DC to California, and for them, one of the toughest
aspects of the move was leaving their KM group. "A core group of seven
of us met in our living room every other week for twelve years," Barbara
reflects. "We sat together, shared our stories, supported one another
through illness, our kids' crises, our parents' deaths, and other major
life transitions. We cried together and laughed uproariously. There was
a level of intimacy and trust in that group that's hard to replace."

CAST A WIDE NET

[IN THE HANDS]{.cotx} of creative groups, social media can serve as a
virtual community organization. For example, CaringBridge provides a
place for people who are ill and their loved ones to communicate
directly with their chosen circle of family and friends. This takes the
pressure off caregivers, who don't have to make multiple phone calls or
send individual e-mails whenever there's a new development.

Following surgery for cancer, author and longtime meditator Joyce
Kornblatt wrote this to her CaringBridge circle: "What this space for
medical updates has unexpectedly turned into---a community of wisdom,
love, and generosity from so many of you---has been a precious gift to
me."

Another meditation student, Susan McCulley, told me this story: "Five
months ago, two days before Christmas, a close friend's only daughter
was killed in an auto accident. From that moment, waves of grief and
love rippled out from person to person. Our community calls it 'the
Invisible Net of Love,' meaning that we are all always surrounded by
love, but we don't notice it's there until we reach out. Not just people
close to the family, but acquaintances and strangers reached out to
offer their support. They also reached in to recognize that this could
have happened to any of us (and still could) and that we all know (or
can imagine) the pain of losing someone we dearly love. On her last day,
it happened that the girl and her mom had brownies for breakfast: it was
the first day of Christmas break, and they wanted to celebrate. Two
months after her death, to honor what would have been her seventh
birthday, the girl's mother invited her Facebook circle to celebrate
their dear ones by having brownies for breakfast. And on that day, more
than thirty-eight thousand people around the world started their day
with a brownie. Love is a net that connects us."

SEEING THROUGH SEPARATION

[WE'RE ALL PART]{.cotx} of countless ephemeral communities as we move
through our days: the fellow travelers on our plane, train, or bus; the
audience at a concert or movie; the glum crowd waiting in rows of chairs
at the DMV. For the most part, we don't identify our brief shared
occupation of time and space as a community. Yet most of us can also
recall a time when an unexpected occurrence created a spontaneous bond
among strangers. These are the times when we suddenly recognize the
unshakable truth of our interdependence.

For a meditation student named Shirley, the catalyst was a massive
snowstorm that brought her town to a standstill. After several freezing
hours at home without power, Shirley headed to a nearby diner, hoping
for some warmth and a quiet corner where she could read. But the place,
which had a backup generator, was soon buzzing with customers, and
Shirley reluctantly volunteered to share her table. Then, as she
recalls, something shifted. "I offered to share some of my scrambled
eggs, and the ice in me began to melt." Before long, Shirley and the
others at her table were squeezing in even more cold and hungry refugees
from the storm. "Thus," she concludes, "the way from separate
discomforts to holy gatherings: from grumpy attitude to gratitude,
finding that the unbearable becomes lessened when shared
compassionately."

Such compassionate sharing is the subject of Rebecca Solnit's remarkable
book [A Paradise Built in Hell: The Extraordinary Communities That Arise
in Disaster]{.epub-i}. Solnit investigated five disasters in depth, from
the 1906 earthquake in San Francisco to 9/11 and Hurricane Katrina, and
discovered that ordinary people typically responded to calamity with
spontaneous altruism, resourcefulness, and generosity. Rather than
panicking, neighbors and strangers came together to rescue, feed, and
house each other. As she interviewed survivors, "it was the joy on their
faces that surprised me," Solnit writes. "And with those whom I read
rather than spoke to, it was the joy in their words that surprised me."
She concluded that the joy revealed an unmet yearning for community,
purposefulness, and meaningful work. "The desires and possibilities
awakened are so powerful they shine even from wreckage, carnage, and
ashes ... These accounts demonstrate that the citizens any paradise
would need---the people who are brave enough, resourceful enough, and
generous enough---already exist."

And then there are those moments of illumination when we glimpse our
connectedness in the most everyday circumstances. Author Alix Kates
Shulman describes her experience this way in her memoir [Drinking the
Rain]{.epub-i}:

I was sitting alone on the downtown subway on my way to pick up the
children at their after-school music classes. The train had just pulled
out of the 23rd Street station and was accelerating to its cruising
speed ... Then suddenly, the dull light in the car began to shine with
exceptional lucidity until everything around me was glowing with an
indescribable aura, and I saw in the row of motley passengers opposite
the miraculous connection of all living beings. Not felt; saw. What
began as a desultory thought grew into a vision, larger and unifying, in
which all the people in the car hurtling downtown together, including
myself, like all the people on the planet hurtling together around the
sun---our entire living cohort---formed one united family, indissolubly
connected by the rare and mysterious accident of life. No matter what
our countless superficial differences, we were equal, we were one, by
virtue of simply being alive at this moment out of all the possible
moments stretching endlessly back and ahead. The vision filled me with
overwhelming love for the entire human race and a feeling that no matter
how incomplete or damaged our lives, we were surpassingly lucky to be
alive. Then the train pulled into the station and I got off.

CHAPTER 22 PRACTICES

[The many facets of connection]{.epub-i}

The writer Wendell Berry said, "The smallest unit of health is a
community." On physiological and psychological levels, connecting with
others improves our health and state of being. We are better able to let
go of stress, to feel supported, and to find a sense of wholeness even
as we move through our busy lives.

Sure, we may not all have concrete groups we feel a part of in our daily
lives, but we can create the sense of support engendered by community at
any point in our day---simply by learning to pay attention in a new way.

Here are five simple ways to find a sense of connection and community in
your every day (regardless of whether or not you're with a group of
people!):

1\. Pay attention to the intention behind each of your actions
throughout the day. If you hold the door for someone, do you just want
to be polite, or are you expecting validation? Not every intention will
be so concrete, so be mindful of more elusive expectations or desires
that may fuel your behavior.

2\. As you go about your day, make eye contact with people you encounter
and give them a smile. They may not see you, they may not smile
back---but you may make someone's day.

3\. Resolve to forgive yourself each and every time you make a mistake
or forget something. By cultivating kindness and self-examination
internally, you will be better prepared to act with awareness in your
relationships with others---even those with whom you don't actually
engage.

4\. Before eating a meal, take a few breaths and reflect on the extended
community that was involved in bringing the food to your table. There
were the farmers who grew the food and the farm owners who employed
those workers. There were the people who transported it and stored it.
There were those who sold it in the grocery store. The list goes on.

5\. As you practice bringing awareness to each emotion, thought, and
experience you have throughout your day, there will inevitably be
moments of greater difficulty---frustration, disappointment, anger,
resentment. As these states arise, and as you may react to them as being
"bad," try to reframe your judgments into recognition of your
vulnerability---your "suffering" or "pain," things you share with all
other beings. How does the shift make you feel?

[]{#part0033.html}

 

[23](#part0041.html_c_ch23){.calibre2}

[FROM ANGER TO LOVE](#part0041.html_c_ch23){.calibre2}

[Nothing is absolute. Everything changes, everything moves, everything
revolves, everything flies and goes away.]{.epub-i}

---FRIDA KAHLO

[Y]{.cic}[EARS AGO WHILE I WAS]{.cotx} writing a blog post on my
computer at IMS, an e-mail from a student landed in my queue. This young
man wanted to know about the nature of anger. I wrote back explaining
that becoming lost in anger cuts us off from other people. It limits our
perspective and makes us see ourselves and the rest of the world with
tunnel vision. When we're angry (not when we're merely feeling it, but
when we are overcome by anger), it often seems like the only thing we
can pay attention to is the person or thing we're angry at. Anger also
tends to make us put people in boxes, so we lose sense of our
connectedness as living beings; instead, we collide with the world,
kicking whatever it is we think got in our way.

Just after I clicked Reply, the computer crashed, and my stress hormones
started pumping. As I tried to calm myself down, I realized that the
most computer-savvy person at IMS was on vacation. My panic over missing
my deadline quickly turned to anger---anger at the person who wasn't
available to help me, anger at myself for not being able to fix the
problem, anger at the computer, anger even at the fact that I was
getting angry!

Flashes of anger like these can seem automatic. But in the midst of this
quick reaction, I sat with my feelings. I made an effort to notice what
my mind was doing. Did sitting with my feelings mean that the anger
suddenly went away? Definitely not! But by inviting myself simply to
notice what was coming up, I gave myself space to see that my anger was
creating tunnel vision. I remembered that I had actually urged our
computer person to take a break from work. I had even helped to arrange
his trip. And a little later, as my panic subsided, I managed to fix the
computer snafu.

Anger at a person or a computer has a different flavor than outrage at
injustice or violence. The sheer heartbreak that fills us as we witness
intense suffering can naturally call forth an inchoate cry of "No!" that
we know as anger. However natural it might be to feel angry, it is still
useful to examine what it's like to be repeatedly overcome by anger and
the consequences both to ourselves and to others.

Most of us are familiar with the strange, addictive quality of
anger---how it fills our minds and how the rush of energy that
accompanies it makes it hard to turn off. As the Buddha said, "Anger,
with its poisoned source and fevered climax, is murderously sweet." When
someone or something makes us angry, our bodies and minds effectively
have an "immune" response, much like inflammation in the body. We
instinctively try to self-protect, similar to the way blood rushes to
the site of a bee sting.

But when anger becomes chronic, we start to see everything through a
narrowed lens. So how can we resolve problems when our vision is
constricted and we feel separate from others? Can we learn to recognize
ourselves in one another even when our minds and bodies are on fire?
Though the energy of anger might lead us to action, it can be so
interlaced with fear and tunnel vision that we recklessly lash out,
hurting ourselves in the process.

Yet if we learn to recognize and let ourselves experience anger when it
arises, we can use its energy productively and avoid becoming embittered
and consumed by it. Paying attention actually dissolves anger's toxicity
and allows us to detect the fear, grief, and feelings of helplessness
that a surge of fury often masks.

LETTING GO AS LOVE

[INTENSE MOMENTS OF]{.cotx} anger can arise in everyday contexts, and
those feelings can do quite a fair bit of damage. A friend of mine tells
me often about how much she learns from the controversies in her New
York co-op apartment building. "We only have four units," she explains,
"and there's no board to hide behind. I've had very painful, disruptive
conflicts with the people downstairs---the kind of thing that makes your
stomach churn and keeps you awake all night." Undoubtedly, we've all
been there---hot with anger at our roommate who leaves the toothpaste
open on the bathroom sink; overwhelmed with frustration at the landlord
who doesn't return our calls; irritated by the people on the beach
listening to a blaring radio. Despite the relative banality of these
examples, the intensity of these feelings of anger is real.

Finding a way to let go---with love, both for yourself and
others---doesn't mean you stop feeling angry. And yet holding on to the
feelings and allowing them to become heavy and inflexible hurts us more
than anyone. We do not have to love everyone who lives in our apartment
building or forget about how annoying it is that our roommate is sloppy.
We can acknowledge that we're frustrated, choose to take an action, and
then let it go.

In the last chapter of section 2, "Forgiveness and Reconciliation," I
wrote about the process of grief and forgiveness, and their relationship
to seeing one's life as a part of something bigger. Recognizing that all
of our lives are interdependent---that our landlord counts as much as we
do, and that she or he wants to be happy as much as anyone else---is a
radical act of love in and of itself. This creates a strong foundation
from which we can practice letting go.

Practicing lovingkindness for all beings, including those we feel angry
at or wronged by in everyday life, doesn't mean we suddenly feel
positive. Rather, it's a way we can reformat our relationships. It's
like changing the channel. As you increase your ability to see and to
love, it will feed into your next interaction and to how you see the
world. You are sending this person lovingkindness for the benefit of
all. In these situations, we aren't necessarily explicitly transforming
anger into activism, but we are similarly using the energy of our anger
toward collective well-being.

START WHERE YOU ARE

[I HAVE SEEN]{.cotx} time and again that anger is a special quandary for
people who devote their lives to helping correct the world's injustices.
We often need a giant jolt of energy, as in outrage, to open our eyes
and shake us out of complacency. Many of us have enough to do just to
manage our own lives day to day, let alone get passionate about someone
down the block or half a world away. The work, though, can make you
vulnerable to chronic rage. In fact, for many activists, cultivating
anger feels like part of their job description.

It takes profound courage to shift such entrenched feelings. As my
friend Mallika Dutt, founder of the global human rights organization
Breakthrough and an activist for thirty years, recognized, anger was
undermining her physical and psychological health, as well as her
ability to help others. She told me, "Many of us who do this work carry
trauma from our own lives, along with the pain and trauma of the people
we've worked with. When you focus on the horrible things people do to
one another, in a way you're constantly re-traumatizing yourself. What
we don't learn in advocacy training is how to heal our own trauma and
find ways to take care of ourselves as we hold space for other people
and their pain."

But five years ago, around the time we met, Mallika says she felt a deep
sense of fatigue and began questioning [how]{.epub-i} she was doing the
work. After decades of work to end violence against women, she said, "I
don't know how to turn the anger off. It is manifest in my organization,
in my relationships. I need to be able to develop a different
relationship to it." This, coupled with the breakup of her twenty-year
marriage, led to a time of personal crisis. "That got me started on the
spiritual path that I had previously avoided," she says. "In the
process, I began to explore emotions other than anger and fury and a
pervasive sense of injustice. I opened up more to compassion,
connection, and love."

Her spiritual journey, including the study of shamanism and other
indigenous traditions based on the interconnectedness of all life, has
enabled her to heal her own trauma and approach her work from a place of
love and compassion. Now, she reflects, "As I watch the world around me
struggle with finding solutions to the problems we face, I feel
increasingly grounded in the idea that love is an essential component of
the pathway forward. If you begin with the understanding that we're all
connected, then the solutions have to include everyone and everything on
the planet."

Mallika emphasizes that working toward social justice from a position of
love does [not]{.epub-i} mean rolling over. She points out: "Martin
Luther King Jr. wrote that famous speech about love and power ... He
talked about how love without power can be anemic and how power without
love can be ruthless. For me, it's really about how one steps into power
and how one can exercise power from a space of love."

When we recognize that we can impact the world from a position of love
and strength, we free ourselves from the notion that we must always meet
injustice with a clenched fist. We develop critical wisdom about our
anger and realize our profound sense of choice in approaching change we
want to see. "Critical wisdom is fierce ... yet at the same time subtle
and tender," wrote my colleague Robert Thurman in [Love Your
Enemies]{.epub-i}. We [can]{.epub-i} meet hatred with love. But to be
able to do this, like Mallika, we must also turn our attention inward
and learn to hold our own emotions and experience with compassion. As
she says, "The self-care piece is critical. If you don't take care of
yourself, you can't show up effectively for other people."

THE DISARMING POWER OF LOVE

[AI-JEN POO IS]{.cotx} the director of the National Domestic Workers
Alliance, an organization working to build power, respect, and fair
labor standards for nannies, caregivers for the elderly, and
housekeepers in the United States. In a realm where efforts to create
change are frequently fueled by animosity and conflict, she says, "I
believe that love is the most powerful force for change in the world. I
often compare great campaigns to great love affairs because they're an
incredible container for transformation. You can change policy, but you
also change relationships and people in the process ... I think that you
can love someone and be in conflict with them."

Ai-jen Poo is a unique activist for many reasons, one of which is her
prodigious ability to help people find common ground. Her organization,
Caring Across Generations, helps workers build on their shared values of
family and the recognition that we all at one time need care.

I went to the launch of Poo's book, [The Age of Dignity]{.epub-i}.
Before she spoke, we were asked to turn to the person sitting next to us
and share a story of having been the recipient of someone's care. The
first person who came to my mind was one of my meditation teachers, who
was incredibly nurturing and loving. (Remember, I had gone to India when
only eighteen, out of a fractured, traumatic childhood. My teachers
basically re-parented me.) I was uncertain as to how the notion of
meditation teacher as caregiver would go over as a cultural concept with
my partner, but it turns out she was from Nepal and was right there with
me.

We so often just take for granted the care we have received, and we take
for granted those who are providing the care. Poo is basically calling
for a shift in consciousness, lifting up love. She says, "I've always
believed it's important to make the invisible visible. And valuing that
which has been taken for granted is something that I've always
instinctually known is the key to the kind of society I want to live in
and raise my children in."

Poo first became involved in the labor movement by volunteering for a
domestic violence shelter, one that specialized in creating community
for Asian immigrant women. Looking back on the origins of her work, Poo
tells [The Nation]{.epub-i} about her "growing hunger for getting at the
root causes of the issue"---an insidious mix of poverty and
gender-related oppression. One of Poo's goals in developing the
organization Caring Across Generations was to expand the notion of
"workers' issues" to include pay discrimination, childcare, schools, and
housing---issues women typically deal with, and which are indispensably
important when it comes to workers' needs to feed their families while
also holding a steady job. Her organization frequently partners with
other national organizations such as 9to5, in addition to other race-and
gender-related non-profits.

Ai-jen Poo isn't simply trying to help workers catalyze the right
fights---between each other, and between them and their employers;
rather, Caring Across Generations seeks to build a support system for
progress and reforms---to benefit all parties in a collaborative way.
This model stands in stark contrast to the typical union actions of
pitting workers against one another. "I learned that there is no such
thing as an unlikely ally," Poo has said in another interview with [The
Nation]{.epub-i}. While her work may be sustained, in part, by steadfast
commitment to resisting the status quo, it's clear that she recognizes
the disarming strength of love and connection.

LEAN IN WITH LOVE

[BROTHERS ALI AND]{.cotx} Atman Smith and their partner, Andres "Andy"
Gonzalez, founders of Baltimore's Holistic Life Foundation, jokingly
refer to themselves as "love zombies." I first met them several years
ago at the Omega Institute at a conference on mindfulness and education,
and simply fell in love with them. I felt that they loved me, too, which
many, many people would say about their own experience---I've heard from
their students, trainees, colleagues, and supporters, "They reminded me
of the love that does exist," "They showed me I was worthy of
something," "I stopped thinking it was weird to say 'I love you' because
of them." And much more like that.

Though Ali and Atman grew up in West Baltimore (the same inner-city
neighborhood where a young man named Freddie Gray died in police custody
in 2015), they weren't your typical boys from the hood. Their father and
uncle taught them yoga at an early age, and the siblings attended a
private Quaker school. But even the neighborhood was different in those
days. "There was more of a sense of community, including an informal
mentoring system, with the older guys being role models for the younger
ones," says Atman. "Then crack came and wiped out a generation of
people. They used or sold drugs, got locked up, or died. I think that's
why the gang explosion happened. No one was holding kids accountable the
way they did when we were growing up."

Ali and Atman met Andy at the University of Maryland--College Park.
Together, the three young men practiced yoga and devoured books on
spirituality. After college, they moved back to Baltimore and delved
even more deeply into yoga, meditation, breath work, and self-inquiry.
Then one day Ali and Atman's mother asked her sons and their friend if
they'd like to teach football to twenty "bad kids" at the school where
she was a teacher. But when the three met with the principal, they asked
if they could teach yoga instead, and she told them they could try. "The
kids were crazy and off the hook," Andy recalls. But, he adds, "After
just a few weeks, the teachers and staff said to us, 'We don't know what
y'all are doing, and we don't really care. Whatever you're doing is
working, so please keep it up.'" Fast-forward fifteen years and the
majority of that first group of "bad kids" is now on the Holistic Life
Foundation staff, which has mushroomed from the original three to
twenty-five.

"We saw an opportunity, and we jumped on it," says Andy. "There was
suffering all over, and we wanted to make a difference. We focused on
underserved communities---inner-city kids, drug rehab centers, mental
health facilities, homeless shelters, and homes for the elderly---where
these practices weren't available. We wanted to provide them for free.
Our after-school program started with twenty kids; now we serve a
hundred and twenty every week. I imagine that five to ten years from
now, those kids will come back and our army of love soldiers will keep
spreading and spreading."

Ali tells the story of Ja'Naisa, one of the kids in the after-school
program, who had a history of getting into fights with her peers. "Boys
or girls, it didn't matter, they would make fun of her, and she'd knock
them out," he says. But then one day in the gym when another girl made a
disparaging remark about her, Ja'Naisa grabbed her and slammed her
against the wall. "She looked at the girl, then at us, then back at the
girl and said, 'You'd better be glad I meditate,'" recalls Ali. "Then
she walked to the corner and meditated for a while. When she was done,
she got up, smiled, and went to play with her friends."

In the wake of the riots following the death of Freddie Gray in
Baltimore in 2015, the Holistic Life team organized a citywide event
they called "Be More Love." "There was so much friction and anger, the
only way we saw to counter that angry vibe was with a loving vibe,"
explains Atman. "So we brought people from diverse backgrounds together
in the area where the uprising happened. We had people from more
affluent communities who had never been to West Baltimore. They were
seeing some of the things they'd only seen on TV. And people from our
community came, including the kids in our program. We led a group
lovingkindness meditation and people sent love to themselves, to Freddie
Gray's family, to victims of police brutality, and victims of violence
everywhere."

"We wanted to get past the anger and move toward the healing," adds Ali.
"The anger did bring a lot of problems to light, but love was the
cohesive force."

Ali acknowledges, "Anger can be the spark for the fire. But then you
have to create a controlled burn. Instead of a forest fire that will
bring down the whole forest, you have to imagine a controlled fire
burning up the invasive species and weeds, and letting everything else
flourish. It's the same with anger ... You need to say, 'Okay, I'm
angry.' And then adjust your focus to come from a place of love,
empathy, and compassion."

There will always be people and situations that ignite our outrage---for
good reason. Yet when we stop resisting our anger and relate to it with
awareness, we free ourselves from anger's stranglehold. By allowing
ourselves simply to feel what we feel, we release the expectation that
painful states of mind such as anger will consume us. They can arise,
and we can let them go---like the tides of the ocean or the waxing and
waning of the moon. It's a practice of not holding on, of choosing not
to identify. In this way, the energy we have to try to make a difference
becomes cleaner and stronger.

CHAPTER 23 PRACTICES

[The many sides of anger]{.epub-i}

It's often hard to see anger as being a complex feeling. After all, when
something makes us angry, we tend to feel inundated in a static state of
being, and we fixate on it. But when we practice being more mindful of
anger as it arises, we can actually prevent ourselves from getting lost
in the state of tunnel vision and instead can see that anger is multi
faceted---it contains emotions like anxiety, fear, sadness, and even
love.

Recognizing these elements of anger makes it seem more complex, but also
more manageable. Anger is not solid and irrepressible but part of our
changing system of feelings and conditions, an alive system that is ever
shifting and ephemeral.

1\. To familiarize yourself with the multifaceted nature of anger, list
all of the emotions that you have experienced when feeling angry with
another person, a situation, or even yourself.

2\. As you brainstorm, it may help to close your eyes and visualize a
specific instance of feeling angry. What emotions come up? You may want
to write down some of the emotions that came up prior to the peak of
your feelings of anger.

3\. As you breathe in and out, think about how the anger felt in your
body. Did your muscles tense? Did you feel an urge to cry? Remember that
anger and stress produce the stress hormone cortisol, which raises blood
pressure and accelerates heart rate.

4\. Try to focus on some of the other more psychological nuances of
anger (frustration, impatience, insecurity, and so on).

[The art of self-intervention]{.epub-i}

Anger is uncomfortable---but it's also addictive! In tough situations,
anger emerges as a defense mechanism, a tool to help you energize so you
can handle whatever catalyzed the feeling. We convince ourselves again
and again, whenever we get angry, that the inner fire of anger will help
us deal with whatever or whoever injured us. Little do we know that we
often injure ourselves even more deeply by allowing the toxicity to take
over.

The good news is that we can intervene in moments of anger as we learn
that letting anger control us is often the greatest enemy of all. So the
next time you are in a situation that sparks a reaction of anger, try
out this practice of self-intervention.

1\. Recognize your anger as it arises. Suppressing anger just makes the
feeling more intense and insurmountable.

2\. Consider whether there is anything concrete you can do or say to
make the situation better (such as leaving the room where a heated
conversation took place, or taking a walk to cool down).

3\. If there's nothing you can do in the moment, keep your attention on
the simple recognition of your anger. The simple gesture of directing
your mind to managing the situation with mindfulness prevents you from
tunnel vision. This is an act of self-care.

4\. If it feels impossible to tolerate the discomfort of your anger, try
opening your perspective. Think of all the things you're grateful for in
the moment. This may help you change your perception of the situation at
hand.

Believe it or not, accepting ourselves---angry as we may be---is an act
of compassion, of love. These moments will always come and go again and
again. The greatest question, then, to ask is, how can I alchemize this
anger into some act of love?

[]{#part0034.html}

 

[24](#part0041.html_c_ch24){.calibre2}

[SAY YES TO LIFE](#part0041.html_c_ch24){.calibre2}

[You are born alone. You die alone. The value of the space in between is
trust and love.]{.epub-i}

---LOUISE BOURGEOIS

[I]{.cic} [BOARDED A TRAIN IN]{.cotx} New Delhi once bound for Bodh Gaya
and a silent meditation retreat---that is, I assumed that at the end of
the seventeen-hour journey, I would alight close to the legendary town
where the Buddha achieved enlightenment. And so I crawled into my tiny
compartment and fell asleep. But when I awoke, ready to disembark on
holy soil, I discovered that while I slept, the train had reversed
course and returned to Delhi. There was some problem with a stubborn cow
on the tracks---or maybe it was a whole herd. I never knew for sure.

And so before taking my place on a meditation cushion, I received a
reminder of one of the most profound lessons of mindfulness training:
[Don't pick a fight with reality]{.epub-i}. Even then, as young and
na[ï]{.span-symbols-sym}ve as I was, I realized that I could respond to
the situation in one of two ways: I could be anxious and upset about
perhaps missing the start of the retreat, or I could be open to what was
happening and view it as a surprising adventure that I could learn
something from, though at the time I couldn't say what. And as it turned
out, I need not have worried about being late. Unknown to me until we
arrived, the teacher I was heading to Bodh Gaya to sit with---the
renowned S. N. Goenka---was on the same train!

In the four decades since my train trip to nowhere, I have been reminded
again and again that we don't have to go anywhere to approach life with
the sense of adventure and openness that I felt that morning in Delhi.
It's just a matter of saying [yes]{.epub-i} to life.

Saying [yes]{.epub-i} to life is enlivening and invigorating.

Saying [yes]{.epub-i} to life frees up our energy to be present with
whatever is happening.

Saying [yes]{.epub-i} to life is the gateway to unimagined adventures
and possibilities---as readily available to us in our living room as on
a trek across India. It's a matter of how we relate to our unfolding
experiences.

OPENING TO THE MOMENT

[SUSAN, A MEDITATION]{.cotx} student, wrote me this: "When I'm feeling
disconnected or lonely or anxious, I do my best to remember to pay
attention to details. While paying attention does have a calming effect,
I realize that paying attention---exquisite, extraordinary
attention---is a way of falling in love. I can fall in love with the
intricacies of a maple seed. I can fall in love with the sharp sound of
the blue jays and squirrels fighting nearby. I can fall in love with the
tension in my heart and throat when I think about the uncertainty of the
coming months. This is a love that I consciously choose and that
transforms any moment from one I'm rushing through or impatient with or
not noticing to one I'm in love with."

The more we open to our present circumstances---our internal
experiences, as well as our relationships with others and the world
around us---the more we create the conditions for happiness to blossom.
Eventually, we come to realize that, in fact, everything we need to be
happy is here right now, when we say yes to life.

Saying yes to life doesn't mean that we have to like what is taking
place at every moment. And in fact, we grow and can make ourselves
happier even by just noticing those moments when we find we are saying
[no]{.epub-i} to life. One fall, I was in Santa Fe for a retreat with
the Tibetan teacher Tsoknyi Rinpoche. One rainy afternoon, I pulled into
the parking lot of my hotel and noticed crowds of people trying to
photograph the sky. I looked up, and there was an incredible rainbow. I
hopped out of the car to join the others in documenting the moment, but
by the time my old iPhone turned on, the rainbow had disappeared.
Instead, there were luminous pink clouds in the sky. And yet I was
disappointed. I fixated on the fact that I had neglected to buy a new
iPhone. A few moments later, two women left the hotel and walked past
me. I heard one of the women gasp. "Wow. Look at those amazing clouds,"
she said to the other. It was at that moment that I realized I could be
saying yes to life, and I did. I was able to laugh at my habit of
disconnecting from the beauty of life by clinging to old tendencies,
stories, judgments, and criticisms. But as I laughed, I let go. I
settled back into the moment, and I allowed my [no]{.epub-i} to become a
[yes]{.epub-i}. Those clouds were extraordinary!

When we open to [this]{.epub-i} moment and don't judge it or try to
change it, even when we're suffering and wish it were otherwise, we tap
into the spaciousness of mind that allows us to move forward skillfully,
with discernment and joy. In other words, every aspect of our
experiences is included. No unwanted thought, emotion, or bodily
sensation is left behind. This is wholeness.

CURIOSITY AND AWE

[JUST AS WE]{.cotx} looked earlier at ways we can reclaim these
qualities in personal relationships so that they transform us rather
than just seeming mawkish and clich[é]{.span-symbols-sym}d, so, too, can
we reclaim them in our relationship to life itself.

Awe doesn't ask our permission to wow us; it just smacks us in the face
with something bigger without bothering to argue us out of our tedium.
Awe can come in a single glance, a beautiful sound, a heartfelt gesture.
Think of how we can slog along in our little tunnel of daily life, back
and forth, and then one day pass a lilac bush in bloom. The fragrance
catches us first and then the beauty of the full blossoms. In pausing to
appreciate it, we receive a reminder of the spectacular. Much like that,
awe can bring this invigorating sense of novelty into everyday
relationships that might otherwise feel stale or dull.

Curiosity is the place where awe is born, and it starts with heightening
our senses. We may suspect life holds many mysteries, but only by paying
attention can we access the grandeur and subtleties that make each
person different and each encounter something fresh. By using our senses
and paying a different kind of attention to the world around us, we may
see that people we took for granted are more complex than we think they
are. If we are able to open the mind to investigate, we may also
discover some people are much simpler than the story we had constructed
around them. Curiosity brings us the unexpected. It is the antidote to
those times when we find ourselves in a rut, unable to take in anything
new because we just can't risk disrupting the dreary order of the day to
day. With that frame of mind, curiosity looks like it would take too
much energy. [What, on top of everything else, you want me to question
my reality? Honestly, I haven't got the time for awe or
wonder.]{.epub-i}

Instead of gripping tightly to a fixed idea of how things are and how
they should be, we can train our mind to hold those notions lightly and
begin each day ready to explore. We do not need to face the world
demanding that it prove us right. Instead, we can say to it: [Surprise
me]{.epub-i}. We can become excited by the possibility that if we keep
our eyes open, we open our hearts to something new. To have the kind of
openness that cultivates awe does not mean we have to be credulous and
sentimental, but the ironic stance---to act unimpressed because we fear
looking foolish---has us experiencing our own lives at a distance. If,
instead, we open our hearts to real love, we allow ourselves to feel the
wonder of life, which research says is vital to sustaining our
connection to the world and to one another.

Awe comes on a spectrum from being inspired by something quite small to
springing from the soaring and majestic. On one end is "Aw!"---the sound
we make when we notice something that reminds us of the struggles we all
share and how we take them on with a full heart, endeavoring to do the
best we can. "Aw!" comes out of the mouth almost without us noticing,
the automatic connection to the heart we spontaneously experience when
we see a child taking his first brave steps, his little hands steadied
by those of his beaming grandmother. The toddler is joyful in the
newness of his body and excited by his growing capabilities, and the
grandma is joyful in guiding another child to step fully into this life.
Awww! We see a spring-loaded puppy bound after a stick, we get an
unexpected call from a friend who remembers that this is the anniversary
of our mother's death, we watch as a teenager on the subway who looks
for all the world like a character from an angsty dystopian novel pops
up from his seat when an elderly man hobbles onto the train car. This
very sound---"Aw!"---captures our amazement at the simple things, the
wondrous moments that happen between people all the time.

The other end of the spectrum is [awe]{.epub-i} with an [e]{.epub-i}.
This awe may be revealed in the small things, the tiny personal
triumphs, but what we get a glimpse of is a sense of the immensity of
the world in all its possibilities, the vastness of its expanse and our
piece in the unfolding of it all. This awe generates its resonance
through a connection to the grand and limitless. In our experiences of
real love with ourselves, with another, with the world, we get the full
spectrum of awe, from the commonplace to the infinite, with someone who
is very close at hand or with all of life.

Two psychology professors, Paul Piff and Dacher Keltner, performed an
experiment about the significance of awe, a quality they defined as
"being in the presence of something vast that transcends our
understanding of the world \[and\] shifts our focus from our narrow
self-interest." In one experiment, they brought study participants to a
grove of eucalyptus trees on the edge of the University of
California--Berkeley campus. Piff and Keltner hoped to demonstrate how
experiencing awe makes us more collaborative, accepting, and more
strongly bound to one another.

They gave the study subjects the choice of looking up at these
magnificent trees, many of which are more than two hundred feet tall, or
looking instead at the concrete fa[ç]{.span-symbols-sym}ade of a science
building that stands just east of the grove. While the participants were
contemplating their options, the professors staged a mishap. They had
someone walking on the path through the grove stumble and drop a handful
of pens. Those who had spent a minute, just a minute, looking at the
trees were more helpful to the person who tripped, picked up more of the
scattered pens, than those who had been gazing at the building. The
lines of the building stirred the rational mind, the researchers
concluded, but not the heart. When the heart and the mind were opened by
gazing at the trees, the sense of awe reinforced those people's
instincts to be less self-interested, kinder, and more helpful to a
stranger.

I remember overlooking the Straits of the Bosporus the first time I
traveled to India. I was excited to be at the juncture of two
continents. I stood in Istanbul, waiting for a ferry, and saw Europe on
one side of the narrow body of water and Asia on the other---with all
the mystery and possibilities it held. That instant for me was the same
as it was for those in the study looking at the tall trees: I felt
connected to the immensity of the world, to the limitlessness of my
dreams and curiosity about what might come next.

A friend who attended Berkeley says she'd like to show me that
eucalyptus grove, because when she came upon it as an undergraduate, she
felt the same things she's heard me describe about standing on the edge
of the Bosporus. Sometimes between classes, she told me, she would take
refuge in the grove and deeply inhale the trees' menthol perfume. The
temperature in the core of the grove is cooler than the rest of campus,
and in the morning, the fog lingers there, giving the stand of trees a
mystical quality. Two forks of Strawberry Creek, a waterway that runs
through Berkeley, merge in that grove. Breathing in the scent of the
trees, hearing the sound of water running over the rocks in the creek
bed, she felt her body releasing into the sensation that she was a
cluster of atoms among other atoms, supported by the world and also a
vital and integrated part of the web of life. This humbled her, yet also
connected her to the infinite scale of life. As joy coursed through her
body, she embraced it and subsequently felt the chatter in her mind
lessen. She felt less stressed and more available, emotionally, to the
people in her life. My friend was experiencing what the researchers
described as awe's impact---imbuing people with humility and a different
sense of themselves, one that is part of something larger.

In my friend's case, she sought out this experience intentionally, as a
way to bolster her connection to herself and the universe and to
replenish her energy for those she loved. We can train our minds to be
like my friend's: finding delight in everyday life will elevate us, too,
and help us fully see ourselves and those we love. I like what the
actress Rashida Jones has observed about her parents, music producer
Quincy Jones and actress Peggy Lipton, because it suggests that she is
awed by awe. "My parents are the coolest of the cool on every single
level," Rashida said in an interview, "and it's because they have a deep
appreciation for every moment of their lives."

TRANSFORM [NO]{.epub-i} INTO [YES]{.epub-i}

[THE MORE WE]{.cotx} cultivate mindfulness, the more clearly we see and
appreciate what's right in front of us, unclouded by judgment or
expectation. And the more we cherish the life around us, the more we
cherish ourselves. It's a powerful equation.

It wasn't until she moved into her new apartment that Donna noticed the
post office across the street. She'd relocated to the small city in
search of peace and quiet, but the post office and adjacent parking lot
bustled with activity. Donna was angry with herself for not having
realized this before signing the lease. But she didn't want to move
again, so she decided to pay attention both to her resistance and to the
commotion outside her window.

First came the morning when members of a large family leaped out of a
large van and the mom yelled, "Okay! Everyone show me your passport
photographs." They were clearly headed for an adventure, and Donna felt
a wave of excitement for them.

Soon she noticed the elderly man who came once a week to collect his
mail. Stooped and slow, he leaned on a cane as he made his way across
the parking lot. Donna's first reaction was to worry about her own
mobility as she aged. But then she saw that as he made his way back to
his car, he would stop and painstakingly pick up trash. Donna imagined
that he wanted to help make the world a better place for as long as he
could. Her view of her own future brightened.

Another day, she watched an old Toyota screech into the lot and a mom,
cell phone crushed between shoulder and ear, wrangle her sleeping
toddler out of his car seat. In a rush, she bumped the boy's head
against the car frame, and he woke up screaming. With that, she dropped
the phone and, holding her son to her chest, kissed his head and
murmured words of comfort until he calmed down.

Donna felt uplifted by these fleeting, ordinary moments. Even if none of
the people she observed later recalled the events she'd witnessed, she
would recall them, and they fueled her happiness. They helped her
remember trips she'd taken, the joyful yet stressful years spent raising
her children, and her own tender aging. Watching the flurry of people
come and go made Donna aware of how everyone struggles daily to be
happy. Best of all, she realized that if she could extend this
compassionate awareness to strangers, she could grant it to herself, as
well.

For some, of course, the day-to-day hurdles are large, to the point of
threatening the life we have dreamed of and worked for. After a car
accident led to the amputation of her right foot when she was sixteen,
Indian dancer Sudha Chandran, who had been training to dance since early
childhood, took three years to recover. On the Facebook page for a
portraiture project entitled [Humans of Bombay]{.epub-i}, Chandran
shared her story: "I remember people would come home and say things
like, 'It's so sad your dreams can't come true,'" she recalls in a blog
post. But she decided to relearn how to dance: "It was a slow and
painful process," Chandran elaborates, "but with every step I learnt, I
knew that this is what I wanted."

On the day of her first performance following the accident, the headline
in the morning paper read, [LOSES A FOOT, WALKS A MILE]{.cotx}. Chandran
hasn't stopped dancing since.

While Chandran undoubtedly experienced frustration, disappointment,
rumination, and regret during her process of reframing her relationship
to dance, she was open to seeing what could be relearned, and became
more resilient. In the end, the greatest triumph may not be that
Chandran is dancing again but that she had the immensity of heart to
try. I always think of that heart when I reflect on her quotation, "You
don't need feet to dance."

THIS FLEETING WORLD AS A BUBBLE IN A STREAM

[TIME IS BOTH]{.cotx} the implacable thief who steals away the gifts of
life and the sacred messenger who bestows them.

Even as we live with the knowledge that each day might be our last, we
don't want to believe it. Yet when we're able to open to the truth of
even our most shattering losses, we find moments of unimagined grace.

Rosemary, an interior designer and longtime practitioner of Tibetan
Buddhism, lost her husband, Jonathan, to cancer a few years ago, ten
years after the initial diagnosis. "We got the news the day of our
wedding anniversary," Rosemary recalls. "I was devastated and thought we
should just go home and weep. But Jonathan wouldn't hear of it. He said,
'Rosemary, we have no idea what's going to happen. We still have to
celebrate our lives. Let's not let cancer make us special; let's just go
on being who we are.'" Jonathan chose to see his life as ordinary
throughout the course of his illness, which included massive amounts of
chemotherapy and a difficult stem cell transplant. "We're all
experiencing loss and change every moment," he told Rosemary. "Mine is
just more noticeable."

Although she had been preparing for Jonathan's death for some time, when
it happened, she felt crushed. "I think the hardest thing when you're a
new widow and you've had this loving exchange is that suddenly you're
unplugged and there's no love coming in and no love going out," Rosemary
says. "It's as if you've been plugged into an electrical socket and then
the power goes out forever. I knew it was going to be hard, but I didn't
know I'd feel like I'd fallen off a cliff."

Rosemary was helped through the weeks and months following Jonathan's
death by family, friends, and a widows support group. The group, she
notes, helped her open to her grief in a way that felt both deeper and
safer than when she was on her own. And her spiritual community, which
had been a source of enormous support to both Rosemary and Jonathan
throughout his illness, also played a key role in helping her through
her grief. "Being with people who knew Jonathan made a huge difference,"
she says. "When they were around, I felt there was a bridge from where
I'd been to where I was then and where I was going. It was a long
bridge, and I didn't feel like I was on the edge of a cliff anymore."

At a certain point, though, Rosemary says she had to stop focusing on
her loss. "The pain was so strong, I felt like I was being taken down by
it," she explains. "I believe that as important as it is to allow
yourself to grieve, you also have to set boundaries. You can't just let
yourself sink. Sometimes you have to go for a walk or call a friend or
watch a movie. And then one day you wake up and decide that you don't
want to live in the past. Jonathan had such an innate sense of courage
about living life no matter what, I wanted to honor him and the life we
shared."

Now, three years later, says Rosemary, "It's as if all the love I gave
to my husband can go out to the entire world, and the whole world is my
husband."

Hearing Rosemary's story made me think of a time years ago when I went
to see my Tibetan teacher, Nyoshul Khen Rinpoche, in Taiwan. I loved
Khenpo (as he was known) deeply and was overjoyed at seeing him again,
but I was concerned because he appeared especially frail and ill. He was
never really in great health, but this time he seemed considerably
worse.

After the visit, we went back to our hotel, close to where we had met
him. My traveling companions and I planned to see Khenpo again in a few
days, but knew that during the interim he had moved somewhere else. When
the day of our second visit arrived, a group of us, holding flowers and
offerings, were waiting outside our hotel for taxis to take us to the
new place. I was feeling incredibly sad. It seemed that now all I could
think was, [Oh no. This could be the last time I ever see him.]{.epub-i}
The prospect was devastating, and I was deeply upset.

After the taxis picked us up, every one of them got completely lost in
the streets of Taiwan. In that time of fruitlessly driving around, my
attitude toward seeing Rinpoche suddenly shifted. I started thinking,
[I'd give anything to see him one more time]{.epub-i}. [One more time
would be the best thing in the entire universe! It would be the greatest
gift I could ever have!]{.epub-i}

As it turned out, the taxis eventually found the right address, and we
were able to see Rinpoche. Contrary to what I feared, he lived many more
years, and I saw him many more times. But that experience taught me a
valuable lesson, as I saw clearly how "one more time" can be the best
prospect imaginable or the worst, depending on how I related to it.

In mindfulness, we are talking about a sense of an expanded present. Our
protestations, our clinging to the past, our efforts to control the
future may arise, but they are strongly attenuated by remembering to
simply be with what is. We drop through our reactions to a space of
profound, grateful connection---that is love of life itself. Always keep
in mind that in reality, what we might have in this moment with a
friend, with a place, with a dance, with a poem, [is]{.epub-i} the one
more time. Treasure it.

Love and loss and grief, letting go and embracing love and life again,
form the tender, inexorable, but natural rhythm of our days. In opening
to this rhythm, we find within ourselves the unshakable love we have
been searching for. To this, too, we learn to say [yes]{.epub-i}.

If love is an ability, a nascent power curled within me, isn't it then
also a responsibility? My own responsibility? This is something I
wrestle with often. The kindness or cruelty with which I treat myself
once I've made a mistake, the way I take shame to heart or hold it in
perspective, my ease of laughter and caring and encouraging myself, or
consoling myself when my heart is broken---is that all up to me?

How about when I meet a stranger or owe a debt of gratitude, run into an
old friend who is a friend no longer, see my heart open under the
admiring gaze of another, or feel myself disappearing as I strive to
endlessly please them---is my response really in my hands?

What about when life deals me a bad blow, when I am reeling from
unfairness or cruelty, when my body betrays all I care about or my
neighbor betrays all I care about or my country betrays all I care
about? "Love is a strength, not a weakness," might be my favorite
saying, but what about those times when I am tempted to, in effect,
cross my fingers behind my back before uttering it? Is the love that
ensues or doesn't---love for myself, for another, for life itself---also
up to me?

I think it is up to me. It is up to each one of us. And I think that
working toward fulfilling that promise is the most amazing thing we can
do with our lives.

[]{#part0035.html}

 

[TAKEAWAYS FROM EACH SECTION](#part0041.html_c_take){.calibre2}

[Section 1 Takeaways]{.epub-i}

--The capacity for love exists inside ourselves.

--We can find freedom from the negative stories we tell ourselves.

--Finding self-love can emerge from testing the borders of our judgments
and assumptions.

--We are always changing and have incalculable potential.

--Perfectionism is an unproductive use of attention. Self-hatred will
not make us "better."

--Acceptance is what allows us to realize that all experiences are
opportunities to learn and grow.

--Through lovingkindness for ourselves, we can learn to accept---and
love---our imperfect selves.

[Section 2 Takeaways]{.epub-i}

--Once we identify the expectations, assumptions, and habits of mind
that we carry around about loving others, we can open ourselves up to
real love.

--A great foundation for loving others is maintaining a level of
curiosity; we can always learn more about those we are close to.

--In a relationship with another person, fairness is not a fixed
principle of right and wrong but a mutual willingness to reassess the
situation and adopt a fresh perspective.

--Whenever we are close to another person, there will always be a space
that separates us. With mindfulness, we are able to explore that space
with a sense of possibility, rather than fear.

--Letting go is essential in love---it is the opposite of clinging to
expectations about how things [should]{.epub-i} be and allows us to
accept others (and ourselves!) as they are.

--Recognizing that no one else can complete us actually enhances our
capacity to love and receive the love of others.

--Mindfulness enables us to see the conflict with a fresh perspective so
that we can feel emotions like anger without getting lost in them.

--Sympathetic joy takes our attention away from our own preoccupations
and allows us to see that joy is available in many more places than we
have yet imagined.

--Forgiveness is a path to peace and a powerful element of love for
ourselves and others.

[Section 3 Takeaways]{.epub-i}

--Compassion isn't a gift or talent---it's the natural result of paying
attention and realizing the infinite opportunities to connect with
others.

--When we make very small efforts to engage in random acts of kindness,
we actually make life less stressful and more pleasant for ourselves, as
well as for others.

--Extending lovingkindness toward others (even those we may not know or
like) doesn't make us into pushovers, but stronger and more authentic
versions of ourselves.

--The first step toward being able to show compassion for others is to
set the intention to do so; we can take joy in the act of stretching
ourselves with kindness and self-acceptance.

--When our fear response takes over and we isolate from others we
perceive as different or threatening, we actually restrict our own sense
of identity.

--When we look past our conditioning, we see that many differences we
latch onto are built on social constructs.

--We may not be part of an official group, but we all share certain
everyday communities---a train car, the line at the DMV. In these common
moments, we can recognize our profound interdependence.

--It takes immense courage and openness to alchemize feelings like anger
into love and hope.

--When we learn to stop resisting tough feelings like anger, we can
engage our feelings with awareness; once we do that, we see that these
feelings are not permanent.

--Approaching life with a sense of adventure is always available to us,
no matter where we are.

[]{#part0036.html}

 

[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS](#part0041.html_c_ack){.calibre2}

I'm very grateful to Bob Miller of Flatiron Books for always championing
love, Carole Tonkinson of Bluebird for seeing so completely what I
wanted to say, and my agent, Joy Harris, for being the best of agents
and best of friends.

As in all things in my life, it takes a village and this did. Many
people offered their stories, poems, quotes, and images of love. They
are really the heart and soul of the book.

Danelle Morton helped me greatly in understanding the structure of the
book, then collecting stories from people and crafting them to help the
structure come alive. Lise Funderburg illuminated a clear path through
the sticky terrain of love for another, whether parent, child, lover,
colleague, or pet dog!

Lily Cushman became my assistant just after I began working on the book,
and brought all my work to a whole other level of presentation,
creativity, and impact.

Barbara Graham is a tremendously talented writer who put aside her own
work to help me when I needed it most. Her broad knowledge of research
findings about topics like meditation, trauma, and gratitude, combined
with her humor and kindness and fundamental know-how of the mechanics of
writing, made her contributions invaluable.

Charlotte Lieberman worked with me for a long time on this project,
first helping me move from the sweeping beginnings of a scary blank
screen to envisioning the book, then interviewing lots of people to
capture their stories, helping me respond to editorial suggestions
through several iterations, and doing whatever excruciatingly detailed
work was called for, like seeking permissions to use quotations. And it
is excruciating.

I had always wanted to work with Toni Burbank as an editor, and I
finally got to. She is a legend, and deservedly so. My ceaseless travel
and teaching commitments made me, I'm sure, a difficult case. Toni was
always brilliant in pointing out what needed to be done despite that,
and that brilliance is reflected throughout the book.

Of the many friends I am blessed with in this life, I can only mention a
few: Joseph, Gyano, Steve, Elizabeth, Willa, and Josey are like my fam.
Jeff, Jerry, and Jennifer provide unwavering support. My meditation
community offers inspiration in both contemplation and actions. And I
want to give a shout-out to Jason, Christi, and Kevin Garner. They
seemed to somehow be there for the most intense moments of the
book---turning in the first draft, turning in the final draft---taking
care of me. And when I was most discouraged about writing, feeling like
I might not be able to settle for just being mediocre, and perhaps would
have to just settle for that, Jason and Kevin took me to see the play
[Hamilton]{.epub-i}. I walked out knowing I had to give writing this
book all that was in me. So also a thank-you to Lin-Manuel Miranda, for
his amazing play, which changed everything.

[]{#part0037.html}

 

[NOTES](#part0041.html_c_note){.calibre2}

INTRODUCTION: LOOKING FOR LOVE

we cannot live within: James Baldwin, "Letter from a Region of my Mind,"
[The Fire Next Time]{.epub-i} (New York: Vintage, 1992).

SECTION 1 INTRODUCTION: BEYOND THE CLICH[É]{.span-symbols-sym}

to do with accountability: Linda Carroll, interview with the author,
July 2015.

a right to be here: James Baldwin, "They Can't Turn Back," [The Price of
the Ticket: Collected Nonfiction]{.epub-i} (New York: St. Martin's
Press, 1985).

who can best us: Sonja Lyubomirsky, [The How of Happiness: A Scientific
Approach to Getting the Life You Want]{.epub-i} (New York: Penguin,
2007).

be reduced by them: Maya Angelou, [Letter to My Daughter]{.epub-i} (New
York: Random House, 2008).

calm, safety, and generosity: Kristin Neff, "The Chemicals of Care: How
Self-Compassion Manifests in Our Bodies,"
[SelfCompassion.org](http://SelfCompassion.org){.calibre2},
[http://self-compassion.org/the-chemicals-of-care-how-self-compassion-manifests-in-our-bodies](http://self-compassion.org/the-chemicals-of-care-how-self-compassion-manifests-in-our-bodies){.calibre2}.

1\. THE STORIES WE TELL OURSELVES

[It Didn't Start with You]{.epub-i}: Mark Wolynn, [It Didn't Start with
You: How Inherited Family Trauma Shapes Who We Are and How to End the
Cycle]{.epub-i} (New York: Viking, 2016).

the one after that: L. H. Lumey et al., "Prenatal Famine and Adult
Health," [Annual Review of Public Health]{.epub-i}, no. 32 (2011).

more prone to PTSD: Rachel Yehuda et al., "Holocaust Exposure Induced
Intergenerational Effects on FKBp5 Methylation," [Biological
Psychiatry]{.epub-i} 80, no. 5 (2015).

nervous system and psyche: Nancy Napier, interview with the author,
November 2016.

2\. THE STORIES OTHERS TELL ABOUT US

ten attempt it: Statistics from [2004 i-SAFE Foundation
Survey]{.epub-i},
[https://www.isafe.org/outreach/media/media_cyber_bullying](https://www.isafe.org/outreach/media/media_cyber_bullying){.calibre2}.

joyously and with cake: Frank Bruni, "Our Weddings, Our Worth," [New
York Times]{.epub-i}, June 26, 2015.

my relationship ... is blessed: Paul Raushenbush, "Debating My Gay
Marriage? Don't Do Me Any Favors," [Huffington Post]{.epub-i}, October
20, 2014,
[http://www.huffingtonpost.com/paul-raushenbush/dont-do-me-any-favors_b_6014926.html](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/paul-raushenbush/dont-do-me-any-favors_b_6014926.html){.calibre2}.

3\. WELCOMING OUR EMOTIONS

[I'm going to protect you]{.epub-i}: Daphne Zuniga, interview with the
author, August 2015.

health and well-being: Jordi Quodbach et al., "Emodiversity and the
Emotional Ecosystem," [Journal of Experimental Psychology]{.epub-i} 143,
no. 6 (2014).

real love and happiness: Barbara Graham, interview with the author,
March 2016.

4\. MEETING THE INNER CRITIC

off the golf course: George Mumford, [The Mindful Athlete: Secrets to
Pure Performance]{.epub-i} (Berkeley, CA: Parallax Press, 2015).

she needs a rest: Mark Coleman, interview with the author, October 2016.

5\. LETTING GO OF PERFECTION

have need of love: Oscar Wilde, [An Ideal Husband]{.epub-i} (Mineola,
NY: Dover Publications, 2012).

self-acceptance and self-love: Kathryn Budig, interview with the author,
April 2015.

got a little better: Quoted in Kathy Jesse, "David Letterman, Even
Retired, Keeps on Interviewing," [New York Times]{.epub-i}, December 1,
2015,
[http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/02/arts/television/david-letterman-even-retired-keeps-on-interviewing.html](http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/02/arts/television/david-letterman-even-retired-keeps-on-interviewing.html){.calibre2}.

6\. BECOMING EMBODIED

heart never lies to us: Ben Harper, "You Found Another Lover (I Lost
Another Friend)," [Get Up!]{.epub-i}, Stax Records, 2013.

7\. MOVING BEYOND SHAME

revolution is long overdue: Margaret Cho, "Self-Esteem Rant," [NOTORIOUS
C.H.O.: Live at Carnegie Hall]{.epub-i} (New York: Wellspring Media,
2002).

9\. FOLLOWING YOUR ETHICAL COMPASS

heals the maker: Christopher Alexander, [The Nature of Order]{.epub-i},
vol. 4 (Berkeley, CA: Center for Environmental Structure, 2002).

things seemed more challenging: Quoted in Olga Khazan, "Spill the
Beans," [Atlantic]{.epub-i}, July 8, 2015,
[http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2015/07/spill-the-beans/397859/](http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2015/07/spill-the-beans/397859/){.calibre2}.

SECTION 2 INTRODUCTION: LOVE AS A VERB

"The very essence of romance": Oscar Wilde, [The Importance of Being
Earnest]{.epub-i} (Ballingsl[ö]{.span-symbols-sym}v, Sweden: Wisehouse,
2016).

peacefulness of love: Linda Carroll, interview with the author, July
2015.

the passion itself: Zadie Smith, [White Teeth]{.epub-i} (New York:
Knopf, 2001).

I rose in it: Toni Morrison, [Jazz]{.epub-i} (New York: Knopf, 2004).

interaction with other people: Atul Gawande, "Hellhole," [New
Yorker]{.epub-i}, March 30, 2009,
[http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/03/30/hellhole](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/03/30/hellhole){.calibre2}.

unwanted mental experiences: Baljinder Sahdra and Phillip Shaver,
"Comparing Attachment Theory and Buddhist Psychology," [International
Journal for the Psychology of Religion]{.epub-i} 23, no. 4 (2013).

emotion were particularly active: Richard Davidson et al., "Lending a
Hand: Social Regulation of the Neural Response to Threat,"
[Psychological Science]{.epub-i} 17 (2006).

baby on the plane: Barbara Fredrickson, "Remaking Love," TedX, January
10, 2014.

people in your midst: Barbara Fredrickson, [Love 2.0: Creating Happiness
and Health in Moments of Connection]{.epub-i} (New York: Penguin, 2013).

10\. BARRIERS TO FINDING REAL LOVE

Sufi poet and mystic: Rumi translation by Brad Gooch and Maryam Mortaz
(unpublished).

ourselves more conscious: James Hollis, [The Eden Project: In Search of
the Magical Other]{.epub-i} (Toronto, ON: Inner City Books, 1998).

we cannot live within: James Baldwin, "Letter from a Region of My Mind,"
[The Fire Next Time]{.epub-i} (New York: Vintage, 1992).

world as a whole: Erich Fromm, [The Art of Loving: The Centennial
Edition]{.epub-i} (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2000).

11\. CULTIVATE CURIOSITY AND AWE

considerable healing potential: Stephen Levine, [Embracing the
Beloved]{.epub-i} (New York: Anchor, 1996).

12\. AUTHENTIC COMMUNICATION

coping is the problem: Virginia Satir, [The Satir Model]{.epub-i} (Palo
Alto, CA: Science and Behavior Books, 1991).

the kinder path: Quoted in Emily Esfahani Smith, "Masters of Love,"
[Atlantic]{.epub-i}, June 12, 2014,
[http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/06/happily-ever-after/372573/](http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/06/happily-ever-after/372573/){.calibre2}.

attempt to find fault: Kathlyn and Gay Hendricks, "How to Create a
Conscious Relationship: 7 Principles, 7 Practices," [Huffington
Post]{.epub-i}, November 15, 2011,
[http://www.huffingtonpost.com/kathlyn-and-gay-hendricks/creating-conscious-relationships_b_1092339.html](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/kathlyn-and-gay-hendricks/creating-conscious-relationships_b_1092339.html){.calibre2}.

deeper layers as well: John and Julie Gottman, [And Baby Makes Three:
The Six-Step Plan for Preserving Marital Intimacy and Rekindling Romance
After Baby Arrives]{.epub-i} (New York: Harmony, 2007).

can be powerfully transformational: George Taylor, interview with the
author, October 2016.

they could give it: Mark Wolynn, [It Didn't Start with You: How
Inherited Family Trauma Shapes Who We Are and How to End the
Cycle]{.epub-i} (New York: Viking, 2016).

13\. PLAYING FAIR: A WIN-WIN PROPOSITION

make love last: B. Janet Hibbs, [Try to See It My Way: Being Fair in
Love and Marriage]{.epub-i} (New York: Avery, 2009).

14\. NAVIGATE THE SPACE BETWEEN

room of our own: Deborah Luepnitz, [Schopenhauer's Porcupines: Intimacy
and Its Dilemmas]{.epub-i} (New York: Basic Books, 2008).

before an immense sky: Rainer Maria Rilke, [Letters to a Young
Poet]{.epub-i}, translated by M. D. Herter Norton (New York: W. W.
Norton, 1934).

"The beginning of love is": Thomas Merton, [No Man Is an
Island]{.epub-i} (Boston: Mariner, 2002).

15\. LETTING GO

I am letting go: Alice Walker, "Even as I Hold You," [Good Night, Willie
Lee, I'll See You in the Morning]{.epub-i} (New York: Doubleday, 1979).

neurological and emotional network: James Hollis, [The Eden Project: In
Search of the Magical Other]{.epub-i} (Toronto, ON: Inner City Books,
1998).

but then move on: Christine Carter, "Raising Happiness," [Greater
Good]{.epub-i}, April 29, 2014,
[http://greatergood.berkeley.edu/raising_happiness/](http://greatergood.berkeley.edu/raising_happiness/){.calibre2}.

quicker if they didn't: Barbara Kingsolver, [Animal Dreams]{.epub-i}
(New York: HarperCollins, 2009).

16\. HEALING, NOT VICTORY

becomes second nature: George Taylor, [A Path for Couples: Ten Practices
for Love and Joy]{.epub-i} (self-published, 2015).

17\. THE HEART IS A GENEROUS MUSCLE

winning an award: Shelly Gable et al., "Will You Be There for Me When
Things Go Right? Supportive Responses to Positive Event Disclosures,"
[Journal of Personality and Social Psychology]{.epub-i} 91 (2006).

18\. FORGIVENESS AND RECONCILIATION

The shared world: Naomi Shihab Nye, [Honeybee: Poems and Short
Prose]{.epub-i} (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 2008).

nor should we: Helen Whitney, [Forgiveness: A Time to Love and a Time to
Hate]{.epub-i}, PBS, 2011.

world lives in you: Frederick Buechner, [Telling the Truth: The Gospel
as Comedy, Tragedy, and Fairy Tale]{.epub-i} (New York: Harper & Row,
1977).

SECTION 3 INTRODUCTION: THE WIDE LENS OF COMPASSION

our intense times: Jason Garner, interview with the author, July 2016.

around the world: Jacqueline Novogratz, [The Blue Sweater: Bridging the
Gap Between Rich and Poor in an Interconnected World]{.epub-i} (Emmaus,
PA: Rodale, 2010).

to help the other: Quoted in "Feeling Others' Pain: Transforming Empathy
into Compassion," Cognitive Neurological Society, June 24, 2013,
[https://www.cogneurosociety.org/empathy_pain/](https://www.cogneurosociety.org/empathy_pain/){.calibre2}.

offering it to others: Julianne Holt-Lunstad et al., "Social
Relationships and Mortality Risk: A Meta-Analytic Review," [PLoS
Medicine]{.epub-i} 7 (2010).

find myself loving them: Kevin Berrill, interview with the author,
September 2015.

rely on one another: Daniel Goleman, "Rich People Just Care Less," [New
York Times]{.epub-i}, October 5, 2013.

19\. PRIMING THE PUMP

or your community: Sonja Lyubomirsky, [The How of Happiness: A
Scientific Approach to Getting the Life You Want]{.epub-i} (New York:
Penguin, 2007).

20\. CHALLENGING OUR ASSUMPTIONS

an upscale neighborhood: Rhonda Magee, "How Mindfulness Can Defeat
Racial Bias," [Greater Good]{.epub-i}, May 14, 2015,
[http://greatergood.berkeley.edu/article/item/how_mindfulness_can_defeat_racial_bias](http://greatergood.berkeley.edu/article/item/how_mindfulness_can_defeat_racial_bias){.calibre2}.

biases about them are true: Quoted in Karin Evans, "Fear Less, Love
More," [Mindful]{.epub-i}, January 7, 2016,
[http://www.mindful.org/fear-less-love-more/](http://www.mindful.org/fear-less-love-more/){.calibre2}.

[just like me]{.epub-i}: Thomas Pettigrew and Linda Tropp, "A
Meta-Analytic Test of Intergroup Contact Theory," [Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology]{.epub-i} 90 (2006).

study's lead author: Andrew Todd et al., "Does Seeing Faces of Young
Black Boys Facilitate the Identification of Threatening Stimuli?"
[Psychological Science]{.epub-i} 27 (2016).

without freaking out: Evans, "Fear Less, Love More."

in love with each other: Ibid.

fourteen years later: Aman Ali's story of 9/11, Facebook status post,
[https://www.facebook.com/amanalistatus/posts/10103715731256804?notif_t[=]{.span-symbols-sym}like](https://www.facebook.com/amanalistatus/posts/10103715731256804?notif_t=like){.calibre2}.

21\. LOVE EVERYBODY

The more you understand: Thich Nhat Hanh, [How to Love]{.epub-i}
(Berkeley, CA: Parallax Press, 2014).

opposed and endangered her: Interview with Malala Yousafzai by Jon
Stewart, [The Daily Show]{.epub-i}, October 8, 2013,
[http://www.cc.com/video-clips/a335nz/the-daily-show-with-jon-stewart-malala-yousafzai](http://www.cc.com/video-clips/a335nz/the-daily-show-with-jon-stewart-malala-yousafzai){.calibre2}.

better person too: Archbishop Tutu,
[TheForgivenessProject.com](http://TheForgivenessProject.com){.calibre2}.

real and urgent conflict: Robi Damelin, "Palestinian and Israeli
Bereaved Mothers Feel the Same Pain," [Haaretz]{.epub-i}, February 24,
2016,
[http://www.haaretz.com/opinion/.premium-1.703226](http://www.haaretz.com/opinion/.premium-1.703226){.calibre2}.

be together forever: Quoted in [Sharon
Salzberg](http://us.macmillan.com/author/sharonsalzberg?utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_authorpage_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre2},
"Three Simple Ways to Pay Attention," [Mindful]{.epub-i}, March 4, 2016,
[http://www.mindful.org/meditation-start-here/](http://www.mindful.org/meditation-start-here/){.calibre2}.

22\. CREATING COMMUNITY

positivity and health: Barbara Fredrickson, [Love 2.0: Creating
Happiness and Health in Moments of Connection]{.epub-i} (New York:
Penguin, 2013).

a democratic society: Robert Putnam, [Bowling Alone: The Collapse and
Revival of American Community]{.epub-i} (New York: Touchstone Books,
2001).

could really talk to: Miller McPherson et al., "Social Isolation in
America: Changes in Core Discussion Networks over Two Decades,"
[American Sociological Review]{.epub-i} 71, no. 3 (2006).

generous enough---already exist: Rebecca Solnit, [A Paradise Built in
Hell: The Extraordinary Communities That Arise in Disaster]{.epub-i}
(New York: Penguin, 2010).

I got off: Alix Kates Shulman, [Drinking the Rain: A Memoir]{.epub-i}
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1995). Reprinted with permission.

23\. FROM ANGER TO LOVE

[Love Your Enemies]{.epub-i}: Robert Thurman and [Sharon
Salzberg](http://us.macmillan.com/author/sharonsalzberg?utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_authorpage_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre2},
[Love Your Enemies: How to Break the Anger Habit and Be a Whole Lot
Happier]{.epub-i} (Carlsbad, CA: Hay House, 2013).

effectively for other people: Mallika Dutt, interview with the author,
April 2016.

in conflict with them: Quoted in Mark Engler, "Ai-jen Poo: Organizing
Labor---With Love," [Yes! Magazine]{.epub-i}, November 9, 2011,
[http://www.yesmagazine.org/issues/the-yes-breakthrough-15/ai-jen-poo-organizing-labor-with-love](http://www.yesmagazine.org/issues/the-yes-breakthrough-15/ai-jen-poo-organizing-labor-with-love){.calibre2}.

raise my children in: Quoted in "An Incredible Container for
Transformation: An Interview with Labor Organizer and Feminist Ai-jen
Poo," [Believer]{.epub-i}, May 9, 2014,
[http://logger.believermag.com/post/85221891259/an-incredible-container-for-transformation](https://logger.believermag.com/post/2014/05/09/an-incredible-container-for-transformation){.calibre2}.

gender-related oppression: Quoted in Bryce Covert, "How the Rise of
Women in Labor Could Save the Movement," [Nation]{.epub-i}, January 10,
2014,
[https://www.thenation.com/article/how-rise-women-labor-could-save-movement](https://www.thenation.com/article/how-rise-women-labor-could-save-movement){.calibre2}.

interview with [The Nation:]{.epub-i} Quoted in Laura Flanders, "Can
'Caring Across Generations' Change the World?" [Nation]{.epub-i}, April
11, 2012,
[https://www.thenation.com/article/can-caring-across-generations-change-world](https://www.thenation.com/article/can-caring-across-generations-change-world){.calibre2}.

we were growing up: Atman Smith, interview with the author, April 2016.

spreading and spreading: Andy Gonzalez, interview with the author, April
2016.

the cohesive force: Ali Smith, interview with the author, April 2016.

24\. SAY YES TO LIFE

helpful to a stranger: Paul Piff, Dacher Keltner, et al., "Awe, the
Small Self, and Prosocial Behavior," [Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology]{.epub-i} 108, no. 6 (2015).

moment of their lives: Quoted in Sean O'Neal, "Interview with Rashida
Jones," [A.V. Club]{.epub-i}, April 8, 2009,
[http://www.avclub.com/article/rashida-jones-26240](http://www.avclub.com/article/rashida-jones-26240){.calibre2}.

what I wanted: Sudha Chandran's story, [Humans of Bombay]{.epub-i}
Facebook post, January 18, 2016,
[http://ow.ly/hjoe307axmx](http://ow.ly/hjoe307axmx){.calibre2}.

[]{#part0038.html}

 

ALSO BY [SHARON
SALZBERG](http://us.macmillan.com/author/sharonsalzberg?utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_authorpage_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre2}

[Real Happiness at Work: Meditations for Accomplishment, Achievement,
and Peace]{.span-symbols-sym}

[The Kindness Handbook: A Practical Companion]{.span-symbols-sym}

[Love Your Enemies: How to Break the Anger Habit & Be a Whole Lot
Happier]{.span-symbols-sym} [(with Robert Thurman)]{.epub-i}

[Real Happiness: The Power of Meditation]{.span-symbols-sym}

[The Force of Kindness: Change Your Life with Love and
Compassion]{.span-symbols-sym}

[Lovingkindness: The Revolutionary Art of Happiness]{.span-symbols-sym}

[Faith: Trusting Your Own Deepest Experience]{.span-symbols-sym}

[Insight Meditation: A Step-by-Step Course on How to
Meditate]{.span-symbols-sym} [(with Joseph Goldstein)]{.epub-i}

[A Heart as Wide as the World]{.span-symbols-sym}

[]{#part0039.html}

 

[ABOUT THE AUTHOR](#part0041.html_c_ata){.calibre2}

![image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre5}

[SHARON
SALZBERG](http://us.macmillan.com/author/sharonsalzberg?utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_authorpage_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre2}
is a central figure in the field of meditation and a world-renowned
teacher and author. She is the cofounder of the Insight Meditation
Society in Barre, Massachusetts, and the author of nine books, including
the [New York Times]{.epub-i} bestseller [Real Happiness]{.epub-i}.
Acclaimed for her down-to-earth teaching style, Sharon offers a secular,
modern approach to Buddhist teachings, making them instantly accessible.

 

Visit her online at
[www.sharonsalzberg.com](http://www.sharonsalzberg.com){.calibre2}, or
sign up for email updates
[here](http://us.macmillan.com/authoralerts?authorName=sharonsalzberg&authorRefId=113755620&utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_authoralertsignup_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre2}.

[![image](images/00004.gif){.calibre6}](https://www.facebook.com/pg/SharonSalzberg/about/?tab=page_info){.calibre2}    [![image](images/00005.gif){.calibre7}](https://twitter.com/sharonsalzberg){.calibre2}

[]{#part0040.html}

 

[Thank you for buying this]{.epub-b}

[Flatiron Books ebook.]{.epub-b}

 

To receive special offers, bonus content,

and info on new releases and other great reads,

sign up for our newsletters.

 

[![image](images/00002.jpeg){.calibre4}](http://us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup?utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_newslettersignup_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre3}

Or visit us online at

[us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup](http://us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup?utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_newslettersignup_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre2}

 

For email updates on the author, click
[here](http://us.macmillan.com/authoralerts?authorName=sharonsalzberg&authorRefId=113755620&utm_source=ebook&utm_medium=adcard&utm_term=ebookreaders&utm_content=sharonsalzberg_authoralertsignup_macdotcom&utm_campaign=9781250076526){.calibre2}.

[]{#part0041.html}

 

CONTENTS

[TITLE
PAGE](#part0000.html_0-efb9bf54b3d547ce84da16865f66be31){.calibre2}

[COPYRIGHT
NOTICE](#part0002.html_1T140-efb9bf54b3d547ce84da16865f66be31){.calibre2}

[DEDICATION](#part0003.html_2RHM0-efb9bf54b3d547ce84da16865f66be31){.calibre2}

[Introduction: Looking for Love](#part0004.html_int){.calibre2}

[SECTION 1](#part0005.html_pt1){.calibre2}

[Introduction: Beyond the
Clich[é]{.span-symbols-sym}](#part0006.html_int1){.calibre2}

  [1. The Stories We Tell Ourselves](#part0007.html_ch1){.calibre2}

  [2. The Stories Others Tell About Us](#part0008.html_ch2){.calibre2}

  [3. Welcoming Our Emotions](#part0009.html_ch3){.calibre2}

  [4. Meeting the Inner Critic](#part0010.html_ch4){.calibre2}

  [5. Letting Go of Perfection](#part0011.html_ch5){.calibre2}

  [6. Becoming Embodied](#part0012.html_ch6){.calibre2}

  [7. Moving Beyond Shame](#part0013.html_ch7){.calibre2}

  [8. Taking a Stand on Happiness](#part0014.html_ch8){.calibre2}

  [9. Following Your Ethical Compass](#part0015.html_ch9){.calibre2}

[SECTION 2](#part0016.html_pt2){.calibre2}

[Introduction: Love as a Verb](#part0017.html_int2){.calibre2}

[10. Barriers to Finding Real Love](#part0018.html_ch10){.calibre2}

[11. Cultivate Curiosity and Awe](#part0019.html_ch11){.calibre2}

[12. Authentic Communication](#part0020.html_ch12){.calibre2}

[13. Playing Fair: A Win-Win
Proposition](#part0021.html_ch13){.calibre2}

[14. Navigate the Space Between](#part0022.html_ch14){.calibre2}

[15. Letting Go](#part0023.html_ch15){.calibre2}

[16. Healing, Not Victory](#part0024.html_ch16){.calibre2}

[17. The Heart Is a Generous Muscle](#part0025.html_ch17){.calibre2}

[18. Forgiveness and Reconciliation](#part0026.html_ch18){.calibre2}

[SECTION 3](#part0027.html_pt3){.calibre2}

[Introduction: The Wide Lens of
Compassion](#part0028.html_int3){.calibre2}

[19. Priming the Pump](#part0029.html_ch19){.calibre2}

[20. Challenging Our Assumptions](#part0030.html_ch20){.calibre2}

[21. Love Everybody](#part0031.html_ch21){.calibre2}

[22. Creating Community](#part0032.html_ch22){.calibre2}

[23. From Anger to Love](#part0033.html_ch23){.calibre2}

[24. Say Yes to Life](#part0034.html_ch24){.calibre2}

[TAKEAWAYS FROM EACH SECTION](#part0035.html_take){.calibre2}

[ACKNOWLEDGMENTS](#part0036.html_ack){.calibre2}

[NOTES](#part0037.html_note){.calibre2}

[ALSO BY SHARON
SALZBERG](#part0038.html_147LC0-efb9bf54b3d547ce84da16865f66be31){.calibre2}

[ABOUT THE AUTHOR](#part0039.html_ata){.calibre2}

[COPYRIGHT](#part0042.html_181NK0-efb9bf54b3d547ce84da16865f66be31){.calibre2}

[]{#part0042.html}

 

[REAL LOVE]{.cotx}. Copyright © 2017 by Sharon Salzberg. All rights
reserved. For information, address Flatiron Books, 175 Fifth Avenue, New
York, N.Y. 10010.

[www.flatironbooks.com](http://www.flatironbooks.com){.calibre2}

Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reproduce from the
following:

Extract from "Our Weddings, Our Worth" by Frank Bruni, published in [The
New York Times]{.epub-i}, June 26, 2015. All rights reserved. Used by
permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United States. The
printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of this Content
without express written permission is prohibited.

Extract from "Even as I Hold You" from [Good Night, Willie Lee, I'll See
You in the Morning]{.epub-i} by Alice Walker. Copyright © 1978 by Alice
Walker. Used by permission of Doubleday, an imprint of the Knopf
Doubleday Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC. All
rights reserved.

Extract from [Honeybee: Poems and Short Prose]{.epub-i} by Naomi Shihab
Nye. Text copyright © 2008 by Naomi Shihab Nye. Used by permission of
HarperCollins Publishers.

Extract from "Rich People Just Care Less" by Daniel Goleman, published
in [The New York Times]{.epub-i}, October 5, 2013. All rights reserved.
Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the United
States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of this
Content without express written permission is prohibited.

Cover design by Henry Sene Yee

The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon
request.

ISBN 978-1-250-07650-2 (hardcover)

ISBN 978-1-250-07652-6 (ebook)

eISBN 9781250076526

Our ebooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or
business use. Please contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales
Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or by email at
[MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com](mailto:MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com){.calibre2}.

First Edition: June 2017
