POWER: Surviving and Thriving After Narcissistic Abuse A Collection of
Essays on Malignant Narcissism and Recovery from Emotional Abuse

SHAHIDA ARABI

Thought Catalog Books Brooklyn, NY

THOUGHT CATALOG BOOKS Copyright © 2017 by Shahida Arabi All rights
reserved. Published by Thought Catalog Books, a division of The Thought
& Expression Co., Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Founded in 2010, Thought
Catalog is a website and imprint dedicated to your ideas and stories. We
publish fiction and non-fiction from emerging and established writers
across all genres. For general information and submissions:
manuscripts@thoughtcatalog.com. First edition, 2017 ISBN 978-1945796326
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Cover photography by © moopsi/Shutterstock, design
by KJ Parish

1

For all of the powerful survivors out there-- the warriors and the
thrivers. You deserve everything good and more.

2

Abusers believe they are powerful. Yet their so-called power lies in
their ugliness and contempt for those they cannot defeat. Their hatred
is their only source of power and it is ultimately meaningless. That is
why they work so hard to maintain a power that will never be theirs. Do
you want to see real power? Observe the warrior who has walked through
fire and survived, time and time again, and lived to tell the tale.
Those who can rebuild themselves from the light of their own strength
and willpower are truly the powerful ones.

---Shahida Arabi

Contents

Dedication Epigraph Foreword ---Therapist Andrea Schneider, LCSW, MSW 1.
The Love Story of a Narcissist and His (or Her) Victim 2. 5 Powerful
Ways Abusive Narcissists Manipulate You 3. Psychological Terrorism: The
Epidemic of Covert Abuse 4. 20 Diversion Tactics Malignant Narcissists,
Sociopaths and Psychopaths Use to Silence You 5. The Secret Language of
Narcissists, Sociopaths and Psychopaths 6. The Pathological Envy of
Abusers Reveals How Powerful Their Victims Are 7. The Man or Woman With
Two Faces 8. The Myths About Narcissistic Abusers 9. What Do Therapists
Have to Say About Narcissistic Abuse? 10. The Myth of Codependency and
the Power of the Trauma Bond 11. 6 Subtle Digs Covert Narcissists Use to
Underhandedly Belittle You 12. Dating Emotional Predators and How to
Learn the Red Flags Before It's Too Late 13. Are They a Narcissist,
Traumatized or Just Emotionally Unavailable? The Differences Between
"Normal" Relationships And Abusive Ones 14. The Great Awakening--Tapping
into Your Power 15. 10 Reasons Why Being Raised by a Narcissistic Parent
Can Get You Trapped in the Trauma Repetition Cycle 16. An Investment
With No Return: 4 Ways Narcissists Financially Abuse You and Why You
Should Split the Check 17. The Real Reason We Love Bad Boys (and Girls):
How We Become Addicted to Toxic Narcissists and Emotionally Unavailable
People 18. Why Abuse Survivors Stay: The Effects of Trauma on the Brain
and The Psyche 19. Healing Your Addiction to the Narcissist: Breaking
the Biochemical Bond 20. Self-Isolation After Narcissistic Abuse: Why It
Happens and How to Heal 21. The Dynamic Duo: Empaths and Narcissists 22.
Healing Invisible Battle Wounds: The Kaleidoscope of Healing 23. 5
Effective Self-Care Tips for Abuse and Trauma Survivors

Additional Resources on Narcissistic Abuse Acknowledgements About the
Author

3

Foreword

Therapist Andrea Schneider, LCSW, MSW Readers are in for a real treat
with Shahida Arabi's informative collection of articles for survivors of
narcissistic abuse. Time and again, I refer my clients to Shahida's
writings as she is spot-on in understanding how to help survivors heal.
She gently educates the curious reader who needs an understanding of
what Mack truck just hit them in the aftermath of narcissistic abuse and
how to understand the complexities of this insidious tsunami.
Ultimately, after pinpointing the covert manipulation tactics, Shahida
provides a lantern to light the way for survivors on how to heal and
move on, leaving no theory or medium for healing unturned. As a
therapist specializing in narcissistic abuse recovery, so many of my
clients are healing from encountering an extreme narcissist in work,
family or romantic relationships. Unfortunately, this form of emotional
abuse is more common than we think, as we are learning in this new age
of technology where information about narcissistic abuse continues to
become more and more accessible to the public. Part of the healing
process is truly the psycho-education involved in understanding concepts
such as the trauma bond that develops between the abuser and victim, the
effects of tactics such as projection, gaslighting, hoovering, and the
abuse cycle. Shahida's works provide the perfect

anchoring and roadmap for understanding this dizzying cycle of emotional
abuse, all while providing the resources to help begin to heal the
residual wounds. Shahida is the one author out of a select few that
writes eloquently and exquisitely from the perspective of both survivor
and researcher: not only with clear evidence-based studies but also
weaving in her own personal experience and life wisdom to assist the
reader with the next steps in recovery. With these essays, she has hit
the sweet spot--combining psychological research, neuropsychology, as
well as the warmth and empathy from her own journey that survivors
crave. Shahida's writings are one of a kind and will surely help comfort
and inform the survivor as he or she works through recovery. I know
countless clients of mine that have benefited from Shahida's work and
will continue to do so. Congratulations, Shahida, on your very important
contributions to helping the world evolve in a direction of healing and
recovery! What a gift you are!

Andrea Schneider, LCSW Author of Soul Vampires: Reclaiming Your
Lifeblood After Narcissistic Abuse (2015) Psychotherapist Specializing
in Narcissistic Abuse Recovery Andreaschneiderlcsw.com

1

The Love Story of a Narcissist and His (or Her) Victim Once upon a
time\[1\], his tenderness wrapped around you and his fingers traced the
outline of your tattoo as his lips brushed against your ear. Most love
stories begin with a kiss; this one begins with a well-constructed mask
and premeditated murder. A first meeting where the conversation is sex
itself; language becomes a weapon and a medicine, a healing balm for
your wounds and a sick game of Russian roulette. He ties his words
around you like a corset, fashioning you into his soulmate.
Fast-forwarding intimacy on all levels, he plays the victim, weaving a
sad story about betrayal by his previous partner who you will later come
to learn is also a victim. Faux innocence and an illusion of
good-naturedness make for a stunning performance. He's used to the
applause and has many admirers lurking in the shadows, but he'll
introduce you to them later. The first act still has to proceed. He
pretends he's never felt like this before, and his pity ploy feasts on
the first taste of your empathy. Your sympathy is delicious, prime for a
dinner date; your compassion will make for good dessert. The real kick
is when he pretends to make you the center of his world in spite of his
own self-centeredness, much like a predator does when hunting prey.
Predators don't take their eyes off of their prey and neither does a
narcissist when preparing to devour his victim. You imbibe both the
drinks and his

masquerade, inebriated on his façade and the charisma which will later
become contempt. First dates quickly become fifth dates; months speed by
as you spend weekends wrapped in his arms and the high of shared
laughter, inside jokes, and exclusive worlds you've created. Worlds no
one else is allowed entry to. You begin to lose touch with friends and
family members. He seems to encourage this behavior and at times even
demand it. Isolation and constant communication become the norm, but you
are prompted to feel as if you desire this isolation at first: it's a
protected world, safe, loving, affectionate, at times overbearing. It
cannot be tampered with. After years of living in a war zone, you enjoy
what feels like a decade of peace, even if you know it is stifling.
Until the first blow, which comes like a gunshot in the dark as you're
sleeping. You try to wake from the nightmare only to realize you're
still in the midst of dreaming. A dream within a dream. The mask slips
and hell becomes a little token of your reality. It's the first jolt of
betrayal, of something not being quite right. You rationalize it and
minimize it, hoping it was just an offcolor comment or a
misunderstanding. You dismiss his rage as a "bad day." He then begins to
knit an intricate web filled with falsehoods, half-truths, the worst
miseries from your past and the best insecurities from your present. New
people, as well as new forms of torment, begin to show up; he introduces
them into the sacred space of your relationship. He ignores you while he
extols them; he demeans you while he praises them. He loves to see you
squirm and he loves to play and win games. He engineers a new false
reality for you to live in where you are doubtful of your own inner
voice. He begins to twist and turn your strengths into flaws, your
talents into travesties, your compassion into naiveté. The blame for
everything and anything becomes yours as he erodes your identity, your
memory, and your self-esteem. His weaknesses suddenly become your
weaknesses; there is no limit to what he will project on your mindscape
as he rents space inside of your head and signs a new lease. He invites
you to his

playground of malice. This particular fun house hosts smoke, mirrors and
distortions of your reality. To the narcissist, romance isn't romance
until it's like cocaine. A drug you begin to sniff daily hoping his
intermittent kindness will numb the cruelty of the callous words and the
actions that add up bit by bit to subtract from your daily joy. Defeat
comes in the startled look you give him when he first brushes the
proverbial blade across your skin; it comes in the form of a snide,
insulting remark that ever so gently passes through his lips, as if
testing your threshold and the precipice of a boundary you didn't even
know you had to draw in the first place. This is followed by the remarks
that make you question whether he ever even meant to be cruel or not.
Where once you felt carefree, lighthearted and loving, you now feel as
if you are being turned into a different person that resembles nothing
like you once were. Being and feeling crazy, oversensitive and humorless
are the portraits he paints to keep you on the edge of never knowing
anything for certain. His true intentions are quickly hidden. His loving
gentleness is often merged with a condescending contempt which leaves
you spinning. It's a potent cocktail of poison and remedy. Each
withdrawal from the drug leaves you reeling. His addiction is savagely
evoking and witnessing your pain and your addiction is attempting to
regain his validation. Wanting to recapture some of the fairy tale bliss
in the beginning which has slowly but surely become a nightmare. Defeat
becomes your daily routine as he tests you more and more; harsh words
become condescending put-downs; sarcastic jabs become full-fledged
attacks; molehills become mountains and partnership becomes a power
play. It doesn't matter how much you fight back because your defeat
slyly settles in onto the sadistic smirk on his face. Bit by bit, the
water reaches a boiling point and you become so accustomed to the heat
that you are no longer aware that you are dying. Defeat is now a lithe
dancer forced to dance to an impossible rhythm, hoping to escape
herself.

Defeat comes rapidly when he begins to rip apart your wounds, slowly and
carefully, piece by piece, instead of nursing them; rather than the
gentle healer, he becomes the wretched surgeon that manufactures your
madness all while sprinkling doubts about your ability to discern what
is happening. Defeat replaces your anticipation of a happy ending and
supplants the main storyline in your relationship: he rejoices in the
gradual slump of your shoulders as he begins to feast on your pain. The
virus has found a host; the leech has secured a new life source. The
fairy tale has reached midnight but now your bare feet hurt too much to
walk away from the illusion of the ball. Somehow, the glass slipper must
fit. It just has to, even if it causes your feet to bleed. The highs are
worth the lows (or so your heart says); your mind doesn't listen, it's
too high on the Novocain of sweet promises while your psyche is warped
behind the prison bars of his projected pain. You become needy for
approval, for any scrap of kindness, any leftovers of sincerity, any
inkling for the dream he once constructed of meeting someone who truly
saw you. Once you feasted on his homemade meals of support,
understanding and comfort; now you're malnourished, never enough. He
picks and prods at each flaw, each insecurity, each wound and when there
are no more to be found, he creates new ones, blaming you for your own
demise. He maims you with the truth of your own humanity. Once you
binged on his affection, and now you're starving from his lack of
praise. You attempt to restrain yourself from feasting on the love of
others while pretending to be satisfied with crumbs. Your body, once his
shelter, now becomes a breeding ground for his lies. Flesh meets flesh
in an attempt to find truth where there is nothing but falsehood. Sweet
lovemaking becomes devaluing coercion. Silence and a callous smile
become the response to your pleas. Discrepancies begin to add up.
Stories begin to self-destruct. Lies begin to love themselves, begetting
more lies. The ending is packaged with the

maximum amount of cruelty in the shortest amount of time in order to
leave the biggest impact. Closure is the only fairy tale, a myth, a
legend. The only true closure can come from within. The truth becomes
the only mirror you can trust and sometimes you are the only one who can
look in it and find yourself again. This is a game he (or she) doesn't
have to win. This is a nightmare you may have to awaken from again and
again in order to realize you're no longer dreaming. This is a type of
love story where the happy ending lies in not finding Prince Charming.
Rather, it lies in the realization that he never existed at all.

1.  A male figure is used to represent the narcissist here, but this is
    not meant to imply that all narcissists are male. Narcissists can
    come from any gender and background. ↵

2

5 Powerful Ways Abusive Narcissists Manipulate You In popular culture,
the term "narcissistic" is thrown about quite loosely and usually refers
to vanity and self-absorption. This reduces narcissism to a common
quality that everyone possesses and downplays the symptoms demonstrated
by people with the actual disorder. While narcissism does exist on a
spectrum, narcissism as a full-fledged personality disorder is quite
different. People who meet the criteria for Narcissistic Personality
Disorder or those who have traits of Antisocial Personality Disorder and
are on the high end of the narcissistic spectrum can operate in
extremely manipulative ways within the context of intimate relationships
due to their deceitfulness, lack of empathy, and their tendency to be
interpersonally exploitative. Chronic abuse by a narcissistic abuser can
lead to symptoms of PTSD, Complex PTSD, or even what psychotherapist
Christine Louis de Canonville calls "Narcissistic Victim Syndrome."
Although I will be focusing on narcissistic abusers in this essay, this
can potentially apply to interactions with those who have ASPD to an
extent due to the overlap of symptoms in these two disorders. It's
important in any kind of relationship that we learn to identify the red
flags when interacting with people who display malignant narcissism
and/or antisocial traits so we can better protect ourselves from
exploitation and

abuse, set appropriate boundaries with others, and make informed
decisions about who we keep in our lives. Understanding the nature of
these toxic interactions and how they affect us has an enormous impact
on our ability to engage in self-care. Watch out for the following
covert manipulation tactics when you're dating someone or in any other
kind of relationship:

1.  The Idealization-Devaluation-Discard Phase Narcissists and those
    with antisocial traits tend to subject romantic partners to three
    phases within a relationship known as "idealization, devaluation and
    discard." The idealization phase (which often happens most strongly
    during the early stages of dating or a relationship) consists of
    putting you on a pedestal, making you the center of his/her world,
    being in contact with you frequently, and showering you with
    flattery and praise. You are convinced that the narcissist can't
    live without you and that you've met your soulmate. Narcissists
    mirror and mimic their potential supply's feelings, values, hobbies
    and interests to manufacture this "soulmate" effect. Be wary of:
    constant texting, shallow flattery and wanting to be around you at
    all times. This is a technique known as "love-bombing" and it is how
    most victims get sucked in: they are flattered by the constant
    attention they get from the narcissist. You may be fooled into
    thinking that this means a narcissist is truly interested in you
    when, in fact, he or she is interested in making you dependent on
    their constant praise and attention. The devaluation phase is
    subsequent to this idealization phase, and this is when you're left
    wondering why you were so abruptly thrust off the pedestal. The
    narcissist will suddenly start to blow hot and cold, criticizing
    you, covertly and overtly putting you down, comparing you to others,
    stonewalling you, emotionally withdrawing from you and giving you
    the silent treatment when you've failed to meet their extreme
    "standards." Remember that when you don't cater to a narcissist's
    sense of entitlement and threaten their sense of superiority---their
    false belief that they have a right to

treat people like objects, playing with them and putting them down
whenever they please---it results in what we call narcissistic rage.
Narcissists can't comprehend that there may be anyone independent of
them, with boundaries, values and beliefs that don't align with the
narcissist's unreasonable demands. When the victim begins to question
the narcissist's abusive and cold, withholding behavior, they often
stonewall the victim, gaslight them and invalidate them further so that
they feel guilty about reacting in the first place. The first time a
narcissist throws you off the pedestal is actually the best moment to
leave and it is usually the moment most survivors wish they had left,
had they known what they were dealing with. It is at this time when the
investment in the relationship isn't as heavy as it might be and the
pain is fresh, shocking and traumatizing. They can throw you off the
pedestal in many ways---there may be a negative outburst followed by a
great deal of gaslighting and blameshifting; there may be a hideously
insulting remark or incident of name-calling disguised as a joke,
followed by stonewalling because "you're too sensitive;" there could
even be an hour-long conversation which consists of primarily bashing
every strength and accomplishment of yours that the narcissist pretended
to love in the early stages of the relationship. Remember, narcissists
don't truly "admire" anyone---if they do praise you on your strengths
and accomplishments in the beginning, more often than not, they are
planning ways to set you up to fail and sabotage you in those same
areas. They suffer from pathological envy which means that anything
you're better at than them will eventually be a subject of denigration
rather than praise during the devaluation phase. In the devaluation
phase, all bets are off ---the true abuser starts unmasking himself or
herself. What drags most survivors back in even after this first
incident is the makeup period. The narcissist will convince you that
this incident and future incidents have a reasonable explanation behind
them---it was really your fault that they called you a terrible name, or
they just become abusive when they're drinking, or sometimes they just
have "bad days." You, the willing,

compassionate, empathic partner, will be prone to agree---perhaps you
did do something to provoke it and after all, nobody's perfect, right?
Then comes the narcissist's most insidious trick: they turn you into
someone who's more like an addictive gambler at a slot machine waiting
for the big bucks rather than your normal, stable self. Since the "hot"
aspect of this phase relies on intermittent reinforcement, a technique
in which the narcissist gives you inconsistent spurts of the
idealization phase throughout, you become convinced that perhaps you are
at fault and you can "control" the narcissist's reactions. This
intermittent schedule of rewards is the same way many gamblers get
hooked on slot machines---although they know a reward is random,
unpredictable and rare, they will still continue to play in the hopes of
getting a reward because an unpredictable schedule of rewards is more
effective in accessing pleasure and excitement than a predictable one.
In fact, as you'll learn in "The Real Reason We Love Bad Boys (and
Girls)," an unpredictable schedule of rewards allows more dopamine to
flow readily to the brain, strengthening the very reward circuits that
compel us to engage with our source of pleasure over and over again. In
the economics world, this is called the Law of Diminishing Returns,
where everything else stays constant while the output decreases over
time. The narcissist gets away with giving you less while getting more
of your time, energy and effort. That's why the narcissist sneaks in
tender moments of love, kindness, generosity and great sex periodically
throughout the abuse cycle so that each and every time an abusive
incident happens, you feel as if you can win the lottery again---if only
you could be "perfect" and everything the narcissist demands you to be.
You are misled into thinking that if you just learn not to be so "needy"
or "clingy," the narcissist will reward you with the loving behavior he
or she demonstrated in the beginning. These are words that narcissists
often use to demean victims when abuse victims mourn the loss of the
idealization phase or react normally to being provoked. It's a way to
maintain control over your

legitimate emotional reactions to their stonewalling, emotional
withdrawal and inconsistency. Unfortunately, it is during the
devaluation phase that a narcissist's true self shows itself. You have
to understand that the man or woman in the beginning of the relationship
never truly existed. The true colors are only now beginning to show, so
it will be a struggle as you attempt to reconcile the image that the
narcissist presented to you with his or her current behavior. Even
though the narcissist can be quite possessive and jealous over you,
since he or she views you as an object and a source of narcissistic
supply, the narcissist is prone to projecting this behavior onto you.
The narcissist makes you seem like the needy one as you react to his or
her withdrawal and withholding patterns even though the expectations of
frequent contact were established early on in the relationship by the
narcissist himself. During the discard phase, the narcissist abandons
his or her victim in the most horrific, demeaning way possible to
convince the victim that he or she is worthless. This could range from
leaving the victim for another lover, humiliating the victim in public,
blatantly ignoring the partner for a long period of time without any
closure on the breakup, being physically aggressive and a whole range of
other demeaning behaviors to communicate to the victim that he or she is
no longer important. Although "normal" relationships can end in a
similar manner as well, the difference is that the narcissist often
makes it clear he or she intends to hurt you by giving you the silent
treatment, spreading rumors about you, moving on very quickly with a new
victim, insulting you and disrespecting you during the discard phase.
Unlike "normal" partners, they ensure that you never have closure, and
if you decide to leave them, they might decide to stalk you to show that
they still have control. The narcissist may still reach out to you after
the discard or attempt to provoke you in other ways to hoover you back
into the trauma of the relationship, keeping tabs on you even after the
discard.

It's all about control for the narcissist, especially the horrific
discard---so if they see you thriving and moving on with your life,
they'll attempt to reel you back in just to subject you to an even more
humiliating discard than before. They want to demonstrate you are
worthless and that you are their property--- often simultaneously. It
makes no sense to us as empathic human beings who would often wish the
best for our partners after a breakup but then again, rational behavior
has never been their forte.

2.  Gaslighting While healthy relationships have room for respectful
    disagreement and consideration of one's feelings, with the
    narcissist, gaslighting and constant emotional invalidation become
    the norm. Gaslighting is a technique abusers use to convince you
    that your perception of the abuse is inaccurate. During the
    devaluation and discard phases, the narcissist will often invalidate
    and criticize your emotions, and displace any blame of his or her
    abuse as your fault. They will suddenly develop abuse amnesia where
    they'll forget horrific incidents of abuse or deny saying or doing
    something that they actually did. This allows them to escape
    accountability, but it's also a type of crazymaking that enables the
    abuser to rewrite reality for you and control your world. In an
    abusive relationship with a narcissist, you are no longer the owner
    of your perception---you are a slave to the narcissist's projections
    and reshaping of your own perception. Frequent use of phrases such
    as "You provoked me," "You're too sensitive," "I never said that,"
    or "You're taking things too seriously" after the narcissists'
    abusive outbursts are common and are used to gaslight you into
    thinking that the abuse is indeed your fault or that it never even
    took place. Narcissists are masters of making you doubt yourself and
    the abuse. This is why victims so often suffer even after the ending
    of a relationship with a narcissist because the emotional
    invalidation they received from the narcissist made them feel
    powerless in their agency and intuition. This self-doubt

enables them to stay within the abusive relationship even when it's
clear that the relationship is a toxic one because they are led to
mistrust their own instincts and interpretations of events. More often
than not, narcissists target sensitive souls like empaths so they are
able to lock us into the fear that we're too sensitive quite easily. The
truth is, anyone would be "sensitive" to verbal abuse and psychological
manipulation.

3.  Smear Campaigns Narcissists keep harems because they love to have
    their egos stroked and they need constant validation from the
    outside world to confirm their grandiose sense of self-importance
    and fulfill their need for excessive admiration. A harem is a group
    of people the narcissist has gathered around himself to validate his
    opinions, cater to their constant need for attention, and stroke
    their ego. This is why narcissists are clever chameleons who are
    also peoplepleasers, morphing into whatever personality suits them
    in situations with different types of people to get what they
    want---supply. Think of the story of the emperor's new clothes---the
    victim will often be the only one telling the narcissist he is a
    naked fool, which will cause a narcissistic injury, rage and denial.
    The harem wouldn't dare because these members are too loyal to the
    narcissist's false self. Beware of people who seem to shape-shift
    suddenly before your eyes into different personas---this is a red
    flag that they are not authentic in their interactions with you and
    others. It is no surprise, then, that the narcissist will probably
    begin a smear campaign against you not too long after the discard
    phase in order to paint you as the unstable one, and that this is
    usually successful with the narcissist's support network which also
    tends to consist of other narcissists, people-pleasers, empaths, as
    well as people who are easily charmed. This smear campaign is used
    to accomplish three things: (1) it depicts you as the abuser or
    unstable person and deflects your accusations of abuse; (2) it
    provokes you into responding, thus proving your instability to
    others when trying to argue his or her depiction of you; and (3) it
    serves as a hoovering

technique in which the narcissist seeks to pull you back into the trauma
of the relationship as you struggle to reconcile the rumors about you
with who you actually are by speaking out against the accusations. The
only way to not get pulled into this tactic is by going full No Contact
with both the narcissist and his or her harem.

4.  Triangulation Healthy relationships thrive on security; unhealthy
    ones are filled with provocation, uncertainty and infidelity.
    Narcissists like to manufacture love triangles and bring in the
    opinions of others to validate their point of view. They do this to
    an excessive extent in order to play puppeteer to your emotions. In
    the book Psychopath Free by Jackson MacKenzie, the method of
    triangulation is discussed as a popular way the narcissist maintains
    control over your emotions. Triangulation consists of bringing the
    presence of another person into the dynamic of the relationship,
    whether it be an ex-lover, a current mistress, a relative, or a
    complete stranger. Remember that saying that you should never trust
    anyone who's rude to the waiter on a date? Well, this same saying
    also applies in the opposite direction as well: never trust anyone
    who's overly friendly to the waitress---especially if it's each and
    every time. It's a sign that your potential partner needs constant
    attention and energy from other people---even if they are complete
    strangers! This triangulation can take place over social media, in
    person, or even through the narcissist's own verbal accounts of the
    other woman or man. The narcissist relies on jealousy as a powerful
    emotion that can cause you to compete for his or her affections, so
    provocative statements like "I wish you'd be more like her," or "He
    wants me back into his life, I don't know what to do," are designed
    to trigger the abuse victim into competing and feeling insecure
    about his or her position in the narcissist's life. The last example
    is especially potent because the only time a narcissist's victim is
    not made to feel jealous about their partner's ex is during the

idealization phase when the narcissist often devalues his or her ex as
"crazy" to make the victim feel special and unique. It is only when you
begin to reconnect with the reality of the abuser that you realize that
the narcissist's ex-partner was not the crazy one, but rather a victim
of abuse just like you-- and that perhaps you two should get together to
exchange notes! Unlike healthy relationships where jealousy is
communicated and dealt with in a productive manner, the narcissist will
belittle your feelings and continue inappropriate flirtations and
affairs without a second thought. Triangulation is the way the
narcissist maintains control and keeps you in check. You're so busy
competing for his or her attention that you're less likely to be
focusing on the red flags within the relationship or looking for ways to
get out of the relationship.

5.  The False Self and the True Self The narcissist hides behind the
    armor of a "false self," a construct of qualities and traits that he
    or she usually presents to the outside world to gain admiration and
    attention. Due to this armor, you are unlikely to comprehend the
    full extent of a narcissist's inhumanity and lack of empathy until
    you are in the discard phase. This can make it difficult to pinpoint
    who the narcissistic abuser truly is---the sweet, charming and
    seemingly remorseful person that appears shortly after the abuse, or
    the abusive partner who ridicules, invalidates and belittles you on
    a daily basis? You suffer a great deal of cognitive dissonance
    trying to reconcile the illusion the narcissist first presented to
    you with the tormenting behaviors he or she subjects you to. In
    order to cope with this cognitive dissonance, you might blame
    yourself for his or her abusive behavior and attempt to "improve"
    yourself when you have done nothing wrong, just to uphold your
    belief in the narcissist's false self during the devaluation phase.
    During the discard phase, the narcissist reveals the true self and
    you get a glimpse of the abuser that was lurking within all along.
    You bear witness to

his or her cold, callous indifference as you are discarded. This is as
close you will ever get to seeing the narcissist's true self. The
manipulative, conniving charm that existed in the beginning is no
more--- instead, it is replaced by the genuine contempt that the
narcissist felt for you all along. See, narcissists don't truly feel
empathy for others---so during the discard phase, they often feel
absolutely nothing for you except the excitement of having exhausted
another source of supply. You were just another source of narcissistic
supply, so do not fool yourself into thinking that the magical
connection that existed in the beginning was in any way real. It was an
illusion, much like the identity of the narcissist was an illusion. It
is time to pick up the pieces, go No Contact, heal, and move forward.
You were not only a victim of narcissistic abuse, but a survivor. Owning
this dual status as both victim and survivor permits you to own your
agency after the abuse and to live the life you were meant to lead---one
filled with self-care, self-love, respect, and compassion.

3

Psychological Terrorism: The Epidemic of Covert Abuse Narcissistic abuse
is unlike anything you've probably ever experienced unless you've had a
narcissistic parent. It's a huge trauma made out of a million tiny
shocks that shatter the memory, erode the self and break your life into
fragments. It's psychological terrorism at its worst and confusing as
hell at its best. It's an unforgettable event (or rather, series of
unfortunate events) that creates some memorable cognitive dissonance
because it hits the core of everything you once believed about the
world. It also doesn't make any sense ---why would the same person who
claimed to love and care for you hurt you ---over and over without a
hint of empathy or remorse? In the narcissist's world, it's simply
because they can. To understand why narcissistic abuse is so traumatic
and problematic, consider that the very nature of it distorts everything
we hold true about humanity. It discredits what we were taught not only
about the human heart but also the universality of the human conscience
and our capacity for empathy. Narcissistic abuse is rife with emotional
neglect and unbelievable acts of murder and violence---only, most of it
can never be traced back to the perpetrator because there may be no
visible bloodshed. This type of abuse is brimming with psychological
mind games, touched with a dash of intermittent sweetness to keep the
victim constantly teetering over the edge of uncertainty and self-doubt.
It is a relationship where the shadows of old scars dance with fresh
wounds.

When the cognitive dissonance about the abuser's ever-shifting true
identity mingles with self-doubt, a feeling of pervasive unworthiness
lingers, an alienation that cannot be voiced aloud. When you've been
psychologically and emotionally abused, there are no words that can
describe the pain, no explanation that you can offer your friends and
family without fearing they'll look at you as if you've grown three
heads. You may even be told by those who have never experienced such
abuse that you're paranoid, taking things too seriously, that you need
to move on and let it go, that every relationship has its problems (it
sure does, but not quite like anything you've encountered in this
particular situation), that your partner didn't mean to verbally tear
you down and cut you apart, and perhaps the most despicable thing that
many survivors of emotional abuse are told: that it "takes two to
tango." The truth is, a victim of abuse rarely consciously "chooses" to
be in an abusive relationship---often, they "choose" a partner who
treats them very well in the beginning---which is the false mask that
the abuser portrays. When the victim is sufficiently hooked into the
relationship and invested, that is when the tide turns, the false mask
slips away, and the terror begins. Tiny red flags become tidal waves,
inconspicuous molehills become monstrous mountains. The victim's choice
to stay in the relationship may not be a choice led by agency, but by
fear, the effects of trauma, by the erosion of their own identity, even
by the threat of violence or the presence of children. There are many
complicated factors that go into the choice of leaving or staying, and
it doesn't help that survivors struggle to gain support from a society
that silences, shames and blames them for being abused in the first
place. Even after the victim leaves or is left by the abuser, the
transition from victim to survivor is made doubly traumatic by the
invalidation of your experiences. You'll be told that because your scars
aren't visible and your wounds can't be measured, that the war zone
you've lived in for the past year or the past decades didn't
exist---that it was all in your head. After all, verbal abuse, emotional
manipulation, psychological torment and coercion aren't even seen as
"legitimate" abuse in our society---it's seen as "playing the victim" by
victim-blamers and those who've either never been through the abuse
cycle themselves or are often the perpetrators of it. The malignant
narcissist takes

advantage of the fact that society won't believe you because the less
society is aware of this form of covert violence, the more this form of
daily degradation and belittlement can go forward, supported by the
gaslighting of your abuser as well as of their enablers. The double bind
is that the victim, without support, is unable to decipher and confirm
his or her confusing reality in a meaningful way without understanding
the nature of narcissistic abuse and of narcissistic abusers. These
toxic types can manufacture all sorts of flaws and create insecurities
that you didn't possess---all to make you squirm, walk on eggshells and
berate yourself---so it's quite easy to think you're the crazy one. In a
relationship with a narcissistic abuser, you'll find yourself constantly
improving and trying to evolve---only to be met with the reality that
the narcissist can never evolve beyond their infantile excessive sense
of entitlement and lack of empathy. What was once the promise of a
partnership becomes a twisted power play where the victim is made to
feel as defective and dysfunctional as his or her abuser truly is. Even
at the ending of the relationship, narcissists don't like to lose
emotional control over their victims. Victims are often stalked and
harassed by these toxic types and yet are the ones called "crazy,"
"delusional," or somehow unhinged. That's because narcissists are
masters of pathologizing your emotions, especially any emotions or
rising epiphanies on your part that threaten to hold them accountable
for their abuse---that threaten to take away their power. They are
masters of rewriting reality so that you appear to be the abuser rather
than them. After all, if you held the reins to your own reality and
trusted in it so fully that even the narcissist couldn't shake your
faith, you'd have all the power, wouldn't you? In the narcissist's
world, accountability and consequences are foreign words that their
victims lose their fluency in once the abuser has convinced them it is
all their fault that they are being abused. They are never to blame for
anything and their abuse is something they feel entitled to engage in.
On the other hand, as soon as the victim is caught "stepping out of
line," in other

words, reacting to a pattern of chronic abuse, they will pay for it and
be punished for threatening the narcissist's delusional sense of
entitlement. That is why it is so very difficult to not only hold an
abuser accountable for covert, psychological abuse, but also for the
victim to extricate himself or herself from the abuser. Victims of abuse
are not just abused by the abuser; they are abused by the court systems
which don't take emotional and psychological violence seriously; abused
by friends and family that don't believe them; abused by society which
blames them for being victims of crimes that the true perpetrators are
rarely seen as culpable of.

So what exactly is a narcissist and why do they behave the way they do?
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.;
DSM--5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013) defines a narcissistic
person as someone who has a pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy
or behavior), an excessive need for admiration, and lack of empathy,
beginning by early adulthood and presenting in a variety of contexts.
This is indicated by five (or more) of the following: Has a grandiose
sense of self-importance (i.e., exaggerates achievements and talents,
expects to be recognized as superior without commensurate achievements)
Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance,
beauty, or ideal love. Believes that he or she is "special" and unique
and can only be understood by, or should associate with, other special
or high-status people (or institutions). Requires excessive admiration.
Has a sense of entitlement (i.e., unreasonable expectations of
especially favorable treatment or automatic compliance with his or her
expectations). Is interpersonally exploitative (i.e., takes advantage of
others to achieve his

or her own ends). Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify
with the feelings and needs of others. Is often envious of others or
believes that others are envious of him or her. Shows arrogant, haughty
behaviors or attitudes. That's the clinical definition, but the way a
narcissist operates in relationships is stealthier and more complex than
the visible signs of narcissism depicted on this list. While not every
single narcissist will be abusive, many abusers demonstrate narcissistic
or antisocial tendencies. Abusive narcissistic partners engage in
chronic manipulation and devaluation of their victims, leaving victims
feeling worthless, anxious and even suicidal. This type of continual
manipulation, which includes an idealization-devaluation-discard abuse
cycle where they "love-bomb" their partners, devalue them, then discard
them until the trauma begins again, is known as narcissistic
abuse---abuse by a partner with NPD or on the far end of the
narcissistic spectrum. This type of abuse can leave psychological and
emotional scars that can last a lifetime. In fact, trauma expert Pete
Walker (2013) suggests that chronic emotional abuse, especially if
experienced in childhood and later reexperienced in adulthood, can cause
symptoms of PTSD or Complex PTSD, which is traditionally seen by society
to be reserved for war veterans but has actually been revealed to be
experienced by abuse survivors. What makes narcissistic abuse so
dangerous is that these individuals employ very covert and insidious
methods to abuse their partners. Due to the very nature of their abuse,
they're able to escape accountability for the abuse because of the false
persona they present to the outside world---which is usually a charming
mask that hides their cruelty. What's important to remember is that
narcissists don't outright destroy you in the way physically abusive
partners may do---they plant the very seeds in your mind that will lead
you to your own destruction. In an abusive relationship with a
narcissistic or antisocial personality, the abusive partner can subject
the partner to numerous forms of coercion, manipulation and

control, including but not limited to emotional abuse, spiritual abuse,
financial abuse, sexual abuse and/or physical abuse. Covert abuse (the
type of insidious psychological abuse that builds up over time) is
sometimes even more damaging than overt abuse because there are no
visible battle wounds to verify the abuse---only the aftermath of
psychological terror. They will cultivate doubts that never existed,
manufacture insecurities that were never present, rub salt on the wounds
they know you don't want opened---all under the guise of "helping" you
or gaslighting you into believing you deserved or provoked the abuse.

The toxic behaviors in narcissistic abuse can include but are not
limited to: Being overly critical and controlling towards their
partners, covertly and overtly putting them down though cruel verbal
abuse and manipulative behaviors that are employed to isolate and demean
them. Narcissists and sociopaths are known for demonstrating contempt
for others as a way to demonstrate their power and false sense of
superiority. This can include name-calling, harsh insults disguised as
jokes, demeaning, contemptuous remarks about the victim's appearance,
intelligence, line of work, lifestyle, skill sets, accomplishments, or
other support networks the victim has outside of the relationship. Being
physically and/or sexually abusive. This can include pushing the
partner, hitting the partner with objects, punching, shoving, slapping,
choking the victim, forcing the victim to have sex without consent, and
coercing the victim into sexual situations that they are not comfortable
with. They may threaten to leave the victim or ruin the victim's life in
some way if they do not comply with their wishes. Manufacturing hostile
or aggressive situations where the victim is led to emotional distress,
especially through the abuser's narcissistic rage over seemingly small
or irrelevant things. The abuser creates an environment where the victim
feels trapped, controlled, and limited in what he or she can say or do.

Engaging in hot and cold behavior that switches quickly between a loving
persona and an abusive one. This is an abuse cycle known as
idealization, devaluation and discard. It includes treating the victim
coldly and callously for no apparent reason, only to return to loving,
affectionate behavior through a technique called intermittent
reinforcement, where they are fed crumbs of affection throughout the
abuse cycle to keep them hooked. This conditions the victim into
expecting less each and every time they interact and also programs the
victim into associating love with unpredictability, distress and unease.
The victim is later discarded in a humiliating, demeaning manner, often
followed by a smear campaign so that the narcissist feels that they've
"won" the breakup. Controlling every aspect of their partner's life to
the point where they isolate them from family and friends; this includes
sabotaging the victim's friendships, familial relationships, important
life events or their goals and aspirations. Stonewalling their victims
into silence should they bring up any concerns about the relationship;
subjecting the victim to silent treatments and disappearances throughout
the abuse cycle to create a sense of chronic insecurity in the victim,
causing the victim to walk on eggshells and increase their efforts to
please their abusive partner. Triangulating their victims with other
love interests including their expartners; engaging in pathological
lying and deceit while pursuing numerous affairs outside of the
relationship; comparing the victim to other people regarding their
appearance, personality, success and other attributes to instill in them
a sense of worthlessness. This infidelity is not driven by
dissatisfaction with the main partner but rather a sadistic need for
narcissistic supply. This supply comes in the form of attention from
multiple people as well as the victim's emotional distress in response
to the triangulation. Gaslighting their partners into believing the
abuse isn't real by denying, minimizing or rationalizing the abuse. This
includes deflecting any

conversations about accountability using circular conversations and word
salad in order to avoid being held accountable for their actions.
Subjecting their victim to smear campaigns to slander their character
and reputation so that the abuse victim is left with no support network.
This includes projecting their own abusive behavior onto the victim so
that no one believes their accounts of abuse. Blameshifting and
projecting their malignant traits onto their partners during
conversations while using a false charismatic self to make their victims
look like the "crazy" ones. It's almost as if they hand off their own
traits and shortcomings to their victims as if to say, "Here, take my
pathology. I don't want it." This is what narcissistic abuse looks
like---and unfortunately, the full extent of narcissistic abuse is not
taught in any psychology class or diagnostic manual, though these
manipulative techniques can be found in numerous books by experts about
narcissism, accounts from mental health professionals who have worked
with survivors as clients and survivor accounts. It is truly a
narcissist's malignant behaviors and how they affect us that are the key
to understanding if your partner is a narcissist. Anyone can be a victim
of narcissistic abuse, regardless of their gender or background. A
narcissistic abuser can lead survivors to feel depressed, suicidal,
anxious, constantly on edge and worthless. If your partner displays
these types of toxic behaviors, at the very least, they are emotionally,
verbally and psychologically abusive. While malignant narcissists are
certainly very dangerous, partners who display even some of these
behaviors and refuse to change do not need the diagnosis of NPD in order
for victims to recognize that they have a toxic relationship partner.
The label of "narcissist" matters far less than the fact that there is
abusive behavior present.

It may not surprise you that a recent study showed that narcissism on
the level of the clinical trait was rising among the younger generation
in the population; in fact, whereas narcissists make up 1 in 30 of those
in U.S. population over 64 years of age, 1 in 10 of twenty-somethings
experience the clinical symptoms of NPD (2015). In The Narcissism
Epidemic: Living in an Age of Entitlement, several factors are pointed
out to explain this increase: public violence and aggression, an
increase in materialism, self-promotion, shallow celebrity culture and
the need for "uniqueness." This is not at all startling, considering
that the expansion of social media has exacerbated this effect: our
selfie-taking culture has us reaching for our smartphones rather than
enjoying the moment, has desensitized us to serial Tinder dating instead
of authentic relationships, and have made us long for large numbers of
"followers" or harems to praise us for our "specialness." For
non-narcissists, this may lead to a temporary and obnoxious trip into
self-absorption, but for those with biologically predisposed
narcissistic tendencies, it includes a permanent relocation. How does
narcissism, especially a malignant form of narcissism with antisocial
tendencies, arise on an individual basis? There are many theories, but
still no clinical verdict on this question. The myth of Narcissus is a
popular one to depict a narcissist's vanity and self-absorption, but a
deeper dialogue about the origins of the full-fledged personality
disorder is lacking. It's true that narcissism is rising in our culture,
but how exactly does it manifest, especially as a personality disorder?
There are many theories about how narcissism arises in the
individual---from a "narcissistic wound" in childhood, to a pattern of
idealization and devaluation by the parent or even a neurological
standpoint that focuses mainly on how a narcissist's brain has
structural abnormalities related to compassion (Kernberg, 1975; Kohut,
1971; Lavendar, 2014; Schulze et. al, 2013). Yet there is still no clear
answer as to how Narcissistic Personality Disorder arises in an
individual.

In "The Cracked Mirror: Features of Narcissistic Personality Disorder in
Children," Dr. Karen Bardenstein (2009) notes that there are certain
risk factors when it comes to children developing the disorder. The
children who become narcissistic are often: the children of narcissistic
parents, adopted children who are overindulged by their adoptive parent
or face competition with their biological siblings, the children of
successful parents, especially if the child lacks the same ability as
their parents, overindulged, wealthy children, and the children of
divorce, specifically, a divorce in which the child is vied over and is
treated as an object to be "won." Narcissists may have suffered
something traumatic when they were a child--- emotional neglect or
physical neglect, as Kernberg (1975) suggests--by a critical parent.
This severe trauma in childhood, what psychologists call a "narcissistic
wound," may have led them to shut off the parts of themselves that could
empathize with others as a form of extreme self-protection (Marks, 2012;
Lavender, 2014; De Lisle 2015). This may have been caused by a parent
who neglected them, abused them and invalidated them, resulting in what
Millon (1981) calls "compensatory narcissism," a self-protective false
self that enables a child to believe in an illusion of superiority in
order to conceal feelings of low self-worth. On the other end of the
spectrum, there are theories that suggest that narcissism can be
produced by overvaluation of the child, allowing the child to remain
like a child forever without any consequences or without any basis in
objective reality for their presumed perfection. This pattern of
overvaluation rather than devaluation by a parent that may have led a
child to arrested emotional development---in other words, a child who is
spoiled to the point where they develop an excessive sense of
entitlement and disregard for the emotions of others. A new research
study by the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences discovered
that parents who overvalued their children by telling them how special
they were produced narcissistic children. In their words, "Narcissism
was predicted by parental overvaluation, not by lack of parental warmth.
Thus, children seem to acquire narcissism, in part, by internalizing

parents' inflated views of them (e.g., 'I am superior to others' and 'I
am entitled to privileges ')" (Brummelman et. al, 2015). This new
research aligns with what Randi Kreger (2012) calls the distinction
between "vulnerable" narcissists and "grandiose narcissists." According
to Kreger, grandiose narcissists are bred by parents who spoil them into
thinking how superior and entitled they are, while vulnerable
narcissists tend to be the product of neglectful parenting. As someone
who has taught very young children of wealthier backgrounds, I
definitely saw this burgeoning sense of entitlement in the parents who
enabled their children's misbehavior, allowing their children to trample
upon the boundaries of others without so much as an apology. The parents
who taught their kids an excessive sense of entitlement had a very
indifferent attitude and coddled their children to the extreme even when
they overstepped boundaries, while the parents who taught their children
healthy boundaries and respect were likely to show empathy, remorse and
accountability for their behavior. We also see narcissism arise when
parents treat their children as trophies or live through them
vicariously---essentially degrading and objectifying them, teaching them
that they are objects---which teaches the narcissistic child to also
view others as objects for their disposal while also overvaluing them as
highly important. There can, therefore, be a dual "overvaluation" and
"neglect" taking place in this circumstance that produces narcissism in
a child; the parent may overvalue the child as perfect but may also
instill a sense of worthlessness in the child by not providing the child
with healthier feedback that validates who they really are as a person.
This is because the narcissistic child is overvalued as "perfect" and
this type of feedback is not balanced with realistic feedback. It places
pressure on the child to be a trophy rather than a three-dimensional
human being. It also teaches children a high degree of entitlement,
instilling in them that they are deserving of things they haven't
earned. Since this parental overvaluation is not balanced with the
acknowledgment of the child's imperfect humanity, it causes that child
to develop a sense of

grandiosity that vacillates between feelings of worthlessness and a
hyperinflated ego---in other words, narcissism in the place of a healthy
selfimage (De Lisle, 2015). It can also cause the child to highly
emphasize one attribute over others---such as looks, intellectual
ability or another talent---in place of healthy self-esteem and
self-acceptance. That's where we have to consider biological
predisposition being passed down in families. Twin studies have shown
that narcissism is a common, heritable trait (Livesley et. al, 1993).
That being said, parents alone may not be responsible for producing
narcissism in their children, and there are many parents with
narcissistic children who do provide their children a loving, validating
home. There is also a biological and neurological standpoint that
redirects us to consider how the brain of someone with NPD differs from
someone who does not have NPD. Researchers have discovered that there
are in fact structural abnormalities related to compassion and empathy
in narcissistic individuals which is interesting to note considering
that psychopaths can also demonstrate brain abnormalities; psychopaths
not only show abnormalities in empathy, they also show abnormalities in
the processing of pro-social emotions such as guilt and moral reasoning
(Schulze et. al, 2013; Sethi et. al, 2015). These abnormalities in the
brain, however, do not excuse a narcissist's behavior and only provide
one explanation because narcissists are in fact still capable of "cold"
empathy or intellectual empathy. They can still place themselves in
their victim's shoes---but many of them choose not to and choose to
continue to abuse, refusing to pursue professional support. Neither
trauma nor biological predisposition excuses abuse. Nor should it
provide a reason for shirking accountability. In the words of my good
friend Lilly Hope Lucario, founder of the award-winning blog Healing
Complex Trauma and PTSD: Hurt people, hurt people? Actually, there are
many traumatized and abused people who don't hurt people. They have
compassion, empathy, a

conscience, and would never want to hurt someone intentionally because
they never want to inflict pain on anyone else. Being hurt, is not an
excuse for hurting others. Hurting people, is a choice.

While each theory is compelling and has its own set of evidence, I need
to stress again that clinicians are still not absolutely certain as to
what causes NPD. The answer is likely more complex than any individual
theory. In my opinion, psychopathology is often caused by an interaction
between biological predisposition and environment. There are also
multicultural components that can make certain disorders more likely
than others in specific countries or manifest differently across various
contexts. We have to consider that there are protective factors or risk
factors that determine whether narcissism actually manifests in a
full-fledged personality disorder or not as well as how it manifests in
the individual. It's usually not nature versus nurture but rather a
combination of nature and nurture---most disorders are a result of the
interaction between environment and biology rather than one or the
other. These factors include a strong support network, access to
therapy/medication, upbringing, religious beliefs, culture, media, as
well as other experiences outside of the family unit like bullying,
sexual assault, witnessing violence, or other traumas can all weaken or
strengthen that predisposition towards pathology. To put it simply,
narcissists can probably be produced through a number of different ways
and can come from a variety of backgrounds. I personally have met
narcissists from both types of backgrounds: traumatic ones as well as
overvalued ones where their parents taught them an excessive sense of
entitlement from very early on. So while survivors can't be 100% certain
what caused their partner's NPD, what survivors can be certain of is
that being with a partner with NPD can be extremely dangerous and
devastating due to their lack of empathy and tendency to be exploitive.
I find that the questions "why?" and "how?" can often cause confusion in
accountability that shames the victim rather than the

abuser. Just because someone has a disorder does not mean their abuse is
not hurtful, that they are not responsible for their abusive behavior or
that their abuse does not have an impact on the victim. Quite the
contrary. Someone who has a disorder and does not get professional
support in changing the behavior that harms others, and instead uses
that disorder as an excuse to continue to abuse others, can still be
held accountable for their actions. Yes, we can be compassionate towards
the fact that our abuser may have been traumatized, but we cannot let
that compassion blind us to the fact that if they are unwilling to
change or receive treatment, as many narcissists aren't; we need to make
our own self-compassion and self-care a priority in order to detach from
them. This is not about stigmatizing someone with narcissistic traits
but rather evaluating how these traits affect us and our well-being.
Disorder or no disorder, abuse leaves a traumatic impact on the
individual, and no one deserves to be abused. In this type of one-sided
relationship, you will ultimately be used as an object to supply
admiration, praise, attention, and whatever they may need at the moment;
this is what Otto Fenichel (1945) calls a source of "narcissistic
supply." If you enter a relationship with an abusive narcissist, be
careful: the false self is often so charming and so different from the
true self that you may fall prey to a vicious cycle of narcissistic
abuse that can be very difficult to extricate yourself from. The
cognitive dissonance that results in being in love with an emotional
predator is enhanced by the false mask the narcissist presents to the
world. A relationship with an abusive narcissist often contains some
degree of psychological, emotional and in some cases, physical and
sexual violence depending on where the narcissistic person falls on the
spectrum.

The classic chicken and the egg question, of course, has to be posed: is

narcissism truly rising in our population or are we just becoming more
aware of it? There's no doubt that the term "narcissist" has become more
commonly used to refer to abusive individuals, particularly those who
lack empathy. In society's eyes, this can be either incredibly
informative or potentially dangerous. As the term "narcissist" becomes
more and more mainstream, people fear that those who have had
experiences with a true full-fledged narcissistic personality will be
overshadowed by those who are simply suffering through a "bad breakup"
and want someone to blame. Nobody wants to be labeled a narcissist
simply for exhibiting the occasional toxic behavior, which we as humans
are all susceptible to. Yet the effect of dismissing the label
"narcissist" altogether is that it downplays the complex trauma that can
arise when the term "narcissist" is never used with relation to
full-fledged Narcissistic Personality Disorder, a disorder in which
someone not only lacks empathy but also possesses an extreme form of
entitlement, false sense of superiority and demonstrates a callous
exploitation of others for their own gain. In a relationship with a
person with this disorder and who is also abusive, there is no such
thing as a normal bad breakup---you aren't granted the confusing
emotions of knowing that you were once cared for or that you two were
simply incompatible. With a malignant, abusive narcissist, it couldn't
have worked out, no matter what. And if it did somehow "work out" and
the abusive relationship has been prolonged, you might still be stuck in
the trauma bond of the relationship. At the end of a relationship with a
malignant narcissist, instead of any form of closure, you are left
knowing that you were abused, mistreated, smeared, potentially leaving
damage in every facet of your life. You are left wondering how a person
could lack basic empathy, respect and compassion. It defies everything
we know about what it's like to be human---and coming face to face with
someone who seems to lack these basic qualities, is a traumatizing
event, if not a series of traumatizing events. Even if the number of
narcissists was smaller than suggested by research, the capacity for
which they affect one human being, let alone the dozens of others they
may affect throughout their lifetime, has an amplifying effect of making

"narcissistic abuse" a more common problem than one might like to think.
According to therapist Sandra Brown, M.A., narcissists and those with
antisocial traits (which we call malignant narcissists) affect nearly 60
million people in the U.S. alone. This means that throughout your
lifetime, you may have encountered a malignant narcissist, whether you
knew it or not. It means your friends have probably encountered one or
two. It means that if you grew up in a family with a malignant
narcissist, you are even more likely to gravitate towards more than a
couple because you've already been conditioned and primed for the type
of devastation that comes with being in a relationship with one. This is
a staggering number and it is one of the reasons why further education
about emotional and psychological violence inflicted by toxic
personality types is so needed---not only in the therapy space but
within society itself which tends to hold too much space for
victim-blaming discourses and not as much space for the dialogue that is
needed---a dialogue about how we can help support abuse survivors so
that they do feel compelled to reach out for help when they need it. At
the very least, survivors of this form of emotional, psychological and
physical abuse can suffer from depression, anxiety and low self-esteem
after this experience. In the worst scenarios, some of them commit
suicide. After years of domestic violence, Jessica Haban took her own
life on December 26, 2015, at the mere age of 28. In an unprecedented
move, her husband, Long Vang, was charged for driving her to suicide: he
had been relentlessly bullying and contacting her during recovery from a
traumatic brain injury even after a restraining order had been placed on
him. He had coerced her into leaving treatment, three days before she
committed suicide. Stalking and harassing behavior is common after the
ending of a relationship with a narcissist, especially if the victim
happened to "discard" the narcissist first. This is also known as
"hoovering" and it includes any and all attempts the abusive partner
uses to reestablish contact with their former victims. Unfortunately,
many victims are "hoovered" back into the relationship only to
experience an even more horrific discard or more intense trauma than
before.

This form of hoovering is deliberate on the abuser's part. Consider a
recent study conducted by Mogilski and Welling (2016) which revealed
that those with darker, malignant traits such as narcissists tended to
stay friends with their exes for self-serving reasons, such as
"practical and sexual reasons"---in others words, to use them as a
source of supply when convenient. This is not uncommon when
narcissistic, sociopathic or psychopathic individuals reach out to
ex-partners---and in the case of Jessica Haban, the incident of
hoovering had an even more lingering effect as it was used to further
torment and bully her for daring to pave the path to freedom from her
narcissistic abuser. Contrary to popular belief, narcissists manipulate
their victims back into the relationship or into interacting with them
again in order to maintain power and control, not because they actually
care about the victim. In an interview with Broadly, narcissism expert
Dr. Tony Ferretti (2016) noted that when the partners of narcissists
were the ones who made the decision to cut ties with the narcissist, the
narcissist likely suffered a narcissistic injury that they felt they had
to compensate for because they didn't like the idea that they hadn't
"won" the discard phase of the relationship. In tamer cases, this might
mean the toxic partner reaching out, cyberstalking the victim, or
sabotaging his or her attempts to move forward---in dangerous ones such
as the case with Jessica Haban, hoovering proved deadly and destructive.
Sadly, tragedies like these are just one of many where people have taken
their own lives due to narcissistic abuse. On March 14th, 2016, a Texas
resident and former United States Air Force veteran took his own life
after he and his wife were subject to chronic bullying and harassment by
a narcissist--- including but not limited to smear campaigns, job loss,
hacking of financial accounts and cyberbullying (all while the
narcissist, in classic fashion, claimed to be the victim). This led to a
petition known as "Shane's Law" to propose a law that would legally
protect victims from the underhanded bullying methods pathological
narcissists often subject their victims to. These are not the only times
a malignant narcissist or sociopathic abuser has driven his or her
victim to suicide, but perhaps none of these incidents are as

overtly explicit as the case of 18-year-old Michelle Carter who
convinced her boyfriend Conrad Roy in a series of text messages to kill
himself under the pretense that she, too, would soon join him. She also
attempted to get him to delete those texts before he died in order to
cover up her involvement--- demonstrating that she was fully aware that
what she was doing was wrong and that she feared criminal culpability.
Fortunately, he did not delete the texts (though he did lose his own
life), and she was charged with involuntary manslaughter. These
tragedies beg the question---how many suicides were in actuality driven
by the abuse of narcissistic or sociopathic partners, friends,
co-workers or family members? How many baffling incidents of psychiatric
hospitalizations, substance use and suicide attempts have been caused by
the crazy-making of someone who was intent on sending someone's sanity
into a tailspin? All of these tragedies magnify manipulative tactics
that are used in the realm of narcissistic abuse. It is common for
narcissists, for example, to convince their partners that they are the
pathological ones in need of help, which further gaslights them into
thinking that they are the problem in the relationship. Research by the
National Domestic Violence Hotline has shown that victims of domestic
violence are more likely to develop mental health and substance abuse
problems---potentially aggravated and provoked by the abuser. According
to The Hotline, 89% of their callers had experienced at least one of the
three types of mental health coercion, and 43% had experienced at least
one of the three types of substance abuse coercion. This is a very
covert tactic that abusers employ in order to depict the victim as the
"crazy one." Think about it: if an abuser can coerce a victim to use
drugs, undermine their sanity all while covertly abusing him or her, who
do you think ultimately comes off as crazy? The victim who tries to
fight back in ways that may appear unhinged or desperate in the public
eye, the person who doesn't trust his or her own reality, is overwrought
with anxiety, the fear of retaliation and the aftermath of trauma---or
the calm, cool collected abuser who videotapes

their victim's reactions to their abuse, who convinces their victim to
go to therapy and overmedicate symptoms that don't exist (unless calling
out abuse is considered a DSM category nowadays), who calls the police,
files a restraining order against the victim and who smears their name
to anyone who will listen? In case you're wondering whether a narcissist
would ever even be able to manufacture such a scenario, I've heard from
survivors who've had the police called on them as soon as they tried to
hold the narcissist accountable for their behavior (restraining orders
for attempts at discussing an issue---now that's what we call an extreme
"communication" problem). I've heard stories of numerous survivors
who've been videotaped without their permission by their narcissistic
partners---their reactions to the abuse videotaped in order to be used
as blackmail and for the purpose of emotional control---leaving out any
documentation of the actual abuse that preceded it, of course. There are
even narcissistic partners who will deliberately accuse the victim of
starting a scene or yelling at them when they're on the phone in
public---to convince others that their victims are crazy---when in fact,
the victim may be asking them a simple question about whether they took
out the trash yesterday evening. Sometimes, narcissists even gaslight
their victims into thinking that they have an unusual problem that they
don't have---interestingly, many victims cited snoring as an imaginary
problem that they were prone to being accused of as a way to make their
victims feel undesirable. This was an imaginary problem invented by the
narcissist that remains challenged by the other external feedback
victims have received to this day. Crazy, right? These people have no
limits as to how low they'll stoop---even to the extent of creating
imaginary traits and behaviors in their victim. In other, more extreme
scenarios, the victims of narcissists and sociopaths are murdered
directly by their partners. The cases of Scott Peterson and the murder
of a pregnant Laci Peterson, Oscar Pistorius and Reeva Steenkamp, Jodi
Arias and Travis Alexander are just a few well-known examples of what
can happen when a malignant narcissist or sociopath feels entitled to
take a life when their sense of entitlement is rattled. Although
psychologists have

speculated that Jodi Arias is a borderline, she has also demonstrated
sociopathic and narcissistic traits in almost every interview she has
done, showing little to no remorse for her actions as well as no
empathy---tell-tale signs that perhaps something deeper than just BPD
may be occurring. Due to the covert and insidious nature of this form of
abuse, narcissistic abuse often gets the least amount of attention and
validation in the realm of domestic violence discourses. Society is
prone to victim-blaming survivors of this type of abuse because it does
not always leave visible scars and, as mentioned before, those who have
not experienced it can misunderstand it as simply experiencing
compatibility issues or normal relationship problems. Yet because this
abuse causes complex trauma, narcissistic abuse can result in symptoms
of PTSD, Complex PTSD, or even in the most extreme cases, it can cause
suicidal ideation and even result in suicide. Psychotherapist Christine
Louis de Canonville describes the effects of narcissistic abuse as
"Narcissistic Victim Syndrome" (NVS). These are the symptoms of
dissociation, compartmentalization, cognitive dissonance and trauma
bonding victims experience, to the point of defending their abusers---a
sophisticated survival mechanism also known as "Stockholm Syndrome." NVS
overlaps and supplements symptoms already experienced by those with PTSD
or Complex PTSD who, in addition to the symptoms listed above, also
suffer from toxic shame, a hostile inner critic and emotional flashbacks
which revert them back into a state of powerlessness whenever a trigger
that resembles the past appears. These symptoms can also include
hypervigilance, reliving of abusive incidents through visual flashbacks,
suicidal ideation, anxiety, dissociation, somatization of symptoms, and
depression. For all of the silence, shame and side effects survivors of
covert abuse have been subjected to, we can take some comfort in the
fact that change is finally occurring. The first ever national
Narcissistic Abuse Awareness Day, created by therapist Bree Bonchay,
LCSW, was held on June 1st, 2016. To honor the survivors of this form of
abuse, survivors were asked to employ the hashtag #IfMyWoundsWereVisible
to their stories and insights in order to raise awareness about this
type of abuse. Used in conjunction with the popular

hashtag #MaybeHeDoesntHitYou and #MaybeSheDoesntHitYou, survivors from
all over the world shared their stories of emotional and psychological
violence, the best-kept secret in domestic violence---a form of violence
that may not always leave visible bruises or scars but still causes
survivors to have battle wounds nonetheless. Make no mistake: covert
abuse is a widespread epidemic and survivors have been forced to keep
silent about it for decades. It's time we speak out about this pandemic
and recognize that while not all wounds are visible, they are no less
damaging.

References American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Publishing. Bancroft, L. (2002). Why does he do
that?: Inside the minds of angry and controlling men. New York: Putnam's
Sons. Bardenstein, K. K., Ph.D. (2009). The Cracked Mirror: Features of
Narcissistic Personality Disorder in Children. Psychiatric Annals,
39(3). doi:10.4135/9781412950510.n565 Bonn, S. A. (2014, January 22).
How to Tell a Sociopath from a Psychopath.
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/wickeddeeds/201401/how-tell-sociopath-psychopath
Brummelman, E., Thomaes, S., Nelemans, S. A., Castro, B. O., Overbeek,
G., & Bushman, B. J. (2015). Origins of narcissism in children.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Proc Natl Acad Sci USA,
201420870. doi:10.1073/pnas.1420870112 Brown, S. L. (2010, August 28).
60 Million People in the U.S. Negatively Affected By Someone Else's
Pathology. Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/pathological-relationships/201008/60-million-people-in-the-us-negatively-affectedsomeone-elses

Fenichel, O. (1945). The psychoanalytic theory of neurosis. New York:
W.W. Norton & Co. Hare, R. D. (1999). Without conscience: The disturbing
world of the psychopaths among us. New York: Guilford Press. Haslam, C.,
& Montrose, V. T. (2015). Should have known better: The impact of mating
experience and the desire for marriage upon attraction to the
narcissistic personality. Personality and Individual Differences, 82,
188-192. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2015.03.032 Holbrook, C. (2013, May 13).
Sociopath Signs: Is Your Ex a Sociopath or a Narcissist
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/05/13/sociopath-signs-is-your-e_n_3181512.html
Jacoby, M., & Kohut, H. (1990). Individuation and narcissism: The
psychology of the self in Jung and Kohut. London: Routledge. Jeltsen, M.
(2016, June 23). Man Charged With Murder For Allegedly Driving His
Partner To Suicide. Retrieved from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/jessica-haban-domestic-violence-suicide_us_576ab898e4b09926ce5d4a53

Kreger, R. (2012, April 4). Why they can't feel joy: Narcissistic
shallow emotions. Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/stop-walking-eggshells/201204/why-they-cant-feel-joy-narcissistic-shallow-emotions.

Lavender, N. J. (2014, January 10). The Narcissistic Wound. Retrieved
from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/impossibleplease/201401/the-narcissistic-wound
Louis De Canonville, Christine (2015). The Three Faces of Evil:
Unmasking the Full Spectrum of Narcissistic Abuse, Black Card Books.
MacKenzie, J. (2015). Psychopath free: Recovering from emotionally
abusive relationships with narcissists, sociopaths, and other toxic
people. Penguin Group.

Mogilski, J. K., & Welling, L. L. (2016). Staying friends with an ex:
Sex and dark personality traits predict motivations for postrelationship
friendship. Personality and Individual Differences.
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2016.04.016 Stout, M. (2005). The sociopath next
door: The ruthless versus the rest of us. New York: Broadway Books.
Twenge, J. M., & Campbell, W. K. (2009). The narcissism epidemic: Living
in the age of entitlement. New York: Free Press. Tourjee, D. (2016, May
10). Narcissists and Psychopaths Love to Stay Friends with Their Exes \|
Broadly. Retrieved from
https://broadly.vice.com/en_us/article/narcissists-and-psychopaths-love-to-stay-friends-with-their-exes
Vaknin, S., & Rangelovska, L. (2007). Malignant self love: Narcissism
revisited. Prague: Narcissus Publications. Vaknin, S. (2012, April 25).
Psychopathic Narcissists: The Uncanny Valley of Cold Empathy. Retrieved
April 11, 2016, from
https://samvaknin.wordpress.com/2012/04/25/psychopathic-narcissists-the-uncanny-valley-of-cold-empathy/

Warshaw, C., MD, Lyon, E., PhD, Bland, P. J., MA, Phillips, H., MA, &
Hooper, M., BA. (2014). Mental Health and Substance Use Coercion Surveys
(Rep.). National Center on Domestic Violence, Trauma and Mental Health.
Retrieved September 30, 2016, from
http://www.nationalcenterdvtraumamh.org/wpcontent/uploads/2014/10/NCDVTMH_NDVH_MHSUCoercionSurveyReport_2014-2.pdf

4

20 Diversion Tactics Malignant Narcissists, Sociopaths and Psychopaths
Use to Silence You Toxic people such as malignant narcissists,
psychopaths and those with antisocial traits engage in maladaptive
behaviors in relationships that ultimately exploit, demean and hurt
their intimate partners, family members and friends. They use a plethora
of diversionary tactics that distort the reality of their victims and
deflect responsibility. Although those who are not narcissistic can
employ these tactics as well, abusive narcissists use these to an
excessive extent in an effort to escape accountability for their
actions. Here are the 20 diversionary tactics toxic people use to
silence and degrade you (some of which we've discussed before but have
also been expanded upon). 1. Gaslighting. Gaslighting is a manipulative
tactic where an abuser replaces factual information with false
information. It can also be described in different variations of three
words: "That didn't happen," "You imagined it," and "Are you crazy?"
Gaslighting is perhaps one of the most insidious manipulative tactics
out there because it works to distort and erode your sense of reality;
it eats away at your ability to trust yourself and inevitably disables
you from feeling justified in calling out abuse and mistreatment. This
is what Dr. Robin Stern calls "The Gaslight Effect"---the inability to
trust your reality

once an abuser has systematically trained you to second-guess your
perceptions of the abuse and manipulation taking place. When a
narcissist, sociopath or psychopath gaslights you, you may be prone to
gaslighting yourself as a way to reconcile the cognitive dissonance that
might arise. Two conflicting beliefs battle it out: is this person right
or can I trust what I experienced? A manipulative person will convince
you that the former is an inevitable truth while the latter is a sign of
dysfunction on your end. In order to resist gaslighting, it's important
to ground yourself in your own reality---sometimes writing things down
as they happened, telling a friend or reiterating your experience to a
support network can help to counteract the gaslighting effect. The power
of having a validating community is that it can redirect you from the
distorted reality of a malignant person and back to your own inner
guidance. 2. Projection. One sure sign of toxicity is when a person is
chronically unwilling to see his or her own shortcomings and uses
everything in their power to avoid being held accountable for them. This
is known as projection. Projection is a defense mechanism used to
displace responsibility of one's negative behavior and traits by
attributing them to someone else. It ultimately acts as a digression
that avoids ownership and accountability. While we all engage in
projection to some extent, according to Narcissistic Personality
clinical expert Dr. Martinez-Lewi, the projections of a narcissist are
often psychologically abusive. Rather than acknowledge their own flaws,
imperfections and wrongdoings, malignant narcissists and sociopaths opt
to dump their own traits on their unsuspecting suspects in a way that is
painful and excessively cruel. Instead of admitting that
self-improvement may be in order, they would prefer that their victims
take responsibility for their behavior and feel ashamed of themselves.
This is a way for a narcissist to project any toxic shame they have
about themselves onto another.

For example, a person who engages in pathological lying may accuse their
partner of fibbing; a needy spouse may call their husband "clingy" in an
attempt to depict them as the one who is dependent; a rude employee may
call their boss ineffective in an effort to escape the truth about their
own productivity. Narcissistic abusers love to play the "blameshifting
game." Objectives of the game: they win, you lose, and you or the world
at large is blamed for everything that's wrong with them. This way, you
get to babysit their fragile ego while you're thrust into a sea of
self-doubt. Fun, right? Solution? Don't "project" your own sense of
compassion or empathy onto a toxic person and don't own any of the toxic
person's projections either. As manipulation expert and author,
Dr. George Simon (2010) notes in his book In Sheep's Clothing,
projecting our own conscience and value system onto others has the
potential consequence of being met with further exploitation.
Narcissists on the extreme end of the spectrum usually have no interest
in self-insight or change. It's important to cut ties and end
interactions with toxic people as soon as possible so you can get
centered in your own reality and validate your own identity. You don't
have to live in someone else's cesspool of dysfunction. 3. Nonsensical
conversations from hell. If you think you're going to have a thoughtful
discussion with someone who is toxic, be prepared for epic mindfuckery
rather than conversational mindfulness. Malignant narcissists and
sociopaths use word salad, circular conversations, ad hominem arguments,
projection and gaslighting to disorient you and get you off track should
you ever disagree with them or challenge them in any way. They do this
in order to discredit, confuse and frustrate you, distract you from the
main problem and make you feel guilty for being a human being with
actual thoughts and feelings that might differ from their own. In their
eyes, you are the problem if you happen to exist. Spend even ten minutes
arguing with a toxic narcissist and you'll find

yourself wondering how the argument even began at all. You simply
disagreed with them about their absurd claim that the sky is red and now
your entire childhood, family, friends, career and lifestyle choices
have come under attack. That is because your disagreement picked at
their false belief that they are omnipotent and omniscient, resulting in
a narcissistic injury. Remember: toxic people don't argue with you, they
essentially argue with themselves and you become privy to their long,
draining monologues. They thrive off the drama and they live for it.
Each and every time you attempt to provide a point that counters their
ridiculous assertions, you feed them supply. Don't feed the narcissists
supply---rather, supply yourself with the confirmation that their
abusive behavior is the problem, not you. Cut the interaction short as
soon as you anticipate it escalating and use your energy on some
decadent self-care instead. 4. Blanket statements and generalizations.
Malignant narcissists aren't always intellectual masterminds---many of
them are intellectually lazy. Rather than taking the time to carefully
consider a different perspective, they generalize anything and
everything you say, making blanket statements that don't acknowledge the
nuances in your argument or take into account the multiple perspectives
you've paid homage to. Better yet, why not put a label on you that
dismisses your perspective altogether? On a larger scale,
generalizations and blanket statements invalidate experiences that don't
fit in the unsupported assumptions, schemas and stereotypes of society;
they are also used to maintain the status quo. This form of digression
exaggerates one perspective to the point where a social justice issue
can become completely obscured. For example, rape accusations against
well-liked figures are often met with the reminder that there are false
reports of rape that occur. While those do occur, they are rare, and in
this case, the actions of one become labeled the behavior of the
majority while the specific report itself remains unaddressed (Kutner,
2015). These everyday microaggressions also happen in toxic
relationships. If you bring up to a narcissistic abuser that their
behavior is unacceptable for

example, they will often make blanket generalizations about your
hypersensitivity or make a generalization such as, "You are never
satisfied," or "You're always too sensitive" rather than addressing the
real issues at hand. It's possible that you are oversensitive at times,
but it is also possible that the abuser is also insensitive and cruel
the majority of the time. Hold onto your truth and resist generalizing
statements by realizing that they are in fact forms of black and white
illogical thinking. Toxic people wielding blanket statements do not
represent the full richness of experience---they represent the limited
one of their singular experience and overinflated sense of self. 5.
Deliberately misrepresenting your thoughts and feelings to the point of
absurdity. In the hands of a malignant narcissist or sociopath, your
differing opinions, legitimate emotions and lived experiences get
translated into character flaws and evidence of your irrationality.
Narcissists weave tall tales to reframe what you're actually saying as a
way to make your opinions look absurd or heinous. Let's say you bring up
the fact that you're unhappy with the way a toxic friend is speaking to
you. In response, he or she may put words in your mouth, saying, "Oh, so
now you're perfect?" or "So I am a bad person, huh?" when you've done
nothing but express your feelings. This enables them to invalidate your
right to have thoughts and emotions about their inappropriate behavior
and instills in you a sense of guilt when you attempt to establish
boundaries. This is also a popular form of diversion and cognitive
distortion that is known as "mind reading." Toxic people often presume
they know what you're thinking and feeling. They chronically jump to
conclusions based on their own triggers rather than stepping back to
evaluate the situation mindfully. They act accordingly based on their
own delusions and fallacies and make no apologies for the harm they
cause as a result. Notorious for putting words in your mouth, they
depict you as having an intention or outlandish viewpoint you didn't
possess. They accuse you of thinking of them as toxic---even

before you've gotten the chance to call them out on their behavior--and
this also serves as a form of preemptive defense. Simply stating, "I
never said that," and walking away should the person continue to accuse
you of doing or saying something you didn't can help to set a firm
boundary in this type of interaction. So long as the toxic person can
blameshift and digress from their own behavior, they have succeeded in
convincing you that you should be "shamed" for giving them any sort of
realistic feedback. 6. Nitpicking and moving the goal posts. The
difference between constructive criticism and destructive criticism is
the presence of a personal attack and impossible standards. These
so-called "critics" often don't want to help you improve, they just want
to nitpick, pull you down and scapegoat you in any way they can. Abusive
narcissists and sociopaths employ a logical fallacy known as "moving the
goalposts" in order to ensure that they have every reason to be
perpetually dissatisfied with you. This is when, even after you've
provided all the evidence in the world to validate your argument or
taken an action to meet their request, they set up another expectation
of you or demand more proof. Do you have a successful career? The
narcissist will then start to pick on why you aren't a multi-millionaire
yet. Did you already fulfill their need to be excessively catered to?
Now it's time to prove that you can also remain "independent." The goal
posts will perpetually change and may not even be related to each other;
they don't have any other point besides making you vie for the
narcissist's approval and validation. By raising the expectations higher
and higher each time or switching them completely, highly manipulative
and toxic people are able to instill in you a pervasive sense of
unworthiness and of never feeling quite "enough." By pointing out one
irrelevant fact or one thing you did wrong and developing a hyperfocus
on it, narcissists get to divert from your strengths and pull you into
obsessing over any flaws or weaknesses instead. They get you thinking
about the next expectation of theirs you're going to have to meet--until

eventually you've bent over backwards trying to fulfill their every
need--only to realize it didn't change the horrific way they treated
you. Don't get sucked into nitpicking and changing goal posts---if
someone chooses to rehash an irrelevant point over and over again to the
point where they aren't acknowledging the work you've done to validate
your point or satisfy them, their motive isn't to better understand.
It's to further provoke you into feeling as if you have to constantly
prove yourself. Validate and approve of yourself. Know that you are
enough and you don't have to be made to feel constantly deficient or
unworthy in some way. 7. Changing the subject to evade accountability.
This type of tactic is what I like to call the "What about me?"
syndrome. It is a literal digression from the actual topic that works to
redirect attention to a different issue altogether. Narcissists don't
want you to be on the topic of holding them accountable for anything, so
they will reroute discussions to benefit them. Complaining about their
neglectful parenting? They'll point out a mistake you committed seven
years ago. This type of diversion has no limits in terms of time or
subject content, and often begins with a sentence like "What about the
time when..." On a macro level , these diversions work to derail
discussions that challenge the status quo. A discussion about gay
rights, for example, may be derailed quickly by someone who brings in
another social justice issue just to distract people from the main
argument. As Tara Moss, author of Speaking Out: A 21st Century Handbook
for Women and Girls, notes, specificity is needed in order to resolve
and address issues appropriately---that doesn't mean that the issues
that are being brought up don't matter, it just means that the specific
time and place may not be the best context to discuss them. Don't be
derailed---if someone pulls a switcheroo on you, you can exercise what I
call the "broken record" method and continue stating the facts without
giving in to their distractions. Redirect their redirection by saying,
"That's not what I am talking about. Let's stay focused on the real
issue." If they're not

interested, disengage and spend your energy on something more
constructive ---like not having a debate with someone who has the mental
age of a toddler. 8. Covert and overt threats. Narcissistic abusers and
otherwise toxic people feel very threatened when their excessive sense
of entitlement, false sense of superiority and grandiose sense of self
are challenged in any way. They are prone to making unreasonable demands
on others---while punishing you for not living up to their impossible to
reach expectations. Rather than tackle disagreements or compromises
maturely, they set out to divert you from your right to have your own
identity and perspective by attempting to instill fear in you about the
consequences of disagreeing or complying with their demands. To them,
any challenge results in an ultimatum and "do this or I'll do that"
becomes their daily mantra. If someone's reaction to you setting
boundaries or having a differing opinion from your own is to threaten
you into submission, whether it's a thinly veiled threat or an overt
admission of what they plan to do, this is a red flag of someone who has
a high degree of entitlement and has no plans of compromising. Take
threats seriously and show the narcissist you mean business; document
threats and report them whenever possible and legally feasible. 9.
Name-calling. Narcissists preemptively blow anything they perceive as a
threat to their superiority out of proportion. In their world, only they
can ever be right and anyone who dares to say otherwise creates a
narcissistic injury that results in narcissistic rage. As Mark Goulston,
M.D. asserts, narcissistic rage does not result from low self-esteem but
rather a high sense of entitlement and false sense of superiority. The
lowest of the low resorts to narcissistic rage in the form of
name-calling when they can't think of a better way to manipulate your
opinion or micromanage your emotions. Name-calling is a quick and easy
way to put you down, degrade you and insult your intelligence,
appearance or behavior while invalidating your right to be a separate
person with a right to his or her perspective.

Name-calling can also be used to criticize your beliefs, opinions and
insights. A well-researched perspective or informed opinion suddenly
becomes "silly" or "idiotic" in the hands of a malignant narcissist or
sociopath who feels threatened by it and cannot make a respectful,
convincing rebuttal. Rather than target your argument, they target you
as a person and seek to undermine your credibility and intelligence in
any way they possibly can. It's important to end any interaction that
consists of name-calling and communicate that you won't tolerate it.
Don't internalize it: realize that they are resorting to namecalling
because they are deficient in higher level methods. 10. Destructive
conditioning. Toxic people condition you to associate your strengths,
talents, and happy memories with abuse, frustration and disrespect. They
do this by sneaking in covert and overt put-downs about the qualities
and traits they once idealized as well as sabotaging your goals, ruining
celebrations, vacations and holidays. They may even isolate you from
your friends and family and make you financially dependent upon them.
Like Pavlov's dogs, you're essentially "trained" over time to become
afraid of doing the very things that once made your life fulfilling.
Narcissists, sociopaths, psychopaths and otherwise toxic people do this
because they wish to divert attention back to themselves and how you're
going to please them. If there is anything outside of them that may
threaten their control over your life, they seek to destroy it. They
need to be the center of attention at all times. In the idealization
phase, you were once the center of a narcissist's world---now the
narcissist becomes the center of yours. According to Kernberg (1992),
narcissists are also pathologically envious. As a result, they exhibit
aggression towards those who possess what they covet and believe they
are entitled to the most power and control. This is why they don't want
anything to come in between them and their influence over you. Your
happiness represents everything they feel they cannot have in their
emotionally shallow lives (Kreger, 2012). After all, if you learn that
you can get validation, respect and love from other sources besides the
toxic person, what's to keep you from leaving them? To toxic people, a
little conditioning

can go a long way to keep you walking on eggshells and falling just
short of your big dreams. 11. Smear campaigns and stalking. When toxic
types can't control the way you see yourself, they start to control how
others see you; they play the martyr while you're labeled the toxic one.
A smear campaign is a preemptive strike to sabotage your reputation and
slander your name so that you won't have a support network to fall back
on lest you decide to detach and cut ties with this toxic person. They
may even stalk and harass you or the people you know as a way to
supposedly "expose" the truth about you; this exposure acts as a way to
hide their own abusive behavior while projecting it onto you. Some smear
campaigns can even work to pit two people or two groups against each
other. A victim in an abusive relationship with a narcissist often
doesn't know what's being said about them during the relationship, but
they eventually find out the falsehoods shortly after they've been
discarded. Toxic people will gossip behind your back (and in front of
your face), slander you to your loved ones or their loved ones, create
stories that depict you as the aggressor while they play the victim, and
claim that you engaged in the same behaviors that they are afraid you
will accuse them of engaging in. They will also methodically, covertly
and deliberately abuse you so they can use your reactions as a way to
prove that they are the so-called "victims" of your abuse. The best way
to handle a smear campaign is to stay mindful of your reactions and
stick to the facts. This is especially pertinent for high-conflict
divorces with narcissists who may use your reactions to their
provocations against you. Document any form of harassment, cyberbullying
or stalking incidents and always speak to your narcissist through a
lawyer whenever possible. You may wish to take legal action if you feel
the stalking and harassment is getting out of control; finding a lawyer
who is well-versed in Narcissistic Personality Disorder is crucial if
that's the case. Your character and integrity will speak for itself when
the narcissist's false mask begins to slip. 12. Love-bombing and
devaluation. Toxic people put you through an

idealization phase until you're sufficiently hooked and invested in
beginning a friendship or relationship with you. Then, they begin to
devalue you while insulting the very things they admired in the first
place. Another variation of this is when a toxic individual puts you on
a pedestal while aggressively devaluing and attacking someone else who
threatens their sense of superiority. Narcissistic abusers do this all
the time---they devalue their exes to their new partners, and eventually
the new partner starts to receive the same sort of mistreatment as the
narcissist's ex-partner. Ultimately what will happen is that you will
also be on the receiving end of the same abuse. You will one day be the
ex-partner they degrade to their new source of supply. You just don't
know it yet. That's why it's important to stay mindful of the
love-bombing technique whenever you witness behavior that doesn't align
with the saccharine sweetness a narcissist subjects you to. As life
coach Wendy Powell suggests in her article, "10 Ways to Discourage
Narcissists From Dating You," slowing things down with people you
suspect may be toxic is an important way of combating the love-bombing
technique. Be wary of the fact that how a person treats or speaks about
someone else could potentially translate into the way they will treat
you in the future. 13. Preemptive defense. When someone stresses the
fact that they are a "nice guy" or girl, that you should "trust them"
right away or emphasizes their credibility without any provocation from
you whatsoever, be wary. Toxic and abusive people overstate their
ability to be kind and compassionate. They often tell you that you
should "trust" them without first building a solid foundation of trust.
They may "perform" a high level of sympathy and empathy at the beginning
of your relationship to dupe you, only to unveil their false mask later
on. When you see their false mask begins to slip periodically during the
devaluation phase of the abuse cycle, the true self is revealed to be
terrifyingly cold, callous and contemptuous. Genuinely nice people
rarely have to persistently show off their positive qualities---they
exude their warmth more than they talk about it and they

know that actions speak volumes more than mere words. They know that
trust and respect is a two-way street that requires reciprocity, not
repetition. To counter a preemptive defense, reevaluate why a person may
be emphasizing their good qualities. Is it because they think you don't
trust them, or because they know you shouldn't? Trust actions more than
empty words and see how someone's actions communicate who they are, not
who they say they are. 14. Triangulation. Bringing in the opinion,
perspective or suggested threat of another person into the dynamic of an
interaction is known as "triangulation." Often used to validate the
toxic person's abuse while invalidating the victim's reactions to abuse,
triangulation can also work to manufacture love triangles that leave you
feeling unhinged and insecure. Malignant narcissists love to triangulate
their significant other with strangers, co-workers, ex-partners, friends
and even family members in order to evoke jealousy and uncertainty in
you. They also use the opinions of others to validate their point of
view. This is a diversionary tactic meant to pull your attention away
from their abusive behavior and into a false image of them as a
desirable, sought after person. It also leaves you questioning
yourself---if Mary did agree with Tom, doesn't that mean that you must
be wrong? The truth is, narcissists love to "report back" falsehoods
about what others say about you, when in fact, they are the ones
smearing you. To resist triangulation tactics, realize that whoever the
narcissist is triangulating with is also being triangulated by your
relationship with the narcissist as well. Everyone is essentially being
played by this one person. Rather than fall into the emotional pothole
of jealousy or competition, reverse "triangulate" the narcissist by
gaining support from a third party that is not under the narcissist's
influence---and also by seeking your own validation. 15. Bait and feign
innocence. Toxic individuals lure you into a false sense of security
simply to have a platform to showcase their cruelty. Baiting you into

a mindless, chaotic argument can escalate into a showdown rather quickly
with someone who doesn't know the meaning of respect. A simple
disagreement may bait you into responding politely initially, until it
becomes clear that the person has a malicious motive of tearing you
down. By "baiting" you with a seemingly innocuous comment disguised as a
rational one, they can then begin to play with you. Remember:
narcissistic abusers have learned about your insecurities, the
unsettling catchphrases that interrupt your confidence, and the
disturbing topics that reenact your wounds---and they use this knowledge
maliciously to provoke you. After you've fallen for it ---hook, line and
sinker---they'll stand back and innocently ask whether you're "okay" and
talk about how they didn't "mean" to agitate you. This faux innocence
works to catch you off guard and make you believe that they truly didn't
intend to hurt you, until it happens so often you can't deny the reality
of their malice any longer. It helps to realize when you're being baited
so you can avoid engaging altogether. Provocative statements,
name-calling, hurtful accusations or unsupported generalizations, for
example, are common baiting tactics. Your gut instinct can also tell you
when you're being baited---if you feel "off" about a certain comment and
continue to feel this way even after it has been expanded on, that's a
sign you may need to take some space to reevaluate the situation before
choosing to respond. 16. Boundary testing and hoovering. Narcissists,
sociopaths and otherwise toxic people continually try and test your
boundaries to see which ones they can trespass. The more violations
they're able to commit without consequences, the more they'll push the
envelope. That's why survivors of emotional as well as physical abuse
often experience even more severe incidents of abuse each and every time
they go back to their abusers. Abusers tend to "hoover" their victims
back in with sweet promises, fake remorse and empty words of how they
are going to change, only to abuse their victims even more horrifically.
According to therapist Andrea Schneider,

LCSW (2015), this is not done because an abuser misses the victim, but
rather because they want to "con" them back into the abuse cycle and
test how far they can trample on their victim's boundaries once more. In
the abuser's sick mind, this boundary testing serves as a punishment for
standing up to the abuse and also for going back to it. When narcissists
try to press the emotional reset button, reinforce your boundaries even
more strongly rather than backtracking on them. Move forward with No
Contact (or Low Contact, if for some reason you must maintain contact
with the narcissistic abuser). Remember---highly manipulative people
don't respond to empathy or compassion. They respond to consequences.
17. Aggressive jabs disguised as jokes. Covert narcissists enjoy making
malicious remarks at your expense. These are usually dressed up as "just
jokes" so that they can get away with saying appalling things while
still maintaining an innocent, cool demeanor. Yet any time you are
outraged at an insensitive, harsh remark, you are accused of having no
sense of humor. This is a tactic frequently used in verbal abuse. The
contemptuous smirk and sadistic gleam in their eyes gives it away,
however---like a predator that plays with its food, a toxic person gains
pleasure from hurting you and being able to get away with it. After all,
it's just a joke, right? Wrong. It's a way to gaslight you into thinking
their abuse is a joke---a way to divert from their cruelty and onto your
perceived sensitivity. It is important that when this happens, you stand
up for yourself and make it clear that you won't tolerate this type of
behavior. Calling out manipulative people on their covert put-downs may
result in further gaslighting from the abuser but maintain your stance
that their behavior is not okay and end the interaction immediately if
you have to. 18. Condescending sarcasm and patronizing tone. Belittling
and degrading a person is a toxic person's forte and their tone of voice
is only one tool in their toolbox. Sarcasm can be a fun mode of
communication when both parties are engaged, but narcissists use it
chronically as a way to manipulate

you and degrade you. If you in any way react to it, you must be "too
sensitive." Forget that the toxic person constantly has temper tantrums
every time their big bad ego is faced with realistic feedback---the
victim is the hypersensitive one, apparently. So long as you're treated
like a child and constantly challenged for expressing yourself, you'll
start to develop a sense of hypervigilance about voicing your thoughts
and opinions without reprimand. This self-censorship enables the abuser
to put in less work in silencing you because you begin to silence
yourself. Whenever you are met with a condescending demeanor or tone,
call it out firmly and assertively. You don't deserve to be spoken down
to like a child--- nor should you ever silence yourself to meet the
expectation of someone else's superiority complex. 19. Shaming. "You
should be ashamed of yourself" is a favorite saying of toxic people.
Though it can be used by someone who is non-toxic, in the realm of the
narcissist or sociopath, shaming is an effective method that targets any
behavior or belief that might challenge a toxic person's power. It can
also be used to destroy and whittle away at a victim's self-esteem: if a
victim dares to be proud of something, shaming the victim for that
specific trait, quality or accomplishment can serve to diminish their
sense of self and stifle any pride they may have. Malignant narcissists,
sociopaths and psychopaths enjoy using your own wounds against you---so
they will even shame you about any abuse or injustice you've suffered in
your lifetime as a way to retraumatize you. Were you a childhood abuse
survivor? A malignant narcissist or sociopath will claim that you
must've done something to deserve it, or brag about their own happy
childhood as a way to make you feel deficient and unworthy. What better
way to injure you, after all, than to pick at the original wound? As
surgeons of madness, they seek to exacerbate wounds, not help heal them.
If you suspect you're dealing with a toxic person, avoid revealing any
of your vulnerabilities or past traumas. Until they've proven their
character to you,

there is no point disclosing information that could be potentially used
against you. 20. Control. Most importantly, toxic abusers love to
maintain control in whatever way they can. They isolate you, maintain
control over your finances and social networks, and micromanage every
facet of your life. Yet the most powerful mechanism they have for
control is toying with your emotions. That's why abusive narcissists and
sociopaths manufacture situations of conflict out of thin air to keep
you feeling off center and off balance. That's why they chronically
engage in disagreements about irrelevant things and rage over perceived
slights. That's why they emotionally withdraw, only to reidealize you
once they start to lose control. That's why they vacillate between their
false self and their true self, so you never get a sense of
psychological safety or certainty about who your partner truly is. The
more power they have over your emotions, the less likely you'll trust
your own reality and the truth about the abuse you're enduring. Knowing
the manipulative tactics and how they work to erode your sense of self
can arm you with the knowledge of what you're facing and at the very
least, help you develop a plan to regain control of your own life and
get away from toxic people.

References Canonville, C. L. (2015, October). The Effects of Gaslighting
in Narcissistic Victim Syndrome. Retrieved from
http://narcissisticbehavior.net/the-effects-of-gaslighting-in-narcissistic-victim-syndrome/
Goulston, M., MD. (2012, February 8). Rage -- Coming Soon From a
Narcissist Near You. Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/just-listen/201202/rage-coming-soon-narcissist-near-you
Kernberg, O. (1992). Aggression in Personality Disorders and
Perversions. New Haven: Yale University Press. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1dszvm8 Kreger, R. (2012, April 4). Why
they can't feel joy: Narcissistic shallow emotions. Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/stop-walking-eggshells/201204/why-they-cant-feel-joy-narcissistic-shallow-emotions.
Kutner, J. (2015, June 1). False reports of rape are vanishingly rare
--- so why treat women as liars by default? Retrieved from
http://www.salon.com/2015/06/01/false_reports_of_rape_are_vanishingly_rare_so_why_treat_women_as_liars_by_default/
Martinez-Lewi, L., Ph.D. (2012, November 10). Narcissist's projections
are psychologically abusive. Retrieved from
http://thenarcissistinyourlife.com/narcissists-projections-are-psychologically-abusive/

Powell, W. (2015, February 3). 10 Ways to Discourage Narcissists from
Dating You. Retrieved from
https://wendypowell.ca/2015/02/03/10-ways-to-discourage-narcissists-from-dating-you-2/
Schneider, A., LCSW. (2015, February 13). 'Hoover Maneuver': The Dirty
Secret of Emotional Abuse. Retrieved from
http://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/hoover-maneuver-the-dirty-secret-of-emotional-abuse-0219154
Simon, G. K. (2010). In sheep's clothing: Understanding and dealing with
manipulative people. Little Rock: Parkhurst Brothers. Stern, R.,
Ph.D. (2009, May 19). Are You Being Gaslighted? Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/power-inrelationships/200905/are-you-being-gaslighted

5

The Secret Language of Narcissists, Sociopaths and Psychopaths Society
assumes that everyone has a conscience and the ability to empathize. In
fact, 1 in 25 people in the United States are estimated to be
sociopaths, according to Harvard psychologist Martha Stout. Narcissists
(those who meet the criteria for Narcissistic Personality Disorder) and
their like-minded cousins, sociopaths and psychopaths, speak in the
language of crazymaking, of projection, of word salad, of gaslighting
and of pathological envy. While I will be focusing on narcissistic
abusers in this essay, keep in mind that all three are unable to
empathize with others and frequently exploit others for their own
agenda. If you encounter someone with narcissistic traits, they could
very well fall towards the extreme end of the psychopathy spectrum and
be a sociopath or psychopath. If these predators have Narcissistic
Personality Disorder or Antisocial Personality Disorder, their lack of
empathy is intrinsic to their disorder. The National Domestic Violence
Hotline dispels the myth that an abuser's mental illness, however,
causes the abuse---because abusers do not abuse everyone--- they usually
choose to abuse their nearest and dearest. In these cases, abuse is
caused more so by a choice by an abuser rather than their mental
illness. These individuals can "switch" their mask quickly when in the
public eye. That means their abuse is under their conscious control and
the abuser is still

accountable for continuing to abuse others and not seeking treatment.
These pathological individuals walk among us every day in their false
masks, often unseen and unnoticed because of how eerily normal they
seem. They are not always serial killers, rapists or criminal
masterminds. Many of them are white-collar criminals while others commit
emotional vice. They can be of any gender, background, and socioeconomic
status. Often times, they are charming, charismatic, the life of the
party, able to hook their victims in and dupe the public effortlessly.
It's very possible you've dated, worked with, had a family member or
friend with Narcissistic Personality Disorder or Antisocial Personality
Disorder in your lifetime---even if you didn't know it then. Learning
their emotional language means acknowledging that their cruelty is not
only explicit but implicit, deeply ingrained in nuances in their facial
expressions, gestures, tones, and most importantly, the contradictory
mismatch between their words and actions. Most importantly, their
cruelty is deliberate and designed to control and ultimately destroy
their victims. Their manipulation is psychologically and emotionally
devastating---and very dangerous, especially considering the brain
circuitry for emotional and physical pain are one and the same
(Eisenberger, 2014; Hsu, 2013). What a victim feels when they are
punched in the stomach can be similar to the pain a victim feels when
they are verbally and emotionally abused, and the effects of
narcissistic abuse can be crippling and long-lasting, even resulting in
symptoms of PTSD or Complex PTSD (Walker, 2013). These types of abusers
are fluent in manipulation, well-versed in sadism, in control and in
rage---their deliberate cutting down of you, which can be best described
as "death by a thousand cuts," can be just as slow and insidious as it
is swift and vicious. It is akin to psychological and emotional rape---a
sordid violation of boundaries and of the trust the victim has given his
or her abuser. Narcissistic abusers can attack at any given moment,
using their choice

weapons of sarcasm, condescending remarks, name-calling, and
blameshifting whenever they perceive you as a threat or whenever they
need entertainment in the form of an emotional reaction. They can also
use their nonverbal language in the form of a sadistic smirk, the cold
deadness in their eyes while professing to love you, their bored, sulky
looks or their cruel laughter to bully you into believing that you are
inferior to them. Survivors spend much of the "devaluation" phase of an
abusive cycle (the phase where they are thrust off the pedestal, only to
be demeaned and degraded) constantly on their toes, careful not to make
a sound lest they incur the wrath of their narcissist. Yet walking on
eggshells doesn't help, as the narcissist can and will use anything and
everything you've said or done against you as a way to destroy you.
There are three key pieces of information that narcissists frequently
collect in the "idealization" phase of the relationship where they are
first lovebombing and grooming you with excessive attention, that they
later wield against you in the devaluation and discard phases in their
special language of depravity. 1. The flaws, shortcomings, insecurities
and secrets you've confided in the narcissist about. The narcissistic
abuser rejoices when you share your wounds, your struggles, and your
triggers early on. It is then that much easier for them to get
underneath your skin and inside of your mind. During the early stages of
the relationship, which are likely to include love-bombing, you are
likely to feel so trusting and open with a narcissist that you share
everything with them: your past, your heartbreaks, what you perceive to
be your flaws. You may see this as a way of establishing rapport, a
connection with your partner, a way of being vulnerable and intimate. A
narcissistic abuser sees it as dinner laying itself on the table. They
will pretend to support you and empathize with you when you reveal these
to them initially, but will later use these to provoke you, belittle you
and demean you during the devaluation phase.

Remember: the narcissist has no limits as to what he or she will use. If
you tell your narcissist you're insecure about your weight, be prepared
for covert and overt put-downs about your body in the devaluation phase.
If you reveal to a narcissist that you've been through a past trauma,
such as being sexually assaulted, it won't be long before they are using
degrading lingo in the bedroom to make you feel like a used object. They
thrive on the fact that you are being retraumatized. Their ability to
make you regress right back into the original trauma with just one turn
of phrase makes them feel powerful. And they live for that power because
it is the only power they have in their empty lives. To a narcissist,
any open wound is an invitation to cut deeper and the narcissist can and
always will cut a wound even deeper than the first. 2. Your strengths
and accomplishments, especially the ones they are pathologically envious
of. Initially, when you were on the pedestal, the narcissist couldn't
get enough of your strengths and accomplishments. They couldn't stop
raving about you to family and friends, showing you off, treating you
like a trophy, an essential part of them. Their association with you
inevitably made them feel superior and important. It bolstered their
false image of being a normal human being who could get a "prize" like
you. In the devaluation phase, a narcissist will literally translate
your strengths into perceived flaws. Once you were "confident and
sexy,"---but now you're "cocky and vain" (a clear projection of
themselves, of course). Before, you were "intelligent and driven," and
now you're just a "know-it-all" or a "smartass." They gaslight you into
believing that your value and worth is not real, all the while
projecting their own sense of inferiority onto you. They will degrade,
minimize, and ignore what you accomplish, now acting as if it means
nothing to them and as if it is of little importance or value to the
world. They will feed you falsehoods about your lack of competence and
ability. They will claim to be better at something than you, all the
while stealing your ideas. They will taunt you into believing that
you're not capable of the smallest of tasks, even

if you are out of their league professionally and personally. They may
project onto you their own insincere traits and accuse you of being
jealous and envious of them, when in fact, they are the ones looking to
tear you down. It is baffling to learn how common this type of
projection is with narcissists--- and it is definitely a projection.
Victims are often happy for the accomplishments of their partners
especially in the early stages of the relationship when they haven't yet
experienced who the narcissist truly is, yet the narcissist will
continue to claim they are insincere, envious, and jealous. All the
things that they conveniently are---envious of us and of anyone who
accomplishes anything they'd like to covet. Please know, you're not
alone, many of us have experienced this crazymaking, and we know how
painful it can be to be accused of such things. They will threaten to
ruin your reputation and they will often sabotage major events as well
as support networks you may have, attempting to turn everyone against
you. They will trample upon your dreams, your aspirations, your beliefs,
your personality, your goals, your profession, your talents, your
appearance, your lifestyle---all the while extolling their own. Their
sudden turn of language takes a toll; it is traumatizing, shocking and
unexpectedly vicious. Everything they once praised will inevitably be
turned and twisted into a weakness. This is because they cannot stand
you "winning" and being better than them at something. To them,
everything is a competition and a game that they must win at all costs.
They seek to destroy you in every way possible so that you, in turn,
destroy and sabotage yourself---all the while they sit back, relax and
watch the unraveling of everything you've worked hard for. 3. Your need
to please them and their need to be perpetually dissatisfied. The
narcissist cultivated your need for his or her validation and approval
early on in the idealization phase. By making you dependent on his or
her praise, they conditioned you to seek the excessive admiration that
only they could dole out. Now, as they devalue you, they use your need
for validation to their advantage by withdrawing frequently, appearing
sullen at every opportunity, and converting every generous thing you do
for them as a

failure on your part that falls short of their ludicrous expectations.
Nothing can meet their high standards and everything wrong will be
pointed out. In fact, even the things they do wrong shall be pinned on
you. Their blameshifting language, passive-aggressive sulky behavior and
narcissistic rage at the slightest injury become all-consuming for the
victim, as the victim attempts to strengthen his or her efforts to meet
the standards of the narcissist---standards which inevitably set the
victim up for failure. For this, the victim is met with verbal assault,
accusations and unfair comparisons which instill in him or her a
pervasive sense of worthlessness and never being "enough." If the victim
ever attempts to make the narcissistic abuser accountable for being a
decent human being, they will lash out in rage, blaming them for the
abuse and stonewalling the victim into silence. They love to have the
last word, especially for the language they've created. Taking back our
control and power from a narcissistic abuser means going to war with the
language they use against us. We must create in its place what I call a
"reverse discourse"---a new language and a rewriting of the narrative
that instead lifts us, motivates us, inspires us and revives us by
replacing the narcissist's cutting words with our own powerful truth.

References Eisenberger, N. I., & Lieberman, M. D. (2004). Why rejection
hurts: A common neural alarm system for physical and social pain. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 8(7), 294-300. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2004.05.010
Hsu, D. T., Sanford, B. J., Meyers, K. K., Love, T. M., & Hazlet, K. E.
(2013). Response of the \[mu\]-opioid system to social rejection and
acceptance. Molecular Psychiatry, 18, 1211-1217. doi:10.1038/mp.2013.96
Stout, M. (2005). The sociopath next door: The ruthless versus the rest
of us. New York: Broadway Books. The National Domestic Violence Hotline.
(2015, May 06). Abuse and mental Illness: Is there a connection?
Retrieved from
http://www.thehotline.org/2015/05/abuse-and-mental-illness-is-there-a-connection/
Walker, P. (2013). Complex PTSD: From surviving to thriving: A guide and
map for recovering from childhood trauma. Azure Coyote Publishing.

6

The Pathological Envy of Abusers Reveals How Powerful Their Victims Are
Out of all the manipulative tactics and forms of coercion and control a
malignant narcissistic abuser subjects us to, the pathological envy of a
narcissist isone of the most baffling experiences of narcissistic abuse.
We often cannot fathom that a loved one, whether friend, family member
or significant other, would ever want to sabotage our success, undermine
our joy or belittle our accomplishments. Yet this horrifying aspect of a
narcissist's diagnostic criteria is even noted in the DSM-5, which
states that not only are narcissists envious of others, they believe
others to be envious of them. A narcissist's pathological envy arises
from their need to be the best, as well as their excessive sense of
entitlement to being the center of attention at all times, i.e., the one
with the most fame, wealth, and status. Any threat to their grandiose
delusions of grandeur will result in a narcissistic injury, and
inevitably, narcissistic rage (Goulston, 2012, McBride, 2016). This is
why narcissists tend to be pompous critics, usually incapable of the
same efforts they criticize in others. The success of others evokes
their pathological envy, reminding them of what they lack and could
never achieve themselves. As a result, they will do anything and
everything possible to minimize the accomplishments of those who
threaten their false sense of grandiosity and superiority.

Initially, narcissists and otherwise toxic people may claim to be very
happy for your success. During the idealization and love-bombing phases
of the relationship they may even excessively congratulate, praise and
flatter you. They may use you as a "trophy" to show off to others,
gaining status and prestige from simply being associated with you. They
have no problem in benefiting from your wealth, your reputation and your
various assets. As the relationship moves forward, however, the need to
devalue their victims kicks in and their pathological envy and
competitiveness becomes more and more apparent. What was once a subtle
look of contempt at the sight of your success soon becomes hour-long
arguments bashing every aspect of your identity, your dreams, your
goals, and any source of joy outside of the realm of the narcissist's
control. What many people don't realize is that narcissists don't just
gravitate towards us because of our vulnerabilities; they are also
attracted to our assets--- and not only because they can exploit those
assets for narcissistic supply. Anything you achieve or gain joy from
stirs this envy within them and precipitates an inexplicable need to win
or one-up you at all costs. Your achievements also represent a threat to
their control over you---after all, if you are gaining happiness and
validation from somewhere outside of the narcissist, you don't need
them. Your independence and self-sufficiency frightens them and scars
their fragile ego. This strengthens their desire to destroy us and our
success in every way possible---so that they can isolate us from other
sources of validation while demeaning the very core of who we are.
Consider that narcissists often claim that victims are 'obsessed' with
them. This is a projection. While trauma can cause a victim to ruminate
over their abuser, the true obsession lies within the narcissist,
because while rumination is a normal effect of trauma, predatory
behavior is present in the narcissist from the very beginning. Victims
do not go out of their way to bully, harass and sabotage the very people
they envy; they do not carefully watch potential targets with the
vigilance of a predator; they do not painstakingly collect information
about an individual's preferences and wounds to idealize them and later
hit them where it hurts most. Victims are not the ones who try to

hoover their exes years later nor are they the ones who focus on past
partners to triangulate them with present ones. Victims are not the
obsessed ones. Narcissists are. One of the most baffling tactics
narcissists use is the exaggeration of perceived flaws or the
manufacturing of fabricated ones in their victims. What is even more
stunning is the double standard embedded within these absurd complaints.
This is the unemployed husband or wife who attacks their spouse for the
income they make; the "constructive critic" who has poor grammar yet
attempts to police the speech or writing of others; the envious friend
who points out a lack in whatever you're succeeding in. Despite a wealth
of external feedback to the contrary, nitpicking narcissists will always
find something wrong with you as a way to feel self-important and
superior. The starry-eyed admiration followed by anger and envy is a
classic case of the type of crazymaking you're likely to encounter in a
narcissist in the devaluation and discard phases of the relationship.
Don't be fooled: whatever happiness they seem to project in the
idealization stage is merely a facade for the deep contempt they feel
for anyone they are threatened by.

Signs of Pathological Envy in a Malignant Narcissist Can Include Someone
Who: Praises you highly for your accomplishments initially; uses your
accomplishments as a way to associate themselves with you and look good.
Likes feeling as if they have the "successful girlfriend or
boyfriend"--- while simultaneously resenting you for it. Competes with
you often; if you bring up what you achieved, they have to bring up
something bigger or downgrade what you've achieved to make you feel
small. Nothing you do is truly special or "impressive"---or, it's
really, really special until the narcissist gets tired of praising you
and wants to cut you down a thousand pegs or so. Highly competitive in
any and every context; will be a sore loser in recreational games,
sports, or other activities and resort to immature actions to "win" or
insult your abilities.

Will accuse you of being arrogant should you happen to share your
happiness or present a healthy confidence in your abilities. They are,
in fact, projecting their own sense of arrogance onto you. Behind closed
doors (or sometimes even out in the open), devalues and minimizes the
things they once praised, making them seem unimportant and lacking
because they know they would have never been able to accomplish those
things themselves. They will emphasize the idea that people are against
you (projecting the fact that it's them that is against you), that your
contribution isn't valuable, degrade or even outright ignore
accomplishments that are in fact a big deal, all with an innocent or
smug look on their face. Sabotages important events in your life such as
big interviews, projects, and deadlines. They do this by using methods
like put-downs, crazymaking arguments that lead to sleep deprivation,
pressuring you to spend time with them right beforehand, insulting you,
covertly casting doubt onto your abilities and talents, one-upping you
and making themselves seem more important, accomplished and talented in
order to stroke their sense of superiority. Treats your goals, dreams
and interests with contempt or a condescending attitude, all while
bringing the conversation back to them. It is also helpful to keep in
mind that a narcissist will often deny they are envious, though their
actions clearly say otherwise. They strive very hard to hide their own
envy, not just from their victims, but also from themselves This is done
to the point of delusion. Their false sense of superiority and haughty
contempt is often accompanied by put-downs, subtle digs, minimizing
statements and demeaning insults---all of which serve to belittle the
victim and make them ashamed of succeeding, of feeling joy, of creating
new connections, of flourishing---of thriving and owning their power to
create a beautiful life. To resist internalizing the verbal garbage a
narcissist may spew at you out of envy, remember the following: if
someone expresses rage and contempt towards you for daring to be proud
of yourself (with a healthy level of pride,

of course) or loving yourself, your life, and your accomplishments, the
problem is not you. It is them.

How to Cope With the Attacks of a Green-Eyed Narcissist Survivors may
struggle with self-sabotage after experiencing a narcissist's abusive
bouts of envy, rage and verbal attacks. They may begin to fear speaking
about their accomplishments or their happiness, lest they evoke their
narcissist's wrath. The cutting words of the narcissistic abuser may
reverberate in their minds long after the relationship has ended,
instilling in them a sense of pervasive self-doubt and worthlessness.
Walking on eggshells and disowning your power, however, is no way to
live. Survivors have to regain the certainty that the reason they
experienced such a pathological reaction was because they were so
powerful in the first place. It is essential that survivors develop a
"toxic people phrases filter"---one in which anything a toxic person
says is "translated" into what it actually means. For example, a
narcissist's degradation of the victim's goals and dreams can be
translated and seen for what it truly is: a sign that the narcissist is
attempting to sabotage them because they recognize what the victim has
is valuable, whether it be financial assets, talent, a support network,
etc. This is how survivors can begin to turn put-downs into power.
Consider the source: have they accomplished what you have? Do they have
any merits outside of their false grandiosity? Note that their only
talent often lies in their ability to manipulate and gaslight the victim
into believing he or she is not "enough" because they know deep down,
they are the ones who are lacking. Remember: normal, healthy people do
not sustain a narcissistic injury or lash out in narcissistic rage when
they see other people succeeding and doing well for themselves. Healthy
people have enough security and empathy to feel happiness for others,
and to witness someone else beaming with authentic pride and
self-love---without wanting to destroy it or sabotage it in some way.
You deserve to succeed. You deserve to flourish. You deserve to be
abundant.

You deserve the support of others who are happy for you and share in
your joy. Do not let any green-eyed narcissist rain on your parade,
trample over your boundaries and make you feel less than because they
sense you are rising above and beyond what they ever could. You owe it
to yourself to be powerful and victorious. See the narcissist's
pathological envy for what it really is: a measure of how powerful you
really are and have the potential to become.

References Goulston, Mark, MD. Rage -- Coming Soon From a Narcissist
Near You. Psychology Today. 8 Feb. 2012. Retrieved from McBride, Karyl,
PhD. The Destructive Force of Narcissistic Injury. Psychology Today. 1
Aug. 2016. Retrieved from Somerstein, Lynn, PhD, RYT. (2013, March 13).
Narcissism: Inside the Lonely, Envious World of the 'Perfect Ones'.
Retrieved from
http://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/narcissism-perfection-superiority-manipulation-0313134

7

The Man or Woman With Two Faces The myth about Jekyll and Hyde is a
living reality for those who have dated, lived with, married or have had
children with a narcissistic abuser, have had a friendship with one or
have been raised by one. These charmers are saccharine sweet when they
first meet you and woo you into the lovebombing and idealizing stage,
but their love for you quickly turns into contempt and resentment.
Readers always ask me, how do I know I am really with a narcissist?
Obviously, only a mental health professional can give an official
diagnosis of NPD, but once you've been with one full-fledged
narcissistic personality, you'll realize quickly what it's like to be
with one. The malignant traits in a narcissistic personality are both
hard to ignore and difficult to discern, especially when you're dealing
with a covert narcissist who is not as overt in his or her tactics. Yet
you'll know when you're dealing with one because of not only the ways
they gaslight and put you down, but also by the way you feel around
them---constantly walking on eggshells, biting your nails in anxiety,
having vivid nightmares about them, ruminating over flashbacks about
cruel things they did and said, going extra lengths to please a partner
who never seems to be pleased, a partner who rages over irrelevant
things and who blames you for practically everything---a partner who is
unable to communicate, but is an expert in miscommunicating his or her
intentions, motives, and malice. Although a lack of empathy certainly
tops the list on qualities to watch out for

with a narcissist, I find that the most understated quality that exists
in narcissists is contempt. They live it, breathe it and get off on it.
You can easily spot an abusive narcissist when their false mask slips in
the early stages and they show contempt for another person (usually
their ex) and begin to devalue them. Contempt is what they consider
their superpower while we consider empathy and compassion to be ours. To
be contemptuous, after all, is to feel like they are above anything they
deem beneath them---especially if they fear it is actually more special
and unique than anything they possess. Narcissists are naturally
competitive and pathologically envious, so they will seek to extinguish
and sabotage anything that may represent something bigger and better
than them. They will minimize, belittle and attempt to ignore your
accomplishments and sabotage important events in your life precisely for
that reason. Being with a narcissist is unsettling in a way we can't
often pinpoint or even articulate. Remember those scenes in Psycho when
Norman Bates raises his head so far up he creepily reveals the length of
his throat? It's subtle. It's chilling. It's not outwardly gory like
other horror movies nowadays but those are the types of movies that get
the hairs raised on the back of your neck and the goosebumps on your
arms. Those are the types of movements that make a difference, much like
the way the subtle digs, sudden flashes of rage and contempt find a way
to creep under your skin and in your head. It is unsettling to know that
the one who purports to love and care about you, actually cannot stand
seeing you happy or successful. Their efforts to undermine, belittle and
minimize your success is at first baffling. Their relentless search to
find ways to have you spinning in self-doubt, through little digs,
remarks and unfathomable insults, is more painful than the slights of a
stranger precisely because this is not a stranger. This is, after all,
someone who knows you intimately. Who is aware of your wounds, your
flaws, your values. Yet this is also someone who still feels entitled to
sabotage you, smear you or interrupt the peace in your safest and most
sacred spaces---the peace in your mind and the sanity in your life.
Don't

blame yourself for how long it takes to see the narcissist for who he or
she really is, because it isn't your fault. Covert narcissists often
"drip-feed" their abuse intermittently, throwing in some crumbs of
love-bombing as well as covert put-downs and underhanded sabotage which
can inevitably build up to more intense rage attacks. Abuse like this
was best described in O.N. Ward's book, Husband, Liar and Sociopath, as
like being a frog in slowly boiling water---you don't realize what
you're in for until it's too late. It can take years to understand what
is going on, how you are being gaslighted, and many of us don't want to
believe our partners who claim to love us are capable of such deceit and
malice. It challenges everything we know to be human---and perhaps it's
a good thing we are still astounded at this form of cruelty because it
means we haven't lost our sense of humanity yet. The lack of empathy and
the excessive cruelty isn't immediately apparent. It builds slowly and
erupts quickly so that the victim doesn't know what hit them. And it's
just as nauseating as being punched in the face or watching a bloody
crime scene. That's what it's like to be with a narcissist. Imagine a
thousand tiny microaggressions building a constant atmosphere of fear,
doubt and pain. You probably don't even have to imagine it because
you've lived through it. There is always a web of doubt and uncertainty.
A constant tension in the pit of your stomach, a heartbeat that races
every other day, an inability to discern what will come next. Your life
is suddenly filled with panic and heartache as gory as any thriller
you've ever watched. In a warped reality such as this---is it any wonder
it takes almost forever for victims to extricate themselves from a
malignant person who continually manipulates them? Someone who has
little to no knowledge about narcissistic abuse can easily excuse
insidious behavior and come to believe that they are the problem. Even
someone with knowledge of narcissistic abuse can get tangled up with
another narcissist due to their subconscious wounding and
programming---experts such as Robert D. Hare, inventor of The
Psychopathy Checklist, admits he is still fooled by these types. That's
because knowledge alone does not make you immune to these predators;
malignant narcissists and

sociopaths operate on the emotional level---they target the parts of the
brain that are not logical. And they traumatize you to make themselves
all the more memorable and unforgettable---enabling them to "hoover" you
back in with apologies and sweet-talk, only to begin the abuse cycle
again. A reality check that many survivors are in need of is coming to
terms with the fact that it really is NOT just you. Due to the covert
nature of this form of abuse, survivors often blame themselves and doubt
themselves about who their partners really are. They are thrown into
severe cognitive dissonance about the reality of their partner's true
self---until they get validation from an outside source, usually a
survivor community, a therapist or even a friend or loved one of the
narcissist who has finally opened their eyes to the abusive nature of
this person. How do I know this? I want to share a couple of personal
stories with you from my own experience that might open your eyes to the
fact that when a narcissist moves onto their next source of supply, much
of it is of the way they treat you is not the first time they've treated
someone like this. I repeat: their abuse, their contempt, their
disrespect and lack of empathy---is not about you. IT IS ABOUT THEM. And
they do in fact, repeat the cycle with others.

Meeting the Ex-Girlfriend of a Malignant Narcissist. Sometimes fate
works in funny ways. Around three years ago or so, I decided to take a
longer train route to avoid the crowd and stepped into the 1 train
station in New York. This was not my usual train and there was no
seeming logic behind it except for the fact that a gut instinct told me
to do so. While waiting for the train, I received a startling shock when
a girl touched my arm and asked me, "Excuse me---do you know \_\_\_\_?"
I was overwhelmed with surprise---and fear at first that this might be
one of the narcissist's flying monkeys, attempting to gain information
from me. He had stalked me two years after I had gone No Contact with
him, even though we had a very short-term relationship when I had left
him.

After I confirmed that I did, in fact, know this person, she introduced
herself and said she was the ex-girlfriend---the previous girlfriend
before me, and the first girlfriend of said person. The first words that
left my mouth, I kid you not, were, "Are you okay?" I knew that she
must've endured what I had because the conversation led me to suspect
that while I had gone No Contact, she was not yet over the abuse--- and
understandably so. She confided in me that she had to call the police on
this person, that his rages were dangerous and his put-downs horrific.
She also told me he had lied to her about his new girlfriend (me at the
time) and said we had gone traveling to her favorite country
together---China. Needless to say, I've never been to China. This
experience cemented within me a fact that I had always seen mentioned
but had never confirmed until that day---that when you are a victim of
an abuser, you are often not the only victim. Instead of moving on with
me, the new "trophy" and source of supply, he had continued to message
her, flaunting his new relationship and crudely insulting her. He had
used what he had learned about her---her favorite travel destination,
for example, to mock and provoke her into believing that she was somehow
less because he had gained a new source of supply. This is not normal
behavior. This is abuse, plain and simple---and it happened not only to
this old girlfriend but also to the one to come and leave later---me.
The illusion that narcissists and sociopaths construct and the lies they
feed the world about their new girlfriend, boyfriend or spouse is
nothing less than another fabrication, as much of a hellish nightmare as
the one you yourself experienced with the narcissist. While it is
painful to think that the narcissist or sociopath has changed for
someone else, I assure you, in the majority of the cases, they have not.
All of

their victims are still objects, still sources of supply. They will
repeat the same patterns and engage in the same abuse (catered of
course, to that specific victim's weak spots). It's just a matter of
time.

The Narcissistic Alcoholic Ex Files Confession: I've dated more than one
narcissistic alcoholic (someone who had substance abuse issues in
addition to their abusive traits)---which is confusing because neither
of my parents or anyone I knew growing up had problems with alcohol.
There was no childhood programming for this one, just mere coincidence
and the fact that narcissists and the fact that narcissists often have
co-morbid substance abuse issues along with their personality disorders.
Yet there were a few incidents I had that proved to me yet again that
the way an abuser treated me wasn't the first time he had treated
someone else this way. 1. I discovered that an alcoholic narcissist I
had been dating would also go into "rages" with his friends as well---he
even at one point blocked his best friend from messaging him during one
of his drunken rages. 2. Another person I dated treated his friend in
the exact same manner--- threatening them, documenting them during a
conversation where he was provoking his friend and putting them
down---as they did when they were drunk with me. The way an abusive
person treats others, especially loved ones or close friends---with
contempt, lack of empathy---can be a clue into their condition. There
will be some people they appear to treat better than you (their harem
members) because they keep those people at a distance and rarely lose
their false mask with them. I always say that the members of a
narcissist's harem are in a "perpetual idealization phase with no
discard---yet" but rest assured, at some point, they will let their mask
slip with those people too and their character will soon become apparent
to them as well.

The man or woman with two faces can be hard to pin down, but for the
sake of clarity, it's important to establish a foundation of exactly
what a narcissist is---and the best way to interpret a narcissist's
character is actually through his or her bizarre, abusive behavior. So
what is a narcissist? I've created a helpful acronym for you to remember
how a narcissist operates---which will be explored more in-depth in the
rest of the essays in this collection. While it "simplifies" a
narcissist's behavior and certainly doesn't account for extenuating
circumstances that may go into other causes for this type of behavior
aside from narcissism, I find it very helpful to refer to if I am
dealing with someone who really does meet the criteria for malignant
narcissism. Never admits to being wrong. Avoids emotions, empathy and
accountability. Rages if anyone challenges their false sense of
superiority. Childish when they don't get their way. Instills doubt in
their victims. Stonewalls during conflicts. Smears and slanders you. In
denial and gaslights you. Subjects you to the silent treatment.
Triangulates you and tears you down. And of course, we can't move
forward without an acronym for this book's title---POWER---which will
help reframe your experience with narcissistic abuse:

Positioning ourselves for greater things. Owning our agency after abuse.
Writing new narratives to replace the old, disempowering ones.
Eradicating toxic habits and relationships. Recognizing our true worth
and value.

I want to end this chapter by reminding you that being powerful isn't
about denying, minimizing or excusing our victimization. A common phrase
that survivors of trauma and abuse will often use is, "I am a survivor,
not a victim." While well meaning and intended to empower, it is
important to acknowledge that we can be both victims and survivors. One
does not necessarily exclude the other. To imply otherwise is to imply
that being a victim is somehow shameful or invalid, as if it is a role
we play rather than a legitimate reality. The truth is, owning our power
and agency means recognizing the times we were once powerless. Whether
you identify as victim, survivor or thriver, know that many of us embody
these identities simultaneously. One does not exclude the other. We can
still be victorious and survive, without invalidating our own
victimization.

8

The Myths About Narcissistic Abusers Not too long ago, an otherwise
empowering feminist platform posted an article that sought to humanize
narcissists. This is only one of the many articles out there that has
had the unfortunate effect of invalidating the attempts of advocates and
mental health professionals to spread awareness about how harmful
narcissistic abuse can be. While I don't have any issues with someone
attempting to humanize narcissists and share a different perspective,
what I do have a problem with were the patronizing insinuations in the
article, not backed by research, which I knew could be very harmful and
re-traumatizing to abuse survivors who had suffered at the hands of a
malignant narcissist with no empathy and a sadistic intent to harm,
devalue, manipulate and destroy them. The article depicted narcissists
as misunderstood victims, which is exactly how many malignant
narcissists want us to see them so they can continue to get away with
their abuse. It also ignored clinical evidence that narcissists are
unlikely to seek help with the idea that "talk therapy" can help them.
As many mental health professionals who are well-versed in the topic
know, talk therapy is a narcissist's playground to blameshift, evade
accountability and smear the true victim. The fact of the matter is, the
majority of malignant narcissists do not wish to change because they do
not think there is anything wrong with their behavior. In addition,
narcissists are not always "insecure," "vulnerable" beings with low
self-esteem as the article and many others like it seem to
suggest---they

can also be grandiose, highly entitled and convey a false sense of
superiority that inevitably translates into dysfunctional, abusive
patterns in intimate relationships. Those are traits that are intrinsic
to their disorder and denying them, sugarcoating them or excusing them
isn't going to change the reality of the abuse that many survivors are
suffering every day, all over the world. My fear is that vulnerable
survivors will see this misinformed article and articles like this early
on in their recovery or when they are just realizing that their partner
has NPD. They may then take this article at face value without doing the
research that counters the discussion within its contents. While not
every narcissist may be the same and there are certainly narcissists on
the lower end of the spectrum, malignant narcissists---which are the
exact types many survivors have experienced---do get gratification from
inflicting pain upon others. There can be much harm done to a survivor
who chooses to "wait it out" and see if their love can potentially
"change" the narcissist, which it rarely does. While we as empathic
beings want to feel compassion for those in pain, that does not change
the reality that forgiving an abuser, excusing the abuse or minimizing
and denying it only perpetuates the abuse cycle and leads to further,
sometimes even lethal, harm to the victim. As society begins to wake up
to the phenomenon of narcissistic abuse and its effects, survivors are
finally beginning to speak out and share their stories. And in true
narcissistic fashion, articles like these redirect us to coddle people
who may be abusive and give them a free pass for their behavior by
basically stating that they may not have empathy, but that "they have
their reasons." In doing so, a narcissist is depicted as perfectly
entitled not to have empathy for their victims because of the
possibility that they may have experienced childhood trauma, but a
victim of narcissistic abuse who has suffered immense trauma, perhaps
even in childhood and in adulthood, is shamed for not forgiving or
showing empathy for his or her abuser. I hope you see the double
standard here---victims are shamed for speaking out about the abuse
they've suffered, accused of dehumanizing narcissists---yet
victim-blaming enablers continue to dehumanize survivors, telling them
it's their fault and that narcissists just need a little more love and
understanding.

A little more compassion will do the trick, right? I think society needs
a wakeup call: this article was a perfect example of the gaslighting,
emotional invalidation, minimization and rationalization of abuse that
survivors are unfortunately all too accustomed to. We live in a society
where a victim of abuse is blamed for not feeling compassion for his or
her abuser. This has got to stop. The problem isn't a lack of
compassion---the problem is that partners of abusive narcissists show
way too much compassion for their abusers and often remain in the
abusive cycle so long that they don't even know who they are by the end
of it. Partners of abusive narcissists and those with antisocial traits
have been told far too often that it "takes two to tango," that their
abuser needs to be coddled, "loved," and "understood," that their
addiction and anger issues made them do it, that they didn't "know any
better," that their personality disorder made them do it, that victims
should've known better---and the list goes on and on. So it's time for
us to start tackling the popular myths about narcissistic abuse in a way
that is trauma-informed and research-based, rather than driven by a
misguided notion to be so politically correct that we forget the reality
of narcissistic abuse and its effects on victims. Let's get this
straight---it's not "ableist" to call out abuse and hold abusers
accountable---it's authentic and potentially life-changing for the
survivors out there who have been silenced and shamed. While not every
garden variety narcissist will be abusive, the traits of malignant
narcissists are incredibly important to shine a light on so that the
victims of this form of abuse get the help and support they truly need.
So let's tackle these ignorant victim-blaming and abuse enabling myths,
shall we?

Myth #1. Narcissists, sociopaths (those with Antisocial Personality
Disorder) and/or psychopaths aren't aware of what they're doing. False.
The predatory nature of these types of manipulative individuals as well
as their intentional, sadistic behavior has actually been
well-documented and researched by experts such as Dr. Robert Hare, Lundy
Bancroft, Dr. Martha Stout, therapist Christine Louis de Canonville and
Dr. George Simon, many

of whom have worked with abusers and/or abuse survivors as clients.
There are many mental health professionals who can attest to the
intentional, sadistic nature of malignant narcissists and sociopaths as
well as their ability to consciously control their abusive behavior in
the public. You'll learn more about this in the next essay, "What Do
Therapists Have to Say About Narcissistic Abuse?" This goes hand in hand
with the myth that "abusers can't help it---that's just the way they
are." Any abuser who can put on a charming front for the public while
abusing their victim behind closed doors CAN in fact, "help it." Their
level of self-control can be measured in their all too measured
performances of charming a room, catering to the needs of complete
strangers, and coddling the egos of their harem members. It can also be
measured in the idealization phase of any relationship with a
narcissist---remember when they were able to control themselves so well
then, making you feel loved, supported and protected? Yeah. They know
exactly how to manage their emotions and control themselves depending on
what they need. It's not that they can't help it, or that they're
utterly helpless to their disorder---it's that they selectively choose
which victims to devalue and discard, and those victims tend to be their
loved ones. The closer you get to a narcissist intimacy-wise, the more
disempowered you will inevitably feel because you become their main
source of supply---their daily emotional punching bag that they can use
as they see fit. Meanwhile, those who do not know them well or those
they keep at a distance as supplementary supply get the charm thrown on
them excessively---until, of course, they fall into the same trap of
wanting to get closer to the narcissist. Then all bets are off, and you
get to see the man (or woman) behind the curtain. Spoiler alert: it's
not pretty. Malignant, narcissistic abusers are not in a state of
psychosis---they are making a deliberate choice to hurt and demean
someone, much like when they choose not to hurt strangers who they try
to impress. In fact, they could use the same energy they use to perform
their false mask for others into not abusing someone. They simply choose
not to. The fact of the matter is, if

abusers can choose to put on a false, charming mask to the public, they
can also choose to change their heinous behavior in private. They simply
do not wish to because their abusive behavior rewards them. Anyone who
has the intellectual capacity to blameshift, gaslight, project, turn
their abusive behavior on and off in public when convenient for them,
stage a smear campaign to escape accountability for their actions---also
has the intellectual capacity to be aware of their own blame and to
process it when a victim continually tells them, "This really hurts.
Stop it!" The bottom line is: you cannot plot to blame someone else for
your actions if you are not aware of your own blame, are aware of how
malicious and abusive your behavior would look to the public and are
attempting to escape exposure. You also cannot switch your mask rapidly
from the true self to the false self when there is a witness if your
behavior is not under your conscious control. Malignant narcissistic
abusers know exactly what they're doing---and they like it.

Myth #2. All abusers had bad childhoods and were traumatized. On the
contrary! Although there have been accounts of traumatic backgrounds for
those with disorders like Borderline Personality Disorder (which is
often misdiagnosed in people suffering from Complex PTSD), there is
still no clinical verdict on what causes a disorder such as Narcissistic
Personality Disorder. I specifically call out narcissists, those with
antisocial traits and psychopaths for a reason---by no means are my
posts applicable to all disorders or mental illnesses. Someone with
Asperger's, for example, does not have the same intentions to hurt
others as someone with Narcissistic Personality Disorder, even if both
conditions have problems with empathy because malignant narcissists are
looking to deliberately manipulate, exploit and harm others. Someone
with Borderline Personality Disorder may not act in the same callous
manner as someone with Narcissistic Personality Disorder, because there
are differences in the capacity for empathy, emotional

range and trauma background between the two (Crowell, 2009; Fertuck,
2009; Kreger 2012; APA, 2013). Undoubtedly, advocates and mental health
professionals who raise awareness about narcissistic abuse and other
forms of abuse take mental health issues very seriously and have immense
compassion for non-abusive people who struggle with their mental health.
We don't shame anyone for struggling with depression, anxiety or any
other mental illness, yet we ourselves have been shamed a great deal for
speaking the truth about the impact of abuse by malignant narcissists
and psychopaths. Abuse is still a choice an abuser makes every day---in
the case of those with NPD and ASPD, these may be personality disorders
but again, they are not a form of psychosis. Abusive individuals with
these traits rarely seek treatment and they continue to pose
considerable harm to their victims. What those who have never
experienced narcissistic abuse sometimes fail to understand is that
survivors and mental health professionals aren't blaming people for
having malignant narcissistic or antisocial traits---they are simply
holding them accountable for the abuse they continue to inflict. This is
actually the most compassionate thing they can do for abusers: hold them
accountable for evolving and taking responsibility for their behavior.
It is also the most compassionate thing they could do for the world
because the more abusers are held accountable for their actions, the
less likely victims of abuse will feel alone, alienated and invalidated;
the less likely an abuser will also think to commit unspeakable crimes
without a second thought. Remember that we are also holding abusers
accountable for their refusal to go to treatment and change their
behavior to lessen the harm that this abusive behavior has on society as
a whole as well as the destructive impact it leaves on individuals.
However that disorder arises, victims are not responsible for "fixing"
the person who demonstrates any type of abusive behavior. The person
with abusive traits is responsible for his or her own change and
healing, however much change is possible for them. Even if it is a
limited amount of behavioral change they are capable of (depending on
where they

fall on the spectrum) it can make a world of difference when they choose
to make a conscious decision to no longer abuse, or, if they feel they
cannot control themselves, to not enter intimate relationships until
they can. Remember: even if narcissists aren't capable of the type of
empathy that nonnarcissists are, they still have cold, cognitive
empathy---they can still place themselves into the shoes of the hurting
victim, even if it's in a more detached, intellectual sense. The problem
is, many of them choose not to, and malignant narcissists often enjoy
harming their victims. This is why I rarely mention a disorder like BPD
in any of my posts on narcissistic abuse---because while some of the
behaviors mentioned can apply to them too, borderline individuals, due
to their tendencies for self-harm, do often enter treatment and many can
benefit from it and change their abusive behavior. I am careful to draw
the distinctions between both because I am well aware of the differences
between BPD and NPD and the differences between those who want to change
versus those who have no interest in changing. In fact, I talk about
them at length in my books as well as my videos. I know that BPD can be
caused by an invalidating early childhood environment, that BPD
individuals are responsive to treatment via DBT and that many BPD
children were actually raised by narcissistic parents (Crowell, 2009).
While this doesn't excuse abusive behavior, I know that there are
differences in the ability of BPD individuals versus NPD individuals in
their capacity to empathize and feel remorse. Which is why I tend to
emphasize the narcissistic personality in my articles more so than other
disorders; this is not a matter of stigmatizing everyone with NPD or
even claiming that everyone with NPD is abusive, but rather, revealing
the characteristics and traits that are associated with very low
empathy, remorse, callous indifference and sadistic pleasure in harming
others---something that malignant narcissists possess. This is not a
stigmatizing label---it is the truth of their disorder. That doesn't
mean I am going to invalidate the suffering of a survivor who has been
emotionally or physically abused by a borderline personality, nor does
it mean I don't hold abusers of any disorder accountable. I acknowledge

that there are also borderlines who have co-morbid traits of malignant
narcissism and that's a whole other set of issues altogether. What this
does mean is that I acknowledge that abusers who enter treatment and
work hard to change their behavior are going to have a different impact
on their victims and society than those who refuse to change and
continue to engage in intimate relationships with the intention of
harming others. The ones who refuse to work on their behavior are the
subject of many articles about narcissistic abuse---not the ones who
enter treatment and work hard to get help. Those with NPD also do not
necessarily have trauma in their backgrounds as BPD individuals are
likely to have. New research has actually confirmed that narcissism in
children can be caused by overvaluing and spoiling children. As I
mentioned in a previous essay, a new study by the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences (2015) discovered that parents who
overvalued their children by telling them how special they were actually
produced narcissistic children. In their words, "Narcissism was
predicted by parental overvaluation, not by lack of parental warmth.
Thus, children seem to acquire narcissism, in part, by internalizing
parents' inflated views of them (e.g., 'I am superior to others' and 'I
am entitled to privileges')." Narcissists can most likely come from a
variety of backgrounds, some with trauma and some without any trauma.
That being said, someone's childhood or trauma does not excuse their
abusive behavior. PTSD or trauma, is not an excuse for (nor does it
justify) abusive or bullying behavior. How do I know? I've known many
survivors who have suffered through immense trauma---yet they do not go
out of their way to harass and bully others, especially not those they
do not even know. However, I have known many bullies, who either act as
victims or shame victims of abuse for not feeling enough "compassion"
for their abusers. Meanwhile, they themselves stalk, harass and belittle
anyone who dares to question them or call them out on their abusive
behavior. The difference between a traumatized survivor and an abuser is
that the former is able to evolve and recognize their mistakes, while
the latter is not at all interested in evolving.

Remember that abuse is a choice, and that everyone is responsible for
managing their own triggers. There are many traumatized survivors out
there who, when triggered, learn to manage their triggers and not lash
out. They recognize that they are acting out due to their triggers and
they take full responsibility for when they do. And yet there are just
as many abusers who use trauma as an excuse to continue abusing. Not
every abuse victim becomes an abuser and not every abuser is an abuse
victim. A person's malignant behavior has more to do with their choices
than their history. Regardless of your diagnostic label or lack thereof,
you do not get to get away with abuse unless you really are in a state
of psychosis. Why? Because there are many children of narcissistic
parents or ex-spouses of narcissists who are very vigilant about their
own toxic behavior as well as their triggers. They are usually the ones
who end up seeking therapy because they do not want to become abusers
themselves.

Myth \# 3. Their addiction or their mental illness made them do it.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder is not the same type of mental illness
as schizophrenia, so please stop perpetuating this pity ploy that "they
can't help it." As I've already stated twice, a personality disorder is
not a form of severe psychosis that causes debilitation to the mental
capacity of the individuals affected. While these individuals have a
limited capacity for empathy, narcissists do not lack the intellectual
capacity to process right from wrong nor are they prevented from getting
help or working to change their behaviors. The National Domestic
Violence hotline shuts down the myth that a person's mental illness is
the sole cause of abuse; while a mental illness can co-exist and
exacerbate abusive behavior, the abuser ultimately makes the choice to
abuse and is therefore still accountable for their actions. Addiction
also does not excuse their behavior; not all addicts are abusive
narcissists. Addiction is usually co-morbid with, and not the cause of
Narcissistic Personality Disorder. Therapist Lundy Bancroft (2002), who
has

worked with many abusers with addiction issues, notes that they were
able to consciously control their abusive behavior even under the
influence of substances. In fact, many of these abusive partners
intentionally used drugs in order to engage in abusive behavior and use
their addiction as an excuse to lash out freely and uncensored under the
excuse of being inebriated. We know from the voices of sociopaths and
narcissists themselves (such as Sam Vaknin and M.E. Thomas) that
malignant narcissists, sociopaths and psychopathic individuals take a
sadistic joy in harming others. They are well aware of the harm their
behaviors cause. How do we know this? Because they tailor their comments
and actions to hurt their victims where it most hurts. In fact, the pain
and trauma of their victims serve as a source of narcissistic supply.
Their awareness doesn't mean they think anything is necessarily wrong
with them---in fact, they believe they are perfectly entitled to doing
whatever they want to fulfill their agenda, regardless of who it harms.
Narcissists could easily take the same energy they use in controlling
their public image or manufacturing chaos in their relationships and
apply it to controlling their behavior in private, behind closed doors.
They choose when and where it is "safe" to rage---usually at their loved
ones. Unlike the rage of those with just Borderline Personality Disorder
(and not co-morbid with NPD), this type of rage is not dissociative; it
is deliberate, enacted in order to control and overpower their victims.
Their behavior is not entirely reflexive and unconscious; much of it
stems from an intentional choice they make every day. They choose to
take a break from their own pathological issues by projecting,
gaslighting and verbally demeaning their victims. They choose not to
seek treatment and they choose to continue to abuse. Their behavior
rewards them and while they can theoretically make the efforts to
change, they feel no need to do so.

Myth #4. The victim finally reacted to the abuse so it must be mutual
abuse and both of them are at fault for the "dysfunctional"
relationship. Actually, it's more likely that the victim has finally
snapped due to the

amount of chronic abuse and trauma he or she has been subjected to.
Reactions caused by chronic abuse are not the same thing as "mutual
abuse"---they are maladaptive coping mechanisms to survive and attempt
to regain control in an abusive environment that has left the victim
feeling helpless and powerless. In some cases, they are also
self-defense. We have to be careful about distinguishing between an
abusive partner who has subjected a victim to longterm manipulation
versus a victim who may be retriggered and re-traumatized throughout the
relationship and provoked to look "crazy" to the public, as abusive
partners are prone to doing.

Myth #5. The victim is still in the relationship or stayed for a long
time, so it's their fault for tolerating the abuse or "co-creating" the
abuse. Abuse causes physical, emotional and psychological changes in the
victim, including biochemical and trauma bonds which tethers abuse
victims to their abusers psychologically, emotionally and
physiologically. You cannot truly "co-create" anything in such an
imbalanced power dynamic that is an abusive relationship. There are many
reasons why abuse survivors stay far beyond the first incident of abuse
that have little to do with the intelligence or strength of the victim
and everything to do with the severity of the trauma they've
experienced. As you know, narcissistic abuse can also lead to what
psychotherapist Christine Louis de Canonville calls "Narcissistic Victim
Syndrome," and victims of chronic abuse may also develop symptoms of
PTSD or Complex PTSD which severely hinder their self-esteem, executive
functioning and decision-making. The more we justify any form of abuse,
rationalize it, minimize it, or attribute it to anything other than the
abuser, we fail to support the victims who actually need our compassion
and empathy. We cannot expect change in any society where an abuser is
not held accountable for his or her actions. Accountability for abusers
is needed because narcissists don't respond to

empathy, compassion or second chances. They respond to potential
consequences. Asking for accountability means that we acknowledge that
an abusive person is still responsible for his or her behavior and the
harm it causes, regardless of the reasons for why the person is abusive.
The cycle of misplaced shame goes like this: (1) A victim is abused, and
tries to speak about the abuse. (2) Society attempts to silence, blame
and shame him/her for the abuse and speaking out, often telling the
victim to speak more "nicely" about his or her abuser and recognize the
abuser's pain instead of recognizing and validating their own pain. (3)
The victim is left feeling further alienated and unsupported, while the
abuser is free to continue to abuse without any accountability
whatsoever. We are empathic beings, which means that some survivors may
feel pity or compassion for their narcissistic abuser. This is an
individual decision and not one that other survivors or non-survivors
should police. If you wish to feel compassion for your abuser, please be
sure that you are putting your own selfcompassion first and not using
your compassion to release your abuser from accountability or using that
compassion as an excuse to prolong that relationship. If you do not
understand this predatory personality and seek to sympathize with them
more than you are detaching from them, rest assured that there will be
harm done. This type of manipulation is cruel and the trauma can last a
lifetime. As much as I can feel empathy for all the parties involved, I
won't feed into this blameshifting, minimization or denial of the impact
of abuse. Abusers and victim-blamers have been getting away with this
discourse for way too long. I am here to support survivors and help to
create constructive change in a society that shames and silences them.
To read more about the distinctions between mental illness and abuse,
addiction and abuse, as well as the myth of "mutual abuse," see the
following articles by the National Domestic Violence Hotline: The Myth
of Mutual Abuse by Jessica R. Why We Don't Recommend Couples' Counseling
for Abusive

Relationships by B. Rollings Drugs, Alcohol and Abuse by B. Rollings
Blame-shifting and Minimizing: There's No Excuse for Abuse by Kathryn
Robinson Abuse and Mental Illness: Is there a Connection?

References American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Publishing. Bancroft, L. (2002). Why does he do
that?: Inside the minds of angry and controlling men. New York: Putnam's
Sons. Bardenstein, K. K., Ph.D. (2009). The Cracked Mirror: Features of
Narcissistic Personality Disorder in Children. Psychiatric Annals,
39(3). doi:10.4135/9781412950510.n565 Bonn, S. A. (2014, January 22).
How to Tell a Sociopath from a Psychopath.
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/wickeddeeds/201401/how-tell-sociopath-psychopath
Brummelman, E., Thomaes, S., Nelemans, S. A., Castro, B. O., Overbeek,
G., & Bushman, B. J. (2015). Origins of narcissism in children.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Proc Natl Acad Sci USA,
201420870. doi:10.1073/pnas.1420870112 Brown, S. L. (2010, August 28).
60 Million People in the U.S. Negatively Affected By Someone Else's
Pathology. Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/pathological-relationships/201008/60-million-people-in-the-us-negatively-affectedsomeone-elses

Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P., & Linehan, M. M. (2009). A Biosocial
Developmental Model of Borderline Personality: Elaborating and Extending
Linehan's Theory. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2696274/ Fenichel, O.
(1945). The psychoanalytic theory of neurosis. New York: W.W. Norton &
Co. Fertuck, E. A. (2009, July 29). Borderline Empathy Revisited.
Retrieved January 03, 2017, from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/science-the-border/200907/borderline-empathy-revisited
Hare, R. D. (1999). Without conscience: The disturbing world of the
psychopaths among us. New York: Guilford Press. Haslam, C., & Montrose,
V. T. (2015). Should have known better: The impact of mating experience
and the desire for marriage upon attraction to the narcissistic
personality. Personality and Individual Differences, 82, 188-192.
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2015.03.032 Jacoby, M., & Kohut, H. (1990).
Individuation and narcissism: The psychology of the self in Jung and
Kohut. London: Routledge.

Jeltsen, M. (2016, June 23). Man Charged With Murder For Allegedly
Driving His Partner To Suicide. Retrieved from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/jessica-haban-domestic-violence-suicide_us_576ab898e4b09926ce5d4a53
Kreger, R. (2012, April 4). Why they can't feel joy: Narcissistic
shallow emotions. Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/stop-walking-eggshells/201204/why-they-cant-feel-joy-narcissistic-shallow-emotions.

Lavender, N. J. (2014, January 10). The Narcissistic Wound. Retrieved
from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/impossibleplease/201401/the-narcissistic-wound
Louis De Canonville, Christine (2015). The Three Faces of Evil:Unmasking
the Full Spectrum of Narcissistic Abuse, Black Card Books. MacKenzie, J.
(2015). Psychopath free: Recovering from emotionally abusive
relationships with narcissists, sociopaths, and other toxic people.
Penguin Group.

Stout, M. (2005). The sociopath next door: The ruthless versus the rest
of us. New York: Broadway Books. Vaknin, S., & Rangelovska, L. (2007).
Malignant self love: Narcissism revisited. Prague: Narcissus
Publications.

9

What Do Therapists Have to Say About Narcissistic Abuse? As the word
about narcissistic abuse spreads, survivors and mental professionals are
both raising their voices to spread awareness. I am so grateful for the
mental health professionals I have connected with over the course of
this advocacy work, all of whom have a deep understanding of the complex
dynamics involved in narcissistic abuse and the workings of pathological
people. They are well aware of the impact of narcissistic abuse and what
it is like to be with a narcissistic abuser. I asked some therapists who
have a wealth of experience in the mental health field and with
disordered personalities what they thought regarding the following
questions, and they didn't hold back on their wisdom. Each shares their
unique insights drawn from their expertise in the field and from their
lives.

From your experience as a therapist or professional, how do you think
narcissistic abuse affects its victims? Melanie Vann, Therapist, Life
Coach and Co-Director of Mental Health News Radio says: Narcissistic
Abuse confuses your executive decision-making. Because of cognitive
dissonance, gaslighting, word salad, one becomes detached from their
very sense of self. The slow drip of this loss of self pushes one
further into a place of only surviving day by day interaction by
interaction. One can begin to lose all insight into logical and rational
thinking because the victim is

always trying to keep the narcissist happy or at the very least,
neutral. One begins to abandon themselves in order to protect the status
quo in the relationship. The dehumanizing tactics of the narcissist
drive the victim into a place of persistent relational preservation so
that the abusive actions are never really processed but just avoided
momentarily. This pain grows so exponentially internally and invisibly
that the victim will at all cost do what is needed to not have to face
the pain that they are existing in a relationship and perhaps love
someone who is not---in many ways---human. The victim begins to lose all
ability to think for themselves or make decisions that don't first
divert naturally to the narcissist's reaction to that decision. Soon,
simple things like when one washes clothes or dishes become difficult:
every glass is cleaned in order to please the narcissist; every piece of
clothing is folded as a way to meet the expectation of the abuser.
Eventually, daily living becomes a quest for perfection. This is a
pseudo-perfection because, in actuality, nothing is ever good enough for
the narcissist. This abuser robs their victim of their independence and
self-efficacy which takes them back to an emotional childhood similar to
when they could not make decisions on their own or even ties one's shoes
with confidence. This way, the victim is afraid to live without the
abuser because internally they are motivated not by themselves, but by
the narcissist. Andrea Schneider, LCSW, Author of Soul Vampires:
Reclaiming Your Lifeblood After Narcissistic Abuse, says: Narcissistic
abuse affects survivors on a visceral level, whereby many experience
C-PTSD, and at a minimum, signs of depression, anxiety, PTSD, and
traumatic loss. Self-esteem takes a major hit and on average, recovery
is around the (at minimum) 18-month zone post No Contact. That is when
an individual hits that "I can put this past me" milestone. The Body
Keeps the Score by Bessel van der Kolk and Complex PTSD by Pete Walker
both illuminate what an NVS survivor is experiencing and what needs to
happen, in part, in terms of moving forward.

Monica White, M.S., LPC, Licensed Professional Counselor says:
Narcissistic abuse is a hidden mental health epidemic with a significant
cost on victims and society. It does not discriminate---it currently
exists in every culture, every socio-economic status, every state, and
every city. Victims are left with profound psychological wounds; a sense
of grief and loss for their place in this world; and questions about
justice in humanity. Symptoms of trauma or grief present initially as
difficulties managing emotions, selfsoothing, concentrating, and/or a
combination of other uncomfortable thoughts and feelings. If left
untreated, these symptoms may lead to a loss of connection or inability
to survive and thrive.

What is the number one tip you would give to survivors who are looking
to not only survive, but also thrive after their experience of
narcissistic abuse? Melanie Vann, Therapist, Life Coach and Co-Director
of Mental Health News Radio says: NO CONTACT, but if one must interact
with their abuser, then learn the skill of grey rocking. Begin to get to
know oneself again. Do things you love, and every time you want to reach
out to the abuser, instead turn that desire back to yourself because
that longing is your desire for self not the narcissist. Love yourself
the way you thought you loved the narcissist. Go through the processes
of grief...it is multi-layered. Find a good grief therapist. Forgive
yourself for abandoning yourself and grant yourself grace for what you
have endured. Monica White, M.S., LPC, Licensed Professional Counselor
says: Clinicians have spent years studying the cause and effect of
traumatic relationships on our self and society. What we've learned
through the research is that the journey of healing is best accomplished
with empathetic others--- such as supportive advocates, fellow
survivors, or trauma-sensitive clinicians ---who have an understanding
of the psychological effects of trauma.

Trauma recovery is best managed when the client's experience is
normalized and validated; when a safe outlet is provided to learn how to
process and gain mastery over the experience, and when the client is
given options on how to manage their recovery at their preferred pace.
If mental health professionals and victims alike continue the work of
joining together to connect with each other, we will be able to raise
awareness of this epidemic and begin to give a sense of safety and
justice to the suffering and grief of trauma survivors. Andrea
Schneider, LCSW, Author of Soul Vampires: Reclaiming Your Lifeblood
After Narcissistic Abuse, says: Know your worth. Reclaim it. Own It. And
in so doing, you are able to go No Contact/Limited Contact, set the
essential healthy boundaries for healthy relationships, and mourn the
traumatic losses associated with narcissistic abuse.

Can narcissists ever change/is it worth ever "empathizing" with a
narcissist to the point of staying in the relationship? Monica White,
M.S., LPC, Licensed Professional Counselor says: It's natural for
readers who don't understand Narcissistic Personality Disorder or
Antisocial Personality Disorder to want to fix "the wounded bird"---the
disordered person---with love and naive determination. The adage "love
heals all wounds" is, after all, fixed into our collective psyche. While
the sentiment works for normal functioning people, it doesn't work for
malignant narcissists. It's actually counterproductive and even
dangerous. Those with narcissistic or antisocial traits are born
genetically "wired" for various degrees of empathy; each one is unique
due to a combination of neurobiology and nurture---but regardless, we
call this "psychopathology" for a reason. Psychiatrists and specialized
psychotherapists are the ones who study and specialize in severe
disorders. There are countless books and journal articles written by
experts trying to understand the nature of this disorder. Fortunately,
there are also psychiatrists, psychologists, judges, social workers, and
family lawyers who have a firm understanding of "almost

psychopaths"---they work and do "risk management" with them every day in
hospitals and court systems. As of yet, they do not have a "cure" or
"treatment" for psychopathy. I would advise readers and survivors to do
what professionals do---learn how to do "risk management" and safety
planning with an experienced professional. Do not do it alone. Melanie
Vann, Therapist, Life Coach and Co-Director of Mental Health News Radio
says: No, narcissists don't believe they need to change. They may change
momentarily if their reputation or image is at stake but they will
eventually return to the same emotional status. It is important when
leaving a narcissist to have a well thought out plan so that you are
least likely to return. Have supports and other resources to help you
through the tough times. Andrea Schneider, LCSW, Author of Soul
Vampires: Reclaiming Your Lifeblood After Narcissistic Abuse, says:
Extreme malignant narcissists or psychopaths are sadistic and beyond
help, devoid of any empathy or remorse for their actions. Those with
your gardenvariety NPD may have dashes of empathy or insight here or
there, but they are unable to maintain empathy for any long period of
time and sustain it in a healthy way. At best, a relationship with a
malignant narcissist or psychopath will be fraught with one-way
nurturance. The partner of the NPD individual will be drained dry of any
mutual support or empathy. It is not a healthy situation for the partner
and the NPD individual is generally rigid, fixed and fused to their
ways/melded into the psyche they have (with lots of "holes"). The
individual with only "traits"(a smattering here or there of arrogance or
entitlement) show the best hope for lasting change IF they go into
intensive counseling and can own responsibility for their misdeeds and
then make the compromise and committed actions to change. Even the
latter scenario is a difficult outcome to achieve. It is best not to be
involved with any person who has narcissistic qualities in any way shape
or form (especially those at the far end of the spectrum)---sticking
your finger in the fire will always equate to pain.

Do narcissists deliberately harm their victims? Why do you think so?
Melanie Vann, Therapist, Life Coach and Co-Director of Mental Health
News Radio says: Yes. They may not be astutely aware of why they hurt
you but they know they like it. Seeing the pain in your face decreases
the pain they feel because the of the lack of soul they have.
Pathological envy is relieved temporarily because for however long their
victims' pain lasts, they feel superior. Their harm is to deliberately
confuse, gaslight, distort your sense of self which they have none of.
It is about maintaining constant control. Pain is a drug to many of
them. If they can cause the victim pain, theirs feels less obvious. I
believe they do have an acute level of empathy but only for the
self...the last few steps of empathy are forgotten in their minds...they
have to be able to put themselves in their victim's shoes so they can
know how to perfectly execute their demise. This is what is confusing to
many empaths because on a basic level they know the narcissist appears
empathic but one must understand that with the narcissist, empathy is a
tool...not something they use to be altruistic. They use it against you
instead of gifting it to you. This is the bedrock of the psychological
abuse that occurs...this "pseudo empathy" that tricks even the best of
us. Monica White, M.S., LPC, Licensed Professional Counselor says: If
you have one person with narcissistic traits interacting with another
person, there is a likely chance that the second person will develop
side-effects (trauma symptoms) from the daily interaction. Therefore,
now two types of people are interacting with each other---a person with
narcissistic traits and a person with developing trauma symptoms.
Whether or not the harm is deliberate, the bottom line is there are two
people existing together in a toxic cycle---perpetrator and victim---and
neither of them are going to be able to function in a healthy, safe
manner without outside intervention and support. Andrea Schneider, LCSW,
Author of Soul Vampires: Reclaiming Your

Lifeblood After Narcissistic Abuse, says: Extreme narcissists (malignant
narcissists and psychopaths) do deliberately and premeditatedly cause
harm---and they enjoy it. They love hurting people as a form of
narcissistic supply. Now, that is downright devious. Those with "traits"
or garden-variety NPD can and do cause pain but they are not always
intending to cause harm---it's just a side effect of their
self-absorption and lack of awareness of how their entitlement hurts
others. Some with "traits" or those that show more BPD traits may show a
little more guilt or remorse or empathy about hurting a loved one...but
that doesn't make them any healthier to deal with! I have known some
NPD/BPD folks and clients who have interfaced with those
individuals...it's not good. Having a relationship of any kind with an
Axis 2 personality disordered person who is unwilling to change or get
treatment is going to be hell. No way around it. Period.

ABOUT THE THERAPISTS Andrea Schneider, MSW, LCSW, is a licensed
psychotherapist and life coach, with a private practice in Southern
California. She has been practicing for more than 20 years, helping
women, men, children, teens and families heal from trauma, loss, abuse
and major depression/anxiety at various life transitions. Andrea
received her MSW (masters in social work) from the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, and her bachelor's in psychology from UCLA. She has
worked in numerous clinical settings ranging from a domestic violence
safe shelter, school-based counseling for children and teens, community
mental health clinic, day treatment facility, a hospice and a
psychiatric mental health clinic for a major HMO. She has been in
private practice for more than 11 years. Andrea also brings her
expertise to supervising pre-licensed, master's-level clinicians and
enjoys training other therapists and medical practitioners in her areas
of expertise. She provides inperson psychotherapy as well as telehealth
support. Visit Andrea's website and blog at andreaschneiderlcsw.com.
Melanie Vann, MA in Counseling Psychology, Certified AACC Life Coach,
EAGALA Certified Equine Therapist has been in the mental health field
for over 15 years. She obtained her Master of Arts in Counseling
Psychology from Regent University. Her passion to help others embrace
their hardships and heal has taken her to multiple realms of the mental
health industry. She founded her own life coaching business and is a
certified AACC Life Coach. She also has professional training in Equine
Assisted Psychotherapy through the world renowned EAGALA certification
program. Her expertise is multi-dimensional as she has counseled those
suffering from eating disorders, Brain Injury, Borderline Personality
Disorder, depression and anxiety, self-mutilation, sexual abuse,
emotional abuse, and unresolved grief. She is currently working as the
Marketing and Advocacy Director for Mental Health News Radio. She is
also occasionally a co-host. Monica White, M.S., LPC, Licensed
Professional Counselor received her Master of Science (M.S.) in Clinical
Mental Health Counseling from the

University of Arkansas; and has since completed 3,000 supervised hours
postgraduate for the professional counselor license. During her
internship, she worked on a hospital inpatient behavioral health unit
conducting assessment and therapy. Throughout graduate school, she
worked with survivors of trauma and with crisis intervention in forensic
and hospital emergency room settings. She currently works as a bilingual
counselor at a nonprofit agency and is trained in cognitive-processing
therapy for post-traumatic stress. In addition to individual therapy,
she has facilitated over 450 therapy groups with varying issues ranging
from family & domestic violence, crisis intervention, anxiety & mood
disorders, personality disorders, adverse childhood experiences,
post-traumatic stress, child welfare, and grief & loss. Psychoeducation
and process groups center around introducing skills such as increasing
emotional and physical safety, identifying the effects of bullying on
self and children, nurturing parenting, building healthy relationships,
stress management, identifying resilience factors, increasing
self-efficacy, and assertiveness training.

10

The Myth of Codependency and the Power of the Trauma Bond Ever had a
victim-blamer claim you were "codependent"? That you in some way
deserved the abuse, or that it was your fault? Let them know:
codependency is a term historically used to describe interactions
between addicts and their loved ones, not victims and their abusers.
Dr. Clare Murphy (2016) asserts that abuse victims can actually exhibit
codependent traits as a result of trauma, not because they are, in fact,
codependent. Contrary to popular myth, anyone can be victimized by an
abuser---even someone with strong boundaries initially, because covert
abuse is insidious and unbelievably traumatic. Remember that abuse can
result in symptoms of PTSD, complex PTSD, or if victims were abused by a
malignant narcissist, what is known as Narcissistic Victim Syndrome.
Abuse also involves a slow erosion of boundaries over time. The abuser
first idealizes the victim, then begins to test and push the boundaries
of the victim once he or she has already been conned into the sham of a
relationship. Meanwhile, the survivor of abuse is like a frog in slowly
boiling water, gaslit into believing that it is all their fault, not
knowing the danger they're in until it's too late. What if you believe
you are truly codependent in some way? It's important to keep in mind
that the lines can be blurred between our own traits and the
psychological reliance that arises from having to survive an abusive,
unpredictable and tumultuous environment. I don't think it's a problem
for a

survivor of their own accord to say, "I have codependent traits" and
work on healing those---especially if they had them before the abusive
relationship. But for society to see codependency as the sole reason
abuse occurred, and use it to blame the abuse victim when there are
plenty of victims who were never codependent prior to the experience, is
where the harm comes in. We need to stop stereotyping all abuse victims
as codependent and start refocusing on the traumatic bond that forms
between abuser and survivor, regardless of the victim's traits. In some
contexts, it may be helpful to pinpoint codependent traits and behaviors
during the healing journey. But when the label codependent is used to
shame, stigmatize or blame abuse survivors, it becomes very problematic
and harmful. We need to be able to take into account the idea that
emotional and psychological abuse, much like assault or any other form
of physical violence, is not our fault. We can own our agency and heal
without having to blame ourselves in the process. The fault lies with
the perpetrator, not with the victim. It is not the victim's fault for
'choosing' the abuser either, because victims rarely consciously choose
an abuser. They choose someone who appears rather kind, caring and
compassionate at the onset. The victim falls in love and invests in the
false mask an abuser portrays, and not the true self of the abuser. It
is only when they are invested in the relationship that the mask begins
to slip and the terror begins. Once someone has been traumatized again
and again by someone who claimed to love them, once an abuser has warped
the victim's reality and caused him or to mistrust their perceptions
through gaslighting, once a victim has been made to believe he or she is
worthless, they are already traumatically bonded to their abusers. It
takes a great deal of professional support, validation and resources in
order for victims to detach from their abusers and begin to heal. The
myth of codependency also casts the abuse victim as an 'enabler' who, by
their own behavior, contributed to being abused. Let's get this
straight: there is only one person who can "control" the abuse, and that
is the abuser

alone. There is a great deal of variety within the survivor group and we
have to acknowledge that there are many survivors who come into the
abusive relationship very independent, strong-willed, and empathic, but
their strengths are exploited, manipulated and slowly broken down by the
abuser over time. It doesn't matter how codependent or how independent
we are, because abusers will abuse their victims regardless---that is
their nature. If you get involved with an abuser, as many survivors do
while not knowing their real character, you will be abused, regardless
of how independent you are. In fact, abusers would probably enjoy the
challenge if their victims were independent, as sick as they are. When
it comes to living in a perpetual war zone of intermittent kindness and
chronic cruelty, there is no 'enabling' of the abuse, merely a need to
survive in a hostile environment. There is a clear power imbalance
between abuser and victim as the abuser 'manages down' the victim's
expectations, threatens, controls, coerces, blameshifts and projects
onto the victim his or her own vile attributes. As the victim is
verbally abused, psychologically terrorized and emotionally assaulted,
he or she has to find ways to minimize, rationalize, deny and 'bond'
with the abuser in an effort to survive. This is a survival mechanism
known as 'trauma bonding,' and victim-blamers ought to educate
themselves on it because anyone can be made to 'act' or 'appear'
codependent simply by being traumatized in the first place (Carnes,
1997). As I describe in a later essay, abuse has traumatic effects on
the brain, tying us psychologically, biochemically and psychologically
with our abusers. This bond has very little to do with codependency and
everything to do with the traumatic effects of abuse. Even a highly
independent victim who is strong-willed at the beginning of the
relationship can begin to demonstrate symptoms of the trauma bond, PTSD
or Complex PTSD---because it doesn't have anything to do with the traits
of the victim when it comes to trauma. No one is immune to the effects
of severe, life-changing trauma and chronic abuse---no one. Even if you
feel you have codependent traits or were 'primed' by childhood abuse,
the abuse you've experienced in any stage of your life is still not your

fault. You are not an "enabler" of the abuser. You are a victim who has
been traumatically bonded to an abuser in an effort to survive.
Understand the trauma bond, and you will understand how it is different
from your actual feelings of disgust, anger and pain towards your
abuser. Your authentic feelings about your abuser are buried beneath the
apparently inextricable bond. In order to extricate yourself, you must
develop a separation between the bond and your actual reality of the
abuse. Write about the abuse when you feel safe to do so; consult a
trauma-informed, validating mental health professional and speak with
other survivors to validate the manipulation and mistreatment you've
endured. Holding onto the reality of the abuse as well as your true
feelings about it is one of the most important things you can do in
order to resist the gaslighting effect, release self-blame and begin to
break the chains of the trauma bond. The bond may keep you attached to
your abuser, but it is possible to sever it and regain your power.

References Carnes, P. (1997). The betrayal bond: Breaking free of
exploitive relationships. Deerfield Beach, FL: Health Communications.
Murphy, C. (2016). "Are women who live with abusive partners
codependent?" Speak Out Loud, 20 June 2016.

11

6 Subtle Digs Covert Narcissists Use to Underhandedly Belittle You
Dealing with an overt narcissistic bully may be frightening and
intimidating, but dealing with a covert narcissist is a whole new
monster. Covert narcissists blind you with their saccharine sweetness;
they present the perfect public image, routinely go on their knees to
pray, say their mantras on their yoga mats, preach "peace and
compassion," all while plotting how to best stab you in the back. Think
Regina George (or simply George, if you're dealing with a covert
narcissistic male), version 3.0, who knows how to hand out pithy
platitudes while engaging in some of the most malicious and
underhandedly deplorable behavior possible. In some ways, covert
narcissists are worse than overt ones. At least overt ones are open
about how devious they really are. Here are six subtle digs they may use
to belittle you in sneaky ways you never saw coming. 1. Concern
trolling. Concern trolling was probably invented by your judgmental
great-great-great-grandmother or snooty aunt in the late 1800s, but it
is used by narcissists and sociopaths alike all over the world today as
their chronic mode of communication when overt bullying methods just
don't cut it. Concern trolling involves covertly putting someone down
with an air of contemptuous, condescending "concern"---which barely
disguises the knowing smirk and sadistic glint in a narcissist's eyes
when they do it. Concern trolling features gems like, "Are you concerned
about getting a job

with your major?" "I am worried about your health---are you sure you're
eating enough?" and "Do you really think you can afford that apartment?"
What does it mean when a narcissist is concern trolling you? It usually
means they're looking to get in a subtle dig without you holding them
accountable for it, and they're looking for an easy way to hold you down
when you're climbing to the top or daring to feel too good about
yourself. Those who aren't aware of a narcissist's tricks may fall into
the trap of second-guessing themselves as soon as the narcissist or
sociopath puts on an air of being concerned---but unless you're dealing
with a non-narcissist who may actually be genuinely worried about your
welfare, or someone who's operating from their own trauma and fear, you
can bet that their so-called anxiety is motivated by a need to pull you
down from whatever current accomplishment you're slaying in. Making too
much money? Got a lease on your dream apartment? Looking hotter than
ever? Expect subtle digs from a covert narcissist, who will look for
ways to find anything---yes, anything---and everything wrong or could go
potentially wrong with the dream life you're living or your recent
success. Remember: abusive, covert narcissists aren't actually
worrywarts---they're sadistic, entitled people who always need to feel
ahead of everyone. Lest you prove their false sense of superiority wrong
or gain something that they covet because of their pathological envy,
you'll be sure to encounter jealousy and underhanded attacks from a
covert narcissist who always needs to feel like they've "won." The best
way to trick a narcissist you can't avoid into leaving you alone? Don't
share your success too often unless you want them trying to sabotage it.
Save that for real friends and trustworthy co-workers or family members.
If you really want to trick a narcissist (and I don't advise this,
because why waste your time when you could spend that energy on No
Contact?) tell narcissists all about your false insecurities (things you
couldn't care less about them insulting because you're way too confident
in those arenas), and they'll

be all over that shit---meanwhile leaving your real wounds (and recent
successes) alone. And go on your way with yo' bad self. 2. The
unexpected flash of Mr. (or Ms.) Hyde after Jekyll. Covert narcissists
know that when they leave someone's head spinning and heart aching,
they're more likely to be memorable---and there's nothing they love more
than feeling smug and important, validated in their deluded grandiosity.
That's why they twist your words, blame you for the abuse and are likely
to engage in hot and cold behavior to the max---so you can spend nights
ruminating, weeping and ruining your own life over them. To narcissists,
someone else's destruction is their own personal win, and there's
nothing they love more than using their shady ambiguity to lure you in
just to attack. One of the most insidious and hideous ways a narcissist
can get under your skin and in your head is by playing the ole'
switcheroo on you. This involves being quite lovely and generous to you
one minute, only to pull the rug underneath you at the last second and
laugh as you fall. They may treat you to a romantic evening, only to
treat you to a rage attack afterward over something irrelevant. They may
bring you home for the holidays to meet their family, only to demean and
humiliate you during the experience. They may talk about a spectacular
getaway with you, describing it in all of its glory, until abruptly
falling short of executing the plan with a sudden excuse or insult
towards you. Vacation or celebration? Oh, they'll offer to plan and
maybe even pay for all of it---so long as you pay emotionally and
psychologically as punishment. In a narcissist's warped mind, there's no
such thing as a free lunch, a free dinner, or even a gift on your
birthday---you always "owe" them something, and that something usually
manifests in their control over you and their ability to switch between
a warm, loving persona to a cold, contemptuous one within minutes.
Protect yourself. Always "split" things monetarily with a narcissist
whenever possible so they can never say you owe them (at least, not in a
court of law--- they may still say you owe them, because well, they're
still a deluded

narcissist). Don't allow them to spoil and lavish you with things that
you'll inevitably "pay" for later---in much more heartbreaking ways.
Their lovebombing is not genuine generosity, it's genuine curiosity
about how much control you're willing to give over due to their facade.
They're not investing in you because they care for and love
you---they're investing because they want a return. 3. Hearsay from the
Third Wheel.Since narcissists enjoy triangulation, it makes sense that
narcissists fabricate scenarios to bring a third party into the dynamic
of the relationship. This third wheel can be anybody---a friend, a
stranger, a co-worker, a family member...the list goes on and there are
no restrictions. Usually you'll hear that this third wheel judging you
in some way (when in reality, they've probably never even heard of you
or, if they have, they've heard the narcissist bragging about you to
triangulate them---the same way you heard about them)---conveniently in
the same way the narcissist feels about you but would never dare to
admit overtly. The narcissist may use the third wheel not just as a way
to evoke your jealousy and provoke and compare you, but also to "speak
through them" and demean you. Think of malignant narcissists as master
ventriloquists. They might claim that "Nancy from work thinks you're too
uptight," or "My parents dislike you," when in fact, none of these
people have had anything but positive feedback concerning you, and some
of them may have never even mentioned you in the first place. Usually,
narcissists do this when this third party seems to have a favorable
attitude towards you---which is threatening to their grandiose belief
that they are the most desirable---so they have to convince you that
you're undesirable in some way. They will also make you believe that you
may even have a community of people against you (and sometimes, they are
actually smearing you to others in order to turn that accusation into a
reality). The illusion of the third wheel's unsavory feelings towards
you serves as outside validation that is fabricated to make you feel
unworthy and defective. 4. Debby-downer minimizing. Narcissists are
pathologically envious of your

success, so they'll find ways to minimize it or point out something
negative associated with it. You may be walking on clouds when you
excitedly tell your friends and family about your new promotion, your
new car or your new dream job. Narcissists, on the other hand, will
immediately feel a dark storm cloud above their heads at the sight of
someone else's joy and success. Cue thunder, lightning and creepy
looking woman or man in a long trench coat emerging from the distance.
So, rather than celebrate with you, they may extend an obligatory
congratulations, quickly followed by a covert put-down, a sarcastic
remark or what I like to call a "Debby Downer Minimizer." The Debby
Downer Minimizer serves to deflate your joy like a needle to a balloon
with one single (or two, or three) comment---it can range from reminding
you of what you still haven't accomplished ("Congratulations on the new
job. Now you can focus on getting married!"), pointing out something
defective with your new source of happiness ("Wow, great job finding a
good place to live. Too bad the neighborhood doesn't have much
nightlife, eh?") or even nitpicking a perceived flaw or fabricated one,
("Damn, your annual income is pretty high...but you know, the economy's
not doing so well. That might change...enjoy it while it lasts.") Build
immunity to minimizers by avoiding them completely. Cutting off all
contact with narcissists when they're attempting to provoke you cuts off
their power source and their ability to remark upon your business. You
don't need them in your life, leeching off the very success they're
belittling. If you aren't able to avoid minimizers, you can also choose
to change the subject whenever someone asks you about your
accomplishment. For example, if you just received a promotion and a
narcissistic co-worker comes sulking around to congratulate and
subsequently minimize you, just say, "Thanks. So how's that new place
coming?" Turn the attention back to them and if you HAVE to, minimize
them--- especially effective if it's something they're ashamed of or
haven't accomplished yet---and you'll see how quickly they'll scramble
to inflate themselves rather than to deflate you.

Want to have fun with a narcissist who's annoying you but one you'll
never see again?\[1\] Stray away from your usual propriety and brag
loudly about your success and don't stop. Tell them about your new
business, your new boat and how you had dinner with the Pope. You'll see
their eyes bulge in rage as they struggle to maintain their composure.
Just when they're about to deliver a covert put-down your way---BAM!
Excuse yourself to the restroom and forget they ever existed. Because in
a narcissist's world, only they should have anything worth bragging
about---but that doesn't mean you always have to give them the
satisfaction of seeing you squirm. 5. The creation of new problems that
never existed. Narcissists are famous for manufacturing situations and
problems that don't actually exist or have a very a low probability of
occurring. Enjoying your current vacation rental? They'll call and tell
you about the possible earthquake in that area. Pregnant with your first
baby? They may tell you to be careful during prenatal yoga, lest it
cause complications (and of course, you happen to be an avid yogi). They
don't have any actual evidence for their claims or an inkling of support
---and even if they do, they're usually presenting this evidence to
belittle you, not help you or keep you informed. To combat this
phenomenon of manufactured new problems, stick to a "That's not true,"
and cut off all subsequent contact. Don't let them get inside your head
with false reasons to worry or exacerbate your anxiety. Narcissists may
have 99 made up problems but your receptiveness to their tactics doesn't
have to be one. 6. Guilt by association. As another way to demean and
belittle you regarding your success, narcissists and sociopaths will
often insult those with your qualities, traits, career path,
aspirations, what have you, in front of you---in order to make you feel
deflated without having to directly address you at all. They will often
do this by bringing in a third party or generalized group that
represents you---especially after you've accomplished something that
they want to make sure you feel terrible about. Got your new painting
featured at a hip art gallery? They'll extend their

congratulations (or sulk about it) and then not too long after, rant and
rave about how "artists are so self-absorbed," knowing very well you
identify with this group. They might even throw a, "Oh, but not you,
honey," with a wink and a smile just to confuse you. Do you like
spending time with your partner, as a normal person does, and going out
to events together rather than apart? He'll mention Debra, his cousin,
who he likes because she's "so independent"---never mind that you own
your own house, your own car, and make your own money, and rarely even
see the narcissist during the week---the narcissist doesn't care about
irrelevant things such as facts. They'd rather paint you as clingy for
wanting a healthy relationship. It could be anything or anyone---so long
as it relates to you and your character traits or sources of joy, it's
prime real estate for a narcissist to twist and turn your source of
power into a reason for feeling powerless.

1.  Don't actually do this. For comic relief only. ↵

12

Dating Emotional Predators and How to Learn the Red Flags Before It's
Too Late Dating an emotional predator such as a narcissist, a sociopath
or a psychopath is a devastating emotional roller coaster of highs and
lows. Although many abusers tend to unfold and reveal their true selves
long after they've already reeled their victims in, there are some key
signs to look out for when dating someone that can foreshadow their
future behavior. It's important to note that emotional predators are not
those who act out of their pain occasionally; these are toxic people who
intentionally and consciously hunt down victims and targets to fulfill
their agenda. They have a chronic pattern of manipulation, deceit
combined with a lack of empathy and remorse for their actions. What many
people fail to understand is that this type of behavior is intentional,
sadistic and often premeditated. The great thing about dating is that
you are not committing to a relationship, so you can use this process as
a way to find out more about a potential partner, and if necessary, cut
ties should he or she turn out to have abusive traits without investing
further in the relationship. Here are some signs to look out for.

1.  A need for control. Abusers want to control and manipulate their
    victims, so they will find covert ways to maintain control over you
    psychologically. They can maintain this control in a diverse number
    of ways:

Excessive contact. Although many people don't realize this, excessive
flattery and attention from a charming manipulator is actually a form of
control because it keeps you dependent on their praise. If you find
yourself being bombarded with text messages, voicemails, calls and
e-mails on an hourly basis in the early stages of dating, keep a lookout
for other signs. It might seem incredible that someone is so besotted
with you after just one date, but it's actually a red flag for dubious
behavior and unwarranted attachment. It's not normal to be in contact
with someone 24/7 especially if you've only gone on a couple of dates
with them. No one has the time to "check in" constantly with someone
they're "just" dating. This form of contact is perfect for abusers to
"check in" with you to see what you are up to, to make sure that you are
suitably "hooked" to their attention, and is a form of "idealization"
which will place you on a pedestal that at first, seems irresistible. Of
course, if you're familiar with the vicious abuse cycle of narcissists
which includes idealization, devaluation and discard, you'll know that
you'll soon be thrust off the pedestal. An unhealthy response to
rejection or boundaries. Unlike dating partners who are simply excited
to see you again and express their interest with polite enthusiasm,
toxic partners will get considerably upset if you choose not to respond
to them right away or if you resist their idealization by giving
yourself necessary space. They won't wait for your response, either:
they will continue to persist and pursue you with an unhealthy level of
attention without knowing much about you. This level of attentiveness is
not actually "flattering" even though it may appear so initially---it's
downright creepy and dangerous. It reveals a sense of entitlement to
your time and presence without regard for your personal preferences,
desires or needs. When you place boundaries with a potentially toxic
partner, they will be sure to step over them. If you say no to coming
home with them on a first date, for example, they may still continue
pestering you despite knowing your reluctance. When your "no" always
seems like a negotiation to someone you're dating, beware. This means
you're in the presence of someone who does not respect your right to
make your own choices and maintain your boundaries or values. Physical
aggression. As perpetual boundary-breakers, abusers can also

overstep the physical space of their victims. This type of behavior may
not come out until months into a relationship, but sometimes abusers can
be physically aggressive with you just a few dates in. Grabbing you too
harshly, pushing you during an argument or conflict, violating your
personal boundaries in any way, pressuring you for sex, touching you
inappropriately without consent is a red flag that must be heeded. It's
a sign that things will only get worse in the future. This physical
aggression may happen under the influence of alcohol or other drugs, so
you're not quite sure what to make of it except that you feel threatened
and unsafe. Don't attempt to justify this if it happens with or without
the involvement of alcohol---alcohol may lower inhibitions, but it
doesn't cause personality transplants. It's very likely that the abuser
is revealing his or her true behavior even while claiming that the
"drink" made him or her do it. Mistreatment of others. Even if the
abuser idealizes you quite convincingly in the early stages of dating,
you may witness his or her behavior towards others as a red flag of
future behavior. For example, is he or she rude to the waiter or
waitress on your date? Does he or she get excessively angry if another
person flirts with you, talks to you or hits on you in front of them?
How about the way they talk about others? If they call their ex a "crazy
psychopath" and include a whole range of expletives about their annoying
coworker, recognize that these are toxic temper issues which you will
eventually be on the receiving end of. Demonstration of unwarranted
anger is an incredibly important tactic that abusers use to (1) preserve
their self-image and their ego, (2) project blame onto others, (3) take
back control by recreating a "version of events" that makes them look
superior and saintly and (4) evoke fear and intimidate others into doing
what they want.

2.  Addicted to provoking you. Covert manipulators are quite gifted at
    provocation. As they learn more about you, they are investigating
    your weak spots and catering their comments towards what they know
    will hurt you the most. Knowing you're triggered by their comments
    gives them a sadistic sense of satisfaction that alleviates their
    secret sense of inferiority and strokes their delusions of grandeur,
    control and

aptitude. Having control over your emotions also gives them the power to
effectively manipulate you and convince you that you don't deserve any
better. Debasing comments about your personality, your looks, your line
of work, what you should wear, who you should hang out with, are all
inappropriate, especially when just getting to know someone. If you find
yourself frequently confronted with these so-called "helpful" comments
during the first few dates, be wary. Nobody should be trying to "change"
you immediately when they're just getting to know you, and if they are,
this is a recipe for chaos. These provocative comments might be
disguised as constructive criticism or "just jokes," but you can
distinguish them because they are often comments laced with
condescension rather than compassion and consideration. Harsh teasing
that serves no other purpose but to ignite your anger or annoyance, put
you down and insult you is different from playful teasing which is used
to flirt and build rapport with a partner. Sarcasm. Beware of the
tactics of the covert sarcastic put-down. Sarcasm is one of the mighty
weapons in an abuser's arsenal. Emotional predators enjoy invalidating
your thoughts, opinions and emotions by making frequent sarcastic
remarks that shame you into never questioning them again. Since sarcasm
isn't often considered "abusive" by society, abusers use it as a way to
escape accountability for their harsh, condescending tone and belittling
behavior. They become more and more condescending in their approach to
sarcasm over the course of the relationship---what was once a "playful"
sarcastic comment now becomes frequent emotional terrorism that
questions your right to have an opinion that challenges theirs. Efforts
at making you jealous. If your date consistently brings up past romantic
partners, looks at other women frequently on your dates (while furtively
checking to see if you're observing them while doing so), and talks
about having a romantic "type" that is quite far from your description,
run. A healthy partner will strive to make you feel secure and
cherished, not insecure and doubtful. This could be a form of toxic
triangulation in which an abusive

partner attempts to create an image of desirability while demeaning your
merits so that you are encouraged to compete for his or her attention.
The silent treatment. Abusers may retreat into silence if you question
their authority or bring up their mistreatment. This may provoke you
into pursuing them even more, in order to try to coerce them into
"validating" your emotions and admit that they are in the wrong.
Unfortunately, you're only giving them more power by doing this. They
will eventually come around, but only after you've vented at them and
eventually apologized for being too "harsh" even when you have done
nothing wrong but express yourself.

3.  Inconsistent character and behavior. The most skilled abusers will
    save the "hot and cold" tactics for when they enter long-term
    relationships, but other abusers may give you a sample of this even
    within the first month of dating. They do so by the following:
    Projection and Gaslighting. Narcissistic dating partners and other
    toxic people are also proficient at gaslighting and projection,
    techniques they use to convince society that their victims are the
    crazy ones and to convince their victims that their reality is
    inaccurate. The effects of this type of manipulation are incredibly
    lethal on victims long-term, so it is important to note signs early
    on in the dating process so that you can detach more quickly from
    the different type of reality these toxic partners are likely to
    impose upon you. Gaslighting and projection are very clever tactics
    that allow toxic dating partners to simultaneously shift the blame
    of their own characteristics onto you while also enabling them to
    escape accountability for their hypocrisy, deceit and otherwise
    unsavory behavior. If you find yourself feeling uneasy about
    something a dating partner did or said and later denied, minimized
    or projected onto you, remember that narcissists enjoy calling
    others "crazy." It's a common word they'll use to describe any valid
    emotional reaction victims have to their shady and inconsistent
    behavior. It is gaslighting in its simplest form but over time
    becomes a complex type of

psychological torture in which the victim starts to mistrust his or her
perceptions of the covert abuse and feels unable to trust his or own
reality. Stonewalling (shutting down a conversation even before it's
begun), silent treatments and devaluation soon follow in order to
maintain control. Narcissists can easily maintain the illusion of their
false self whenever their behavior is called out and discredit their
victims so that the covert abuse is never recognized or addressed
without the dire consequences of you walking on eggshells. To understand
the difference between a partner who provides you constructive criticism
or simply disagrees with you and a partner who routinely projects their
own qualities and gaslights you, look closely at their actions rather
than their words. Does it appear that the person you are dating often
accuses you of the same characteristics, traits or actions that they
themselves seem guilty of committing? Do they call you a hypocrite when
they are the ones who often contradict their proposed beliefs? When you
call them out on being rude, do they bring up something irrelevant you
did in response, in order to shift the topic back to you instead? For
example, you may meet narcissistic partners who, in the beginning, are
very possessive of you, track where you go and who you are with, seem to
check up on you 24/7 and call you out if you ever dare to show signs of
flirtation or interacting with another man. Yet the moment you ever call
out signs of potential infidelity on their part or question any lies
that don't quite add up, they may unleash their narcissistic rage and
gaslight you into thinking you are the jealous, possessive one and tell
you that you're getting too heavily invested in the relationship too
soon---minimizing the fact that they had been putting you under
surveillance from the very beginning. Be careful---the projection and
gaslighting of narcissists is so adept, so sneaky, so conniving, and so
utterly convincing, that you are often led to apologize for being alive
at all. Superficial charm. There are an endless number of toxic people
who begin their ploys with superficial charm accompanied by
self-absorption and an

actual lack of empathy or substance. You can begin to spot how
superficial their demeanors are once you've had some practice in
identifying nonverbal gestures, nuances in facial expressions and tone
of voice. Skilled predators are quite charming and you can easily learn
to see through this by observing the way they exaggerate how they feel
about you and their glib ways of showing you that they "care" when they
really don't. For example, hearing "I've never felt this way about
anyone else," on a first or second date is not only premature, it's most
likely a lie to impress you. When this charm is paired with actions that
don't align with the abuser's words, like the fact that this person
never actually asks you about your interests or passions despite being
so "enamored" with you, you'll soon realize these are just shallow ways
of getting into your head (and most likely your bed). Pathological
lying. Do you catch the person in frequent lies or stories that simply
don't add up? Do they "drip-feed" you information so that the full story
eventually unravels over time? A girl he hung out with was once just a
"female friend," and now suddenly he mentions that he used to date her.
A man she sees for Sunday brunch is "just" a colleague, but then you
find out that it's an ex-husband. It's true that everyone reserves some
crucial information on the first few dates for later and everyone makes
mistakes or tells "white lies" to preserve their self-image
occasionally. However, if these lies seem to be chronically common, it's
not a healthy pattern to start off a relationship with. Disclosure,
honesty and open communication are foreign words to the abuser, who
lives in a world of falsehoods. Frequent disappearances. In the
beginning, the person you were dating was constantly on top of you,
bombarding you with calls and texts. Suddenly, they disappear for days,
only to come back again as if nothing ever happened. These
disappearances, which are often staged without convincing explanations,
are a way of managing your expectations and making you "pine" for
contact. Attitude changes towards you. Abusers engage in black-and-white
thinking and this results in emotional polarization in the ways they
view you. You're either "the one" when you're meeting their needs or
you're suddenly the

villain if you disappoint them in any way or threaten their fragile
sense of superiority. Beware of this "hot and cold" behavior, because
it's another tactic to manage your expectations and keep you on your
toes. Even if you don't like the person, if you tend to be the
people-pleasing type, you might fall into the trap of attempting to
avoid rejection and win their favor. It's "reverse psychology" at its
finest. Intermittent reinforcement. This is a psychological tactic that
provokes you into trying to please a toxic person, even if he or she is
mistreating you. The abuser gets to have you on your "best behavior"
without changing his or her own behavior. Abusers love giving "crumbs"
after they've already seduced their victims with the idea of the whole
loaf of bread. You might find yourself on the receiving end of praise,
flattery, attention one day, only to be given cold silence the day
after. Narcissists believe you should walk on eggshells just to manage
their "triggers," otherwise known as their false sense of superiority
when threatened. Occasionally you will get the same idealization that
you received on the first few dates, but more likely, you will get a
mixture of hot and cold, leaving you uncertain about the fate of the
relationship. TIPS FOR DEALING WITH PREDATORS IN DATING: If you notice
any of these red flags after the first few dates or within the first few
months of dating, do not proceed. Since within the first few dates you
are usually presented with a person's best behavior, you can be sure
that things will not get any better. You cannot fix this person and you
run the risk of emotionally investing in someone who is out to
deliberately harm you. Be careful: if you choose to reject an abuser
outright, it may infuriate them or he or she may use "pity ploys" or
angry harassment to convince you should go out with them again. Going No
Contact if someone is bothering you, harassing you or making you feel
uncomfortable in any way is a better tactic. Block their number and any
other means they might use to communicate with you. If they've been
disrespectful, they don't deserve a polite response. Should they
continue to harass you, document the evidence and tell them you will
take legal action if necessary. If you're trying online dating, make
sure

you block the predator from the site you are using after you document
their messages by using screenshots. Tread lightly when you're dating
someone new. Don't give out personal information like your address, home
telephone number or other means of reaching you besides a cell phone
number. If possible, use an alternative like a Google Voice number or
other text messaging app while still getting to know someone. You must
put your safety and privacy first. Resist projection and gaslighting.
Stick to what you know to be true. Do not allow your toxic dating
partner to minimize or deny things he or she may have said or done. When
a dating partner attempts to gaslight you or project qualities onto you,
know that this is a clear red flag of emotional infancy that will not be
suitable for a long-term relationship. It is helpful to keep a journal
during your dating process to note any inconsistencies, red flags,
emotions and/or gut feelings that may arise. You will want to refer to
this journal often in order to keep grounded in your own perceptions and
inner sense of truth. Keep your eyes open. Be willing and open to
recognizing both the bad and the good. While we all want to see the best
in people, it's important not to also gaslight ourselves into denying or
minimizing the signs that someone is not compatible with us. The signs
will always be there, and even if they don't present themselves quite as
visibly, your gut instinct will tell you when something is not quite
right.

13

Are They a Narcissist, Traumatized or Just Emotionally Unavailable? The
Differences Between "Normal" Relationships And Abusive Ones To outsiders
who have never experienced this form of abuse, narcissistic abuse
appears to be an elusive phenomenon to grasp. Readers may wonder if
they're truly dealing with a malignant narcissist or your garden variety
immature, emotionally unavailable jerk. Let's be clear about this:
narcissistic abuse is not about an oversensitivity to the normal ups and
downs of relationships, nor is it a complaint about incompatibility or
mere emotional unavailability in relationships. All malignant
narcissists, sociopaths and psychopaths are emotionally unavailable to
an extent, but not all emotionally unavailable people are narcissists,
sociopaths and psychopaths. The difference lies in their intention to
harm, their inability to change and their sadistic nature.

A Note About Complex PTSD and Narcissism Knowing what we know about
trauma and its effects on the brain, combined

with the research noting the effects domestic violence has on the
development of abusers and abuse victims in future generations, it makes
sense to jump to the conclusion that toxic people are always traumatized
ones, wounded and in pain. "Hurt people, hurt people" is a common
platitude we hear from the time we encounter schoolyard bullies to the
time we discover our spouse, our parent, our family member, co-worker or
friend may be a toxic bully. We make all sorts of excuses about how a
person only operates from their own pain, how they are simply lashing
out, how they wouldn't possibly hurt others if they hadn't been hurt
themselves. Yet knowing what we know about how a malignant narcissist
intentionally sabotages and caters to their victim's worst insecurities
and wounds, the platitude "hurt people, hurt people" simply does not cut
it. In "The Myths About Narcissistic Abusers," you learned that not all
narcissistic abusers may come from a background of abuse and that there
are many grandiose narcissists who do feel entitled to hurt others; some
can actually be overvalued by their parents rather than devalued. The
truth is, these types of abusers continue to abuse and not seek
professional support because they feel rewarded by abusing others. While
any trauma they may have faced may have shaped the person's behavior
early on, it does not justify the perpetuation of harmful behavior
towards others in adulthood. That being said, distinguishing between a
traumatized person and a toxic one is a complex affair, riddled with
nuances, unanswered questions and conflicting evidence. Having spoken to
a great number of Complex PTSD survivors and being a Complex PTSD
survivor myself, I've run into this question many times, without a
definitive answer. Pete Walker notes that many diagnosed Borderlines,
for example, are misdiagnosed when they should've been given the
diagnosis of Complex PTSD. How can we tell whether someone is acting out
of their past trauma and has Complex PTSD versus a person who has
Narcissistic Personality Disorder or Antisocial Personality Disorder?
How can we tell if it's both? What if there's an individual walking
around with all three?

We can never be sure, without a clinician's diagnosis, what exactly our
loved ones may be suffering from, though we can certainly make an
educated guess based on their past and present behavior, their history
of abuse, their willingness to enter treatment and so forth. I find that
there are some distinguishing factors that can help us to understand how
someone who is struggling with Complex PTSD vs. someone who is suffering
from malignant narcissism operates: 1. Their ability to not only take
accountability for their actions but also evolve from their toxic
behavior. Malignant narcissists rarely take full responsibility for
their actions and avoid being held accountable whenever possible.
Complex PTSD survivors, if they do not have co-morbid malignant
narcissistic traits, that is, are often so lost in a sea of self-blame
and toxic shame that they do nothing but blame themselves for all the
abuse that they've endured. Yes, Complex PTSD survivors can certainly be
triggered and lash out, but they do not use their condition as an excuse
to evade accountability for their actions. Instead, they seek help and
enter treatment and acknowledge when they have hurt others. 2. Their
ability to empathize and show genuine remorse for their toxic behavior.
Malignant narcissists suffer from a shallow range of emotions and their
diminished capacity for empathy is also well known. Many of the trauma
survivors I know who are not malignant narcissists are actually
incredibly empathic; in fact, as a result of what has happened to them,
they try to ensure that it does not happen to anyone else. Unlike
malignant and abusive narcissists who are in a chronic state of "fight"
mode and wish to attack others preemptively, the hurtful behavior of a
trauma survivor is not intentional or catered to the wounds of others,
but rather, arises from when they feel threatened and need to
self-isolate. Harming others, even unintentionally, causes them a great
deal of distress and sends them into a spiral of negative self-talk. 3.
The person has experienced apparent traumas that have either taken place
recently or have come to the surface as a smaller trauma has awakened a
chain of larger traumas from childhood. While narcissistic

abusers can have a history of trauma in their background too, a survivor
with Complex PTSD has often experienced the worst of both worlds: being
abused in childhood, only to later re-experience the same abuse in
adulthood. If they are behaving uncharacteristically towards their
abusers, for example, or are overwhelmed emotionally, it is not because
they themselves are malignant narcissists, but because they're still
reeling from the impact of their trauma. 4. Survivors of trauma who do
not have a history of abusing others do not intentionally manipulate or
set out to belittle others; rather, this behavior arises from their need
to protect themselves rather than to demean others. Beware: there are
some malignant narcissists who may claim to suffer from PTSD or Complex
PTSD while bullying and abusing others, but they have something much
deeper and darker going on than the symptoms of trauma. Complex PTSD
survivors who are not narcissistic will not go out of their way to
bully, demean or harm others (they're actually pretty hypervigilant
about their impact upon others because they know what it's like to be
abused)---malignant narcissists will. 5. They seek out professional
support and continually work on changing their behavior to lessen the
harm and impact those behaviors pose to others. Malignant narcissists
feel so rewarded by their behavior that they either rarely enter
treatment or when they do, they manipulate professionals into thinking
they are the victims rather than the individuals they have abused.
Non-narcissistic Complex Trauma survivors enter treatment with a genuine
interest in healing their harmful behaviors---both to themselves and
others. Those who suffer from complex trauma are more likely to turn to
self-harm and self-defeating behaviors, while those who are malignant
narcissists turn to harming others. The overlaps, discrepancies and
nuances between Complex PTSD and malignant narcissism are complicated,
but I hope you'll see the differences clearly---the intent to harm
others versus self-harm, the capacity for empathy, for a wide emotional
range, for evolution, and the willingness to change and take
accountability for one's actions are all distinguishing factors. When
traumatized, people may momentarily demonstrate narcissistic traits and

behaviors that do not represent who they really are. Malignant
narcissists, on the other hand, have a chronic pattern of behaving the
way they do since childhood---regardless of whether or not they had
trauma in their background.

Another question I am often asked is whether survivors of narcissistic
abuse can become narcissists themselves. It depends on whether you mean
in childhood or adulthood. From what I understand, NPD is a personality
disorder that arises in childhood---so if a scapegoat or golden child
did become narcissistic and suffered that core wound or upbringing that
interrupted their normal patterns of behaving and interacting, it's
certainly possible that a child could become narcissistic or even a
full-fledged narcissist as a result. However, an adult who has been
traumatized by a narcissistic partner is unlikely to suddenly develop
NPD because NPD is something that is birthed during childhood, probably
through an interaction between an existing biological predisposition and
environmental factors. More likely, the abuse victim will either pick up
"fleas," behaviors from the narcissist that are temporary and/or suffer
symptoms from the trauma that has been experienced. Flea-like behaviors
are picked up as defense mechanisms against the abuse being endured.
Children of narcissistic parents who do not become fullfledged
narcissists can also pick up on fleas from their experiences as well,
without being full-fledged narcissists. Again, it's not the occasional
toxic behavior or trait that defines a malignant narcissist: it's the
lack of capacity for empathizing, for evolving, for taking
responsibility, and for intending and desiring to harm others.

Apart from the differences between traumatized individuals and toxic
ones, there needs to be a line drawn to distinguish between a normal,
healthy relationship (or even just a "regular" dysfunctional one where
both parties play a role in toxicity) and a toxic, abusive one where the
abuser holds much of the power. The abuse described here in this book is
not a matter of everyday envy, anger or healthy conflict that eventually
leads to resolution and growth in a relationship; it is a matter of a
person with a personality disorder subjecting a victim to extreme,
chronic devaluation, control, sabotage and disrespect. It is also not a
matter that can be "worked" out, as malignant narcissists are not
willing to change because their manipulative behavior rewards them. If
you have experienced the deliberate cruelty of a narcissistic abuser (as
in, they fed off your pain and would make sure to provoke you where it
hurt) through the techniques I've described in this book, combined with
a total lack of empathy, it is likely that your partner is on the
narcissistic spectrum, even if they are not a full-fledged narcissist.
If on the other hand, if you feel this partner had the ability to
empathize but simply did not want a close relationship, it could be
emotional unavailability or compatibility issues. These people can be
downright scary and dangerous; if forced to choose between the two, many
survivors would prefer to encounter a regular emotionally unavailable
person over a full-fledged narcissist any day. The former is undoubtedly
painful, but the latter is inevitably harmful. Whether this partner had
the full-fledged personality disorder is difficult to say without
learning the partner's full spectrum of behavior, which is often
observed throughout the course of a very intimate, long-term
relationship, although it can surface sooner. Many outsiders do not know
who a narcissistic partner is behind the mask because they never get
close enough to them for them to uncover the mask through devaluation
and discard. What you may have experienced can be just a brief portrait
of this person, which means there can be something much deeper beneath
the surface. The

ways in which narcissists act in long-term, romantic relationships can
be different from short-term ones, as the long-term relationship partner
is often subject to a horrific cycle of abuse, while the short-term one
can also have horrific abuse but the cycle is cut thankfully short
before the victim can live through the full, prolonged nightmare. Let's
repeat this: narcissistic abuse or any form of abuse for that matter is
not a "relationship" problem. It's not a problem regarding mere
incompatibility or the occasional toxic communication problem or normal
human flaws that arise naturally within all of us. It's not a problem
that can be solved by changing and improving ourselves---even if
self-improvement is in order because none of us are perfect and we could
all stand to work on ourselves. The issue isn't imperfection because all
of us are---in some way---imperfect. Relationships are difficult enough
as it is without abuse involved, but when abuse is present, it isn't a
relationship. It's a scam---a cunning con man or con woman luring us
with the false illusion of a relationship in order to act as a puppeteer
to our emotions. The issue is the fact that imperfection or perceived
imperfection in the victim is misused as justifications for
unjustifiable abuse. Victims are often convinced by their partners that
their very human flaws (or flaws invented by the narcissist to
manufacture insecurity) are somehow deal-breaking character traits. Yet
consider the fact that a non-abusive partner would never have to abuse
you in order to give you constructive criticism, work through a conflict
or break through a barrier. A non-abusive partner would deal with
incompatibility in healthier ways---either by working with you to
resolve the issues or by ending the relationship maturely if they felt
you two were not a good fit for each other. There are certainly
dysfunctional relationships that are born from the character traits and
toxic interactions of two people, yes, but being with a narcissistic
abuser goes beyond mere dysfunction. It crosses the line to deliberate
psychological (sometimes even physical) violence and terror---

stunning acts of cruelty and mind-blowing inhumanity. It is unfathomable
to anyone who hasn't experienced it, and all too real for the victims
who have. The issue isn't a victim's oversensitivity to that cruelty or
inconsiderate behavior either---because no matter how sensitive a victim
is, an abuser's deliberately hurtful and manipulative behavior can, in
fact, harm them regardless of their level of confidence. Imagine a child
who is broken down and belittled every day by a narcissistically abusive
parent---do you expect him or her to have the same level of confidence
after these childhood experiences? No. What about an adult who goes
through traumatizing experiences with a narcissist in a decade-long
marriage, or who has already been abused in childhood and re-experiences
it again? Do you expect that person to be the same person?
No. Narcissistic abuse is traumatic and lifechanging, for both a child
and an adult---and especially for the child who has been emotionally
battered and bruised, only to be used as a punching bag yet again by
their adult partners. No level of confidence or security can fully
protect you from the trauma of chronic trauma---unless you find a way to
use your confidence and security to end the relationship and begin to
heal from it.

Emotionally Unavailable or Narcissist? I am often asked if there are
differences between emotionally unavailable people and full-fledged
narcissists. As I noted before, while all full-fledged narcissists are
inherently emotionally unavailable, not all emotionally unavailable
people are full-fledged narcissists. Their narcissism can be temporary
or circumstantial, although it can still have a toxic effect on their
loved ones. For example, emotionally unavailable people or
smooth-talking players can blow hot and cold, be superficially charming,
disappear without a word, use intermittent reinforcement (both
intentionally and unintentionally due to the many other people they're
pursuing simultaneously), have a harem, all without meeting the full
criteria for this disorder. Unlike narcissists, they may still feel
empathy towards others while remaining manipulative and unable to enter
unhealthy relationships. They may still come across as toxic while
having the ability to feel remorse for their actions and

the ability to evolve if they choose to. Not to justify their actions,
but being emotionally unavailable may serve as a defense mechanism for
the hurt they've experienced in the past. Even survivors of narcissistic
abuse themselves can become emotionally unavailable if they haven't
taken the time and space to process and heal their trauma. That doesn't
mean that they are necessarily malignant narcissists---it simply means
they've been traumatized and don't have the best communication patterns
in relationships. Emotional unavailability and healing from the impact
of trauma isn't necessarily a life sentence---but a lack of empathy
demonstrated by a narcissistic abuser who refuses to change often is. On
the other hand, we must remember that these abusers could very well be
narcissists who fake remorse. That's when it can become difficult to
tell them apart. Normally what would distinguish them is how they act
during and after the ending of a relationship---do they stage a smear
campaign? Do they pursue a new partner immediately? Do they attempt to
still contact you even while with a new partner? Do they seem to be able
to callously discard you without a word? Does it seem they deliberately
stage personal attacks against you throughout the relationship, engage
in stonewalling, chronic emotional invalidation and gaslighting? Do they
frequently triangulate you with others? Do they stalk you if you leave
them as a result of narcissistic injury? Do they follow the
idealization, devaluation and discard phase to a tee? These are signs
that something deeper than emotional unavailability may be going on.
Although some tactics are frequently used by narcissists more so than
others ---triangulation for example---emotional predators of any kind
(with other disorders such as Antisocial Personality Disorder or no
disorder) can still be capable of being abusive and toxic. They may have
a host of other problems such as anger issues, addictions, control
issues and jealousy issues which don't necessarily stem from that
particular disorder. That's why even if they are not full-fledged
narcissists, they are not worth pursuing in the long run and can still
be harmful to your mental health. I get it: emotional unavailability is
frustrating. It's toxic and dysfunctional and it's never fun to date an
emotionally unavailable person who doesn't know

what he or she wants. It can also be heartbreaking and terrifying.
But---and this is a huge but---your everyday emotionally unavailable
jerk who is not a malignant narcissist or sociopath is capable of
evolving. They're usually not abusive in the ways that a malignant
narcissist is. You are also capable of moving forward and evolving from
an emotionally unavailable person with some closure, knowing they were
not the one. He or she may have narcissistic traits, they may have been
traumatized, maybe they're not into commitment--- who knows what their
issue is? However, when you throw malignant narcissism into the mix,
that's a whole other set of issues. Narcissistic abuse is a chronic
pattern of disrespect, devaluation, and degradation. It's psychological
warfare and manipulation. It often includes losing sight of your dreams,
your finances, and sometimes even your sanity and your life. I am not
exaggerating the life-long impact of this form of abuse ---I have heard
stories from thousands of survivors around the world who have been
depleted emotionally, psychologically, financially and spiritually by
these toxic types. They have been battered in every way imaginable and
as you read in the beginning of this book, some of them were pushed over
the edge---the victims of a silent crime where the perpetrators will
rarely be held accountable for their actions or were only held
accountable when it was far too late. Survivors often feel so alienated
by this form of covert abuse that they feel they have nowhere to turn.
Mental health professionals and advocates alike are gradually beginning
to expose psychological violence, but not at a rate where every single
therapist is familiar with these dynamics. I would caution any marriage
or couple's therapists to be wary of these types, as they can manipulate
therapists very well into thinking the victim is the abuser. Friends and
family members may be the abusers themselves or they may easily
invalidate the experiences of survivors because until they have
experienced it themselves, they will struggle to understand exactly what
is taking place. I have heard too many tales where the criminal justice
system, the friends and family members of victims and the harem members
of the malignant narcissist take the side of the abuser over the
victim---all because of their false mask.

Remember that before you read about narcissistic abuse, you were prone
to excusing your abuser's actions, denying them, minimizing them or
rationalizing them. As a survivor of abuse, you may have also blamed
yourself for "provoking" your abuser somehow because that is what the
abuser wanted you to believe. It's difficult to explain that this is not
a normal relationship or even your run-of-the-mill dysfunctional one
because usually, the latter takes two dysfunctional people who don't
know how to communicate in a healthy manner. In fact, while you were in
the abusive relationship, you were unlikely to have told the full truth
of what you were experiencing to anyone, fearing that they would not
believe you. The harsh truth is, they may not believe you,
unfortunately, and that has to do with the way we stigmatize abuse
survivors in society, making them feel ashamed about the fact that they
were abused in the first place. Many victims attempt to "play up" the
romantic moments with their abusers to others, or emphasize everything
that is going well, as a coping mechanism---it enables them to pretend
that everything is fine, when in fact, behind closed doors, the victim
is fighting for survival each and every day of his or her life. This is
probably why it is so easy for the narcissist is swoop in and work his
or her magic, telling everyone who will listen that the victim is
"unhinged" and that the narcissistic abuser did "so much" for them,
while the victim stayed silent about the transgressions that went on for
years. In an abusive relationship, the dysfunction lies primarily within
the behavioral patterns of the abuser, though the effects of trauma can
certainly cause the victim to engage in maladaptive coping mechanisms
and lash out in ways uncharacteristic of them. The victim may attempt to
cope with the trauma in various ways, trying to take back their power by
sometimes even resorting to using the same tactics that a narcissist
uses, but failing to engage in them as heartlessly. As a result, they
feel more and more ashamed and the abuser then uses their behavior as
justification for the abuse, even while knowing very well that had the
victim never been abused in the first place for such a long period of
time, they would not have reacted in such a way. This does not make the
dynamic "mutual abuse," just because a victim finally

becomes reactive after chronic disrespect. We must remember that the
survivor has become locked into a traumatized state and then becomes
increasingly triggered by the narcissist. They may then resort to
certain maladaptive coping mechanisms to survive. The survivor of this
type of abuse then needs to take agency to find healthier ways of
coping, but that does not make the victim the abuser (even though the
abuser will certainly try to convince them they are). The victim goes
into the relationship with the intention of loving and caring for
someone in a reciprocal relationship; the abuser goes into the
relationship as a scam artist, as someone who controls, manipulates and
erodes the victim's reality slowly but surely, exploiting the victim for
all they are worth. There is a power imbalance as the victim tries to
over-communicate and express his or her feelings to their abuser to no
avail, attempting to express how much the abuser has hurt them while the
abuser "hoovers" the victim back in with pity ploys, fake displays of
remorse or shallow apologies that never incorporate changes in behavior
or empathy for the victim. The bottom line is: garden-variety
emotionally unavailable people, Complex PTSD and trauma survivors and
victims of narcissists are capable of evolution. They're capable of high
degrees of empathy, of remorse. They not only know right from wrong,
they often discern between it when it comes to their behavior. Malignant
narcissists? They couldn't care less about who they hurt in the process.
Each and every one of us has probably engaged in a toxic behavior or two
in our lifetime---that doesn't mean we engage in a chronic pattern of
abuse or that we are abusers or toxic narcissists. We are simply
human---but we never deserve to be abused. If you want to know if you're
in trouble, ask yourself: am I being chronically emotionally,
psychologically, financially, sexually or otherwise abused? If the
answer is yes, the problem goes beyond just incompatibility or emotional
unavailability. Whether a person is a true malignant narcissist or not
becomes less important than their chronic pattern of behavior---their
long-term behavior will tell you everything you need to know, even when
labels seem to fail.

14

The Great Awakening--Tapping into Your Power The truth is that the
entire relationship with a narcissist, a sociopath or a psychopath is
one big set-up for you to fail. The moving goal posts, the contradictory
words, the compliments merged with callous cruelty---they're all
deliberately staged so that you view your successes as missteps and your
life outside of the narcissist as a false reality, when it is in fact,
the other way around. The "reality" you live in when you're in a
relationship with such a partner is the one that is false---filled with
gaslighting, projection, and falsehoods to keep you off balance, under
their control and constantly seeking their approval. During the abuse
cycle, they seem like the powerful ones, the puppeteers micromanaging
your every move, causing you to doubt every instinct and emotion, and
you, rightfully so, feel utterly powerless, depleted, relentlessly on
the edge. For all that love-bombing, fast-forwarding and fake promises,
it's a steep climb to a nonexistent view, a dead-end road, a massacre in
the place of a celebration---multiple endings rather than beginnings.
The end of your innocence, your perceived future together, your hope in
humanity and your carefully constructed naiveté to the fact that this
world is filled with con artists, scammers and exploiters just waiting
to suck you dry. It's hard work without much return on your investment,
a surefire way into emotional bankruptcy. It's a performance where
you've been cast for a role you'd never voluntarily audition for---the
narcissist's source of supply that he or she can

use, misuse, mistreat, berate and tear down whenever they feel like it,
all while intermittently throwing you crumbs of affection and validation
to keep you wishing and hoping for something which the narcissist simply
may not be capable of being---a healthy relationship partner. At the
same time, a relationship with a narcissist is also a cataclysmic rude
awakening into the fact that people are rarely who they portray
themselves to be. It's knowledge. It's experience. It's insight and
wisdom---perhaps the kind you wish you didn't have. Sometimes, it's even
social capital---enabling you to navigate even more intelligently and
with more discernment than ever before. You're wide-eyed and vigilant.
You see what other people don't see. You learn about boundaries and your
values. You recognize the value of authentic people, those rare breeds
who wear their hearts on their sleeve and bleed integrity instead of
exploit that quality in others. It doesn't have to be a "waste of time"
to have been through this experience---even while validating how painful
it is and the fact that no one should ever have to go through it. When
you've been through something horrific like this, at the very least you
are owed the fruits of its wisdom and the drive it provides you to kick
some serious ass. Because there's nothing more powerful than a survivor
tapping into his or her power. There is nothing more powerful than a
survivor being motivated to reach their maximum level of success,
self-development and self-love--- by the very bullies who attempted to
disempower them. Being a survivor can be used as an awakening to the
emergence of your true self, your past traumas, your deep-rooted wounds
and a shaking up of your core beliefs. Surviving alone is a measure of
your resilience and true strength ---no matter how weak you may feel at
the moment. Thriving isn't about forcing yourself to heal quickly or
forgetting it ever happened or attempting to force-feed yourself
compassion for your abuser while foregoing any sense of kindness towards
yourself. Thriving isn't about perfection, it's about progress ---no
matter how small, because it all culminates into growth down the line.
Thriving is about acknowledging your power while acknowledging you were

once powerless. Thriving can even be about recognizing your current
state of powerlessness while holding steady to the faith that things can
turn around, that you are capable of a different life than the one
you're living now. It's about validating your pain while seeking to
channel it constructively. It's about reevaluating the unhealthy beliefs
instilled in you while unraveling the new healthier ones ready to
emerge. It's a portal to your greatest gifts and your authentic calling.
It's an experience that can be used and channeled to heal and to help
others heal. It's an invitation in to a community of other survivors,
other lost children of narcissistic parents or survivors with decades
worth of experiences with malignant narcissists. When you're in a war
zone, you develop a much different perspective than someone who lives
their life fed with a silver spoon. You are forced to develop a belief
in yourself, a strong faith that can surpass anything and everything
when you've been abused---just in order to survive. You're forced to
depend and rely only on yourself because you're so alienated otherwise.
You learn how worthy your time is and you learn how to stop wasting it
on unworthy people. You learn the importance of self-care, of
self-compassion, of discernment and intuition. You learn to listen to
the inner voice in your own soul, rather than the dark voices speaking
to your ego. Everything is much easier when you sail through life with
an empathic, understanding partner or supportive parents (and that is
the type of ease each and every one of us deserves). Being with a
narcissist is challenging beyond words---it's hurtful, it's best to
avoid it, it's incredibly unfair, it can cause symptoms of complex
trauma, it can be debilitating, it provides excessive strain, but it can
also inspire and push us to reach greater heights than ever before. Make
no mistake: you did not deserve what you endured. You have every right
not to believe that this pain had a greater purpose. You have every
right to forfeit and abandon the idea that you had to go through this
pain to become greater---the truth may be that you didn't have to, but
you can use this experience to become greater regardless. You have every
right to be victorious. The pain of this experience gives you further
incentive to live,

survive, thrive and move forward with a mission. I know it changed me
because now I want to make sure others avoid the same pain I did, or at
the very least, begin to heal from it and validate themselves. I am so
deeply connected to these experiences that another survivor's pain is my
own and I understand it from a depth that others who haven't experienced
it may never know. Your gift from this experience lies in your empathy
and compassion for yourselves and other survivors who need
healing---your ability to reconnect with the part of yourself who wants
to survive, strive and thrive---is connected with the larger world
around you. You deserve to have a voice for your stories, a healing balm
for your pain. You deserve not only your own compassion but your own
gentleness. A gentleness that says, "I may not be where I want to be,
but I'll get there somehow. Where there's a strong will, there's a
definite way. I will survive. I will strive. I will thrive. I am the
source of my own power." Even if you're crawling on your knees now,
unsure of the future, uncertain of whether you'll survive or not, even
if you are living now simply out of spite, know that somewhere down the
line you will live for yourself and thrive for yourself, even more
powerful than ever. Do not give up hope, and don't be afraid to seek
support---both professional support and from other survivors who have
been there. You deserve all the validation and support in the world.

I find that there are four main types of power survivors can tap into
when they're either undergoing narcissistic abuse or recovering from it.
I'd like to share these with you, in the hopes that you feel you can tap
into these power sources, whenever you feel like giving up.

The Power of No Contact

For survivors whose relationship with the narcissistic abuser has
already ended, the power of No Contact lies in a) resisting attempts
from your partner in hoovering you, or b) engaging in emotional
nonreactivity---if you are not currently in No Contact with your partner
and are in a more complex situation (such as a long-term marriage with
young children or a co-parenting situation), there is still a way to do
"Low Contact" as you begin to detach and extricate yourself from the
relationship. Some people have used the Gray Rock method, first invented
by Skylar, successfully in order to become nonreactive to their
partner's provocations when they had to have contact, while others have
used their partner's silent treatments as spaces for self-care, healing
and coming together with a plan (and preferably a lawyer who is
wellversed in NPD) to divorce their partners, regain custody or restore
finances, or at the very least restore their sanity by getting out of
the relationship altogether. Learn more about No Contact and the best
ways to empower yourself on the healing journey: I dedicate an entire
chapter to No Contact in my first book on narcissistic abuse,Becoming
the Narcissist's Nightmare. For more tips on going No Contact, be sure
to also check out my article here: selfcarehaven.org/no-contact.

The Power of Reverse Discourse The power of reverse discourse is all
about the power of reframing. Foucault first referred to reverse
discourse in the context of challenging society's historical discourses
about gender and sexuality. I've adapted this idea to apply to
everything in our lives that we can reframe in order to reclaim our
power, agency and control in our lives. I've been through a lifetime's
worth of bullying and abuse---yet I've managed to conquer these demons
time and time again due to the power of reverse discourse. Here are four
ways I currently practice reverse discourse successfully to achieve my
goals and move forward from toxic situations. You can use reverse
discourse by (1) "talking back" to your abusers, (2) replacing

a word they used to disempower you with a new positive affirmation, (3)
reassigning degrading words with new, positive connotations that serve
you, and (4) channeling every terrible thing someone has said about you
into your highest good or the greater good of society.

1.  "Talking back" to the abuser. This is not about literally talking
    back, it's more about talking back to the ruminations over the abuse
    in your own mind. As many abuse survivors know, verbal abuse doesn't
    just end with the abuser---it continues in the mind of the abused,
    playing like an old record that won't stop spinning in your head.
    When "talking back" to an abuser in my mind, I find it most
    liberating when I allow myself to be as uncensored as possible when
    I think or even write these "comebacks" down. Writing will hopefully
    serve as a safe space where you can vent your frustrations freely
    without the consequences of breaking No Contact. Feel free to
    unleash your rage onto the page. That's what it's there for, and it
    sure does beat pursuing literal revenge which could have real-life
    consequences. Related to this, you may also choose to create lists
    that outright challenge all the negative declarations toxic people
    have made about you. Creating this "reverse discourse" means writing
    down the concrete accomplishments or positive feedback others have
    given you, to counter snide remarks or abusive comments that you
    find yourself ruminating over. If you're stuck, here are some ideas
    from my own use of reverse discourse: Start by turning everything
    your abuser said onto them. Did they say you were unappealing? Write
    down how ugly and unappealing their outside is as well as their
    inside. Did they say you'd never achieve your dreams? Talk back to
    them and say just because you haven't achieved yours doesn't mean I
    won't achieve mine. Big ideas are not suited for small-minded people
    like you. Did they say you weren't smart enough? Tell them you were
    smart enough to

stop spending time with a dummy like them. Yep, when I said harsh, I
meant harsh. Let it out. Be a badass. Stop censoring your own anger.
It's not as if the narcissist can hear you, so feel free to express
yourself uncensored, to yourself. Connect with your authentic self, your
authentic rage and your fighter attitude. So long as you do not act upon
any of these thoughts or break No Contact by sending them any part of
this new discourse, you're safe to release your anger in a healthy
manner. In fact, according to Beverly Engel, LMFT, in her article, "When
is it Better Not to Forgive?" attempting to stifle your anger while
forcing yourself to forgive your abuser too soon actually impedes the
healing process.

2.  Word or phrase replacement. For the second component of reverse
    discourse, you can replace abusive words you've heard with new words
    or phrases whenever they come up in your mind or you find yourself
    ruminating over them. How you use this is up to you and your
    personal needs. Some survivors will find word/phrase replacement
    jolting, so for them, they might have to start small and begin to
    use positive words they have an easier time believing in that
    eventually lead up to the bigger beliefs they want to have for
    themselves. A survivor who has been criticized for her appearance
    may find more solace in replacing his or her rumination with
    something small like, "I am imperfect, but imperfection is
    beautiful," rather than right away saying, "I am so beautiful"
    without any belief in it. Assess where you're at and what you feel
    most comfortable saying---don't force yourself into extremes if
    you're not ready for them. Other survivors, however, may benefit
    from extremes. I personally found it helpful to make the new word or
    phrase as hard-hitting and extreme as possible, because as an abuse
    survivor, I was used to hearing the other extreme end of the
    spectrum. For example, if your abuser constantly attacked your
    intelligence, replace any abusive phrase they've used against you
    with, "I am smart as hell" or "I am brilliant." The extra bonus of
    this exercise is that

not only will you begin to silence your abuser's voice in your head,
you'll begin to voice an even more powerful method of self-talk that
will pave the way for success and confidence in the future. It may even
be helpful to add an additional phrase that gives back the projection to
your abuser---for example, "I am the smart one, you're just sad you
aren't," is a great example of how to actively defuse the abuser's power
while igniting your own. Whichever way you use this method, make sure
that it caters to what you personally feel comfortable with. This can be
an incremental process and there is no right or wrong way to do this
method.

3.  Giving previously disempowering words a positive connotation and
    reframing their meaning. In our society, words like "bitch" have
    been "taken back" with more positive connotations that refer to
    being a powerful woman, the most famous example being the new use of
    the word in Sherry Argov's book, Why Men Love Bitches. There's no
    rule that says we can't apply the same principle to degrading words.
    If there is a phrase that you need to "remodel" to serve you and
    feel that you can without being triggered, all the more power to
    you. For example, if a female narcissist emasculated you by saying,
    "You're not a real man, you're too sensitive," and this thought
    keeps popping back in your head, try remodeling this by saying, "If
    being a real man means taking your crap passively, sure, I am not
    your definition of what it means to be a real man. I am even
    better." It's powerful to recognize that while words can be
    destructive, they can also be taken back, reconstructed, rewritten
    and remodeled to revive your power.

4.  Channel every terrible thing someone has said about you into your
    highest good or the greater good of society. I do this all the time.
    If someone insults your intelligence, you simply store that away as
    an incentive to prove them wrong in every single way. If someone
    tells you that you're not capable of something, you do everything

you can to achieve it or something else even better. You use what
someone says to disempower you---to empower yourself and others even
more. You can also use this facet of reverse discourse to contribute to
the world as well. For example, I've used all the victim-blaming
statements of ignorant people as incentives to write blog posts that
shed light on the factors that tether us to our abusers; I've used it to
make videos that dismantle stereotypes about abuse survivors and compile
research that proves these people wrong regarding their misconceptions
about abuse survivors. Remember, only use these methods in ways that
empower you and only if they make you comfortable. Reverse discourse is
all about interrupting your usual thought patterns, taking back control
over the language being wielded against you, and reframing words to
serve your healing journey. It's not about embracing the abuse but
rather reclaiming your power from it. Use reverse discourse in a
constructive way that is meaningful to you and works for you--- it's a
power method that's meant to work with you, not against you.

The Power of Opposite Action In order to challenge the narcissist's
power, you have to acknowledge the power of opposite action. This means
that when the narcissist... Stonewalls you: You use that silent
treatment to use your voice across many platforms and with those who
matter. You use that period to recollect yourself, connect with your
authentic self and cherish that beautiful "me" time. You "stonewall" the
narcissist by cutting off contact with them whenever they're
disrespecting you. You walk away from any and all toxic arguments and
provocations, as difficult as it may seem. You refuse to invest in their
mind games and instead invest in yourself. Triangulates you: You make
yourself the #1 priority. You "triangulate" the abuser, not to make them
jealous, but to give yourself support during the recovery process. This
is accomplished by building a new support network or reconnecting with
your old one---if and only if that old one provides a safe

space for your healing. Sometimes survivors can also have toxic friends
or family members in addition to their partner that they need to also
detach from during this time. Connecting with other survivors might be a
crucial part of your journey as well. Gaslights you: You validate and
recognize and honor your reality, knowing that what you've experienced
is grounded in truth. Writing is an incredible tool to reconnect with
the reality of what you've experienced. Whenever you begin doubting or
second-guessing yourself, write to a trusted friend, post on a
survivor's forum or write in a journal regarding what is occurring, what
has occurred in the past and what you've actually experienced as opposed
to the reality the narcissist is attempting to construct for you.
Devalues you: You "devalue" the illusion of the narcissist's false self,
reconnecting with the true self of the narcissist and who this person
actually is. Rather than feeding into reminiscing over all of the good
memories with the narcissist, counter this habit by remembering how he
or she made you feel the majority of the time when they abused you,
controlled you, berated you and made you feel small. Reconnect with the
truth of the narcissist's toxic traits and remind yourself why you are
so lucky to be free or at the very least, aware of who the narcissist
truly is behind the mask. Discards you: You "discard" the narcissist, go
No Contact or Low Contact and cut all ties with this toxic individual.
Discarding the narcissist first is never easy, but there are multiple
ways you can go about it, from detaching slowly while you plan an escape
to going cold turkey with a safety plan in place (recommended for
situations where there is violence present in the relationship.) Gets
New Supply: You "supply" yourself with new dreams, new goals, new
friendships and space and time for healing. When was the last time you
pursued your big dreams, indulged in a few of your God-given gifts or
traveled solo to a new place? When was the last time you took an hour to
yourself to unplug from everything and have a nice bubble bath? When was
the last time you meditated or went to a yoga retreat? There are many
sources

of "healthy" supply you can seek that won't disappoint you, abuse you or
make you feel small. Instead, these sources of supply will make you feel
loved and remind you of how valuable you are. It's time to devalue and
discard the narcissist---and supply yourself.

The Power of Extreme Self-Care Extreme self-care is something we'll talk
about more in-depth later in this book, but it requires that you ask
yourself, "What do I need, right at this very moment?" every day. You
"tend" to yourself. You don't make excuses for not taking that extra
long walk to relax, or squeezing in a five-minute meditation when you
need to recharge during your work day. If you're in an abusive
relationship or recovering from one, extreme self-care may look like the
beginnings of Low Contact (minimal contact except when necessary) or No
Contact; it may look like you traveling to a different city for the
weekend, alone or to a trusted friend or relative's place, to get away
from your abuser, provided that you are not isolated by him or her. In
the most extreme scenarios when none of that is possible, it may look
like spending five minutes each day to research the options that are
available to help you---whether it be professional help, local community
support, or even an online forum. Whatever form this extreme self-care
takes will be catered to your unique circumstances, but it will always
go towards trusting yourself to "re-parent" yourself, to self-soothe and
love yourself. These techniques will give you some peace of mind,
especially when you're living in a war zone of epic proportions. Read
more about the different healing modalities available for you as a
survivor in the essay, "Healing Invisible Battle Wounds: The
Kaleidoscope of Healing."

My friend, Lilly Hope Lucario, founder of Healing Complex Trauma and
PTSD, compiled the following list below on things we as survivors need
to stop doing during our healing journey. These toxic habits only
further hinder our progress, increasing self-blame and toxic shame. I
share this list with you in the hopes that you will realize that in the
emergence of your power, it is important to eradicate the self-defeating
habits and beliefs about your healing journey.

"Ten Things To Stop Doing" By Complex PTSD Survivor Lilly Hope
Lucario 1. Listening to unsolicited advice from those who know little
about trauma, or those with little empathy. 2. Comparing your journey to
others. 3. Believing healing or recovering quickly, are a sign of
strength. 4. Thinking you were in any way to blame for being abused. 5.
Thinking that the way toxic people treated you, is in any way a
reflection of your self-worth. 6. Thinking you should be "over this" by
now. 7. Believing that minimizing the trauma helps the healing process,
when all it does is invalidate your experience. 8. Thinking you are a
bad person for not forgiving heinous abuse. 9. Thinking you are weak for
being abused. 10. Thinking you should tolerate people invalidating your
trauma and the effects of it on your life.

15

10 Reasons Why Being Raised by a Narcissistic Parent Can Get You Trapped
in the Trauma Repetition Cycle The amount of distance required between
yourself and your toxic family is directly relative to the depth of harm
they cause and their unwillingness to change. --- Lilly Hope Lucario

Freud called it repetition compulsion, I call it subconscious
programming from childhood. It's where we get all our icky patterns
(that's the clinical term I am sure) of getting enmeshed with
narcissistic partners and friends in adulthood after being raised by
narcissistic parents in childhood. Not every victim of narcissistic
abuse has been narcissistically abused; on the contrary, I've met many
survivors who've never been abused in childhood. This goes to show that
anyone can be a victim of a narcissist because many of them are covert,
insidious and you may not know you're in a relationship with one until
it's too late. However, we can't deny that being "primed" for abuse of
any kind from early on can have a negative impact on our interpersonal
relationships. We can acknowledge these patterns without blaming
ourselves for them in the process.

The effects of childhood trauma, including emotional neglect or abuse in
childhood, can have alarmingly potent effects on our psyche as we enter
adulthood, even to the extent of rewiring the brain (van der Kolk,
2016). The children of narcissistic parents, those who meet the
diagnostic criteria for Narcissistic Personality Disorder, know this all
too well, having been raised by someone with a limited capacity for
empathy and an excessive sense of grandiosity, false superiority and
entitlement (Ni, 2016). Children of narcissistic parents are programmed
at an early age to seek validation where there is none, to believe their
worthiness is tied to the reputation of their families, and to
internalize the message that they can only sustain their value by how
well they can 'serve' the needs of their parents. They have lived an
existence where love was rarely ever unconditional, if given at all.
This is not to say that childhood survivors of narcissistic abuse cannot
rise above their childhood conditioning; in fact, they can be stronger
survivors and thrivers as a result of the resilience they are capable of
developing and the ways in which they channel their traumas into
transformation (Bussey and Wise, 2007). It takes real inner work and
bravery to unravel the traumas that we've had to endure as children as
well as address any retraumatization as adults. Being able to understand
our relationship and behavioral patterns, as well as any negative
self-talk that has arisen as a result of the abuse, can be revolutionary
in challenging the myths and falsehoods we've been fed about our worth
and capabilities. I write this list as a daughter of a narcissistic
parent, regarding how and why we can easily become "trapped" in another
cycle of abuse that is all too familiar to our upbringing.

1.  Love-bombing represents the excessive attention we may have never
    received from our parents. Narcissistic parents, much like
    narcissistic abusers in relationships, pathologize and invalidate
    our emotions to the point where we are left voiceless. We are not
    allowed to feel, so we end up going to extremes: we either become
    repressed and numb or we become rebel children who 'feel' too

much, too soon. Our emotions become overwhelming either way, because our
grief is not processed in a healthy way, starting from childhood. The
childhood experiences of not feeling heard, seen, loved and validated
can condition us to accept less---while also asking for more. Although
anyone can be a victim of love-bombing, the excessive attention a
narcissist uses to manipulate us in the idealization phase of a
relationship can hook survivors even more strongly when they are being
retraumatized. Due to these past experiences of trauma, we can be extra
susceptible to the love-bombing and idealization of a narcissist because
we have more reason to seek the validation we did not gain in our past
experiences. When a toxic person love-bombs us and later devalues us, it
results in the reinforcing of those wounds as well as new emotional
injuries that maim us. Yet that does not make the abuse our fault---it
simply means we have more to heal than survivors who are encountering a
narcissistic abuser for the first time.

2.  Idealization when our parents needed something and devaluation when
    we were no longer useful is familiar. Narcissistic parents treat
    their children like trophies and objects---puppets that must do
    their bidding and do everything to serve them, even while they
    maintain a perpetually dissatisfied attitude towards them. This
    pattern of idealization and devaluation teaches us that love is
    unstable, frightening, and ultimately unpredictable. It causes us to
    walk on eggshells, fearful that we may displease others. It also
    desensitizes us and makes us tone-deaf to verbal abuse later on in
    adulthood (Streep, 2016). Although we may learn to identify
    emotional and verbal abuse, we will be less likely than someone who
    had a healthy upbringing to recognize how damaging it can be or how
    unacceptable it truly is, because it unfortunately is 'familiar' to
    us as the only version of love we've been shown. We may become
    'trauma bonded' to our abusive parents and more prone to bonding
    with abusive partners in adulthood as a result (Carnes, 1997). This
    sweet-and-mean cycle strangely and masochistically feels like "home"
    to our subconscious, which has been ingrained with the pattern of
    longing for

the approval of our parents---and that behavioral pattern is now
transferred on to our new partner. We learn to become conditioned to the
crumbs of highly conditional love and approval, while expecting much
less in the arenas of decency and respect. We may even go to the other
end of the spectrum and shut out anyone who resembles our parents in
tone or attitude---some of this may be hypervigilance, but much of it is
self-protection and intuition about the behaviors that have traumatized
us in the past. Children of narcissistic parents can re-sensitize
themselves to the fact that abuse is not a normal or healthy part of any
relationship by addressing their people-pleasing habits, doing important
boundary work, and replacing old narratives of unworthiness with
empowering ones about the type of love and respect they truly deserve.
They can essentially 'reparent' themselves in a safe, protective space
(Walker, 2013).

3.  We are accustomed to being micromanaged and controlled. To us,
    control, fear, and coercion is normalized as a form of intimacy
    rather than abuse. Narcissistic children tend to become enmeshed
    with the demands and identities of their overbearing, controlling
    parents. These types of parents are known to frequently violate the
    boundaries of their children as well as their privacy. They work to
    erode the identity of the child so that he or she becomes the
    perfect source of narcissistic supply. This means excessively
    attempting to control the child's interests, hobbies, aspirations,
    relationships and even personality traits through manipulation,
    threats, as well as verbal, physical or sometimes even sexual abuse.
    Never allowed to be independent agents, children of narcissistic
    parents were fed the blue pill of compliance in childhoods. They're
    not "awake" yet to the fact that their people-pleasing habits may
    excessively cater to people who don't deserve their generosity. Fear
    is considered a normal part of a relationship and without it, we may
    feel oddly

"bored" by the lack of adrenaline, dopamine and oxytocin levels we're
accustomed to through the periodic love-bombing and scapegoating of our
parents.

4.  Witnessing the dynamics of one partner abuse the other has us
    replicating the roles in adulthood. It will not come as a surprise
    to you that those who were raised in households with domestic
    violence are much more likely to become victims or perpetrators
    themselves (UNICEF, 2006). Boys are more likely to be violent with
    their partners when they start to date and girls are at an increased
    risk of becoming victims of that abuse (Jeltsen, 2016). According to
    Liz Roberts, deputy CEO at Safe Horizon, a nonprofit that works with
    domestic violence victims in New York City, children who experience
    domestic violence may also bully and show aggression towards their
    peers. However, it's important to keep in mind that not every abuser
    is an abuse victim and that not every abuse victim turns into an
    abuser. Abuse is still a choice someone makes. Those who are
    full-fledged narcissists may find it difficult to evolve or may
    choose not to evolve due to their impaired empathy, but those who
    are survivors of abuse are capable of evolving out of and growing
    from their trauma. I believe that children of narcissistic parents,
    whether male or female, are at an increased risk for either becoming
    narcissistically abused or being narcissistic themselves. This is
    because we come to identify with the victim parent or may even have
    "fleas" of narcissistic traits while growing up that we need to
    evolve from during our healing journey.

5.  We learn to associate being an object with being valued. As the
    child of a narcissistic parent or parents, you were taught that you
    were not inherently worthy, but rather that your worth depended on
    what you could do for the narcissistic parent and how compliant you
    were. The emphasis on appearance, status, reputation is at an
    all-time high in households with a narcissistic parent. Due to the
    narcissistic parent's grandiosity, false mask and

need to be the best, you were probably part of a family that was
'presented' in the best possible light, with abuse taking place behind
closed doors. Within the home was a different story than the one
presented to the public: you may have witnessed the horrific dynamics of
seeing one parent verbally or even physically abuse the other, been
subjected to the abuse and neglect yourself, and/or experienced both
parents working together to undercut you and your siblings. If you ever
dared to threaten the perfect false image or did anything to speak out
about the abuse, you were most likely punished. The emotional and
psychological battery children of narcissistic parents endure when going
against the expectations and beliefs of the family can be incredibly
damaging and have life-long effects on their self-image, their agency
and their faith in themselves. Existing for the purpose of maintaining
someone else's reputation is a rather limiting experience for a young
child. It is scarring to be told that you only exist for the purpose of
serving another. Being a trophy boyfriend, girlfriend, wife or husband
may initially feel flattering because as a child, to be considered a
prize felt like a seal of approval---and the only source of "real"
attention and validation from your parents.

6.  If we were scapegoated as children, we'll feel a sense of toxic
    shame and pervasive unworthiness that prevents us from knowing we
    deserve better. Pete Walker (2013) calls this "toxic shame." It's a
    symptom of the Complex PTSD that can often accompany narcissistic
    abuse. When we get tangled up with a narcissist who could possibly
    be the mirror image of one or both of our parents, we revert back to
    that sense of powerlessness and shame that plagued us ever since we
    were young children. The feeling of never being quite enough, and
    being hated for merely existing, is an ancient feeling that a
    relationship with a toxic narcissist in adulthood is sure to trigger
    and cement. What do you think happens when we continue to

reinforce that toxic shame? We end up not feeling good enough all over
again and trauma bonded to our abuser, who represents to us the people
we failed to please in childhood. While the logical, reasoning part of
our brain tells us to get out, our subconscious runs towards the very
perpetrator who acts and behaves an awful lot like the ones that we
depended on for our survival.

7.  Our pain threshold is much higher than those who have never been
    abused; we're much more desensitized to toxicity and thus more
    likely to hold on even when things are terrible. When you are raised
    by a narcissist or two narcissistic parents, contempt is considered
    a part of love and 'normal' in a relationship. We are treated well
    only when we are needed and then quickly subjected to contempt and
    terrifying narcissistic rage when we 'disobey' and threaten the
    parent's excessive sense of entitlement (Goulston, 2012). The
    condescension, contempt and hatred with which a narcissistic parent
    uses to berate their children is not only immensely hurtful, it
    retrains the mind into accepting abuse as a new normal. In her
    article, "Why Unloved Daughters Fall For Narcissists," author Peg
    Streep (2016) suggests that after experiencing childhood abuse, we
    become "tone-deaf" to verbal abuse, desensitized to toxic
    interactions to the extent of not even processing it as abuse. We
    may still be incredibly hurt by the abuse, but we may process to it
    in a way that differs from those who have grown up in healthier
    households without abuse and are able to identify it as a
    dealbreaker more readily. As we become acclimated to a toxic
    environment, we may also develop what Patrick Carnes (2013) calls
    "betrayal bonds" or trauma bonds---similar to Stockholm
    Syndrome---in order to survive in such a hostile situation. This
    trauma bonding can also be reenacted with an abuser in adulthood and
    when it is, it's doubly dangerous to the survivor who is already
    vulnerable. In fact, Dr. Martin Teicher (2006) has pointed out the
    growing evidence that verbal abuse in childhood can change the way a
    brain is wired, increasing the risk for anxiety and suicidal
    ideation in adulthood. There has been corresponding

research that confirms that parental verbal aggression can, in fact,
lead to changes in the brain (Choi, et. al 2009; Teicher, 2006). Being
raised by a narcissistic parent can literally change our brain,
potentially making us a completely different person than we would have
been pretrauma. Brain areas affected by trauma can include the
hippocampus, the amygdala, the corpus callosum and the frontal cortex.
In addition, trauma results in alterations in the key neural systems
involved in stress responses, such as the HPA axis---this chronic
activation wears out parts of the body, resulting in hippocampal/limbic
abnormalities in children (Perry, 2000). Trauma has affected the way our
brain processes further trauma, debilitating us from feeling powerful
enough to leave another abusive situation without the right form of
support. When we are in what Pete Walker calls constant fight, flight,
freeze or fawn mode, we are unlikely to be able to concentrate our
resources on how to develop a healthy emotional detachment to the
situation---to our brain, it feels like an actual death if we are
abandoned, especially by a toxic partner who resembles a parental
figure, and we may feel the need to find any way possible to avoid that
abandonment, even if it means going back to the same situations that
render us feeling powerless and ashamed.

8.  Due to the fact that we were never celebrated or rewarded for our
    accomplishments unless they served our parents, we become accustomed
    to conditional support. Narcissistic parents teach us that we need
    to be perfect and successful, but that you should never be rewarded
    for it or feel "enough." Narcissists are masters of moving the goal
    posts so that nothing their victims do is ever enough. As childhood
    abuse survivors, we are no exception to that rule. Our
    accomplishments are rarely acknowledged unless they meet an
    arbitrary criteria for "what looks best to society," or confirms the
    narcissistic parent's own grandiose fantasies. Our abusive parent is
    never genuinely proud of us unless he or she can claim credit for
    that particular success. Some narcissistic parents can even envy or
    look down upon the success of their children,

especially if that success enables that child to become independent of
their parents, outside of their realm of power and control. It is not
uncommon for these types of parents to attempt to sabotage the success
and happiness of their children if that success interferes at all with
their grandiose self-image, their own ideas of what 'happiness' should
entail (usually whatever makes them look good rather than what makes
their children feel good) or their compulsion to micromanage and control
every facet of their children's lives. In the sick mind of the
narcissistic parent, it would be better if their children did not exist,
rather than unable to do their bidding and 'perform' the identity that
the parent wishes their children to embody or achieves the exact goals
they want their children to achieve. Even if they were the perfect
daughters or sons, the goal posts would again shift. That is why, for
children of narcissistic parents, the phrase, "Your parents must be so
proud" evokes a cringe and a trip down the memory lane of trauma. What
are we really thinking when you say that? "My parents are rarely proud
of me no matter what I do. For them, it was never enough. For the most
part, I raised myself and accomplished this, in spite of what they did."
Please know that these platitudes, while well-meaning, can be triggering
for survivors of childhood abuse or trauma, because we were never
validated or loved unconditionally by our parents or, at the very least,
one of our parents. As a result, children of narcissistic parents crave
the positive regard they never received in childhood---they crave the
excessive attention that only a narcissist can seemingly provide. In the
initial stages of dating a narcissistic abuser, they might be provided
with heaps upon heaps of support, admiration and praise---this can feel
addictive to the children of narcissists who might be duped into
thinking that they've found, at last, a source of unconditional support.
But what they're actually experiencing is subconsciously what

they're used to---a conditional phase of support that only lasts as long
as the narcissist's idealization phase.

9.  You may have developed a "fixer" attitude from catering to your
    narcissistic parent or parents. With an abusive, rageful parent or
    parents, children of narcissists may feel accustomed to walking on
    eggshells or even acting as the sole caretakers for their parents at
    a young age. There is often a role reversal that takes place,
    especially if one or both parents are addicts of some sort, as
    narcissists can also have substance abuse issues in addition to
    their personality disorders. If we develop a "fixer" or what some
    might deem codependent (a controversial term in the survivor
    community) attitude towards an abuser, we're likely to carry on that
    feeling of wanting to serve or help someone in need in our future
    relationships as well. Note that there is nothing wrong with feeling
    empathy, compassion and wanting to help others. None of these
    qualities need to be eradicated, even if they may make us more
    vulnerable to predators who want to exploit those qualities.
    However, excessively catering to someone else's needs before your
    own is a recipe for a great deal of resentment and lack of
    fulfillment down the road. Children of narcissists are intimately
    acquainted with the phrases, "Sorry," "Hope I am not bothering you,"
    and "I can do that for you, no worries" 24/7. It's a challenge for
    us to realize that our needs matter too, and that sometimes we need
    to prioritize our own self-care before the desires of another
    person.

10. You're trying to make a toxic person the family you never had, when
    in reality, they are exactly like the family you did have. According
    to integrative psychotherapist Maxine Harley (2016), abusive parents
    interrupt Maslow's pyramid and the hierarchy of needs. Our need for
    belonging, for a safe place, for a home, is hugely distorted by the
    experience of having a narcissistic parent present. What may feel
    safe to a child raised in a normal home may feel unfamiliar and
    strange to a child raised in an abusive

one. Our safe place, morbidly enough, may feel like it is in the arms of
another narcissist like the one or ones who raised us. That is why,
rather than focusing on our partner as a parent (whether they are toxic
or not) it's important to "re-parent" ourselves, soothe ourselves and be
gentle with ourselves as if we were our own children, knowing that no
matter what, we will always have ourselves as a guiding light of
support. Only when we've reparented ourselves and grieved the loss of
our childhood, can we be fully welcoming and open to receiving a partner
who can support and love us with the same sort of fervor as we show
ourselves in times of need.

The effects of being the child of a narcissist are complex and varied
depending upon the level of trauma that has been experienced, the
ability of the child to detach and live an independent life outside of
his or her parents and their coping resources. However, having surveyed
hundreds of survivors and spoken to thousands over my lifetime, I find
that there are many commonalities among us that often deter us from
leading the joyful, fulfilling lives we fully deserve. For example: When
things are going well, we feel undeserving and unworthy of it. We find
ourselves sabotaging our success and joy because we have been raised to
think we do not deserve it. I remember a very sweet reader
congratulating me on a recent life-changing event I shared on social
media---it was a post about accomplishing a dream that I always had. She
said something that was very special that I'll never forget. She said,
"You deserve all this and more." You deserve all this and more. This was
a stranger who did not know me, yet she said something that I had never
heard from my own parents. How many of us as survivors of narcissistic
abuse need to hear these words? Those were some of the most powerful
words a survivor could hear, especially a survivor of childhood
narcissistic abuse. And you know what? We all need to

tell ourselves that whenever something good happens. "I deserve this, I
really do. I don't have to feel guilty about accomplishing things,
working hard, achieving my dreams, being my own person or being happy. I
deserve this and more. I really do. And I don't have to stand in the way
of all the abundance flowing to me. I am worthy of abundance and joy."
Our biggest challenge is to know that we are worthy and rejoice in that
knowing. If anything, we are just as deserving as anyone who had a
normal childhood of being happy. In fact, I'd wager that we deserve to
give ourselves ten times the amount of love and compassion than those
without a traumatic childhood give themselves because we need it that
much more. We essentially need to "love-bomb" ourselves---but not in the
false, shallow way the narcissistic abuser has done or the narcissistic
parent did whenever they needed something from us. In an authentic way
that honors our true self, our flaws, our gifts, our triumphs, and our
terrors. We are not perfect, but we are loveable and worthy. We are
afraid to take up space and ask for what we need.We are even overly
apologetic for it. As I mentioned before, children of narcissistic
parents learn how to say sorry for having basic desires and needs. This
is a habit I am still trying to grow out of, and I've been working on my
boundaries for years! We might find ourselves trying to placate people
while we ask for something, qualifying our needs with "No worries if you
can't" or compromising our boundaries because we fear it will make other
people uncomfortable. We may even physically manifest this by overeating
or undereating so as to not take up as much physical space or hide
ourselves under extra weight because we feel we shouldn't be visible or
seen. We give second, third and hundredth chances to those who don't
deserve it. Although I am definitely not a golden child, I've witnessed
both golden children and scapegoats still continuing to engage in the
bond with narcissistic parents because they refuse to believe there is
no hope of a healthy and authentic connection. We are taught from a very
young age that we have to tolerate abuse, adjust to it, adapt to it and
endure it as much as humanly possible. As a result, we carry that
behavior into adulthood and

continue to give a million and one chances to people who say they will
change and never do. Inside of us may be that hope that if our partners
change, perhaps there is hope for our parents too. But what we really
need to change is our patterns of saying yes when we really need to say
no, while setting our pattern of sticking to our boundaries firmly and
walking away from toxicity whenever needed. We learn that we have to be
the best if we want to be considered worthy. As children of narcissistic
parents, we internalize the idea that there is always someone better,
and you must beat them--starting with your own siblings. Children of
narcissistic parents are often turned against their siblings in a
competition to vie for the affection and love they always craved but
never received. Narcissistic parents are well-known for 'triangulating'
children against one another as an attempt to unnecessarily compare
them, demean them and feed their own sense of power and control over
their children. Usually there is a golden child and a scapegoat, and
sometimes the roles are reversed depending on what the narcissistic
parent needs to meet their agenda (McBride, 2011). Scapegoated rebel
children are often truth-seekers who desire an authentic connection with
their family members, but fail to remain silent about the abuse that
occurs when they do not meet the absurd expectations of their parents.
The golden child, on the other hand, is usually lauded as the
'standard,' but this too can quickly take a turn should the golden child
ever exercise his or her agency and do something outside of the parent's
control. We are taught at a very young age that we will never be good
enough, that we must always compare ourselves to others, and fail to
acknowledge our inherent worthiness and value. As adults, we learn that
we do not have to compete with anyone in order to be worthy or valuable,
nor do we have to necessarily be the best at everything. Cultivating a
sense of unconditional self-love, as well as an appreciation of our
unique skills and abilities, can go a long way in combating these
harmful internalizations from abuse and replacing them with a healthy
level of pride and self-sufficiency. We choose partners and friends who
are not happy for us or not supportive in healthy ways. We choose those
who may appear to excessively

support us in the beginning only to subject us to envious put downs,
minimization of our success and sabotage later on. This is because there
is a part of us that is not comfortable with the idea of someone
supporting us wholly. We don't know what that is like to have supportive
figures who have our back no matter what. We only know conditional
support---support that is given when we do something to make our parents
look good. Similarly, we are subconsciously programmed to make our
partners look good when they need it, but not feel good for the very
things that make us a "trophy" in their eyes. There is a void and an
emptiness where a healthy sense of safety and positive self-regard
should've been cultivated. In its place is a vast void which is often
filled with a lot of toxic shame that shouldn't belong to us or any
innocent child for that matter. It was never ours to begin with. It was
projected onto us by the very people who were supposed to raise us, care
for us and love us unconditionally. In order to mitigate feelings of
toxic shame and self-blame, survivors must recognize that it takes a lot
of inner work, selfparenting and professional support to understand how
to fill these gaps in a healthy and nourishing way, in a way that gently
allows us to parent ourselves. There may not be a replacement for a
parent's love or attention, but that doesn't mean that there can't be
healing.

If you are the child of a narcissistic parent or parents, please know
that it is not your fault if you were traumatized, or even
re-traumatized. You can break your own patterns by doing the work to
heal some of your subconscious wounding and beliefs, which often starts
with the biggest belief, "I am not enough." This might mean breaking
some of the subconscious, repetitive selfdefeating beliefs and patterns
that have been holding you back through healing modalities that target
the mind, the body and the spirit. My essays, "Healing Your Addiction to
the Narcissist," and "Healing Invisible Battle

Wounds," offer more information on the myriad healing modalities
available for the complex trauma survivor. During this time, it's
important to acknowledge that you can heal at your own pace. It takes a
great deal of re-parenting, processing the grief of not having a loving
parent, and moving through the complex emotions that can arise, combined
with No Contact or Low Contact with our parents, to begin to heal. This
can be tackled through many techniques, including but certainly not
limited to working with a therapist who is familiar with PTSD and
Complex PTSD, somatic practices like yoga and Reiki, hypnosis,
meditation, positive affirmations, and most importantly, a hiatus from
relationships that enables you to explore your core beliefs without the
risk of further reinforcing them by being with another narcissist. Some
do find the love of their lives after being with a narcissistic partner,
while others find themselves back in the circle, being tortured once
more. That's why a hiatus from relationships can be so important and
essential to survivors of this form of abuse, to ensure that you can
continue on the dream of the former without risking getting trapped
again in the latter. In adulthood, we gain the opportunity to validate
our own emotions and recognize that what we feel, and have felt all
along, is entirely valid. We learn how to process our emotions, our
trauma, and the grief of being unloved as children and adolescents. We
learn that we have opportunities to detach from our abusive parents,
whether it be through Low Contact (minimum contact only when necessary)
or No Contact at all. We experiment with using our agency to separate
ourselves from the identity erosion that has occurred in our childhoods.
We learn to separate the narcissistic parent's harmful beliefs about us
and our own burgeoning faith. Most of all, we learn that it is okay to
believe in ourselves and to welcome good things into our lives. We learn
that we are deserving of all that is good. It is important to remember
that as children of narcissistic parents, we carry the legacy of our
wounds, but that these wounds can become portals to deeper and richer
healing. We do not have to burden the next generation with our wounding,
but rather use it as a way to nurture and validate future

generations. We have options as to how we can channel this trauma for
our own growth, rather than our destruction. These wounds cannot heal if
they are not addressed or if we refuse to be awake; at the same time,
our timeline for healing will be unique and our journey cannot be
compared to that of others. Self-awareness and self-compassion is needed
more than ever. As children of narcissistic parents, we have to learn to
protect ourselves from further abuse and set up a plan to better engage
in self-care. Falsehoods about parents always being loving and having
our best interests at heart simply do not cut it when it comes to
manipulative, toxic and abusive parents. These parents are incapable of
empathy and are likely to 'hoover' you back only when they need to use
you as a source of narcissistic supply (Schneider, 2015). We must allow
ourselves to grieve for the loss of our childhood and embrace the truth
that our parents may have never loved us, or wanted the best for us, but
that we can 'reparent' ourselves the best ways we know how-- through
empathy, compassion, self-acceptance and self-love. Make no mistake:
when you are the child of a narcissistic parent, the idea that you never
deserved this love, is perhaps the biggest lie of all.

References Bussey, M. C., & Wise, J. B. (2007). Trauma transformed: An
empowerment response. New York: Columbia University Press. Carnes, P.
(2013). The Betrayal Bond: Breaking Free of Exploitive Relationships.
Health Communications Incorporated. Choi, J., Jeong, B., Rohan, M. L.,
Polcari, A. M., & Teicher, M. H. (2009). Preliminary Evidence for White
Matter Tract Abnormalities in Young Adults Exposed to Parental Verbal
Abuse. Biological Psychiatry, 65(3), 227-234.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.06.02 Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P., &
Linehan, M. M. (2009). A Biosocial Developmental Model of Borderline
Personality: Elaborating and Extending Linehan's Theory. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2696274/ Goulston, M., MD.
(2012, February 8). Rage -- Coming Soon From a Narcissist Near You.
Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/just-listen/201202/rage-coming-soon-narcissist-near-you
Harley, M. (2016). How Toxic Parents Topple the Foundations of Maslow's
Pyramid. Psych Central. Retrieved on October 5, 2016, from
http://psychcentral.com/blog/archives/2016/09/09/how-toxic-parents-topple-the-foundations-of-maslows-pyramid/

Jeltsen, M. (2016). The children who saw too much. Retrieved from
http://ryot.huffingtonpost.com/the-children-who-saw-toomuch/ Ni, P.
(2016, February 28). 10 Signs of a Narcissistic Parent. Retrieved from

https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/communication-success/201602/10-signs-narcissistic-parent
Perry, B.D. (2000). Traumatized children: How childhood trauma
influences brain development. The Journal of the California Alliance for
the Mentally Ill 11:1, 48-51. Schneider, A., LCSW. (2015, February 13).
'Hoover Maneuver': The Dirty Secret of Emotional Abuse. Retrieved from
http://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/hoover-maneuver-the-dirty-secret-of-emotional-abuse-0219154

Teicher, M. (2006). Sticks, Stones, and Hurtful Words: Relative Effects
of Various Forms of Childhood Maltreatment. American Journal of
Psychiatry Am J Psychiatry, 163(6), 993. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.163.6.993
Streep, P. (2016). Why Unloved Daughters Fall for Narcissists. Retrieved
October 05, 2016, from
http://blogs.psychcentral.com/knotted/2016/09/why-unloved-daughters-fall-for-narcissists/
Van der Kolk, B. (2014). The body keeps the score: Brain, mind, and body
in the healing of trauma. New York: Viking. Walker, P. (2013). Complex
PTSD: From surviving to thriving: A guide and map for recovering from
childhood trauma. Azure Coyote Publishing.

16

An Investment With No Return: 4 Ways Narcissists Financially Abuse You
and Why You Should Split the Check Narcissists not only mess with our
minds, they mess with our money. Financial abuse is one of the most
underexplored forms of abuse but it requires greater attention. Even
Forbes magazine (2012) has featured an article dedicated to helping
victims of narcissistic abuse strategically prepare their financial
paperwork in the event of a nasty divorce proceeding with a narcissist.
Landers, the writer of the article, acknowledges that a narcissistic
partner is likely to refuse to give financial documentation, use their
children as pawns and defy court orders. Yet even before a divorce, a
narcissist can engage in some shady financial abuse as a way to control
their victims---whether they are dating or in a longterm relationship.
Both male and female narcissists are capable of financially abusing each
other. In fact, the social norms of males being providers can be
exploited and used against them in the realm of financial abuse, while
the social norm of the female being primarily a housemaker can also
threaten male ideals when the female makes more money should the
narcissist be the male partner. Here are four popular ways that
malignant narcissists engage in financial abuse in the context of an
intimate relationship.

1.  Micromanages your money.

Telling a narcissist about your wealth is like inviting a lion to eat
beside you during dinner time. Soon, your finances will be under the
microscope so the narcissist can figure out the best ways to exploit it
and use it for themselves. The narcissist may give you forceful
suggestions about how to manage and invest your money. They may suddenly
ask you to give them a large loan because you have "so much" while
claiming they are lacking. To the narcissist, their money is theirs and
yours is theirs too. They feel excessively entitled to sabotaging the
success of others and they feel excessively entitled to the fruits of
your labor as well. If you're married, your spouse may ask you to pay
the majority of the bills, create a joint bank account (where funds will
mysteriously disappear into shady venues and ventures), and guilt you if
you make more money than them. After they're done guilting you and
getting the monthly mortgage paid for, they'll then attempt to depict
your contributions as worthless and meaningless---even when they've
barely done anything to chip in themselves.

2.  Uses money as a means of control. Narcissists are known to shower
    their victims with praise, gifts and dinner dates during the
    love-bombing stage of the relationship. Victims are lured into
    thinking that they are simply dating a generous partner, when in
    reality, they may be dating a toxic one who will later use their
    so-called generosity against them. Narcissists don't just "give"
    anything freely---they give in order to receive and what they most
    like to receive is control over the victim. There are typically two
    main ways a narcissist can use money as a way to control you. One is
    through voluntary excessive giving followed by a "you owe me"
    attitude and the second is through excessive stinginess and an "I'll
    give you an allowance attitude." The "you owe me" attitude is when a
    narcissist literally manufactures situations where you'll later feel
    obliged to give them something in return even though initially, the
    narcissist will make it appear as if it is a gift they

are giving freely. They'll entertain you with their "Oh, please, let
me," and "Let me buy you this" phrases---just to hold it against you
later. They may take you out to dinner, treat you to a vacation or give
you a present for your birthday---only to complain how they "pay for
everything" even if you refused to accept their offers initially. Make
no mistake: a narcissist accounts for every single cent you "owe" them
in their delusional minds, even if it was presented as something given
out of their own free will with no strings attached. Regardless of how
much money a narcissist has, a narcissist will make sure you give them
the 82 cents you owe them and split a fourdollar bill. Yes, they'll
really go that far. This is because it's not really about the money or
the gifts: it's about power. So long as the narcissist can make you feel
guilty and obligated to catering to their every need, they have no
problem buying something simply to punish you for it later. They love
that rush of feeling in control, in knowing that you are indebted to
them. It makes it that much easier to control you when they know they
have something they can use to coerce you to perform their bidding.
That's why it's always best to split the check with a narcissist
upfront, even if a narcissist is "begging" to treat you as a way to lure
you into this shady power dynamic: splitting the check ensures that
neither of you will technically owe each other anything---and in the
event that the narcissist tries to say otherwise, at least you'll have
the receipts to back it up. The second mentality narcissists use is an
"allowance" attitude. This can happen in a toxic, abusive marriage with
a narcissist even when the victim of the narcissist technically makes
more money, because the narcissist can coerce and intimidate the victim
into having control over all of the funds regardless of who earned them.
They may use physical or emotional violence to force the victim into
compliance with getting an "allowance" rather than access to their
money. This will disable the victim from meeting their basic needs and
taking care of their children. The limited allowance may also serve to
further isolate them from their social networks and recreational
activities---

basically disabling them from creating a life on their own terms.
Meanwhile, the narcissist will use the money (whether they were the ones
who earned it or not) in whatever way they see fit: love-bombing new
supply, gambling, and feeding their various addictions.

3.  Devalues the money you make even if they benefit from it. According
    to narcissism expert Dr. Tony Ferretti, inside every malignant
    narcissist is a sense of pathological envy and need to win at all
    costs. If you make more money than your partner, rest assured that
    he or she will attempt to devalue your earnings as well as your
    success as an attempt to feel powerful and superior about
    themselves. They may belittle your source of income, even if you
    make ten times more than their dead-end job. They will claim you are
    "broke" or attempt to say condescending things like, "I know you
    don't have money," even when you were paying their cab fare last
    night and they're struggling to make ends meet while living off of
    their parent's trust fund. In contrast, when they need a loan,
    they'll say the opposite: "I know you have the money" and the
    unspoken words, "And I am entitled to it." Even if you're treating
    them to dates, giving them lavish gifts or helping them through
    school, rest assured that they are resentful of the fact that you
    can provide for them better than they can provide for themselves.
    That's why they have to make sure that you feel inferior even if you
    are more financially adept and secure than they are.

4.  Exploits your money and does not pay you back. This is perhaps the
    most common way a narcissist uses your money. They ask for shady
    loans or never chip in for the bill, going so far as to constructing
    sob stories about how they need the money for a sick aunt or uncle,
    a tuition bill or a month's worth of rent lest they be put out on
    the streets. Given the fact that the victim is likely to have
    empathy for his or her partner, they may grant them the loan, only
    to never see or hear the narcissist again. Once the money has been
    paid, the narcissist (or sociopath), like a cunning

charlatan, disappears into the distance riding the horse you've bought
them. Their sweet treatment of you relies on how long you take to give
them the loan and their callous treatment begins shortly after. Trying
to protect yourself from financial abuse by a narcissist? Be sure to get
a divorce financial planner, ensure that you have good credit and a
separate bank account. Keep note of all of your financial records. If
you pay anything to a narcissist, make sure you have a note that says
what it's for so that the narcissist can't take you to court claiming
you never paid off his or her imaginary debt for you. Don't give out
loans to people you're "just" dating and furthermore, don't share much
about your finances if you suspect you may be in the presence of someone
toxic.

17

The Real Reason We Love Bad Boys (and Girls): How We Become Addicted to
Toxic Narcissists and Emotionally Unavailable People "Bad boys" and bad
girls wreak havoc on our lives, our bodies and our brains. The reasons
we love bad boys, toxic people and emotionally unavailable partners are
not just emotional and psychological---they are downright biochemical.
The truth of the matter is, our brains can be rewired to fixate on
people who aren't good for us. Emotionally unavailable men, toxic
partners such as narcissists or sociopaths and pickup artists alike all
depend on these effects to get us hooked. We can become addicted to the
highs and lows of dangerous romantic relationships in a way that makes a
breakup from a toxic person similar to rehab from a destructive drug
addiction. Have you wondered why you were unable to let go of that one
person who defined your relationship ambiguously, treated you
inconsistently and unfairly, brought up your worst insecurities while
simultaneously subjecting you to sweet talking and fantasy-prone
fast-forwarding? Unfortunately for those of us who have a tendency
towards dating bad boys (or girls), our addiction to toxic partners is
actually strengthened by their mistreatment of us.

When we first meet a toxic partner or an emotionally unavailable person,
our bond with him or her becomes cemented through their excessive
attention combined with their emotional withdrawal and withholding
throughout the relationship. The knowledge of what a toxic partner does
to our brain makes it more likely for us to cut back on our investment
on those who we perceive may not be a good fit earlier on, detach from
any attachments we may already have to toxic people and realize that the
powerful bond that's been created has arisen from our biochemical bonds,
not our true standards. Remember that rejection and affection often go
hand in hand in such a turbulent relationship where a partner is fluent
in giving you mixed messages. Rejection can hurt, literally, and it's no
surprise that your brain circuitry during a breakup mirrors your brain
circuitry when you are in physical pain (Eisenberger & Lieberman, M. D.
2004; Hsu et. al 2013). A breakup with a toxic person who has mistreated
you throughout the relationship compounds this effect and makes it that
much more difficult to recover from. These are a few main chemicals and
hormones involved which make for a powerful cocktail of attachment that
have little to do with the merits of the person you're dating and
everything to do with their shady behavior:

Dopamine Positive experiences like unforgettable dates, over-the-top
attention, flattery, amazing sex, gifts, and grand romantic gestures can
all release dopamine in the brain. Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that
controls the pleasure center of our brains which creates reward
circuits, which then generates automatic associations in our brain that
link our romantic partners with pleasure and even our survival
(Smithstein, 2010; Carnell, 2014). The catch? Dopamine flows more
readily in the brain when there is an "intermittent reinforcement"
schedule of rewards rather than a consistent schedule. The inability of
a toxic partner to give us what we need leaves us pining for the good
times and continuing to invest in the relationship, much

like a gambler at a slot machine who hopes for a perceived gain despite
the inevitable losses of such a risky investment. Dr. Helen Fisher
(1994; 2016) discovered that this "frustrationattraction" experience of
obstacles in a romantic relationship actually heightens our feelings of
love, rather than hindering them. She discusses how the brains of those
in adversity-ridden relationships become activated in an eerily similar
way to the brains of cocaine addicts. Emotionally unavailable men or
otherwise toxic partners are masters of intermittent reinforcement; they
do things on their own schedule---literally. They may disappear for
days, they may have a plethora of side chicks, they may constantly woo
you and also withhold from you that coveted relationship status. They're
always on the precipice of commitment or changing for the better before
they press the reset button once again. They are always uncertain (or
too certain when they're sweet-talking you into bed) about the future,
and they leave you guessing about their true intentions on a daily
basis. When we don't know the next time we'll see someone or are unable
to predict their next move, that person becomes much more alluring to
our brain. So that nice guy who performs these kinds acts consistently
rather than periodically feels less rewarding to the brain than the bad
boy who takes turns treating you to wonderful dates and then also
mistreating you with his disappearances, false promises, ambiguous
statements, hot-and-cold behavior and sudden withdrawals of affection.
In other words? Our brains can become masochists, seeking the very
people that hurt them. They become so accustomed to good behavior from
nice guys that they stop releasing as much dopamine (Korb, 2016). That's
why even in a healthy relationship, we can become so "used to" the
safety and security of a gentle partner that we find him or her less
exciting over time. On the other hand, taking a reprieve from a toxic
partner, which will surely happen at some point because he's not one to
stick around for too long before he's on to the next best thing, gives
the reward circuits of our brains a good "reset" so that the next time
they're into us and hoovering us back in, the

dopamine effect feels that much sweeter. A charming player who comes
along to sweep us off our feet, only to later replace us with another
member of his harem---ultimately and sadly steals the show. The
unpredictability of when we'll get our next "fix" of this elusive person
creates stronger reward circuits, which leaves us wanting more and more.
Unfortunately, the higher the emotional unavailability of a partner, the
more exciting he appears to us---at least, to the reward center of our
brains. In order to be mindful of the dopamine effect, we have to
understand that the reason we're so obsessed with a toxic partner isn't
because he's better than the nice guy with whom the romance may build
more gradually and organically; it's usually because he's much worse.
Resisting the dopamine effect means resisting creating new pleasurable
memories with the person who provides us pleasure primarily through
pain.

Oxytocin Let's not forget about how we bond with these partners through
the power of touch. Physical intimacy enables women in dysfunctional
relationships to indiscriminately release oxytocin, aptly named the
"love" or "cuddle" hormone (Watson, 2014). This is the same hormone that
bonds mother and child at birth, and it also bonds you with the men that
are undeserving of you. Oxytocin promotes not only attachment but also
trust. Studies show that when oxytocin is involved, betrayal does not
necessarily have an effect on how much a person continues to invest in
the person who betrayed him or her (Delgado, 2008). So the deception of
a toxic partner doesn't necessarily derail us from trusting him blindly,
especially if we're physically enmeshed with him. The oxytocin effect
may also be stronger for women than for men; according to Susan
Kuchinskas, author of the book, The Chemistry of Connection: How the
Oxytocin Response Can Help You Find Trust, Intimacy and Love, estrogen
tends to promote the effects of oxytocin bonding whereas testosterone
dampens it.

Emotionally unavailable men, toxic partners and "bad boys" are often
more exciting in bed. Whether this is because the intermittent
reinforcement of their hot-and-cold behavior tricks our brains into
thinking so or whether bad boys tend to have more sexual prowess remains
to be seen, but the fact of the matter is, once we've bonded with them
sexually, we've also bonded with them psychologically and emotionally.

Cortisol, Adrenaline and Norepinephrine Toxic partners evoke spikes in
our levels of cortisol, adrenaline and norepinephrine, all of which
regulate our reactions to stressful situations and work with our "fight
or flight" response. Except what often happens in a toxic relationship
is that we "freeze" in the relationship with a sense of learned
helplessness rather than fight or flee (though we may also certainly
fight, too). The release of stress hormones is sure to sharpen your
focus on that particular partner, as we have a tendency to become
hyper-aware of anything that has caused our stress hormone system to go
into overdrive as an evolutionary response to threat. This is likely to
cause you to seek out the source of both your comfort and discomfort:
the toxic partner that simultaneously becomes both your safe haven as
well as your shitty excuse for a relationship. According to Christopher
Bergland (2015), oxytocin, adrenaline and cortisol work together to
consolidate and reconsolidate fear-based memories. So your fears and
anxiety about abandonment by this partner, combined with your physical
intimacy with that partner make memories related to this partner more
vivid and more difficult to extricate yourself from. The
unpredictability, fear and anxiety associated with a partner who either
causes you to walk on eggshells and habitually leaves your head spinning
releases adrenaline which has an antidepressant effect. We can become
addicted to this effect. Fear also releases dopamine, which again feeds
those pesky reward circuits in our brain, leaving us longing for that
adrenaline rush. Fear and pleasure inevitably become intertwined despite
our best efforts to expose and dismantle the seeming irrationality of
our behavior.

This is why a couple who rides a roller coaster together or experiences
a lifethreatening event tend to bond even more closely. It is also why
you tend to inadvertently bond more deeply with someone who has hurt you
or has even subjected you to abuse---we call this "trauma bonding."

Serotonin When we fall in love, we become obsessive like people with
OCD... literally. Research has revealed that serotonin levels in our
brains drop in a similar fashion when we are in love as they do in the
brains of people with Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (Marazziti, 1999).
Since serotonin regulates and stabilizes mood, curbing obsessive
thinking, you can imagine how low levels of it when we're romantically
involved with someone can cause our decision-making abilities and
judgment to go haywire. Low levels of serotonin also encourage sexual
behavior, so serotonin only makes it more likely that we'll also be
swept away by bonds created by oxytocin and dopamine as well. Since
dopamine is also released when we recollect pleasurable memories,
constantly daydreaming and reminiscing over the first romantic moments
of a charming partner often has the effect of amplifying this circuit in
the brain. That's why you're usually hanging onto every text, waiting
anxiously for the next phone call or fantasizing about the next date
even if it's with someone you know logically may not be a good fit.
Toxic partners and bad boys tend to dominate our brains 24/7 with their
unpredictable behavior as well as their love-bombing, so it's no wonder
that we develop an otherwise irrational compulsion to go back to the
very people who hurt us. While our brain is definitely not out for our
best interest when it comes to bad boys, that doesn't mean our brains
can't be rewired for positive change. Neuroplasticity makes it possible
for our brains to make new neural connections in productive ways such as
exercise, healthy social bonds, music, new hobbies, interests and
passions (NIH, 2012). The key to healing from bad boy addiction lies in
substituting this unhealthy drug with healthier rewards

and obsessions---those that truly nurture and nourish us, rather than
those that starve us and leave us reeling for our next fix of crumbs.
Falling in love with a dangerous partner is very much like becoming a
serious addict. In order to survive the withdrawal effects, we have to
go cold turkey, or at the very least, begin to wean ourselves off from
the high dosage of toxicity.

References American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA:
American Psychiatric Publishing. Anderson, S. (2010, November 08). Can't
let go of a bad relationship? Retrieved April 11, 2016, from
https://susanandersonlcsw.wordpress.com/2010/11/08/cant-let-go-of-a-bad-relationship/
Bergland, C. (2015, July 10). Cortisol and Oxytocin Hardwire Fear-Based
Memories. Retrieved April 8, 2016, from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-athletes-way/201507/cortisol-and-oxytocin-hardwire-fear-based-memories
Bergland, C. (2013, January 22). Cortisol: Why "The Stress Hormone" Is
Public Enemy No. 1. Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-athletes-way/201301/cortisol-why-the-stress-hormone-is-public-enemy-no-1
Bergland, C. (2012, November 29). The Neurochemicals of Happiness.
Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-athletes-way/201211/the-neurochemicals-happiness
Bremner, J. D., Krystal, J. H., Charney, D.S., & Southwick, S. M.
(1996). Neural mechanisms in dissociative amnesia for childhood abuse:
Relevance to the current controversy surrounding the "false memory
syndrome." American Journal of Psychiatry, 153 (7), 71-82.

Bremner JD (2006). Traumatic stress: effects on the brain. Dialogues in
clinical neuroscience, 8 (4), 445-61. Burke, T., Ph.D. (2008). How
trauma impacts the brain. Speech presented in Rachel's Vineyard
Ministries. Retrieved from
http://www.rachelsvineyard.org/Downloads/Canada%20Conference%2008/TextOfBrainPP.pdf
Braiker, H. B. (2004). Who's pulling your strings?: How to break the
cycle of manipulation and regain control of your life. New York:
McGraw-Hill. Carnell, S. (2014, May 14). Bad Boys, Bad Brains. Retrieved
from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/badappetite/201205/bad-boys-bad-brains
Carnes, P. (2013). The Betrayal Bond: Breaking Free of Exploitive
Relationships. Health Communications Incorporated. Carver, J. M. (2004).
Stockholm Syndrome: The Psychological Mystery of Loving an Abuser, Page
3. Retrieved 2016, from
http://counsellingresource.com/therapy/self-help/stockholm/

Delgado, M. (2008, July 14). To Trust or Not to Trust: Ask Oxytocin.
Retrieved from
http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/to-trust-or-not-to-trust/
Drexler, S. M., Merz, C. J., Hamacher-Dang, T. C., Tegenthoff, M., &
Wolf, O. T. (2015). Effects of Cortisol on Reconsolidation of
Reactivated Fear Memories. Neuropsychopharmacology, 40(13), 3036-3043.
doi:10.1038/npp.2015.160 Eisenberger, N. I., & Lieberman, M. D. (2004).
Why rejection hurts: A common neural alarm system for physical and
social pain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(7), 294-300.
doi:10.1016/j.tics.2004.05.010 Ferster, C. B., & Skinner, B. F. (1957).
Schedules of reinforcement. Appleton-Century Crofts.
doi:10.1037/10627-000 Fisher, H. E. (1994). Anatomy of love: The
mysteries of mating, marriage, and why we stray. New York: Fawcett
Columbine.

Fisher, H. E. (2016). Love Is Like Cocaine -- Issue 33: Attraction --
Nautilus. Retrieved from
http://nautil.us/issue/33/attraction/love-is-like-cocaine Georgia Health
Sciences University. (2011, February 28). Brain's Reward Center Also
Responds to Bad Experiences. Retrieved from
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2011/02/110222121913.htm Harvard
Health. (2007). Drug addiction and the brain: Effects of dopamine on
addiction -- Harvard Health. Retrieved from
http://www.health.harvard.edu/press_releases/drug-addiction-brain

Herman, J. L. (1992). Trauma and recovery. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Hsu, D. T., Sanford, B. J., Meyers, K. K., Love, T. M., & Hazlet, K. E.
(2013). Response of the \[mu\]-opioid system to social rejection and
acceptance. Molecular Psychiatry, 18, 1211-1217. doi:10.1038/mp.2013.96
Halpern, H. M. (2004). How to break your addiction to a person. New
York: Bantam Books. Jacoby, M., & Kohut, H. (1990). Individuation and
narcissism: The psychology of the self in Jung and Kohut. London:
Routledge. Kernberg, O.F. (1975). Treatment of narcissistic
personalities. Int. J. Psychoanal., 56:245-248. Kross, Ethan, Marc G.
Berman et al. "Social rejection shares somatosensory representations
with physical pain" (2011) PNAS, vol, 108, no.5, 6270-6275.

Kalsched, D. (2013). Trauma and the soul: A psycho-spiritual approach to
human development and its interruption. London: Routledge. Klein, S.
(2013). Adrenaline, Cortisol, Norepinephrine: The Three Major Stress
Hormones, Explained. Retrieved from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/04/19/adrenaline-cortisol-stress-hormones_n_3112800.html
Lavender, N. J. (2014, January 10). The Narcissistic Wound. Retrieved
from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/impossibleplease/201401/the-narcissistic-wound
Livesley WJ, Jang KL, Jackson DN, Vernon PA (December 1993). "Genetic
and environmental contributions to dimensions of personality disorder."
Am J Psychiatry 150 (12): 1826--31.doi:10.1176/ajp.150.12.1826. PMID
8238637. Louis De Canonville, Christine (2015). The Three Faces of Evil:
Unmasking the Full Spectrum of Narcissistic Abuse, Black Card Books.
Marazziti, D., Akiskal, H. S., Rossi, A., & Cassano, G. B. (1999).
Alteration of the platelet serotonin transporter in romantic love.
Psychological Medicine Psychol. Med., 29(3), 741-745.
doi:10.1017/s0033291798007946

McGowan, K. (2004, November 1). Addiction: Pay Attention. Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/articles/200411/addiction-pay-attention
Mental Health Daily. (n.d.). How To Overcome Adrenaline Addiction: Tips
From A Former Addict. Retrieved March 4, 2016, from
http://mentalhealthdaily.com/2013/03/02/how-to-overcome-adrenaline-addiction-tips-from-a-former-addict/
Millon, Theodore (1981). Disorders of Personality: DSM-III Axis II. New
York: John Wiley & Sons. National Institutes of Health. (2012).
Neuroplasticity. Retrieved from
https://www.nichd.nih.gov/about/overview/50th/discoveries/Pages/neuroplasticity.aspx
Nutt DJ, & Malizia AL (2004). Structural and functional brain changes in
posttraumatic stress disorder.The Journal of clinical

psychiatry, 65 Suppl 1, 11-7 PMID: 14728092 Pavlov, I. P. (1928).
Lectures on conditioned reflexes. (Translated by W.H. Gantt) London:
Allen and Unwin. Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. (1983). Learned
Helplessness and Victimization. Journal of Social Issues, 39(2),
103-116. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.1983.tb00143.x

Reece, G. (2013, February 25). The Trauma Bond/Abusive Relationships.
Retrieved from
http://garyreece.blogspot.com/2013/02/the-trauma-bondabusive-relationships.html
Seligman, M. E., & Maier, S. F. (1967). Failure To Escape Traumatic
Shock. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 74(1), 1-9.
doi:10.1037/h0024514 Sethi, A., Gregory, S., Dell'acqua, F., Thomas, E.
P., Simmons, A., Murphy, D. G., . . . Craig, M. C. (2015). Emotional
detachment in psychopathy: Involvement of dorsal default-mode
connections. Cortex, 62, 11-19. doi:10.1016/j.cortex.2014.07.018
Smithstein, S. (2010, April 19). Dopamine: Why It's So Hard to "Just Say
No" Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/what-the-wild-things-are/201008/dopamine-why-its-so-hard-just-say-no
Shin LM, Rauch SL, & Pitman RK (2006). Amygdala, medial prefrontal
cortex, and hippocampal function in PTSD. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 1071, 67-79 Teicher, M. (2006). Sticks, Stones, and Hurtful
Words: Relative Effects of Various Forms of Childhood Maltreatment.
American Journal of Psychiatry Am J Psychiatry, 163(6), 993.
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.163.6.993

The National Child Traumatic Stress Network. (2016). Effects of Complex
Trauma. Retrieved from
http://www.nctsn.org/traumatypes/complex-trauma/effects-of-complex-trauma#q4
UNICEF. (2006). Behind closed doors: The impact of domestic violence on
children. The Body Shop International.
http://www.unicef.org/protection/files/BehindClosedDoors.pdf Van der
Kolk, Bessel (2015). The body keeps the score: Brain, mind, and body in
the healing of trauma. New York: Penguin Books. Walker, P. (2013).
Complex PTSD: From surviving to thriving: A guide and map for recovering
from childhood trauma. Azure Coyote Publishing. Watson, R. (2014,
October 14). Oxytocin: The Love and Trust Hormone Can Be Deceptive.
Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/love-and-gratitude/201310/oxytocin-the-love-and-trust-hormone-can-be-deceptive

18

Why Abuse Survivors Stay: The Effects of Trauma on the Brain and The
Psyche We always hear insipid, repetitive questions about why abuse
survivors stay, yet we never stop to reflect on the effects that a
traumatic event like abuse has on their minds, their bodies and their
spirits. Why are we so quick to recognize the effects of trauma in war
veterans, yet so slow to acknowledge the impact of those who have lived
in a war zone during their childhoods at the hands of abusive parents or
in adulthood with their partners? What is it about invisible battle
wounds that we don't take seriously, especially when it affects the
quality of our lives, our happiness, our security, our confidence---
everything that makes life worth living in the first place? As you can
imagine, trauma in childhood has a long-lasting effect on the brain.
Trauma in adulthood has these effects as well. If you're wondering why
you felt irrationally tied to your abuser, realize that not only were
you trauma bonded---the effects of the trauma literally did shut down
key parts of the brain related to decision-making. Our amygdala, which
processes our emotions, tends to become hyperactive when we are
traumatized, while our medial prefrontal cortex and hippocampus, which
deal with learning, memory and decision-making tend to be dampened in
the face of trauma (Nutt and Malizia, 2004; Shin, Rauch and Pitman,
2006). I don't share this information to make you feel helpless---I
share it with you because I think understanding why we acted the way we
did in an abusive situation is one of the first steps to dissolving some
of the toxic self-blame that prevents us from forgiving

ourselves and causes us to judge ourselves harshly, which I find hinders
the healing journey significantly. While we certainly do have the agency
to change, evolve, learn new things and heal the brain, it's important
to acknowledge the effects trauma has on the brain as a way to better
understand ourselves and the way the trauma has affected us. The truth
is, the past can live in the present, causing us to regress back to
those old childhood wounds. Survivors of narcissistic abuse in childhood
face a double bind when they encounter narcissistic abuse again in
adulthood: when trauma survivors encounter stimuli that remind them of
their trauma, regardless of how many years have passed, the amygdala
(part of our limbic system) reacts as if they are re-experiencing the
same event (Walker, 2013). This is what happens when we are recalling a
traumatic memory: the left frontal cortex shuts down and the areas of
the right hemisphere, especially the areas of the amygdala, light up.
Since the left hemisphere is associated with thinking and rational
planning, and the right side of the brain collects sensory information,
such as visual memories and the emotions associated with them, cutting
off the "left" side while activating the right can disconnect the two
(Burke, 2008). When we have an emotional flashback, the more emotional
right brain becomes overactivated while the logical, reasoning left
brain becomes under-activated (Vaughan, 1997). Traumatic memories are
also stored in different parts of the brain than those associated with
the reasoning parts of the brain. According to Theresa Burke,
Ph.D. (2008), traumatic memories tend to stay stuck in the brain's
nonverbal, subcortical regions like the amygdala, thalamus, hippocampus,
hypothalamus and the brain stem, which are not accessible to the frontal
lobes. In fact, trauma "shuts down" executive functioning associated
with the frontal lobes of the brain. These frontal lobes that are
negatively affected due to trauma are the reasoning, logical aspects of
our brain which help us to pay attention, manage time, switch focus,
plan and organize, remember details, and perform tasks based on
experience. That's why many survivors of narcissistic abuse may feel
like they're in a

"fog" of confusion, constantly distracted, unable to focus and make
decisions without second-guessing themselves constantly. So for those
who think abuse survivors can simply "logically" process their situation
and get out of and over the situation easily and be done with it, think
again. The parts of our brain that deal with planning, cognition,
learning and decision-making become disconnected with the emotional
parts of our brain---they can cease to talk to each other when an
individual becomes traumatized. Professional support, validation and
tailored resources are needed for the survivor to begin the dialogue
between the trauma and the self.

Complex PTSD and Narcissistic Abuse It was Harvard medical professor
Judith Herman (1992) who first described the distinction between PTSD
and Complex PTSD in her book, Trauma and Recovery. The mental health
community has been slow to recognize and acknowledge C-PTSD, which has
led to misdiagnoses of long-standing traumatized individuals with
anxiety and depressive disorders, and borderline or dependent
personality disorders (Walker, 2013). While Complex PTSD has been
discussed in the framework of physical and/or sexual abuse in childhood,
it can also be caused by emotional and/or verbal abuse, long-term
domestic violence as well as long-term childhood emotional neglect.
Complex PTSD is PTSD that develops from chronic trauma---a trauma that
is long-term and often inescapable. In addition to the regular symptoms
of PTSD which the majority of C-PTSD victims also meet the diagnostic
criteria for, survivors with Complex PTSD find that their ability to
adapt to stress, interact with others and regulate their emotions are
severely affected. When it comes to complex PTSD, no trauma is too
small. Every trauma is valid in its own right. Chronic trauma can cause
painful events that are seemingly minor to seem life-threatening. This
is why the phrase "let it go," can be so damaging to victims of
long-standing abuse and trauma. Survivors who have endured long-lasting
emotional abuse from their partner, who have been bullied, who've been
with multiple narcissists and/or have

been raised by a narcissistic parent or caregiver may find that they
suffer from the following symptoms: Emotional Flashbacks---Reliving the
abusive events with a strong emotional component that includes feelings
of abandonment, shame, and fear. Seemingly minor events can trigger a
flashback and cause major emotional and psychological distress.
Nightmares---Vivid dreams regarding traumatic events, with a high
emotional component -- survivors often feel shame, humiliation, and
powerlessness. Heightened Inner Critic---A high degree of excessive
negative self-talk and judgment that permeates everyday thoughts and
emotions. Avoidance---Avoiding thoughts, people, places and activities
for fear of being triggered. Numbing---Victims may feel emotionally numb
or shell-shocked, unable to connect with the full emotional depth of the
experience. Social Anxiety---Isolating oneself from social situations,
feeling ashamed and defective. Avoiding situations involving interacting
with others, for fear that they will be exposed as "different."
Increased Anxiety, Hypervigilance and Arousal---Heightened distrust of
others, panic attacks, emotional outbursts, overwhelming emotions.
Difficulty concentrating---A lack of focus and interrupted concentration
due to emotional distress. Toxic Shame and Self-Abandonment---Survivors
feel defective, worthless, and shameful. They "abandon" themselves
because of the way they have been abandoned by others, not feeling
worthy of care, protection, love, respect or compassion.
Disassociation---Survivors may forget traumatic events or feel detached

from their bodies or mental processes. The most extreme version of
disassociation is Dissociative Identity Disorder, a rare disorder which
often results from sexual abuse in childhood. Individuals with DID split
into multiple "alters," different identities that "speak" to the
different aspects of the victim while the victim is unaware or fairly
unconscious about the actions of these alters. All-or-none/black and
white thinking---In this cognitive distortion, everything is categorized
as all good or all bad; survivors are prone to seeing themselves in
black and white thinking as well, judging themselves as worthless and
useless. Distorted perceptions of the perpetrator---Victims may be
preoccupied with revenge, assigning total power to the perpetrator or
excessive preoccupation with the perpetrator. Self-harm---In order to
cope with overwhelming emotions, survivors may engage in self-harm,
including but not limited to cutting, excessive drinking, placing
themselves in dangerous situations, self-sabotaging or self-mutilating
behaviors. Suicidal ideation---Survivors may struggle with suicidal
thoughts and feel as if they can no longer cope with the pain. Due to
their sense of helplessness and paralysis, they feel as if they no
longer want to live and have to give up in order to escape the pain.
Therapist Pete Walker (2013) discusses how children who suffer abuse at
a young age are at risk for complex PTSD, in his book Complex PTSD: From
Surviving to Thriving. For those who continue to "reenact" their old
childhood trauma through abusive relationships, this type of PTSD is
more likely. Due to complex PTSD, we may be prone to nightmares,
hypervigilance, intense flashbacks, emotional numbing and avoidance of
situations that remind us of the abuse. Due to chronic abuse,
individuals may also develop into what Walker calls one of the four "F"
types, which consist of "Freeze,

Flight, Fight and Fawn" types or a hybrid of two of the types. "Freeze"
individuals are paralyzed by their own trauma; they socially isolate
themselves from others and avoid situations that might re-traumatize
them."Fight" individuals (those who tend to be on the narcissistic
spectrum) tend to fight back against the trauma by reacting aggressively
towards anyone who threatens to make them vulnerable. "Flight"
individuals exit situations that make them vulnerable to an excessive
extent even when the threat posed by their environment is seemingly
minimal. Finally, the "Fawn" type tends to become overly compliant to
the toxic people who are draining them, in order to avoid
conflict---these tend to be the people-pleasers in the 4 F group. If you
are a childhood narcissistic abuse survivor who has also experienced
narcissistic abuse in adulthood, you may find yourself fitting into one
of these 4 F types or perhaps even a hybrid of two or more types.
Finding professional support from a trauma-informed counselor who
specializes in Complex PTSD and its effects is important to the recovery
process.

The Emotional and Psychological Reasons Narcissistic Abuse Survivors
Stay To the outside world, abuse survivors appear to face an easy
decision: leave or stay in the abusive relationship as soon as they
endure an emotionally or physically abusive incident. Internally,
however, they may struggle with cognitive dissonance, damaging
conditioning from intermittent reinforcement, PTSD or Complex PTSD
symptoms, trauma bonds, any previous trauma from past abusive
relationships or experiences of childhood abuse, feelings of
worthlessness, biochemical bonds and learned helplessness ---just to
name a few. Although it may seem counterintuitive, leaving a long-term
abusive relationship can actually be even harder than leaving a
nourishing, supportive and positive one. This is because narcissistic or
antisocial abusers are masters of playing mind games and covert
manipulation, are able to deny the abuse through gaslighting and present
a false image to the world which supports their denial. Survivors are
then subjected to a battle within their own minds

about whether the reality they experience is truly abuse---a type of
cognitive dissonance that society seems to encourage by engaging in
victim-blaming. Remember that abusers present a false, charming self to
the world and their true self is exposed primarily to their victims
after a certain amount of investment has already been placed in the
relationship. In the initial stages of dating or the relationship,
abusers are likely to present their best image. It is only after they've
"hooked" the victim with their covert manipulation tactics such as
mirroring and love-bombing, that they begin devaluing, demeaning and
hurting the victim. The victim then has to find ways to psychologically
process the trauma of this sudden "turn" in personality---a process that
can take months to years depending on the duration of the relationship,
the availability of the victim's own coping resources, as well as the
severity and nature of the abuse. This is a trauma that can affect
anyone, regardless of who you may have been prior to entering the
abusive relationship. A common misconception is that abuse survivors
must have lacked confidence when they met their abuser or suffered from
low self-esteem. For my first book on narcissistic abuse, I surveyed
hundreds of survivors of narcissistic abuse who came from a variety of
backgrounds, trauma histories and confidence levels. Some did suffer
from low self-esteem, while others were at a very confident place in
their lives when they encountered a narcissist. Both types of people
were still "managed down" by the traumatic emotional, psychological and
verbal abuse over time because of its covert, insidious and incremental
nature. They became shells of who they used to be---because trauma has a
real impact on the brain, regardless of how confident you may be and no
one is immune to the effects of trauma and abuse. Although childhood
trauma and other vulnerabilities can certainly make us more susceptible
to being in abusive relationships, the truth is, anyone can be a victim
because narcissists and sociopaths deliberately deceive others with a
false mask in the early stages of a relationship. Once they have their
partners

sufficiently hooked, they begin to "devalue" them and mistreat them in a
way that is quite horrific. This is an actual trauma that the partner
experiences and will continue to experience throughout the abuse cycle.
Survivors need a great deal of professional support, validation and
resources to begin the healing journey, as there tends to be a lot of
cognitive dissonance and traumatic bonding involved when it comes to
abuse. I am a passionate advocate of ending abusive relationships, going
No Contact and owning our agency after abuse. However, at the same time
that I want to encourage survivors to empower themselves after the
abuse, I also want people to understand that the act of leaving such a
relationship is rarely as easy as it seems. Not leaving sooner is not an
indication or a measure of a victim's strength or intelligence. It has
more to do with the severity of trauma they have experienced. This false
narrative of how easy it is to end an abusive relationship is actually
holding us back from creating safer spaces for survivors to feel
validated, supported, and being able to speak out about their
experiences---this support is essential to any victim in an abusive
relationship. This is why I want to dismantle the harmful stereotypes of
why abuse survivors stay longer in abusive relationships than one might
expect by offering some insights on why they really do. If you're not an
abuse survivor, the reasons might surprise you. The reasons survivors
stay are complex and tied to the effects of trauma, the ways in which
abuse survivors start to see themselves after the abuse, and the ways in
which society makes it more difficult for them to speak out about their
abuse.

1.  In a nourishing, positive relationship, we can love the person
    enough to let go with a sense of closure. In an abusive one, ending
    the relationship is a decision filled with fear of retaliation and
    anxiety.

In healthy relationships, there is mutual respect and compassion,
something that has existed throughout the course of the relationship
despite any obstacles. Even if it is difficult, we trust that the person
we are letting go will respect us enough to take time to heal before
jumping into another relationship the day after the breakup, will not
threaten or stalk us because we left them (only they are allowed to
discard us in a narcissist's mind), will not violently assault us and
will not stage a smear campaign against us due to the fact that we
discarded them first. Partners who are not narcissists or sociopaths
will most likely leave us alone after a breakup and not bother to
"hoover" simply because they need supply. They are understanding about
boundaries and the need for space after the ending of a relationship.
Due to the potential infidelity, manipulation, put-downs, gaslighting
and deception abuse survivors endured throughout their relationships,
cognitive dissonance about who the abuser is, as well as a sense of
incessant self-doubt, survivors may lack a sense of closure and
certainty about ending an abusive relationship. Understandably, many
abuse victims don't wish to let their abusers move on to the next victim
after terrorizing them, because they fear that the next person might be
treated better, thereby confirming their own sense of worthlessness that
was instilled by the abuser in the first place. They may also have an
unending sense of needing a real "apology" or seeing karma at work
before they feel they can truly let go. Of course, abuse survivors
eventually learn that they can only gain closure from within---after
they've ended the relationship and begun the work of healing and
recovery. They also realize that the next victim will most likely be
subjected to the same abuse, even if it appears otherwise when their
abuser treats the next victim to the idealization phase. Apologies from
the abuser won't suffice, as they are recognized for what they truly
are: pity ploys or hoovering tactics designed to pull us back into the
toxic dynamic rather than signs of genuine remorse. Self-forgiveness,
instead, becomes paramount.

2.  Abuse survivors start to view themselves through the eyes of their
    abuser.

The belittling, condescending remarks and the physical violence abusers
subject their victims to leads to a sense of learned helplessness and
self-doubt which make survivors fearful that they really aren't as
worthy as they think they are. Abuse survivors could be the most
confident, successful and beautiful people to the outside world, but
they are subjected to an internal world of fear, negative self-talk and
a shaky self-esteem as a result of the traumatic conditioning their
abusers have put them through. They have been taught to live on a diet
of crumbs (the occasional compliment, some shallow show of attention,
perhaps even a showering of gifts and flattery before the abuse cycle
begins again) which serves to remind them that they must "work" for a
love that will never be unconditional, a love that will never contain
real respect or compassion. As a result, they may compare themselves to
people in happier relationships or even to the seemingly idealized way
their abusers treated their exes (as narcissists are likely to either
place their exes on a pedestal or demean them as crazy) and wonder, why
not me? What's wrong with me? Of course, the problem is not them---it is
the abusive relationship which is the source of toxicity in their lives.
The abuser is likely to subject the victim to many comparisons to drive
the point home that it is somehow the victim's fault that he or she is
being abused (also known as triangulation). Due to this, survivors have
a difficult time accepting the fact that even if they were the most
confident, successful, beautiful and charismatic people on earth, they
would still be abused by the abuser because that is what abusers do in
intimate relationships. Abusers manipulate victims because they enjoy
the feelings of power and control, not because victims themselves lack
merits. In fact, narcissistic abusers feel particular joy at bringing
down anyone whose accomplishments and traits they envy to reinforce
their false sense of superiority. Due to the skewed belief system which
develops after the abuse, survivors feel that ending the relationship
would paradoxically confirm the narcissist's view of them. They
associate the ending of the relationship to a failure on

their own part, the inability to win the affections of someone who has
made themselves look like a prize by constantly idealizing them then
subsequently withdrawing from them. Narcissistic abusers blow hot and
cold throughout the course of an intimate relationship to make it seem
like you're the problem and not them. Survivors struggle to win the game
of gaining an abuser's affection, especially if they're prone to
people-pleasing habits and fears of rejection as well as abandonment.
The terrible things the abuser has done to us somehow don't compare to
the pain of also being abandoned after being abused: it's almost as if
the abandonment would prove our so-called "unworthiness" which has been
manufactured by the abuser to make us feel unable to leave. On the
healing journey, survivors rediscover their authentic selves and learn
how to depart from toxic people-pleasing habits instilled in them by
their abuser as well as in childhood. They begin to reclaim their worth,
separate from their social interactions and romantic relationships. It
is one of the most freeing, empowering experiences to finally leave an
abuser and stick with No Contact. Rebuilding your life after abuse is
not easy, but it is an unbelievably transformative experience.

3.  Ending the relationship would mean that the survivor has to face the
    reality of all the traumas they've experienced, on their own,
    without the protective defense mechanisms that shield them from the
    severity of the trauma. Although this is not always a conscious
    choice, as a result of the trauma they've experienced, abuse
    survivors may attempt to rationalize, minimize or deny the abuse to
    avoid the pain of the harsh reality they're experiencing, which can
    lead to abuse amnesia during the "good times" with their abuser.
    They may also experience the defense mechanism of disassociation
    which enables them to survive during moments of horrific abuse.
    Staying in the abusive relationship allows survivors to still engage
    with the good parts of the relationship while psychologically
    protecting themselves from having to face the trauma of it.

As narcissists and sociopaths tend to be excellent masters of
gaslighting, flattery and even sex, creating certain pleasurable bonds
that appear to surpass the pain we experience during the abuse, abuse
amnesia becomes a tempting form of psychological protection from a
survivor's own demons. Abuse amnesia is aided by the abuser's
performances of being apologetic, kind, caring and compassionate during
the positive highs of the abuse cycle. Dissociation, on the other hand,
is often not intentional on the survivor's part ---the mechanism of
dissociation occurs quite naturally in response to traumatic events. Of
course, the reality is that those bonds we have with our abusers are
trauma-based bonds that have little to do with actual fulfillment, love
or respect, and everything to do with the illusion of who we believe
narcissists are. Ending the relationship is made even more difficult if
trauma from previous relationships or childhood exists. As we've noted
before, children who grow up witnessing domestic violence within their
own families have been reported to more likely to be victims of abusive
relationships themselves. It may almost seem normalized because of the
behaviors we're unconsciously modeling from our childhood. We might
identify with the victimized parent or may even have promised ourselves
we would never be like them, only to have unconsciously chosen a partner
that has enabled us to attempt to "fix" our past by attempting to fix
our abusive partner. Knowing what we know about the effects of trauma on
early adolescent brain development, the idea that someone who grew up
witnessing such violence and abuse would not be psychologically affected
is dubious. Thinking that someone would not be affected by the same type
of trauma in adulthood (especially if they've already experienced it in
childhood) is even more unlikely. After the ending of an abusive
relationship, survivors have the great privilege of uncovering their
past traumas and the trauma they've just experienced and begin to work
through them. The ending of this relationship is actually a golden
opportunity to heal from the wounds that were never healed in the first

place. The fear of being left alone with the pain has been
overcome---the survivor now has the space and time to independently act,
think and feel outside of the toxic dynamics of the previous
relationship.

4.  Society shames abuse survivors into thinking it's their fault and
    this can create barriers to a strong, validating support network. As
    a result of the stigmas associated with being and staying in an
    abusive relationship past the first signs of blatant disrespect,
    many people who have not undergone abusive relationships themselves
    are prone to pass judgment upon survivors. How could he/she stay?
    they ask. Why didn't you leave the first time they hurt you? Are you
    sure it's really "abuse"? The victimblaming, shaming and doubting
    leave abuse survivors feeling incredibly isolated in their situation
    and alienated from their own support networks. This question of "why
    didn't you leave?" can further persuade survivors to seek the false
    comfort of the abusive relationship because they would rather stay
    than speak out and risk being shamed, stigmatized, judged,
    questioned by the very people who are supposed to care about
    them---friends, family, and even the criminal justice system. Here's
    a thought: if society stopped viewing abuse survivors in such a
    negative, judgmental light, they might actually be more likely to
    report domestic violence. If friends of abuse survivors adopted a
    mindset of compassion and understanding, rather than ignorant
    judgment, they may actually get the support they need to feel like
    they wouldn't be alone after the end of the relationship. This
    question of "why didn't you leave?" can further persuade survivors
    to seek the false comfort of the abusive relationship because they
    would rather stay than speak out and risk being shamed. The fact of
    the matter is, if you haven't been in an abusive relationship, you
    don't really know what the experience is like. Furthermore, it's
    quite hard to predict what you would do in the same situation. I
    find that the people most vocal about what they would've done in the
    same situation often have no clue

what they are talking about---they have never been in the same situation
themselves. By invalidating the survivor's experience, these people are
defending an image of themselves that they identify with strength, not
realizing that abuse survivors are often the strongest individuals out
there. They've been belittled, criticized, demeaned, devalued, and yet
they've still survived. The judgmental ones often have little to no life
experience regarding these situations, yet they feel quite comfortable
silencing the voices of people who've actually been there. While being a
survivor can sometimes alienate us from society, it can also give us an
intense connection with other survivors, in interactions filled with
understanding and compassion. We have the ability to offer empathy and
insight to others on a level other individuals aren't capable of.
Survivors on the healing journey can learn how to use their voices,
connect with alternative communities and reach out to those who have
been there.

5.  They aren't psychologically ready to leave. Tony Robbins makes an
    astute observation in his book, Awaken the Giant Within: we only
    stop a bad habit or behavior when the pain of it far surpasses any
    pleasure or reward. While this might be a bit too simplistic of a
    theory to apply to the complex dynamics of abusive relationships, it
    often plays true for the moment the survivors finally leave.
    Considering there are many psychological factors that may be holding
    abuse survivors back as well as external barriers such as financial
    dependence, having children with our abuser, the threat of physical
    violence or a combination of the reasons above, our readiness to
    leave just yet is hindered. We may plan when to leave and how to
    leave, fantasize about that moment, but there are usually a couple
    of factors that postpone the time of escape. None of the best advice
    in the world can convince us until we feel that inner transformation
    and until we reach that turning point where we say to ourselves,
    "I've had enough. I am enough. And so much better than this."

That moment often comes after an experience of extreme pain---a turning
point when we've reached our pain threshold, whatever that threshold may
be. Unfortunately, until we've made this decision from our own internal
compass, there is not much others can do to intervene apart from
offering their support. The decision must come from the survivor---and
because he or she has been in the abusive relationship for so long,
robbed of his or her choices, it may be the first powerful choice they
have made in years. Once the decision has been made and actions have
been taken to maintain No Contact, leaving becomes the ultimate victory.
The turning point, whatever it was, has made them psychologically ready.
Survivors have truly owned their agency and power when they can leave an
abuser and never look back. They have learned all they can from being in
the relationship and are ready to begin their healing.

The next time you find yourself asking the question, "Why did I stay?"
or asking someone else why they did, remind yourself that it usually
takes a great deal of effort, resources, strength, validation,
addressing wounding on all levels of body and mind, for a survivor to
become fully empowered to begin to heal from this form of trauma.
Self-blame can be a symptom of the trauma we've experienced, but we can
evolve into self-forgiveness and selfcompassion on the healing journey.

References Burke, T., Ph.D. (2008). How trauma impacts the brain. Speech
presented in Rachel's Vineyard Ministries. Retrieved from
http://www.rachelsvineyard.org/Downloads/Canada%20Conference%2008/TextOfBrainPP.pdf
Burke, T., Ph.D. (2008). How trauma impacts the brain. Speech Nutt DJ, &
Malizia AL (2004). Structural and functional brain changes in
posttraumatic stress disorder.The Journal of clinical psychiatry, 65
Suppl 1, 11-7 PMID: 14728092 Burke, T., Ph.D. (2008). How trauma impacts
the brain. Speech Shin LM, Rauch SL, & Pitman RK (2006). Amygdala,
medial prefrontal cortex, and hippocampal function in PTSD. Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences, 1071, 67-79

Burke, T., Ph.D. (2008). How trauma impacts the brain. Speech Vaughan,
S. C. (1997). The talking cure: The science behind psychotherapy. New
York: Putnam's. Burke, T., Ph.D. (2008). How trauma impacts the brain.
Speech Walker, P. (2013). Complex PTSD: From surviving to thriving: A
guide and map for recovering from childhood trauma. Azure Coyote
Publishing.

19

Healing Your Addiction to the Narcissist: Breaking the Biochemical Bond
To combat the biochemical bonds we've discussed, we have to understand
that we will inevitably go through withdrawal when we cut contact with
the narcissist. This means that we have to address withdrawal from high
levels of oxytocin, dopamine, adrenaline and even the spikes in cortisol
our body has become habituated to. There are ways to fulfill these needs
in a healthier manner that do not involve the narcissist. Here are some
of the ways to naturally boost your feel-good chemicals and substitute
your addiction to the narcissist with productive activities.

Boost Oxytocin No Contact or Low Contact is essential to start to wean
off of the effects of the oxytocin bond, although, of course, it will
come with cravings to reconnect with the narcissistic partner. Rather
than giving in to this temptation to reconnect, supplant that craving
with healthier connections. Here are some examples:

Increase Physical Contact You can produce oxytocin by cuddling a cute
animal or a loving friend or family member; research shows that cuddling
with a dog actually increases the oxytocin levels of both the dog and
its owner (Odendaal and Meintjes,

2003). If you can, adopt an animal or snuggle with a pet you already
have or volunteer to dogsit for a friend. You can even give yourself a
hug whenever you need it---yes, it will still release oxytocin. Make it
a regular habit to hug the people you care about. If you feel
comfortable doing so, have ended the relationship with your narcissistic
partner and at some point feel able to distinguish between physical
contact and emotional connection, you may want to spend time with
someone you're attracted to---this is only if you're able to see them as
a casual partner ---during this time, attempting to forge a long-term
relationship is discouraged unless you feel you've considerably healed.
Keep it simple---interact with, talk to, or go on a casual date with
someone with no strings attached and only if you can keep your
expectations and investment very low. Be mindful that engaging in sexual
activity can potentially bind you to this person, so act accordingly
depending on what you feel you can handle as this can be triggering and
retraumatizing. We're not trying to create another bond with a
potentially toxic partner here---we're just opening up the opportunity
for flirtation and social bonding. This technique won't work for
everyone because not everyone is able to detach physical affection from
something more serious but for others, going on a simple date or
flirting with someone else can provide a pleasurable distraction and
gets the survivor back on the path of feeling like a loveable, desirable
human being. It will also remind you that you have other options for
close contact and intimacy with other beings besides the narcissist. I
would only warn you against serial dating, as this can lead to
complications and feelings of rejection and further abandonment if for
whatever reason you become attached to a casual partner or multiple
partners.

Enhance Social Bonding According to the latest research, oxytocin can
increase compassion and prosocial behavior in those suffering from the
symptoms of PTSD (Palgi et. al, 2016). Intimacy is at the root of
oxytocin bonding and while oxytocin has

been spoken about in the framework of romantic relationships, there's
nothing to suggest that this form of bonding doesn't work in other types
of interactions. Hang out with friends that really care about you to
increase affection and intimacy in your life as well as social bonds. If
you don't have any supportive friends, join a new gym or support group
that challenges you to interact with people. Given the connection
between oxytocin and compassion, it can help to support a friend, donate
to a cause or lend a listening ear to someone. Not only will you help
someone, it'll make you feel better as well. It's a win-win situation
that benefits everyone. It's also important to show self-compassion, as
research indicates that this too can heighten oxytocin levels. Loving
kindness meditations can help increase compassion towards yourself and
others. For more information about the connection between
self-compassion and oxytocin, see Dr. Kristin Neff's article on the
Huffington Post, "The Chemicals of Care: How SelfCompassion Manifests in
Our Bodies."

Boosting Dopamine and Adrenaline I am putting these two bad boys
together because I think we can combat both with the same activities.
Seeking that adrenaline rush? Take up an activity that makes you tremble
with both fear and anticipation. Whether it's rock climbing, skydiving,
bungee jumping or boldly going on a job interview, do things that give
you that rush that the narcissist used to give you. I promise it will
have a better result than seeking your rush from a toxic relationship.
Looking to feed your reward system? Create new reward circuits that have
little to do with the narcissist by taking up a new hobby you'll be
absorbed in, a new volunteer venture or a new project. For example: Go
after your passions and explore job opportunities that excite you. On my
own journey of No Contact, I created a YouTube channel, wrote a book,
got a new job, and attended Meetups to meet new friends. This gave back
to my reward system in a way that was productive, not destructive. It
also made

me hopeful that I was rebuilding a better life with a new support
system---this hope is so essential in moving forward from the
devastation of a relationship with a toxic partner. What are at least
three activities, goals and/or hobbies you could be pursuing right now
to replace the time and energy you spent on the narcissist? Write an
exciting bucket list and instead of letting it collect dust, actually
start doing the activities on that list. Make sure this list has items
that challenge and excite you---add an element of "fear" (healthy fear
this time around!) to make your anticipated schedule as unpredictable as
your narcissist's hot and cold behavior was. For example, I went on a
number of adventures on my journey that made life more interesting and
exciting---from the super weird and silly to rewarding and challenging.
Everything from riding a mechanical bull for the first time to taking a
pole dancing class (for the sole purpose of fitness, of course) to going
on my first ever roller coaster. I also attended an art therapy group,
tried my first ever yoga class in a scalding hot room and joined a brand
new gym. Try things you've never done and do things you have done in a
new way---whether it's just for laughs or a productive activity, as long
as it's brand new, your brain and your body will thank you. The sky's
the limit! Life can be exciting, and yes, even more pleasurable without
the narcissist. It's time to "love-bomb" yourself with all the
attention, excitement, luxury and self-care you deserve. Make sure that
you also do these things spontaneously and try new things on a whim. I
used to look up different events on a daily basis to see what new
adventure I would be going on every day. This unpredictable,
"intermittent schedule" of rewards will allow dopamine in your brain to
flow more readily. Yes, I really just wrote that sentence. I think I
just reached hardcore nerd level. Go out with friends that make you feel
your best. These friends must be people who you can honestly say make
you feel good because they have positive and supportive attitudes. The
friends who make you laugh, the friends you always have a good time
with, who love you dearly, can get that dopamine flowin' like no other.

Alternatively, plan solo dates with yourself that give you that "me"
time while also providing pleasure. This can include buying your
favorite food, going to the spa, soaking in a bubble bath with scented
oils and candles, getting a massage, buying yourself a new outfit,
buying a ticket to a country you've always wanted to explore---whatever
makes you happiest, engage in it at this time more frequently on your
own. This will help you to become more independent and less
people-pleasing, because you will remember the positive experiences you
had alone and will therefore be less likely to fall prey to attaching to
toxic people just for the sake of having someone with you on every
adventure you go on. Of course, try to incorporate the element of
surprise whenever possible by introducing something "new" to this solo
date---a food you haven't tried, a place you haven't visited, or a
country you haven't yet stepped foot in. Travel somewhere else for at
least a weekend---even if it's just to a bed and breakfast in a
different town or state. This can give you that much-needed escape that
reminds you that your life will continue regardless of whether or not
the narcissist is in it or not.

Ease Up on the Cortisol We'd prefer not to have more of this hormone.
Author and coach Christopher Bergland (2013) suggests numerous ways to
counteract the effects of this hormone, which include physical activity,
mindfulness, meditation, laughter, music and social connectivity. So why
not take up a meditation and/or yoga class that will decrease these
levels as you're healing? Here are some ideas: Join a daily or weekly
Vinyasa Flow yoga class and/or incorporate a tenminute breathing
meditation every single morning to get those stress levels down. Watch
more comedy shows and comedy movies to tickle your funny bone. Laughter
lowers cortisol levels and this will also feed your reward system.
Smile, even if you don't want to. Smiling releases endorphins that
increase

relaxation. Plan a weekly night out with some of your most supportive
friends to increase social connectivity. Join a forum or support group
for abuse survivors. Listen to music that expresses the different stages
of grief and anger you may experience in the aftermath of an abusive
relationship. Self-Care Warrior Pro-tips: If you let your tongue go limp
in your mouth and open it slightly, this sends a message to your brain
stem and limbic system to turn off cortisol and adrenaline. If you
contract your muscles and take short, rapid breaths, you can also reduce
cortisol levels for a quick pickme-up (Bergland, 2013). How neat is
that?! Relaxing and self-soothing are key to detaching from the
narcissist in your life. They will also enable you to step back and
resist your impulses if you're thinking about reconnecting with your
narcissistic partner.

Serotonin Surge Serotonin can cause ruminative addiction to your
ex-partner when levels are low and can affect your impulsivity, ability
to act on plans, emotions, memory, weight, sleep, and self-esteem. To
boost this powerful hormone, try these natural serotonin boosters, some
of which are discussed by Alex Korb, Ph.D. (2011) in "Boosting Your
Serotonin Activity." Sunlight---Exposure to sunlight increases serotonin
levels. Take morning and afternoon walks where it is likely to be sunny
daily in order to get your daily dose. B-vitamins---Low levels of
serotonin can cause depression. Taking Vitamins B6 and B12 can
potentially lower the risk of depression. According to Cornell Women's
Health, there has been a link found between inadequate amounts of B6 and
B12 and depression. B vitamins are also found to be essential for the
creation of both dopamine and serotonin. Massage---Research shows that
massage therapy can help lower cortisol levels and boost serotonin and
dopamine levels, especially among

populations of need such as depressed pregnant mothers, those suffering
from cancer as well as those with migraine headaches (Field, 2005).
Recalling happy memories---According to Korb (2011), remembering happy
memories can increase serotonin production in the anterior cingulate
cortex, a part of the brain that controls attention. Look through old
photo albums, old journals and home movies if you need help visualizing
happy memories. By remembering happy memories, there's a dual effect: we
increase serotonin while also preventing ourselves from ruminating over
unhappy events. Self-care warrior pro-tip: Do not use this tip to think
about or romanticize happier times with your abusive ex-partner.
Instead, make a daily gratitude list of things that made you happy that
have nothing to do with your expartner. Therapy---Another way to tackle
these trauma bonds is by talking to a mental health professional that is
experienced in narcissistic abuse not only in relationships but also in
families. Someone who is well-versed and validating in this topic can
help you to uncover the wounds that you may not be aware of beneath the
surface. I'll talk more about the different types of therapy available
in the section, "Traditional Healing Methods Explained."
Medications---There are, of course, medications that can help if you are
struggling with severe, crippling anxiety or depression such as SSRIs.
However, they are beyond the scope of this book to discuss. Please
always consult your psychiatrist or mental health professional regarding
the best medication for you to take. Do not ever "replace" medication
you are taking with any of these tools, as they are meant as a
supplement to your self-care regimen, not a replacement for therapy. You
should always discuss with your mental health professional any change in
medication you are currently taking, as there can be side effects.
Exercise, baby!---Whether you're currently in an abusive relationship,
planning to leave, or have already started the journey to No Contact,
any form of exercise--whether it be running on the treadmill,
weight-lifting, dancing,

yoga, walking, biking, Zumba--will act as a natural antidepressant and
enable you to cope with your emotions more effectively at whatever stage
of recovery you may be in. Self-Care Warrior Pro-tip: Exercise can
target many of these biochemicals all at once. Doing some jumping jacks,
squats, running in place all allow a surge of neurotransmitters like
norepinephrine, dopamine and serotonin. Exercise can lower cortisol
levels as well. I highly encourage you to get a gym membership as well
as a membership to your local yoga center if you don't have one already.

The Holy Trinity of Healing: Angering, Crying and Verbal Ventilation
Perhaps the most important way of healing the brain lies in addressing
the complex emotions that arise from it. Grieving complex trauma is a
significant way we allow ourselves to heal. Pete Walker, trauma
therapist and author of the book Complex PTSD: From Surviving to
Thriving, believes there are a few main ways victims of trauma can begin
to process and heal the trauma which can take the load off of our
brains. I've briefly listed them below here, but you can read his
in-depth analysis of each on his in-depth and brilliant article here:
pete-walker.com/pdf/GrievingAndComplexPTSD.pdf

Angering Angering includes allowing yourself to feel the anger you have,
especially if the anger was from childhood trauma. This can be done
alone or in the presence of a safe, validating witness. Angering turns
your self-blame into a powerful stance of knowing you were not to blame,
and silencing the inner critic that often emerges from PTSD or Complex
PTSD. Angering can also help to ease the repetition compulsion we talked
about in the essay, "10 Reasons Why Being Raised by a Narcissist Can Get
You Trapped in the Repetition Cycle," because the more we get real with
our legitimate anger at being mistreated, the more likely we'll be able
to stand up to those who engage in toxic behaviors that reenact the
trauma.

Crying as a Medium Being able to cry, through anger and with compassion
for ourselves, is a physical outlet for the trauma trapped within our
bodies and an emotional release for the repressed emotions that are
exacerbating the anxiety overload in our brains. While it may seem
challenging at first, let yourself cry through the grief. Let yourself
grieve through the unhealed wounds, and for the unfair incidents of
abuse you've suffered. In crying, as cliché as it may sound, there is
healing, awakening, and truth. In grieving, there is potential for
stopping ourselves from regressing into another emotional flashback.

Verbal ventilation Speaking or writing out our painful feelings in an
uncensored manner can be both therapeutic and effective for healing
trauma in the brain---by connecting both left brain reasoning with right
brain emotion---which we know from reading about the effects of trauma,
often lose communication with one another in the midst of trauma, as the
left side of the brain becomes underactivated and the right side of the
brain becomes overactive. Whenever I feel I've lost my voice, I turn to
the page, or the video camera, or record my message on my phone. It's
powerful to speak after being silenced for so long ---so let yourself
speak, even if you're the only one that's listening.

20

Self-Isolation After Narcissistic Abuse: Why It Happens and How to Heal
Perhaps one of the most devastating aspects of narcissistic abuse is not
just the isolation we suffer at the hands of our abuser, but the
self-isolation we impose upon ourselves during and after the abuse.
Isolation is a tactic abusers use to ensure that they do not have
support or validation outside of the relationship. The abuser may
attempt to control who the victim sees and interacts with through a
myriad of manipulative tactics. Narcissistic abusers are interested in
power and control; by isolating their victims, they are able to gain
this power and control over their victims by micromanaging their lives,
their beliefs and their social networks. Self-isolation, on the other
hand, is self-imposed. It is a symptom of the prior isolation and abuse.
The victim becomes continually conditioned to seek out reprieve from the
abuse alone, and feels so alienated that they are unable to reach out to
others. Due to the toxic shame and self-doubt that arises from the
trauma, combined with the isolating techniques of our abusers,
self-isolation can be a common symptom of the abuse we've suffered. Yet
it is one that is not often spoken about or explored. I want to explore
why self-isolation may occur, and how we can begin to heal from the
aftermath.

1.  Our abuser has convinced us we are somehow socially inept and
    undeserving of a strong social network.

This isn't as commonly discussed in articles about the abuse cycle, so I
thought I would mention this first even before I get into the more
common explanations. Abusers can project their own lack of empathy,
ability to connect with others, and flat emotional range onto us. They
may try to convince us we are the ones who are socially awkward, "fake,"
have a flat affect or are socially inept. They may claim, "No one likes
you," or accuse you of not having any friends when they are, in fact,
the ones who are lacking in meaningful connections with others. They can
project this onto us even when we are social butterflies and have a wide
social network of friends, family members, co-workers and acquaintances.
This sends us into a spiral of self-doubt about our ability to engage
with others. Over time, the constant belittling may break us down to the
point where we become hypervigilant, socially anxious and display the
exact attributes the abuser has conned us into believing we possess. Yet
it is narcissistic abusers who often fail at being emotionally
intelligent--- their emotional intelligence may extend to manipulating
others, but it does not always extend to building valuable
relationships. According to researchers Caligar, Levy and Yeomans
(2015), "Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder may be
grandiose or self-loathing, extraverted or socially isolated, captains
of industry or unable to maintain steady employment, model citizens or
prone to antisocial activities." There is variety in this group and not
all of them are socially adept. Although many narcissists can be
persuasive and charming in the initial stages of idealization, their
emotional intelligence cannot carry them as far as it does for those who
have empathy. A new study showed that much like the old adage of the
tortoise and the hare, narcissists may quickly become popular among peer
groups, but are unable to sustain longer-term friendships and
relationships. In essence, emotionally intelligent non-narcissists
become more popular over time while those with high levels of narcissism
lose their popularity. People with high levels of narcissism often
denigrate others, and as a

result, experience significant dislike from those around them at longer
acquaintance. (Czarna, et. al 2016)

If you have self-isolated or been belittled by your abuser, don't worry;
you have the ability to make meaningful connections far beyond what the
narcissistic abuser will ever make. Introverted survivors of narcissists
can be even more susceptible to believing in the falsehoods the
narcissist feeds them about their ability to navigate social situations,
because they tend to primarily look inward. They are introspective and
usually tackle problems with the assumption that those problems stem
from the self or at least, must be resolved within the self. So when an
abuser tells them they are defective, unable to make friends or that
there is something fundamentally wrong with them, they may be prone to
believe it. Yet regardless of whether you are introverted or
extroverted, a narcissist will try to convince even the belle of the
ball that he or she is nothing but a bumbling fool. It does not matter
if the victim is intelligent, has a striking sense of humor or wit, can
hold an audience captive or have people around them that adore him or
her---because if that is the case, the victim poses a threat to the
narcissist's false sense of superiority and grandeur. In the case of
victims who are more introverted, but compassionate and empathic, the
narcissist knows the victim will easily be brought to self-doubt about
their social acumen, to ensure that they do not gain validation outside
of the narcissist. In fact, they tend to use this put-down more often
with those who have strong social networks and an immense capacity for
empathy. This serves a dual purpose: (1) convincing you that you are
unable to sustain meaningful relationships with others so that the
narcissist becomes your whole life, thereby increasing their power and
control and (2) projecting their own feelings of lack onto you.

On the one hand, individuals with narcissistic personality disorder
often have a profound need for others to support their sense of self and
also to help with self-esteem regulation. On the other hand, genuine
engagement with others can threaten the stability of the grandiose sense
of self, by confronting the individual with the painful reality that
others have attributes that they lack. (Caliger, Levy and Yeomans,
2015).

2.  The abuser isolates us from our social support networks in an effort
    to control our reality. During the idealization phase, the
    narcissistic abuser is able to ensnare us into a twisted fairy tale
    in which we feel compelled to spend every living, breathing moment
    with them. We become infatuated with a high that only a victim who
    has been groomed and love-bombed by a manipulative, malignant
    narcissist can attest to. We might spend a majority of our day
    texting or calling them. We may gradually begin to spend less and
    less time with friends and family members due to the narcissist's
    constant need to woo us, take us away on vacations or romantic
    dates. The narcissist may even begin to smear our family members or
    friends, expressing a dislike for them behind closed doors or
    attempting to convince us they are against us or the relationship.
    As a result, we might begin to withdraw, miss events and interact
    less and less with our loved ones as an effort to placate and please
    the abuser. However, once the devaluation phase sets in, the victim
    is shocked and traumatized. They barely have enough space or time to
    process the trauma, let alone reach out to those who have supported
    them in the past. They feel ashamed that they did not listen to the
    warnings of their friends or family members, or they may feel
    ashamed that the narcissist has charmed their social network into
    only seeing their false self rather than the reality of their
    abusive behavior. Either way, if victims no longer have their social
    network as a safe space to confide in, they will find themselves
    becoming increasingly isolated by their abuser. An abuser who
    taunts, verbally assaults and emotionally injures them, convincing
    them they are not worthy or valuable.

What do you think happens next? The survivor, who may have once been
extroverted, joyful, attentive to others---becomes reclusive and
secluded. They withdraw from others and no longer seem to possess the
joie de vivre that once marked them. Instead, they are fearful, anxious,
perpetually on eggshells. They become secretive about the abuse, fearing
no one would believe them, or they feel a pervasive sense of shame that
they have chosen to remain in the relationship. Society's ignorant
members, after all, have taught the survivor to feel ashamed about
getting into an abusive relationship in the first place. With seemingly
nowhere to turn, they develop a sense of learned helplessness about
their own isolation.

3.  Processing the trauma is an important and sometimes beneficial part
    of self-isolation. Self-isolation can also be a protective
    mechanism. Trauma causes chaos in our brains and bodies, creating a
    separation among thoughts, emotions and memories that erodes any
    sort of coherent narrative about the trauma. I find that mind-body
    healing techniques along with trauma-informed professional support
    can help us form a dialogue again among the disparate parts of our
    brain and release some of the trauma stored in our bodies---often,
    this trauma burdens us so much that healthy outlets for release are
    needed so that we have space for revival. Know that this is not your
    fault, you did not deserve the injustice you endured. You deserve
    your own compassion; you deserve to be gentle with yourself. It's
    okay to not be okay for a while, it's perfectly okay to grieve the
    losses you've suffered because trauma is an earth-shattering blow to
    our worldview and what we thought we knew, our faith in people and
    the world. The brain has been overwhelmed with the trauma of the
    relationship for so long, that survivors may need a space and time
    for healing and recuperation after the abusive relationship has
    ended. We may find ourselves unable to trust our own perceptions
    about people after the abuse. This is a necessary component of
    healing, and to some extent, self-isolation can be a protective
    barrier against meeting more manipulative and exploitative people at
    vulnerable periods after the abuse.

Survivors may suffer from periods of hypervigilance and a sense of
overwhelming distrust of people after they've been narcissistically
abused. This can begin to emerge during the abuse cycle as well. This
hypervigilance and distrust is not always paranoia; sometimes, it is
intuition that more pathological people exist in our lives. Many
survivors start to recognize that the people they have surrounded
themselves with may possess similar narcissistic traits. This isn't
uncommon, especially for survivors who have been raised by narcissistic
parents and programmed to feel undeserving of healthier relationships
and friendships. However, apart from discerning legitimately toxic
people, it's important to learn how to healthily cope with emotional
flashbacks and regressions back to feelings of powerlessness whenever we
interact with others. Being able to manage our anxiety and reduce our
discomfort is key to regaining some of the power and social capital we
may have lost during the relationship. Sometimes we need that hermit
phase before we come out of our shell---and much like the hermit, we
need that barrier of protection at times to survive. As our healing
journey progresses, self-isolation becomes more of a cocoon, a
hibernation before rebirth.

How to Begin Healing from Self-Isolation Healing from self-isolation and
isolation in general is not an easy task. However, while survivors may
not be able to fully recapture the pre-trauma social identity they
possessed prior to the abuse, they can still benefit from tremendous
post-traumatic growth. The lessons learned from narcissistic abuse,
including the reality that not everyone has a conscience or capacity for
empathy, are actually vital to our emotional intelligence. Armed with
new knowledge about the manipulative tactics of these abusers, we are
now able to navigate social situations with more discernment than we
have ever had. Here are some tips on how to begin healing from
self-isolation. Work with a trauma-informed mental health professional
who can help you to reduce social anxiety and better manage emotional
flashbacks. I highly recommend this if you are dealing with severe
anxiety, symptoms of PTSD

or Complex PTSD. You will need professional support to act as a guide
for healing your triggers and managing the inevitably devastating
aftermath. Go No Contact and "isolate" yourself from your abuser---the
person who really does not deserve your company. If you cannot go No
Contact due to having children with your abuser or other extenuating
circumstances, implement a form of Low Contact in which you only
interact with your abuser when it is absolutely necessary. This will
give you some reprieve from the constant belittling of your social
abilities and worth. It will also grant you time and space to create
more empowering belief systems without the interference of your abuser.A
lot of people in our society confuse boundaries and No Contact with a
lack of compassion. Nothing could be further from the truth.
Self-compassion is part of the deal too. Cutting off toxic people is
necessary for our self-care and is the most compassionate thing we can
do for ourselves and others. Imagine how much we are able to give to the
world authentically without toxicity in our lives. Holding others
accountable for their abusive behavior is just as, if not more
compassionate, than coddling them for behavior that will inevitably hurt
others. That is the type of compassion I stand up for and believe in.
Create a weekly schedule that incorporates social activities. It can be
as small as scheduling in a walk to the local coffee shop to chat with
the barista or as large as attending a group therapy session. Getting a
gym membership or joining a yoga class can be ideal for the anxious
survivor because you can choose whether or not to initiate contact with
others. Being surrounded by people, even if you're not directly
interacting with them, can still be valuable in lifting your mood---the
endorphins released during exercise to counter the depression you may be
feeling is an extra bonus. If you are feeling particularly anxious,
start small and lead up to bigger milestones. Reframe your destructive,
self-defeating thoughts and beliefs that have been implanted during the
abuse experience. Use tools such as reverse discourse, positive
affirmations, meditation and hypnosis to affirm your sense of safety and
your social abilities. You can find hundreds of healing

methods, tips and tools in my essay, "Healing Invisible Battle Wounds:
The Kaleidoscope of Healing." During periods of self-isolation where you
are unable or unwilling to engage in social activities, use that time
constructively to work on a new hobby, goal or dream. Be part of a
community that allows you to be introspective. Many survivors can
benefit from being part of an online community for survivors where the
pressure to interact in person is lessened. I recommend making a solid
effort to reach out to 'safe' people such as domestic violence centers,
validating support groups, coaches who understand narcissistic abuse as
well as friends and family members who honor your experience. Be careful
about who you disclose your experiences to; make sure these are people
who make you feel your best, have your best interests in mind, support
your decision to leave your abuser and have the expertise to both guide
and validate you. It's a vicious cycle when those around you are also
incredibly invalidating and may not understand what you've been through.
It adds to the self-isolation, because we don't want to risk being
retraumatized by those who simply do not get it, and those who refuse to
get it. Be discerning about who you want to keep in your life during
this time. These can be huge stepping stones in the right direction.
While reducing our social anxiety, creating more positive and meaningful
connections and building a stronger support system is essential to our
healing journey, periods of self-isolation can also lend us some
incredible insights. Self-reliance and discernment are actually internal
resources we can learn to master in order to become more
self-sufficient, independent and receptive. Loving ourselves and being
able to rely on ourselves is valuable to healing and overcoming some of
the shame that the initial self-isolation is driven by. Ironically,
being able to be alone while in a loving, self-compassionate place,
leaves us open to receiving love, support and validation from others
down the road. Perhaps this is a hidden blessing to survivors in a
sense: we learn we can

conquer anything---with or without anyone, and we learn to be discerning
about who we open up to, as well.

References Caligor, E., Levy, K. N., & Yeomans, F. E. (2015).
Narcissistic Personality Disorder: Diagnostic and Clinical Challenges.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 172(5), 415-422.
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2014.14060723 Czarna, A. Z., Leifeld, P., Smieja,
M., Dufner, M., & Salovey, P. (2016). Do Narcissism and Emotional
Intelligence Win Us Friends? Modeling Dynamics of Peer Popularity Using
Inferential Network Analysis. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 42(11), 1588-1599. doi:10.1177/0146167216666265

21

The Dynamic Duo: Empaths and Narcissists Anyone can fall prey to toxic
people such as a malignant narcissist or sociopath, someone who has very
little empathy combined with an excessive sense of entitlement, false
sense of superiority and a tendency to be interpersonally exploitative
for their own gain. That being said, it is interesting to note that
INFJs, one of the rarest personality types, were represented as one of
the biggest groups to be on forums such as PsychopathFree.com, a popular
support forum for survivors of narcissists, sociopaths and psychopaths.
The dynamic between empaths and narcissists has been explored in
numerous articles, but what about the INFJ empath? It may seem quite
bizarre that one of the most "authentic" personality types could end up
with someone who tends to be very inauthentic and superficially
charming, but there are reasons why they may (initially) gravitate
towards each other. Let's talk more about how the traits of an INFJ
empath interact with the traits of a narcissist---and how, like any
other personality type, we can be both vulnerable to narcissists as well
as empowered by what we've learned from our experiences with them.

1.  As natural perfectionists, INFJs often seek the "ultimate
    relationship." INFJs are idealists; they place high value on the few
    people they invite into

their more closeted inner worlds. When INFJs seek the ultimate
relationship, their heart is in the right place---they only want what
they know deep down they deserve---a person who respects and honors them
as they are. To an INFJ, the narcissist's love-bombing (a period of
excessive idealization and "grooming" that a narcissist subjects a
victim to) may initially represent the ultimate high of a perfect
relationship---of the affection, adoration and attention they may not
have received from the external world. As lovers of communication, INFJs
may initially mistake a narcissist's abilities as a cunning wordsmith as
their ability to express their deep desire for the INFJ. Once an INFJ
has learned all the tricks and tools of such charlatans, they are able
to differentiate between authentic interest and an inauthentic agenda,
but like any other personality type, they can be susceptible to a toxic
person's "false mask" of seeming vulnerability and innocent admiration.
There are many ways to evolve from this as an INFJ. One of them might
mean still holding true to yourself and your expectations for a good
relationship, without expecting that everyone who initially seems to be
the ideal may, in fact, be the ideal. In many cases, compassionate love
builds slowly, like a friendship, and the sudden spark of chemistry and
fastforwarding does not necessarily represent the authenticity of a
long-term romance. As an INFJ, one of our biggest challenges is learning
to honor ourselves and our instincts above the appearance of the ideal,
in order to achieve the real thing.

2.  Due to their high degree of empathy, INFJs tend to be healers and
    natural counselors---which means they may have a tendency to want to
    "fix" others. The compassion and empathy of an INFJ empath is an
    enormous strength for this sensitive personality type. Yet sometimes
    INFJs can run the risk of going beyond just helping someone and
    serving as a catalyst for their growth and

into wanting to "fix" an unhealed, toxic person who doesn't take
accountability for their own healing. If you are an INFJ who has been
raised by narcissistic parents or who have had toxic partners, please
know that it is not your fault for being abused, whether it was in
childhood or adulthood. Your sensitivity and empathy may have been
exploited and taken an advantage of by a toxic person but that doesn't
mean that these are not some of your greatest gifts in this world. It
simply means that we can use our empathy in a more discerning way,
towards the people who won't use it for their own agenda. Know that
there are genuine people out there who won't take advantage of your
empathy and will be grateful for your support. You don't have to break
your own boundaries to meet the excessive needs and expectations of
toxic people.

3.  INFJs try to avoid conflict and are highly sensitive to criticism.
    Since INFJs tend to skirt conflict whenever possible, walking on
    eggshells can become even more amplified in the dynamic with a toxic
    partner. Any survivor of abuse can get caught up in doing this
    because of the effects of trauma, but INFJs may be even more prone
    to rationalizing, denying, minimizing the behavior of their abusers
    in order to "keep the peace." Good news though, the fiery spirit
    inside an INFJ can thankfully counteract this people-pleasing habit:
    they are also so driven to end injustice that they can also go to
    the other extreme of cutting any person who exhibits toxic behavior
    out of their lives without a second thought. INFJs can use their
    stubbornness to their advantage when cutting ties with toxic people,
    if they are willing to confront and tackle conflict head-on in order
    to get the healthy lives they truly deserve. An INFJ's sensitivity
    can also be used against them in order to gaslight them into
    thinking that any abuse or mistreatment that is occurring is "all in
    their heads," when in fact their sensitivity is alerting them to
    potential danger. Abusive partners, family members or friends can be
    highly critical while also

accusing the victimized party that they are simply "too sensitive." It
is true that an INFJ can be a highly sensitive person, but they can also
possess a beautiful sense of humor as well and are able to think very
critically about themselves. INFJs are not resistant to
self-improvement---in fact, their constant evolution is a part of their
need for ongoing growth and devotion to maintaining their integrity. So,
if an INFJ truly was overreacting to something, you can bet that they
would eventually realize that and apologize for it. The problem is, when
you apologize to a toxic person who hurts you continually regardless of
any long-winded discussions about their behavior, you ignore the inner
voice that is telling you that this person is not as interested in
evolving as you are. You begin to realize that you are not the sensitive
one---they, in fact, are the insensitive ones (and we all know that
toxic people can have very sensitive egos and can rage when they don't
get what they want). It's important to remember that it is not an INFJ's
sense of humor, sensitivity or willingness to call out mistreatment when
they see it that is the problem when it comes to the dynamic between an
INFJ and a toxic person. Rather, their sensitivity allows them to "feel"
on a deep intuitive level when they are encountering someone who is
toxic, or even a malignant narcissist, sociopath or psychopath. An
INFJ's sensitivity can act as an intuitive radar for when toxicity is
present ---so while it's always advisable to be able to take a step back
and mindfully note our reactions to people as INFJs, remember that as an
INFJ you also have a deep connection to your intuition and may even be
more likely than other personality types in picking up these vibes early
on.

Letter from an Empath to a Toxic Person Read this whenever you feel
guilty about establishing your boundaries with others.

While I love to help others, I am not responsible for fixing your life
or catering to your toxicity. I am not responsible for managing your
triggers, walking on eggshells or telling you what you want to hear in
order to keep the peace. I am not your emotional punching bag nor am I
your emotional sponge. I do not exist for your pleasure or as a site for
your projected pain. My responsibility is to myself---to be my own
person and stay true to myself ---to heal my own wounds, manage my own
triggers, and engage in self-care so that I can give to others
authentically without depleting myself in the process. My responsibility
is to maintain healthy boundaries---especially with those who are
unhealthy.

5 Tips for Staying Strong as an INFJ Empath You are never more alone
than when you are in a crowd filled with disingenuous people. You are
never more at peace than when you're connected with another highly
empathic being. You seek comfort in the words of people who understand
complex and abstract ideas. Your energy is often drained by those who
lack empathy and compassion. It is revived by those in your tribe who
truly get you. You are often the first to "know" and "sense" when there
is something off about someone or a situation---an alienating experience
when no one else is there to validate it with you. You long to be
"normal" but belonging to any group usually means sacrificing a part of
yourself, and while sacrificing yourself for others is your forte, it's
not one you can risk when it comes to your integrity. You get a natural
high from communicating from the deep center of your highest truth. You
drag yourself low when you are placed off-center by those who try to
feed you falsehoods about yourself and others. You can get derailed
easily by the toxic vibes of others and put back on track when absorbed
in your inner voice and guidance---or perhaps by an uplifting message
from a friend who genuinely cares. True friends and partners are hard to
come by but when they do come along, they are cherished and

thoughtfully tended to---mindfully and graciously, each and every time.
Your interactions with other empathic beings are sacred ones and you
honor them with a loyalty that might surprise others. Relationships with
others can result in spiritual transcendence or spiritual blockages.
You're overwhelmed by the hatred in the world; bullies, predators and
naysayers can make a meal out of your emotions. They feast on your
sensitivity and your perceived gentleness. Yet these people tend to be
your greatest teachers and incentives for personal growth and
transformation. Beneath the gentleness, there is a fiery, complex,
multifaceted being, waiting to set the world on fire with his or her
truth. But you reveal yourself by layers ---one by one---and it can take
a lifetime for someone to really know you. Some never do. Sometimes,
you're not even sure you fully know yourself. You try to find the
meaning in everything, and your soul feels most fulfilled when you are
giving back with what you've learned through your experiences and the
endless dialogues you have with yourself. Pondering the world, pondering
the intentions and motives of others, and your place in the universe.
You feel the sacred connectedness of every action, every reaction, and
every person that comes into your path, because you intuitively
understand that they are part of your life's journey. In your world,
synchronicities are miracles and you are hungry for deep connections
with others. No matter how weak or overwhelmed or helpless you've felt,
you move through the world with a quiet resolve, an inner strength that
is unparalleled for the adversity you may have faced. This is what it's
like to be an INFJ (the Myers-Brigg Personality type indicating a person
who is introverted, intuitive, feeling and judging) who is also an
empath. Being an empath doesn't mean you are necessarily an INFJ as
empaths can be from a variety of personality types, but INFJs tend to be
natural empaths. Due to our high sensitivity, eerily on point intuition
and rich inner worlds, we have a lot to give to the world as the rarest
personality type. We find unconventional and conventional ways to share
our gifts in ways that can change the lives of others, including our
own. We tend to be the healers of

the world. Yet the world takes a lot from us, quite easily, and we
usually need a great deal of solitude to recharge. Empaths soak up the
emotions of others. They tend to become enmeshed with other people's
identities. They get tangled up in the energy of other beings very
easily. They are also very attractive to a wide variety of people
because they're authentic, sensitive and good listeners---so they
attract both good people as well as toxic ones who tend to take
advantage of their compassion. While being an empath can be exhausting,
it is also a gift to be able to connect and heal others. It is a gift to
be immensely intuitive, to connect to the pain of others because we tend
to have the most nourishing relationships with people who are also
empathic. Many empaths who are also INFJ's benefit from using their
gifts in professions that heal, care for or counsel others. Being an
INFJ empath means we have to protect ourselves very carefully and
wisely. Because empaths have such porous boundaries in terms of how
they're enmeshed energetically and emotionally with others, it's
important to filter out negative, toxic people as well as negative
energy by giving ourselves some sacred vows to live by in terms of what
we will and won't tolerate in our relationships. There are five tips
that I've learned from being an INFJ empath that may help in resolving a
notorious inner conflict we experience: save the world or save
ourselves? The answer lies in both---saving the world while creating
very strong boundaries that will ultimately save ourselves.

1.  Boundaries As both introverts and empaths, we may have difficulty
    asserting our rights with others, but learning to communicate our
    boundaries in a healthy way is vital for us to stay grounded in our
    integrity. I always advise others to make a non-negotiable contract
    of boundaries. These are at least 10 sacred vows you make with
    yourself about what you won't tolerate in any relationship of any
    kind. These can be very basic or specific and customized to your
    needs and standards (i.e. I won't tolerate any form of abuse vs. I
    won't tolerate anyone

who speaks condescendingly to me.) Then, make sure you follow through
with ending a toxic interaction even before it's had time to build by
recognizing when your boundary is being crossed, asserting your boundary
and reinforcing it by taking yourself out of the toxic interaction
altogether if it is not addressed appropriately.

2.  Extreme self-care Extreme self-care is asking yourself every day,
    "What do I need in this moment?" This practice acknowledges how
    self-care is selfless, rather than selfish---because the more energy
    you have within yourself, the more energy you have to give to the
    world. It means addressing your needs almost as attentively as you
    would the needs of a child, being in tune with how your energy feels
    and nurturing yourself without apologies or excuses. If your need is
    to get some sleep, it may be better for you to finish up that
    project tomorrow. If the need is having fun, perhaps you need to
    schedule a night every week where you can go out with friends or get
    some downtime. If your need is for solitude, maybe it's time for
    some quiet meditation and reflection. Whatever it is that you need
    in order to replenish your reserves, do it. The world needs you and
    your gorgeous energy.

3.  Energy work Empaths can pick up on residual energy and be deeply
    affected by the energetic vibrations of others. Cleansing your
    energy means clearing your sacred spaces---physically, emotionally,
    psychologically, spiritually and sexually. Engage in forms of
    exercise that you love to cleanse your body of trapped energy, do
    yoga, meditate, clear the clutter in your physical spaces. Don't be
    intimate with those who are toxic. Connect with the power of nature
    as a sacred space of healing. Energy clearing can take any form you
    feel is right for you---whether it be a chakra healing meditation or
    a session on the treadmill, do whatever you can to keep yourself as
    cleansed as possible of toxic energies so that you can reconnect
    with your natural, uplifting energy.

4.  Visualization

Imagining a barrier around you that separates you from others can help
remind you that you are an independent entity. This can be any barrier
you feel represents you; imagine yourself bathed in white light or
surrounded by a brick wall that deflects any negative energies coming
your way. Visualization is all about reinforcing this idea that you
don't have to take on the feeling states and projections of others. You
have a right to your own energy, your own viewpoint and your own
perspective about yourself. You can stay grounded in your own truth and
not have to take on the pain of others.

5.  Selective community Surround yourself with only those who respect
    your boundaries and those who appreciate you and see your worth.
    INFJ empaths may have a hard time connecting with superficial people
    but may be pressured by society to conform and go with the crowd.
    Please don't sacrifice your uniqueness to fit in. The world needs
    your gentle guidance, your beautiful spirit and your creative mind.
    Don't chase after toxic people who undermine you, belittle you and
    demean your dreams or your insights. The people who will really see
    you for the treasure that you are tend to be the keepers. You
    deserve to be just as respected, honored and cherished as any other
    personality type in this world. As an INFJ, you have a right to
    honor and love yourself.

22

Healing Invisible Battle Wounds: The Kaleidoscope of Healing Healing
isn't a linear journey---it's a complex, convoluted and multifaceted
process that includes ups and downs, breakdowns and breakthroughs. When
you're the child of a narcissist and date or marry a narcissist, there's
more baggage to reclaim and detours back into the past you may have to
take. Sometimes you're crawling through the journey and other times
you're running like there's no tomorrow. Some days you'll be on your
knees praying and other days you'll be walking firmly towards your
perceived destination. Like breaking through a cocoon, change often
requires erupting from within ---all your bits and pieces have to
shatter, explode, and almost destroyed before you're reborn again. It's
messy, it's cruel, it's painful, it's heartbreaking, but it's also
inspiring, life-changing and extraordinary. It's beautiful, it's
imperfect, it's horrific, it's unfair. You may always remember certain
traumas, but sometimes karma gives you some solace in little miracles
that come your way and yes, it may take time before you see the big
miracles happen. I wish I could tell you there was a time limit to
healing or some magical mathematical computation that could calculate
how much time you need to properly heal---maybe by multiplying the
number of years you were with your narcissistic partner and by dividing
it by the minutes you spent witnessing his or her true self? Perhaps
raise the number of years you were

heartbroken to the tenth power and then subtract each minute you spend
meditating and doing yoga---would that reveal the timeline for healing?
I wish. Unfortunately, it's not so simple. What we consider to be
healing in our society---slapping on a quick Band-Aid to everything we
want to sweep under the rug---is actually desensitization and
self-destruction. Stifling our anger and denying our pain, forcing
ourselves to forgive too quickly or pretend we are absolutely fine, is a
surefire way to culminate our traumas to an eventual breakdown later on.
There are many healing modalities for narcissistic abuse, but there is
no quick fix, no magic cure, no final destination where everything is
suddenly okay. Memory isn't like that, the mind isn't like that and the
heart and soul don't forget. The body does indeed keep the score
especially when it comes to trauma---so does the spirit. There may be a
gradual return to normalcy after the trauma has been processed---but
inevitably as a survivor you will see the world differently from what
you did before this experience---and perhaps that is a good thing,
because you are now fully awake to what is, and not what you want
reality to be. You will understand that there are many people who will
feed on your pain and will try to destroy you, just as there are also
many people out there who are there to love and nourish you. You will
see how capable and resilient you are, even in the worst of
circumstances. You will learn to rely on yourself and those worthy of
your trust, rather than place your faith in the uncertainty of someone
with a dark character. You will see that you only deserve the good
people in your life and that while the experiences you had were unfair
and that you in no way deserved them, you can still use them and channel
them into your greatest victories. I've found throughout my journey,
that in order to challenge the narcissist's power, you have to channel
the power of opposite action. I spoke about this in my first book about
narcissistic abuse, Becoming the Narcissist's Nightmare, where I
reframed the traditional terms we use for narcissistic abuse and instead
applied them to how we can detach from the narcissist and empower
ourselves during the healing journey. This means that when the
narcissist... Stonewalls you---you use that silent treatment to use your
voice across

many platforms and with those who matter. Gaslights you---you validate
and recognize and honor your reality, knowing that what you've
experienced is grounded in truth. Devalues you---you devalue the
illusion of their false self, reconnecting with the true self of the
narcissist and who this person actually is. Discards you---you "discard"
the narcissist, go No Contact and cut all ties with this toxic
individual. Gets New Supply---you "supply" yourself with new dreams, new
goals, new friendships and space and time for healing.

There are many modalities for healing, both traditional and alternative.
Healing often requires recovery on the level of the mind, the body and
the spirit. Every healing journey is different and one healing method
that works for a particular survivor may not work for the next. I have
found it most effective when I've combined healing modalities---both
traditional and alternative---to address both the subconscious wounding
as well as the aspects of narcissistic abuse that require knowledge and
behavioral change. Here are some healing modalities that may work to
help you---some of these modalities also help to address symptoms of
Complex PTSD:

Traditional Methods for Healing Cognitive Behavioral Therapy What is it?
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy was developed in the 1960s by Dr. Aaron T.
Beck as a therapy that focuses on challenging cognitive distortions and
unhealthy thoughts which feed into a cycle of maladaptive behaviors as a
result. It has been proven effective for a variety of disorders and
medical conditions.

How does it work? After an abusive relationship with a narcissist, we
will likely find ourselves ruminating over the lies the narcissist has
fed to us about ourselves, our value in the world and our worthiness.
Our beliefs about the world and ourselves can drastically change when we
are met with the experience of any form of abuse and can cause us to
engage in selfdestructive thought patterns, feelings and behaviors
(Bancroft, 2002). CBT can be helpful in dismantling these distortions
and false beliefs by enabling us to find healthier, alternative ways of
thinking and feeling while pinpointing the connections among unhealthy
thoughts, feelings, beliefs and behaviors. Here are some resources that
may help you on your CBT journey, hopefully along with the help of a
validating CBT therapist:

Links\[1\] The Beck Institute--What is Cognitive Behavioral Therapy?:
beckinstitute.org/get-informed/what-is-cognitive-therapy CBT Worksheets:
getselfhelp.co.uk/freedownloads2.htm Specialty Behavioral Health PDFS:
specialtybehavioralhealth.com/pdfscognitive-behavioral-therapy Lynn
Martin's Cycle of Maladaptive Behavior Client Handouts:
martincbt.com/maladaptivecycle.html Self-Care Warrior Pro Tip: Work in
the therapy space is just the beginning. While in therapy, it's
important to continue self-work and self-care through exercise,
meditation and your own "homework" regarding what you've discussed in
the therapy space. When not in therapy, you can start a supplementary
practice that incorporates CBT techniques at home by making a simple
list of the negative assumptions you have about yourself and the abuse.
These can include distortions like, "I am at fault for the abuse," "I am
not worthy," "I deserved the abuse." Then, write down any and all
evidence against these distortions. Next, write a "replacement" for the
false belief or

thought you've been carrying that incorporates this new, healthier way
of thinking. This may be, "Abuse is the abuser's fault," "I am worthy
and valuable," and "I only deserve love, compassion and respect."

Therapy and Healing Modalities for Complex PTSD Effective therapies and
healing modalities for C-PTSD can include the following:

Prolonged Exposure Therapy Prolonged exposure therapy has four
components: (1) education about the symptoms of trauma and the goals of
treatment, (2) breathing techniques to manage distress, (3) real world
exposure which helps you to work on approaching safe situations that you
may have avoided due to fear of being triggered---as treatment goes on,
you work towards exposing yourself to more distressing situations and
(4) talking through the trauma, which involves addressing the painful
memories you have been avoiding---as survivors continue to desensitize
themselves to imagining and talking about these avoided memories, the
fear of them lessens.

Cognitive Processing Therapy Much like Prolonged Exposure therapy,
Cognitive Processing Therapy involves educating the survivor about their
PTSD symptoms. However, the emphasis on this type of therapy is on
identifying maladaptive thoughts and feelings and then learning skills
that help you challenge these cognitive distortions. This type of
therapy also helps you work through changes in beliefs you may have had
in your worldview due to the trauma, addressing your old and new beliefs
about safety, trust, control, relationships and selfesteem.

Meditation as a Tool for Healing

Remember how we talked about how trauma creates changes in the brain,
often shutting down communication between the more emotional parts of
our brain and the frontal lobes which control executive functioning, our
ability to organize, plan, think and make decisions? Or how trauma can
shrink the hippocampus and the amygdala, which affects emotion, memory
and learning? Well, research has shown that meditation not only thickens
the auditory and sensory parts of our brain but also increases gray
matter in the frontal lobes, regardless of how old you are (Lazar,
2005). Abuse keeps us locked in the "fight or flight" mode---mentally
and emotionally paralyzed. According to research done by a Harvard
neuroscientist, a regular meditation practice for eight weeks can
literally change our brain, making the amygdala which controls the
"Fight or Flight" response, smaller, and thickening the hippocampus
which helps with emotional regulation. The very areas of the brain that
were once affected by trauma can now be rewired by meditation. A
forty-minute meditation practice every day can change the way you
approach your emotions, your relationships and your overall sense of
happiness and contentment. Meditation is free and can be done anywhere
at any time. Contrary to popular myths, it does not require shutting off
your thoughts but rather acknowledging them, accepting them, observing
them and letting them pass. All you need is a willingness to focus on
your breath and a space where you can sit quietly and reflectively. Here
are some meditation podcasts and meditation channels I follow, some of
which are meditation channels and others that are specifically about
healing narcissistic abuse. You can also go to
tinyurl.com/selfcarewarrior using the password self-care warrior to
access some of the links if you're currently reading the paperback
version of this book.

Links Meditation Oasis by Mary and Richard Maddux (This is my favorite
meditation resource and the one that began my journey. Wonderful for

beginners and experts alike): www.meditationoasis.com The Meditation
Society of Australia (free meditations mp3s on their website):
www.download.meditation.org.au YellowBrickCinema--Relaxing Music:
www.youtube.com/user/yellowbrickcinema Lucy Rising--Meditations for
Narcissistic Abuse: www.youtube.com/channel/UCkGplfDhNsv9gZI5OnAVtXA
Self-Therapy for Narcissistic Abuse Trauma/EMDR Sound Therapy:
www.youtube.com/watch?v=0SsMYi0dWs4 The Little Shaman Healing--Shamanic
Drumming and Binaural Meditation: www.youtube.com/watch?v=GdqTO7JTIsI
Joseph Clough--Self-Hypnosis Meditations:
www.youtube.com/channel/UCP2YbHOmP8dFfZfHHPcaMw Michael
Seeley--Self-Hypnosis Guided Meditations:
www.youtube.com/user/michaelsealey

DBT Dialectical Behavioral Therapy (DBT) combines cognitive behavioral
therapy with Eastern mindfulness techniques. It is traditionally used
for patients with Borderline Personality Disorder (although, as you have
read previously, many victims with complex PTSD can be misdiagnosed with
BPD). DBT offers a mindfulness approach that enables individuals to
regulate and cope with their emotions, improve their interpersonal
effectiveness skills and stay grounded in the present moment during
crises. The skills of DBT can be taught to anyone and everyone and are
very useful for anyone who struggles with emotion regulation and toxic
interpersonal relationships. It's important to remember that the
majority of those diagnosed with Borderline Personality Disorder have
suffered abuse and trauma in childhood---some people with BPD actually
have narcissistic parents themselves. There is an overlap between the
symptoms of Complex PTSD and BPD, so misdiagnoses of those suffering
from the effects of narcissistic abuse is common. You don't have to be a
Borderline to benefit from the skills

of DBT; there are excellent websites that offer an overview of the
skills and methods involved in DBT, such as DBTSelfHelp.com

Group Therapy Group therapy led by a mental health professional can be a
safe space to talk about your struggles, fears, and traumas while
witnessing others doing the same. Research groups that focus on domestic
violence, trauma, and/or any other areas you may be struggling with at
this time. Expressing our emotions with others allows us to gain
validation and support. It also increases social accountability for
maintaining progress and self-care. Search for a therapy group here:
groups.psychologytoday.com/rms

Support Groups If you struggle with dysfunctional, abusive relationships
and have trouble setting boundaries with others, there are support
groups with other survivors that can help you. Some survivors have
benefited from attending CoDA (Codependents Anonymous) meetings or
Narcissistic Abuse Survivor Meetup groups in their local area. Go to
Meetup.com to learn more. A word of caution: If you are thinking of
attending a meeting for Narcissistic Abuse, be careful and "test" it out
first before you commit to anything---I once attended one where the
group moderator had a very victim-blaming stance towards the
narcissist's other victims; she also seemed baffled by anyone who had a
pattern of abusive relationships, revealing a lack of knowledge about
trauma repetition. Remember that any support group, whether online or
offline, can be triggering because the moderator or fellow members of
the group may not be licensed professionals as opposed to group
therapists and may themselves have narcissistic tendencies; much like
the narcissistic abuse blogosphere, we have to be careful about the
resources we consult; it's important to consume support groups in a way
that is healthy and balanced.

Alternative Healing Methods Explained EMDR What is it? Eye Movement
Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) therapy is an integrative
psychotherapy approach developed by Dr. Francine Shapiro, who noticed
that eye movements can mitigate the intense effect disturbing thoughts
have on us. It has been researched and proven effective, especially for
the treatment of short-term trauma. While EMDR may not work for
everyone, many survivors have reported finding relief after using it as
a tool to process their trauma safely. How does it work? Traumatic
memories keep us "frozen in time." When we relive a traumatic moment, we
feel as if it's happening all over again--- retaining all the details
from the first time we experienced it. EMDR is a complex eight step
process that desensitizes us to the negative emotions and thoughts
associated with our traumatic experience through rapid eye movement and
restores us with more positive feelings and beliefs. You can learn more
about EMDR and find an EMDR therapist at the EMDR International
Association here: emdria.org.

Emotional Freedom Technique (EFT) What is it? Similar to acupuncture,
EFT was developed by Dr. Mercola. It is a "tapping" technique where we
use our own fingers to touch the same energy meridians, coupled with
positive affirmations, without the invasiveness of needles, to reprogram
the way we think and feel.

Tapping Points TH = Top of Head EB = Eye Brow

SE = Side of the Eye UE = Under the Eye UN = Under the Nose Ch = chin CB
= Collar Bone UA = Under the Arm WR = Wrists

How does it work? There are nine tapping "points" some of which are
listed above. Emotions like anxiety become trapped in certain parts of
our body. EFT allows us to release these energetic blocks by allowing
electromagnetic energy to flow more freely throughout the body. The
affirmations are designed to validate and understand the function of the
negative emotions, acknowledging their protective purpose while enabling
the client to feel permitted to let them go. For more information about
EFT, visit: eft.mercola.com

Yoga According to the Dr. Bessel van der Kolk, founder of the Trauma
Center at Justice Resource Institute, yoga has been proven as an
effective complementary treatment for chronic PTSD. Increasing a sense
of mindful awareness, it enables individuals to experience "safety and
mastery" over their bodies, giving them the resources to productively
interpret intense physiological states of re-experiencing the trauma.
This is especially helpful to survivors of physical and/or sexual abuse.
According to their studies, yoga has helped survivors to ease
dissociative symptoms, affective dysregulation and reduce tension
throughout the body. I personally love hatha yoga, Bikram yoga, and hot
vinyasa flow yoga. If you're a beginner to yoga, I recommend you take a
beginner's class before moving onto more advanced classes. For more
information about the effects of yoga on trauma, I encourage you to
visit traumacenter.org.

Mirror Work Self-help powerhouse Louise Hay talks about the
effectiveness of looking into a mirror and saying positive affirmations
rather than engaging in the traditional negative self-talk that arises
when we normally look in the mirror. Mirror work may at first glance
appear narcissistic, but really, it's about giving ourselves a healthy
dose of self-love and self-compassion. Talking to ourselves lovingly and
compassionately, while seeing ourselves reflected back, has the dual
effect of conditioning ourselves with positive affirmations and
associating those affirmations with our own self-image.

Art Therapy Art therapy has been proven by research to be effective for
victims suffering from PTSD, as trauma tends to shut down the part of
the brain related to language (Broca's area) which renders us
speechless. Art provides a medium through which we can begin a dialogue
with our trauma by reconnecting us to the somatic and limbic aspects of
the brain where trauma is encoded. Whether you use a sketchpad or a
canvas doesn't matter. Pottery, sculpture, painting, sketching---it all
counts. Get your painting tools, your colored markers or pencils and
create something new. If you currently reside in the U.S., you can find
art therapists in your area on the American Art Therapy Association
website at arttherapy.org.

Reverse Discourse and Narrative Therapy/ NLP Reframing As you learned in
"The Great Awakening," one of your main power sources is reverse
discourse. Reframing your narrative is a large part of reverse discourse
and is also the framework of narrative therapy. As a graduate student at
Columbia University, I studied the effects of life-course narratives and
how they interacted with the life-course trajectories of bully victims.
I explored how bully victims with a resilience narrative---those who
reframed their experiences and rewrote their narratives as a powerful
impetus towards success---were able to channel their experiences into a
greater purpose.

The bully victims I interviewed actually returned to the site of the
trauma to teach in classrooms themselves and raise awareness about
bullying. This was a way to take back the often debilitating experience
of severe bullying and instead use it productively as an experience that
could leave a positive impact on future generations. This empowering
narrative reframing enabled these victims to become survivors---it made
them even grateful for the learning experiences of their adversity and
most importantly, it gave them the motivation to change more lives as a
result of what they had experienced. Narrative therapy works on the idea
that it is not our life events but rather our interpretation and
narration of them, that affects our ability to solve problems in our
lives. In addition, it attempts to rework trauma into a coherent
narrative from disintegrated pieces that may be caused by dissociation.
It places the client as the "expert" on his or her life stories and
works to uncover skills, competencies, strengths and values to create
"alternative" stories to the usual negative ones that often claim our
perception of ourselves and our lives. Rather than narrating the same
old story that we are not capable, for example, we may instead choose an
alternative tale which recalls the multiple times we've survived and
thrived through horrific circumstances. This is why writing and
journaling are so powerful for recovery because we can literally change
the narrative and talk back to the existing one. We can "reframe" the
experiences we've had to benefit us. We can also reframe our perception
of the abuser as powerful and invincible at any point by rewriting that
old narrative so that we become the powerful agents of our lives. You
witnessed my own personal journey where I reframed myself as a
"warrior," who has tackled trauma throughout her life by channeling it
into her transformation---rather than as a helpless victim repeating a
cycle of trauma (although I certainly wouldn't deny that we can be both
victims and survivors). I told a story of using my adverse experiences
for the greater good, rather than talking about these experiences as
being so powerful that they took over my life and defeated me. Rather
than emphasizing my challenges, I refocused on my strength and spoke
about how I used the experiences of

trauma and abuse as a way to build a platform for survivors and give
back to the survivor community. Even if you're not working with a
counselor who is trained in narrative therapy, you can change your
narrative at any time while using a piece of paper and pen (or a good
old laptop). Start by writing your old story of adversity (I was abused
as a child, I felt hopeless and helpless) and then, write an alternative
tale (Due to my abuse, I was able to help other survivors) right
underneath it. What you'll find is that by creating a new, empowering
alternative story, you start changing the negative self-talk, judgment,
doubt, fear and self-hatred that is demonstrated in your old one. For
more information about narrative therapy, be sure to visit
dulwichcentre.com.au/what-is-narrative-therapy. For more about the
techniques involved in reverse discourse, be sure to check out the
section "The Power of Reverse Discourse" in the essay, "The Great
Awakening--- Tapping Into Your Power."

Neurolinguistic Programming (NLP) and Self-Hypnosis If your abuser can
brainwash you into thinking terrible, negative things about yourself,
can you brainwash yourself into thinking empowering, positive ones? Yes!
I've done it many times---even when I was an eleven-year-old undergoing
severe bullying, I made sure that I sat with myself and told myself very
positive things about myself, soothed myself as if I was an adult
soothing a child---even though I was a child soothing my child self! As
I did not have any adults who supported me, I was forced to become an
adult self to my child self. This is what helped me to succeed even in
the most impossible of circumstances with the whole world turned against
me. I made sure to conquer my internal world before I ever battled it
out to conquer the world outside of me. You could say I was born to
create my own reverse discourse...and I want to teach others how to do
it too. The art of changing your internal landscape of your belief
systems to affect

your external landscape through your behavior is known as NLP
(Neurolinguistic Programming). It was originally created by John Grinder
and Richard Bandler in the 1970s to uncover powerful tools and skills
for communication and change across a wide range of professional fields.
Simply put, our use of language can literally "recode" our
"programming," the way we automatically behave and react to certain
stimuli. According to Anthony Beardsell, NLP Master Trainer, NLP is the
art of "training yourself for excellence." It is all about reframing
your internal representations and changing your physiological state, in
order to influence and improve your behavior. This is what I'll call
re-idealizing yourself after the devaluation and discard. That's right,
I said it. You WERE worthy of being idealized, and just because the
narcissist used that idealization for his or her own malicious agenda,
doesn't mean the positive, loving things they said about you weren't
absolutely on point. You are actually awesome and beautiful and
intelligent and talented and powerful and unique---yes, you really are.
You fell in love with the narcissist precisely because he or she made
you feel exactly what you yearned to feel about yourself. You fell in
love with the unconditional positive regard that you deeply desire
within yourself. Now you just have to start giving that to yourself.

Meditation and Self-Hypnosis Time Kelly Jo Holly has an excellent
meditation on this called How to Heal Abuse Hypnosis, on
verbalabusejournals.com to begin to envisage your abuser as someone
comical and childish. Joseph Clough has a self-hypnosis channel to
alleviate any fears or anxieties you're facing here:
youtube.com/user/josephcloughhypnosis Michael Sealey also has a terrific
self-hypnosis channel that helps to raise confidence, improve sleep and
mood. Visit him at youtube.com/user/michaelsealey.\[2\] Positive
affirmations, which is a technique I have mentioned throughout the

book and are already a part of many of the diverse healing techniques
described, are an important way of starting to heal those subconscious
wounds by reprogramming how we think about ourselves, our potential and
the world around us. These are phrases that help us to interrupt our
normal thought patterns by instilling in us positive messages about
ourselves and the world around us. Research has confirmed that positive
self-affirmations can help to improve problem-solving under stress
(Creswell et. al, 2013) and psychologists suggest that positive
affirmations also help us to preserve our self-integrity in the face of
threat, enabling our "psychological immune system" to defend itself
(Sherman, 2006). A common criticism of positive affirmations is that
they cannot work for people with low self-esteem, but I beg to differ;
they certainly won't work for everyone, but they can work. Given
everything I went through in my childhood and adulthood, it strikes me
as miraculous as to how much I have been able to overcome. Positive
affirmations and reverse discourse have been a cornerstone in my journey
to becoming my best self and accomplishing what I've set out to achieve,
despite the traumas and doubts that may have suggested otherwise. For
those struggling with low self-esteem, PTSD or Complex PTSD, positive
affirmations may have to be customized in order to prevent triggers or
said in a way that gently and incrementally approaches the aspects of
yourself that are being reworked, much like in reverse discourse. You
may have to say things like, "I choose to be happy," rather than "I am
happy," if you have severe doubts about yourself, a technique suggested
by Daniel Perskawiec, a Certified Hypnotherapist and NLP Trainer of the
NeuroIntelligence Institute.

Inner Child Work What is it? Inner child work is a therapeutic tool that
survivors can use to reconnect with the wounds of their childhood and
deepen the relationship with the adult self. It can involve
visualization, positive affirmations, and meditative/reflective work.

How does it work? As cliché as it may sound, I truly believe that
survivors of chronic victimization by narcissists have deep core wounds
that exist in their "inner child." There is a part of us that is
connected to that child because when we are reacting to abuse in
adulthood, the same wiring in our brain becomes reactivated and we
literally regress back into infancy on a cellular level. Many of us who
feel unnoticed, unheard, and unseen due to other siblings or a toxic
parent taking up all the space develop a sense of unworthiness early on
---then, events in youth and adulthood tend to reinforce, retrigger and
cement those wounds so deeply that we feel traumatized anytime we are
placed in "second place" position---and rightfully so, because it is, in
fact, a chain of trauma that needs to be healed. Pain as historical and
ingrained as this needs to be addressed at its roots. As you learned in
the section, "Your Brain on Trauma," the trauma repetition cycle isn't
something we can logically process and solve because it's not rational,
it is emotional and psychological, embedded into our thought patterns,
our physiological reactions and our deeply ingrained beliefs. It's our
subconscious wounding that creates these types of patterns in
adulthood---so the first step is becoming aware of these wounds on a
conscious level. That is why I always recommend meditation,
self-hypnosis, affirmations---these can all address the subconscious
wounding that other sources of knowledge like articles, books, blogs,
videos---while helpful---may not be able to access. That's why inner
child work---creating a dialogue with and visualizing comforting our
inner child and the wounds that this child carries, may be essential to
healing for survivors of chronic abuse. That is why it is important to
do what Pete Walker (2013) calls "re-parenting" the inner child---by
giving it the compassion and unconditional positive regard that we may
not have received in childhood. This means nurturing the child, soothing
the child, giving the inner child a

safe emotional space to express his or her feelings, and ultimately
thrive, integrated happily in our adult body. As adults, we may have
disassociated from the wounds of childhood because it was too severe for
us to process. Connecting with our inner child gives us permission to
address the pain we may have suppressed or numbed as a coping
mechanism---allowing us to grieve and feel righteous anger at the
suffering we experienced---both of which can be crucial to recovery. For
me personally, Melanie Tonia Evan's Narcissistic Abuse Recovery Program
(NARP) was a cornerstone in my journey to addressing these subconscious
wounds and detecting that they existed. Even if you do not believe in
Law of Attraction or any of the other philosophies related to the
program, it can work as a healing meditation program that enables you to
visualize your wounds, detect what wounds in childhood are creating this
pattern of gravitating towards narcissists, and also healing them. If
you can't afford this program, you can try Inner Child meditations on
YouTube---there are plenty of different ones online. Link: Check out how
to heal your inner child mindfully in Healing the Child Within here:
mindful.org/healing-the-child-within/

Reiki Healing What is it? Reiki is a Japanese spiritual non-invasive
healing and stressreduction technique which involves a Reiki
practitioner using his or her hands to "heal" your body, based on the
energetic blockages that may be present within your body. "Rei" means
universal and "ki" means life energy. How does it work? Reiki operates
under the idea that negative feelings and thoughts are not just stored
in your mind, but also your body, your aura and your energy
field---which often result in illness. When our life-force energy is
disrupted by emotions like depression, anxiety, anger---this results in
us being sick. Energy flows through the practitioner's hands to where it
most needed during a Reiki healing session, restoring balance and
harmony physically, emotionally and spiritually. You can find Reiki
practitioners in your area here

on the International Association of Reiki Professionals website at
www.iarp.org. You may also wish to search on Yelp, Groupon and
LivingSocial for centers and practitioners that offer Reiki. You can
also learn how to use Reiki healing on yourself using the numerous
resources available online. Link: Watch this video on Reiki Healing
here: tinyurl.com/reikimeditation

Acupuncture What is it? Acupuncture is an ancient Chinese healing
technique involving the use of needles at specific points of the body to
heal a wide variety of physical and psychological ailments. How does it
work? There are 12 primary and eight secondary invisible lines of energy
flow in the body known as "meridians." An acupuncturist targets specific
points of the body to help resolve the physical and/or emotional ailment
plaguing the patient. In "Stories of Healing Emotional Trauma in My
Acupuncture Clinic," acupuncturist Nicholas Sieben, M.S., L.Ac, writes,
"People may recognize there are unresolved issues in their lives:
"ghosts" from their past. But most are unclear how to go about resolving
them. Many go to talk therapy. However, according to Chinese Medical
theory, trauma lives in our bodies. It becomes stuck in our blood and
bones where it incubates, causing various physical and mental symptoms.
To fully resolve trauma, the body needs to be released. There needs to
be a physical detox." To learn more about acupuncture, visit NIH's page
on acupuncture here: nccih.nih.gov/health/acupuncture. You can also
search for an acupuncturist if you live in the United States here:
aaaomonline.org/search.

Chakra Balancing What is it? Energy practitioners believe that we have
seven energy centers in

our bodies known as "chakras." This energy map of the body was developed
hundreds of years ago in India and chakra balancing is still a practice
today. These energy centers house emotional and physical well-being, and
each chakra is associated with specific physical ailments. Trauma can
affect each and every one of the chakras. To read how, visit:
www.traumahealed.com/articles/check-in-with-your-chakras.html How does
it work? A compelling discussion in the narcissistic survivor community
is the ability of a narcissist to energetically drain us, leaving us
feeling depleted of our internal resources. Keeping our chakras balanced
and cleansed through visualization and meditation allows us to have a
healthy mind-body connection that prevents both physical dysfunction as
well as emotional difficulty. Link: To learn about each of the seven
chakras and where they are located, check out:
tinyurl.com/chakrameditate. How to heal the chakras: Start with a
balancing chakra meditation. My favorite, and the most effective I've
found so far, is Michael Sealey's Chakra Balancing, Cleansing and
Healing meditation, easily searchable on YouTube. Self-Hypnosis is akin
to meditation in that it helps to subconsciously reprogram your mind.
Michael Seeley also has very soothing hypnosis tracks that are
incredibly calming and healing---very much like meditation. I highly
recommend his Chakra Healing Meditation, Guided Meditation for
Over-Thinking, and Sleep Hypnosis for Deep Confidence. You can also help
heal the chakras through aromatherapy, gardening, yoga, mantras,
affirmations and sound. Here are some resources below that will help you
to identify the best practices for healing your chakras:

Links Heal Yourself Now: The Best Healing Method for Each Chakra by
Vicki

Howie: consciouslifenews.com/best-healing-method-chakra/1133074 7 Easy
Ways to Spring Clean Your Chakras by Deborah King:
healyourlife.com/7-easy-ways-to-spring-clean-your-chakras Your 7 Chakras
and How to Keep Them Balanced and Cleared:
spiritualspaniagara.wordpress.com/2014/07/16/your-7-chakrasand-how-to-keep-them-balanced-cleared

Cord Cutting What is it? Cord-cutting is a spiritual exercise that
enables you to cut your energetic bond with a toxic and negative person
in your life. It can help you in detaching from that person or a toxic
interaction you've had. How does it work? It involves visualization of
the cord between you both and cutting the cord. I have included a
meditation for cord-cutting below which incorporates visualization and
affirmations. A word of caution: if you are in a severely distressed
emotional state about your narcissistic partner, it is best to leave
this meditation for when you are in a calm and centered place in your
healing journey, as you will be asked to visualize your partner in this
meditation. Always consult with a trauma-informed counselor about any
triggers you may experience for meditation. Meditation Time Link:
Releasing and Cord-Cutting Meditation:
drive.google.com/file/d/0BwuR3cap2xc2UGpPdU03eTZRdGM/view

Aromatherapy and Incense What is it? Aromatherapy is an alternative
healing method where the individual uses scents and essential oils as a
way to help with emotions and health. Individuals can choose to inhale
the fragrance or apply the oils directly on their skin. How does it
work? According to Suzanne Bovenizer, CMT, CST, our sense of smell is
connected to the limbic system in our brain, where emotions and memories
are stored. Scents stimulate that part of the brain, releasing chemicals
that cause us to become more calm and relaxed. Aromatherapy can

help a great deal with anxiety, which can be a key component of the
distress victims of narcissistic abuse experience. You can buy essential
oils and an essential oil diffuser for your home so that aromatherapy is
always accessible to you. You may also seek aromatherapy in alternative
ways: some yoga centers offer yoga with an aromatherapy component, and
many massages can also incorporate elements of aromatherapy in a
session. I recommend both essential oils and incense. Here are some
links to purchase products for aromatherapy:

Products for Healing Art Naturals Top Essential Oils Essential Oil
Diffuser Aromatherapy Incense The Complete Book of Essential Oils and
Aromatherapy by Valerie Ann Worwood

Spirituality/Faith/Prayer In the Survivor Survey, many survivors listed
their faith as one of the key components that kept them going after
narcissistic abuse. Faith in a bigger purpose, a higher being, a greater
meaning, is very threatening to a narcissist who wants to be considered
God. It is very threatening to a narcissist's Godlike delusions of
grandeur when we place our faith in something bigger than
them---whatever faith or spirituality we may practice, a belief in a
greater purpose and meaning is incredibly threatening to these predators
because it enables us to believe in ourselves, our worth and our rights
as human beings. Research has shown that a relationship with a perceived
spiritual figure can serve a compensatory role in dysfunctional
attachments we may have formed throughout our lives and that such a
relationship may also have a moderating effect on low self-esteem
(Reinert, 2005). Have something that you can do every day that connects
you to whatever

form of faith or spirituality you have. It could be a gospel choir or a
mindfulness program---a church or a Buddhist temple. It does not matter
what form this spirituality or faith in a bigger purpose takes. It can
even just be faith in your own higher self, your inner guidance and
intuition. For those who engage in prayer, combine prayer with
meditation to get the added benefits of rewiring your brain---simply
begin or end every meditation with a prayer that personally inspires
you. Here are some examples: "Thank you, God for this meditation. May I
heal from my terror and may I feel whole again." "Thank you to my Higher
Self. I pray that I am protected, safe, and strong during my healing."
"God, guide me through my meditation and help me gain everything that I
may need from it. May it help my healing journey. Amen."\[3\]

The Power of Nature Nature is a healing balm to a hurting soul, a
powerful portal to more healing that is often overlooked and
underestimated. Developing a daily connection to nature every day
through hiking, walking or jogging in a natural environment has an
incredible effect on our brains and can act as a restorative practice
that enables us to refocus, reenergize and rejuvenate. Scientific
research has proven nature's ability to lower cortisol levels, relieve
stress, improve our ability to concentrate and improve our mood (Berman,
Jonides, & Kaplan, 2008; Mayer et al., 2009). Even the act of walking
barefoot on the earth during warmer months can improve overall wellbeing
and sleep while reducing pain and stress levels; the theory of the
benefits of "earthing" suggests that walking barefoot connects us to the
earth's electrons. You can also do this through gardening, which is also
a very therapeutic and mindful activity that allows you to see the
growth you want within manifest externally. Some ideas for enjoying the
daily benefits of nature may be: scheduling a

morning or afternoon walk every day, taking a trip to a location with a
beautiful natural landscape, taking a walk by a river, going to the
beach, hiking outdoors, taking a jog in a park or the woods, taking your
lunch break outdoors or picnicking frequently. If the weather is not
warm, "access" nature in alternative ways: go camping and make sure to
start a fire; sit near a fireplace if indoors; open the window in the
morning to let the sunlight in and hear the chirping of the birds; watch
the snow fall or hear the rain. Listen to meditation music that
incorporates the sounds of rainfall, a waterfall or the waves of an
ocean.

Music Therapy as Catharsis Music helps to regulate mood, reconnect with
our authentic emotions, reduces heart rate and blood pressure, lowers
cortisol levels which cause stress and helps to manage anxiety levels.
It's no wonder that music can even be used in a therapeutic relationship
to help an addict in his or her recovery, can help improve social
functioning in patients with schizophrenia, and can reduce the side
effects of cancer treatment. For narcissistic abuse survivors, music can
help us get in touch with emotions we've been suppressing, channel and
release some of those emotions in a safe space of healing, and connect
with someone else (the artist) through the lyrics, the beat of the music
and/or the theme of the song. Music can also help to lift a survivor
from a mood of despair and powerlessness, gently guiding that survivor
to feel happier and empowered while simultaneously giving their immune
system a boost! Now that's what I call healing on the level of the mind,
body and spirit. You can choose to listen to the music you find most
healing, or you can even seek out a certified music therapist at the
American Music Therapy Association at musictherapy.org/about/find.

Links Here are some links to interesting studies on the effects of
music:

CNN---This is your brain on music:
cnn.com/2013/04/15/health/brainmusic-research/ PsychologyToday---Does
Music Have Healing Powers?:
psychologytoday.com/blog/brick-brick/201402/does-music-havehealing-powers
Harvard Health Publications---Healing Through Music:
health.harvard.edu/blog/healing-through-music-201511058556

Self-Care Haven's Music Library for Survivors I have created a playlist
with some of the songs that have helped me on my recovery journey.
There's a diversity of genres, moods, and emotions to connect with
through these songs. Check out my YouTube playlist for survivors here:
tinyurl.com/survivorplaylist. You may also wish to check out an artist
by the name of Twinkly Tus, who sings beautifully empowering songs about
narcissistic abuse, on SoundCloud: soundcloud.com/twinklytus. Self-Care
Warrior Pro Tip: Hybrid Techniques Practice Hybrid Healing Modalities to
make these extra powerful.\[4\] Also what I like to call the Dual Mind
and Body Method---Combining positive affirmations with movement (such as
physical exercise) can also help to further reinforce them into your
belief system. Record your positive affirmations on your phone or tape
recorder and listen to them while you go for a jog or watch daily. This
enables you to access multiple parts of your brain and reprogram both
your mind and your body. It conditions you to associate your
affirmations with movement, energy and vitality rather than the dark
slumber of depression narcissists lure us into. I love doing "hybrid"
activities where I am combining techniques. For example, I once attended
a candlelit hot yoga class with music playing---it appealed to all of my
senses and targeted various areas of my brain, allowing me to
self-soothe and heal both mind and body at once.

There are plenty of ways to combine healing methods and make it fun!
This might mean... Relaxing in a scented bath with an audio of positive
affirmations playing in the background. Listening to positive
affirmations I recorded myself (or, as Louise Hay recommends, a loving
caregiver or friend recorded for you) as I walk on the treadmill or go
for a run. When doing yoga poses, repeat powerful mantras such as, "I
love myself," "I am safe," "I am balanced" during each pose aloud or in
your mind. While getting a massage, meditate or pray silently, allowing
your thoughts to simply flow. Taking a walk on the beach while
meditating to the sound of the waves. Viewing empowering videos like
"Mind Movies" that help me visualize the situations I want while
listening to soothing music or a meditation with binaural beats. These
are easily searchable on Google and YouTube. Using a scented oil
diffuser or incense while writing/journaling.

Blogs and YouTube Videos on Narcissistic Abuse A great deal of my
surveyed survivors pointed out the helpfulness of validating blogs and
videos they watched online in their healing journey. There was something
about seeing a live person talk about narcissistic abuse, share tips and
resources, and validate their experiences, that enabled them to heal
tremendously. Even today, I receive comments on my own YouTube channel,
Self-Care Haven, from survivors about how these videos have played a
major role in their healing journey. Validation, resources and
encouragement are key to healing, so I encourage all narcissistic abuse
survivors to watch helpful videos on this type of abuse. You may wish to
start off with videos that have gentle encouragement rather than
triggering topics. Here are some helpful channels I follow from fellow
survivors of narcissistic abuse who are insightful and experienced (you
can find the full list in the Resources section located at the end of
the book):

YouTube Links (All searchable on YouTube):

Lisa A. Romano, Adult Children of Alcoholics Life Coach Shrinking Violet
Finally Free from Narcissism Annabel Lee Narcissism Survivor Spartan
Life Coach Ross Rosenberg

Releasing the Assumption that a Narcissist is Just Like Us and That
We're Supposed to "Let it Go." Do you ever ruminate about whether your
narcissistic partner misses the relationship or why he didn't fight for
you the way he should have? Or why you wish you had some sort of
validation and acknowledgment from him that he mistreated you? Do you
question why you can't seem to let it go? It's because you're not
supposed to---not yet anyway. Many people who haven't experienced this
type of abuse are used to people telling them to "let it go," but this
can be nearly impossible for a survivor of this type of crazymaking. We
have to go through multiple methods of processing what's
happening---including understanding the way narcissists think and why
they act the way they do before we even get to the tip of the iceberg.
That is why healing and the No Contact journey while rewarding, can be
very challenging as well. Many survivors ask why their narcissist
doesn't hoover or "miss" them, but the reality is that the narcissist
has no emotional capacity to be attached. A part of the narcissist
closed off a long time ago, for reasons and causes that were way before
you ever entered the picture (which is why I stress it is absolutely not
your fault how your partner behaves towards you). Although I don't
advise doing this as this can be triggering, looking at any online forum
where people with NPD talk about their mindsets or reading a book by
someone who is a sociopath and narcissist is alarming and devastating.
The reality that survivors don't wish to believe because it is so
heartbreaking...is that people with NPD feel a void where emotions would

normally be and cannot experience real human emotions like love and
empathy. Narcissists feel a very shallow, watered-down version of normal
human emotions except for rage and envy, which they feel with intensity.
Narcissists will unfortunately never be able to connect to another human
being due to this emotional numbness---he may "fake" it well in the
beginning, but the connection will reveal itself to be false. If they
have been emotionally and/or physically violent towards you, they will
be violent towards another. If they have triangulated you, they will
triangulate someone else. The abusive cycle never ends, but thankfully,
you are working on breaking your own cycle with the narcissist. That is
what is important and what will ultimately save your own life. That
being said, I can very much relate to and understand the addiction to
wanting validation from this type of toxic partner, especially since
this type of partner has worked very hard at managing you down and
making you feel as if you are the person to blame for the problems in
the relationship. This is why we become so addicted to wanting and
seeking approval. Narcissists don't work on our logical, thinking
minds---they appeal to the emotional parts of our brains which are
hard-wired to respond instinctively to avoid abandonment. We haven't
evolved beyond the "if I am out of the tribe, I won't survive"
mentality, unfortunately---and the narcissist can target the very wounds
that make us fear abandonment---tricking us into believing that their
discard of us is a life and death situation. Unfortunately for many
victims, it can be and that is why I want to make sure you know that a
narcissist's pathology is not your responsibility. Your own body
chemistry has been hooked through surges in chemicals and hormones like
dopamine, oxytocin, adrenaline and cortisol and conditioned to seek the
highs and lows only this partner can give you. This was also a person
you spent a considerable amount of time with---our investment in such a
relationship is often complex and nuanced---filled with love, anxiety,
hatred, disappointment, grief and fear.

We hope for more even when we have grown accustomed to receiving crumbs.
We become addicted to the abusive cycle which conditions us to associate
love with violence. I hope you can remember this whenever you are
feeling guilty about your feelings to reach out to your partner or
desire for him or her to reach out to you. The key is to accept your
feelings while still allowing yourself to release your partner. Judging
your feelings will not help you---but embracing them will. You have to
say to yourself, "It is okay to have these feelings. I honor them but I
don't act upon them." We must own and see our pain before being able to
release it more effectively ---especially in a relationship where our
pain was rarely seen or recognized as valid. One of the cruelest aspects
of narcissistic abuse are the joys you used to cherish that were tainted
by the toxic abuser. They have ways of even making what you love to do
or things you love about yourself inaccessible. Shutting down due to
trauma and chronic anxiety are symptoms of the aftermath. It will take
time. Small steps are easier than big steps. I just hope you know that a
part of you can never be taken and destroyed. It's the same part of you
that is still willing to survive and hope. Hold onto that part of
yourself and keep adding to it every day. Meditate, adopt a mantra or
affirmation, say a short prayer...start small and I have faith you will
move onto the bigger actions when you are ready. You have to fight for
the miracles that are ahead of you no matter how bleak it may seem now.
It does and will get better. The best is yet to come.

Manifest a New Reality for Yourself Through Gratitude and Faith in
Yourself Let me preface this section by saying that you don't have to
believe everything about the art of "manifestation" to gain a new
perspective. There are certainly components of manifestation that I
still struggle with today and find victim-blaming as I fully believe
that the accountability of abuse lies with the abuser. I don't think we
"attract" abuse in any way---I think abuse happens to us because an
abuser chooses to abuse us. I also don't wish this

section to come across as victim-blaming, as I adamantly believe that
survivors are not to blame for abuse in any shape, way or form. There is
a heated debate regarding Law of Attraction and manifestation in the
survivor community. Some survivors find it victim-blaming, while others
have utilized it (including through programs such as Melanie Tonia
Evans' NARP program) to change their lives. From a sociological and
psychological viewpoint, believing in the idea that we can create a new
life for ourselves can help us increase our perceived agency and power.
So whether you call it manifestation, the secret, or the law of
attraction, or simply a desire to rebuild a new life, the label is less
important than the fact that a belief in your own agency can be helpful
as a template for pursuing your future goals and aspirations. I firmly
believe that you should only use healing resources that you are
personally comfortable using and the resources that are not triggering
to you ---so if LoA triggers you in any way, avoid using any resources
associated with it altogether. I've selectively used what I can from the
principles of manifestation in order to rebuild my own life.
Sociologically speaking, adopting a mindset that you can "create your
own reality" can open up new avenues and opportunities as your perceived
agency and power receives a boost. I have personally benefited from
experimenting with some of the principles of LoA to manifest incredible
miracles and changes in my life, and so have incredible public figures
such as Oprah, Jim Carrey, Tony Robbins and Marie Forleo. To each their
own, however, and if you don't believe in it, you certainly do not have
to. Not everyone will benefit from this idea that we can create our own
reality and everyone will have different perspectives on this. For
survivors who are open to manifesting, it can be a source of motivation
and inspiration to address the agency you have in rebuilding your life.
Experiment with increasing your daily joy by cultivating positive
emotions whenever possible or moving from an emotion of complete
powerlessness to more powerful emotions; watch mind movies that
represent the love, wealth

or abundance you want your life to have; reset your mood and negative
selftalk often with encouraging statements as well as laughter,
meditation and yoga. I find that gratitude is a very powerful way to
channel the power of manifesting great things in your life; the energy
of gratitude is simply too powerful not to create amazing things in your
life, especially when you feel the depths of it. Don't force yourself to
be grateful---just take small steps to recognize what is going right,
and let a calmer mood set in, slowly. It's okay to build up to it. A
powerful prayer that I try to wake up with each day is the following:
"Thank you, God, for my eyes that still see, my ears that still hear, my
legs that can still walk, my heart that still beats. I am alive. I am
healthy. I am accomplishing my goals. For that, I am grateful. Thank
you." You can use this as a template for making your own gratitude
prayer, customized to you, your faith and your particular beliefs. I
usually add the blessings I've experienced this month or year or even
the day before to the prayer, to remind myself of all of the great
things that are happening. This helps me to focus on the bigger picture,
especially when things are tough, and remember that good things have
happened and that good things are still ahead. I've also found that by
being grateful for certain things, I see those exact things amplified in
my life in very little time---I basically get more of what I am grateful
for, almost immediately. That's just a nice bonus, but the real deal is
the way you feel---and I feel much lighter, more alert, and more loving
and compassionate after I say what I am grateful for. Whether you
attribute that to a cognitive bias or miracle-making, the fact of the
matter is, it works---so, why not do more of it? It's no secret that
trauma survivors can suffer from ruminations of what they've
experienced, and that this pain can be unbearable. Gratitude or
manifesting a new reality isn't about sweeping that pain under the rug,
holding your breath and hoping it'll all go away. It doesn't mean you
don't seek professional support for your trauma or that you can't engage
in healing

modalities or that you invalidate what you've experienced. It's simply a
way to reconnect with the source of power inside of you that says, "I am
here. I am still alive. And I am still fighting." However, do not forget
to balance this with acceptance of your emotions and the fact that what
you went through was traumatic; that your abuser is still an abuser and
that you do not need his or her energy in your life; don't use
manifesting principles to repress your emotions or prevent yourself from
getting help. Emotional blockages actually deter you from rebuilding
your life ---so allow yourself to grieve when needed. Don't try to
bypass negative emotions in an effort to only be positive; this simply
does not work. You need to be able to process and grieve the complex
emotions that will arise, and honor them. This is only meant to be a
framework to begin creating the things you do want to manifest in your
life. Allow yourself to honor your authentic emotions while still
remaining open to feeling better. Focus on what you want moving forward,
create vision boards of the life you want, write extensively and
specifically about the life you want, become aligned with the energy of
your true self---these are principles that can be helpful to survivors
who want to carve out a space of hope and inspiration for their future
lives.

1.  If reading the paperback version of this book, all links in this
    chapter can also be accessed via tinyurl.com/selfcarewarrior with
    the password, "selfcarewarrior." ↵
2.  If you are suffering from severe symptoms of complex PTSD or PTSD,
    please consult a mental health professional to discuss if any
    meditations or self-hypnosis tracks discussed in this book would be
    potentially triggering for you. ↵
3.  For those victims who have suffered spiritual abuse, it's important
    to not force yourself to engage in anything that makes you feel
    uncomfortable or triggers you regarding the abuse you experienced
    and spirituality being used against you. When looking at various
    healing modalities, please always consider your own comfort level
    and your triggers first. When in doubt, consult with a licensed
    mental health professional who can help you to navigate your
    triggers and work through the warped spirituality that the
    narcissist may have used against you. ↵
4.  If you do wish to experiment with hybrid techniques, make sure
    they're not interfering with each other and that these two
    techniques you're using truly complement one another. Sometimes,
    it's

important to focus a great deal of our energy and attention into one
single activity---such as meditation---for it to be effective. ↵

23

5 Effective Self-Care Tips for Abuse and Trauma Survivors Being a trauma
survivor is a challenging journey, but it is also an empowering one.
Trauma acts as the catalyst for us to learn how to better engage in
selfcare and introduces us to endless modalities for healing and
expressing ourselves, enabling us to channel our crisis into our
transformation. Most importantly, it gives us access to connect with
other survivors who have been where we are. It is in these validating
communities that we tend to find the most healing, even outside of the
therapy space. Here are some tips that I've lived by that can benefit
the healing journey of those who have been through trauma and abuse.

1.  Positive affirmations In order to reprogram our subconscious mind,
    which has undoubtedly been affected by the abusive words and actions
    we've undergone, we have to literally reprogram our brain and
    minimize the negative, destructive automatic thoughts that may arise
    in our day-to-day life. These thoughts stir self-sabotage and hold
    us back from embracing all the power and agency we have to rebuild
    our lives. Many of these thoughts are not even our own, but rather,
    the voices of our abusers and bullies who continue to taunt us long
    after the abuse has ended. When we've been abused or bullied in any
    way, we continue to abuse ourselves with what trauma therapist Pete
    Walker calls the voice of the "inner critic."

The most powerful way I've reprogrammed my own inner critical voice is
through a system of positive affirmations that I engage in on a daily
basis. These are positive affirmations that should be tailored to your
particular wounds and insecurities. For example, if you have an
insecurity about your appearance that your abuser has attempted to
instill in you, a positive affirmation can gently interrupt the pattern
of ruminating over such harsh comments by replacing the toxic thought
with a loving one. A self-sabotaging thought about your appearance
suddenly becomes, "I am beautiful, inside and out" whenever the harmful
thought or emotion associated with the thought comes up. One of the most
effective techniques in engaging in these positive affirmations aside
from saying them aloud is a technique from my larger method of "reverse
discourse" which I discuss in my first book, The Smart Girl's Guide to
Self-Care. Record all of your positive affirmations on a tape recover or
a voice recording application and listen to them daily. Hearing your own
voice repeating these affirmations daily---"I love myself," "I am
valuable," "I am worthy," "I am beautiful"---is a potent way to rewrite
the narrative abusers have written for you and banish that browbeating
bully inside of your own head.

2.  Heal the mind through the body According to trauma expert Dr. Bessel
    van der Kolk, author of The Body Keeps the Score, trauma lives in
    our bodies as well as our minds. It's important that we find at
    least one form of physical outlet for the intense emotions of grief,
    rage, and hurt we're bound to feel in the aftermath of abuse and
    trauma, in order to combat the paralysis that accompanies trauma,
    leaving us feeling numb and frozen. I personally love kickboxing,
    yoga, dance cardio and running while listening to empowering music
    or listening to positive affirmations. Do something that you're
    passionate about and love to do. Don't force your body into
    activities that you're not comfortable with or exhaust yourself.
    Using physical exercise as an outlet should be an act of self-care,
    not self-destruction.

3. Breathe For abuse survivors who struggle with symptoms of PTSD or
complex PTSD, mindful breathing exercises and meditation are especially
helpful in managing what therapist Pete Walker (2013) calls our fight,
flight, freeze or fawn responses to flashbacks and ruminating thoughts.
Taking time to observe our breath, whether it be for five minutes or an
hour, can be immensely helpful to managing our emotions and
non-judgmentally addressing our painful triggers. In addition,
meditation literally rewires our brain so that we are able to mindfully
approach any maladaptive responses that may keep us locked into the
traumatic event (Hubbard, 2014). If you have never meditated before and
would like to try it, I would highly recommend an app known as Stop,
Breathe and Think, recommended for people of all ages.

4.  Channel your pain into creativity Art therapy is especially helpful
    to survivors of PTSD because it enables survivors to find modes of
    expression that allow them to create and integrate rather than
    self-destruct. According to van der Kolk, trauma can affect the
    Broca's area of the brain which deals with language. It can shut
    this area of the brain down, disabling us from expressing what is
    occurring. Allowing ourselves to express the trauma in a somatic way
    is important because trauma and the dissociation that comes with it
    can be difficult to process into words. When we are dissociated from
    the trauma, our brain protects itself from the traumatic event by
    giving us an outsider perspective to the trauma, disconnecting us
    from our identity, thoughts, feelings, and memories related to the
    trauma. The brain tends to "split" a traumatic event to make it
    easier to digest (Kalsched, 2013). Since trauma can disconnect us
    from both our minds and bodies through processes of
    depersonalization, derealization, and even amnesia, art can help us
    reintegrate the trauma where we were previously disconnected from
    the experience. As Andrea Schneider, LCSW, puts it,

expressive arts can be a way of "mastering the trauma" that we've
experienced. Whether it's writing, painting, drawing, making music,
doing arts and crafts ---it's important to release the trauma in
alternative ways that engage both our mind and body. When we create
something, we can also have the option of sharing our art with the
world---whether it's a beautiful painting or a book, harnessing our pain
into creativity can be a life-changing experience---both for ourselves
and for others.

5.  Asking for help Contrary to popular opinion, asking for help does
    not make you helpless or powerless. It is in fact, a strong
    recognition of your own power to be able to seek help and be open to
    receiving it. Sharing your story with other survivors can be
    incredibly healing and cathartic. If you are struggling with the
    effects of trauma, I highly recommend finding a validating mental
    health professional who specializes in trauma and understands its
    symptoms in addition to finding a support group of fellow survivors.
    Having the support of a mental health professional throughout the
    process can ensure that you are able to address your trauma triggers
    in a safe space. It is important to choose a validating,
    trauma-informed counselor who can meet your needs and gently guide
    you with the appropriate therapy that addresses the symptoms and
    triggers. Some survivors benefit from EMDR therapy, which is a
    therapy that enables them to process their trauma without being
    retraumatized in the process. However, a therapy that works for one
    survivor may not work for another depending on their specific
    symptoms, the severity of the trauma and the length of time a person
    has been traumatized. Be sure to discuss with your mental health
    professional what the right type of therapy is for you. As a
    supplement to therapy, you may wish to also consult the resources on
    this excellent list, which includes free or low-cost mental health
    resources:

greatist.com/grow/resources-when-you-can-not-afford-therapy. Throughout
this journey of healing from trauma and abuse, make sure that you are
being self-compassionate towards yourself. A great deal of trauma
survivors suffer from toxic shame and self-blame. It's important that we
are gentle towards ourselves during this journey, that we acknowledge
that we are doing our very best and that we ask ourselves every day,
"What would be the most loving thing I can do for myself in this
moment?" in any circumstance. There is no time limit to learning and
healing, there is only the opportunity of transforming our adversity
into victory, our powerlessness into power, one small step at a time.

References Kalsched, D. (2013). Trauma and the soul: A psycho-spiritual
approach to human development and its interruption. London: Routledge.
Schneider, A., LCSW. (2014, March 24). Expressive Arts As Means to Heal
Trauma. Retrieved from
http://www.goodtherapy.org/blog/expressive-arts-as-means-to-heal-trauma-032414
Van der Kolk, Bessel (2015). The body keeps the score: Brain, mind, and
body in the healing of trauma. New York: Penguin Books. Walker, P.
(2013). Complex PTSD: From surviving to thriving: A guide and map for
recovering from childhood trauma. Azure Coyote Publishing.

1

Additional Resources on Narcissistic Abuse Resources for Immediate
Support: If you believe are suffering a mental health crisis or other
medical emergency, contact your doctor immediately, seek medical
attention immediately in an emergency room or call 911. If you are
struggling with suicidal thoughts or other urgent concerns that require
immediate attention, please reach out to the National Suicide Prevention
Hotline at 1-800-273-8255. The Lifeline provides 24/7, free and
confidential support for people in distress, prevention and crisis
resources for you or your loved ones. There are also other resources you
can reach out to: The National Domestic Violence Hotline 1-800-799-7233
You can also chat with them in their 24 hour Live Chat, available on
their website at www.thehotline.org. Making a Safety Plan:
www.thehotline.org/help/path-to-safety Getting a Restraining Order:
www.loveisrespect.org/legalhelp/restraining-orders Documenting Abuse:
www.loveisrespect.org/legal-help/documentingabuse Attorneys who are
well-versed in Narcissistic Personality Disorder:
onemomsbattle.com/resources-attorneys If you haven't already, I highly
recommend reading my first book, Becoming the Narcissist's Nightmare for
additional support and insight from survivors as

well as experts in the field. My journey would not have been complete if
not for the extensive reading I did looking into this subject from
talented professionals and survivors. For readers who wish to learn more
about the specific behaviors of narcissists and sociopaths, I also
recommend reading the following books. In Sheep's Clothing:
Understanding and Dealing with Manipulative People by George Simon,
Jr. Ph.D; The Sociopath Next Door by Dr. Martha Stout Psychopath Free by
Jackson MacKenzie Complex PTSD: From Surviving to Thriving by Pete
Walker The Body Keeps the Score by Bessel Van der Kolk, MD Stop
Spinning, Start Breathing by Zari Ballard Without Conscience: The
Disturbing World of the Psychopaths Among Us by Robert D. Hare, Ph.D
Soul Vampires by Andrea Schneider, LCSW, MSW The Human Magnet Syndrome:
Why We Love People Who Hurt Us by Ross Rosenberg, M.Ed Narcissistic
Lovers: How to Cope, Recover, and Move On by Cynthia Zayn and M.S. Kevin
Dribble Husband, Liar, Sociopath by O.N. Ward Malignant Self-Love by Sam
Vaknin Confessions of a Sociopath by M.E. Thomas It's All About Him by
Lisa E. Scott Help! I'm in Love with a Narcissist by Steven Carter and
Julia Sokol Unashamed Voices: True Stories Written by Survivors of
Domestic Violence, Rape and Fraud: Exposing Sociopaths in Our Midst by
Paula Carrasquillo and Lisa M. Ruth

Blogs and websites that also have helpful information on narcissistic
behavior, abuse and the effects of trauma include: Pete Walker--Complex
PTSD www.pete-walker.com Psychopath Free

www.psychopathfree.com After Narcissistic Abuse
www.afternarcissisticabuse.wordpress.com Narcissistic Behavior
www.narcissisticbehavior.net Michelle Mallon's Facebook Community:
Narcissistic Victim Syndrome www.facebook.com/NarcissisticVictimSyndrome
Psychopaths and Love www.psychopathsandlove.com The Narcissistic Life
www.thenarcissisticlife.com Mental Health News Radio Interviews with
Narcissistic Abuse Advocates
www.everythingehr.com/category/mental-health-news-radio Andrea
Schneider, LCSW www.andreaschneiderlcsw.com Shannon Thomas,
LCSW--Southlake Christian Counseling www.southlakecounseling.org/blog
Healing from Complex Trauma and PTSD
www.healingfromcomplextraumaandptsd.com Lisa E. Scott www.lisaescott.com
Emotional Impotence www.emotionalimpotence.com

YouTube channels I follow on narcissism and emotional abuse include:
Lisa A. Romano, Adult Children of Alcoholics Life Coach
www.youtube.com/user/lisaaromano1 Narcissism Survivor
www.youtube.com/user/NarcissimSurvivor Spartan Life Coach
www.youtube.com/user/spartanlifecoach

Psychopath Free www.youtube.com/user/PsychopathFree/videos Ross
Rosenberg www.youtube.com/user/clinicalcareconsult

Channels Searchable on YouTube: Self-Care Haven Finally Free from
Narcissism Annabel Lee Shrinking Violet Understanding Narcissists

2

Acknowledgements I am so grateful to the wonderful Thought Catalog team,
who made this book possible: thank you for your faith in my work, your
work on this project and for giving me a platform for spread my message.
To my sister, thank you for your endless support and encouragement---for
believing in me and for being my true family. To my loved ones, my
nearest and dearest: thank you for the adventures and the life lessons
that I will remember for a lifetime. To the therapists, professionals
and writers who have supported my work and continue to raise awareness
about this cause with their gifts, their insights and their expertise; I
am still in awe. Thank you for your loving guidance and generosity.
Special thanks to Andrea Schneider, Kristin Walker, Monica White,
Melanie Vann, Shannon Thomas, Michelle Mallon, and Christine Louis de
Canonville for being such inspirational changemakers, soul sisters and
sources of support. To the survivors who read, share and support my
work; thank you for your strength, your gentle words of kindness, your
wisdom and your loving compassion. It is because of you that I continue
to be driven and inspired every day and I can't thank you enough for
your courage and your kindness. Special thanks to Lilly Hope Lucario,
who has been a guiding light throughout my advocacy work and an
ever-present reminder of the power of a survivor who continues to work
for the greater good. I am also so grateful for my YouTube viewers and
community, who have given me a platform for my voice. For Deb, Fiona,
Tus, and Erin, whose strong voices and gift for helping others continue
to be powerful sources of inspiration for survivors everywhere. Thank
you to all of the changemakers---your stories, your insights, and your
validation continue to heal the world. Never stop speaking your voice
and

never stop owning your power.

3

About the Author

New Day Photography, NYC

Shahida Arabi is a graduate of Columbia University graduate school,
where she studied the effects of bullying across the life-course
trajectory. She is the #1 Amazon bestselling author ofThe Smart Girl's
Guide to Self-Care and Becoming the Narcissist's Nightmare: How to
Devalue and Discard the Narcissist While Supplying Yourself, featured as
a #1 Bestseller in three categories and as a #1 Amazon bestseller in
personality disorders for eight consecutive months after its release.
She studied Psychology and English Literature as an undergraduate at
NYU, where she graduated summa cum laude. Her interests include
psychology, sociology, education, gender studies and mental health
advocacy. Her writing has been featured on The Huffington Post, MOGUL,
Thought Catalog and Harvard-trained psychologist Dr. Monica O'Neal's
website. Her blog, Self-Care Haven, has had millions of views from all
over the world and her work has been shared by numerous mental health
professionals, award-winning bloggers and bestselling authors.

Twitter: twitter.com/selfcarehaven Facebook: facebook.com/selfcarehaven
Website: selfcarehaven.wordpress.com

4

THOUGHT CATALOG, IT'S A WEBSITE. www.thoughtcatalog.com

SOCIAL facebook.com/thoughtcatalog twitter.com/thoughtcatalog
tumblr.com/thoughtcatalog instagram.com/thoughtcatalog

CORPORATE www.thought.is


