Advance praise for Daring Greatly "A wonderful book: urgent, essential,
and fun to read. I couldn't put it down, and it continues to resonate
with me." ---Seth Godin, New York Times bestselling author of Linchpin
"The brilliantly insightful Brené Brown draws upon extensive research
and personal experience to explore the paradoxes of courage: We become
strong by embracing vulnerability, we dare more greatly when we
acknowledge our fear. I can't stop thinking about this book."
---Gretchen Rubin, New York Times bestselling author of The Happiness
Project and Happiness at Home "In Daring Greatly, Brené Brown refers to
herself as both a mapmaker and a traveler. In my book, that makes her a
guide. And I believe the world needs more guides like her who are
showing us a wiser way to our inner world. If you'd like to set your
course on being more courageous and connected, engaged and resilient,
leave the GPS at home. Daring Greatly is all the navigation you'll
need." ---Maria Shriver, New York Times bestselling author of Just Who
Will You Be? "Daring Greatly is an important book---a timely warning
about the danger of pursuing certainty and control above all. Brené
Brown offers all of us a valuable guide to the real reward of
vulnerability: greater courage." ---Daniel H. Pink, New York Times
bestselling author of Drive and A Whole New Mind "What I find remarkable
about this book is the unique combination of solid research and
kitchen-table storytelling. Brené becomes such a real person in the book
that you can actually hear her voice asking, 'Have you dared greatly
today?' The invitation in this book is clear: We must be larger than
anxiety, fear, and shame if we want to speak, act, and show up. The
world needs this book and Brené's unique blend of warmth,

humor, and butt-kicking makes her the perfect person to inspire us to
dare greatly." ---Harriet Lerner, Ph.D., New York Times bestselling
author of The Dance of Anger and Marriage Rules: A Manual for the
Married and the Coupled Up "One of the tragic ironies of modern life is
that so many people feel isolated from each other by the very feelings
they have in common: including a fear of failure and a sense of not
being enough. Brené Brown shines a bright light into these dark recesses
of human emotion and reveals how these feelings can gnaw at fulfillment
in education, at work, and in the home. She shows too how they can be
transformed to help us live more wholehearted lives of courage,
engagement, and purpose. Brené Brown writes as she speaks, with wisdom,
wit, candor, and a deep sense of humanity. If you're a student, teacher,
parent, employer, employee, or just alive and wanting to live more
fully, you should read this book. I double dare you." ---Sir Ken
Robinson, New York Times bestselling author of Out of Our Minds and The
Element: How Finding Your Passion Changes Everything "Here's the essence
of this book: Vulnerability is courage in you but inadequacy in me.
Brené's book, weaving together research and Texan anecdote, shows you
the path forward. And don't for a moment think this is only for women.
Men carry the burden of being strong and never weak, and we pay a heavy
price for it. Daring Greatly can help us all." ---Michael Bungay
Stanier, author of Do More Great Work "I deeply trust Brené Brown---her
research, her intelligence, her integrity, and her personhood. So when
she definitively lands on the one most important value we can cultivate
for professional success, relationship health, parental joy, and
courageous, passionate living... well, I sit up and take notice. And
even when that one most critical value turns out to be the risky act of
being vulnerable. Brené dared greatly to write this book, and you will
benefit greatly to read it and to put its razor-sharp wisdom into action
in your own life and work." ---Elizabeth Lesser, New York Times
bestselling author of Broken Open: How Difficult Times Can Help Us Grow
and cofounder of the Omega Institute

"In an age of constant pressure to conform and pretend, Daring Greatly
offers a compelling alternative: Transform your life by being who you
really are. Embrace the courage to be vulnerable. Dare to read this
book!" ---Chris Guillebeau, New York Times bestselling author of The
\$100 Startup

DARING GREATLY

DARING GREATLY How the Courage to Be Vulnerable Transforms the Way We
Live, Love, Parent, and Lead

BRENÉ BROWN, Ph.D., LMSW

GOTHAM BOOKS

GOTHAM BOOKS Published by Penguin Group (USA) Inc. 375 Hudson Street,
New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton
Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario M4P 2Y3, Canada (a division of
Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.); Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R
0RL, England; Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland
(a division of Penguin Books Ltd); Penguin Group (Australia), 250
Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of
Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd); Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11
Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi--110 017, India; Penguin
Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632, New Zealand (a
division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd); Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty)
Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL,
England Published by Gotham Books, a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
First printing, September 2012 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Copyright © 2012 by
Brené Brown All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced,
scanned, or distributed in any printed or electronic form without
permission. Please do not participate in or encourage piracy of
copyrighted materials in violation of the author's rights. Purchase only
authorized editions. Gotham Books and the skyscraper logo are trademarks
of Penguin Group (USA) Inc. LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA Brown, C. Brené. Daring greatly : how the
courage to be vulnerable transforms the way we live, love, parent, and
lead / Brené Brown.---1st ed. p. cm. Includes bibliographical
references. ISBN: 978-1-101-59499-5 1. Assertiveness (Psychology) 2.
Risk. 3. Courage. I. Title. BF575.A85B76 2012 158---dc23 2012018649
Printed in the United States of America Set in Janson Text Designed by
Spring Hoteling While the author has made every effort to provide
accurate telephone numbers, Internet addresses, and other contact
information at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the
author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for changes that occur
after publication. Further, the publisher does not have any control over
and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party
websites or their content. Except for friends and family, names and
identifying characteristics of individuals mentioned have been changed
to protect their privacy. ALWAYS LEARNING

PEARSON

To Steve You make the world a better place and me a braver person.

CONTENTS What It Means to Dare Greatly Introduction: My Adventures in
the Arena CHAPTER 1 Scarcity: Looking Inside Our Culture of "Never
Enough" CHAPTER 2 Debunking the Vulnerability Myths CHAPTER 3
Understanding and Combating Shame CHAPTER 4 The Vulnerability Armory
CHAPTER 5 Mind the Gap: Cultivating Change and Closing the Disengagement
Divide CHAPTER 6 Disruptive Engagement: Daring to Rehumanize Education
and Work

CHAPTER 7 Wholehearted Parenting: Daring to Be the Adults We Want Our
Children to Be Final Thoughts Appendix---Trust in Emergence: Grounded
Theory and My Research Process Practicing Gratitude Notes and References
Index About the Author

WHAT IT MEANS TO DARE GREATLY

THE phrase Daring Greatly is from Theodore Roosevelt's speech
"Citizenship in a Republic." The speech, sometimes referred to as "The
Man in the Arena," was delivered at the Sorbonne in Paris, France, on
April 23, 1910. This is the passage that made the speech famous: "It is
not the critic who counts; not the man who points out how the strong man
stumbles, or where the doer of deeds could have done them better. The
credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, whose face is
marred by dust and sweat and blood; who strives valiantly; who errs, who
comes short again and again, because there is no effort without error
and shortcoming; but who does actually strive to do the deeds; who knows
great enthusiasms, the great devotions; who spends himself in a worthy
cause; who at the best knows in the end the triumph of high achievement,
and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring
greatly...."

The first time I read this quote, I thought, This is vulnerability.
Everything I've learned from over a decade of research on vulnerability
has taught me this exact lesson. Vulnerability is not knowing victory or
defeat, it's understanding the necessity of both; it's engaging. It's
being all in. Vulnerability is not weakness, and the uncertainty, risk,
and emotional exposure we face every day are not optional. Our only
choice is a question of engagement. Our willingness to own and engage
with our vulnerability determines the depth of our courage and the
clarity of our purpose; the level to which we protect ourselves from
being vulnerable is a measure of our fear and disconnection. When we
spend our lives waiting until we're perfect or bulletproof before we
walk into the arena, we ultimately sacrifice relationships and
opportunities that may not be recoverable, we squander our precious
time, and we turn our backs on our gifts, those unique contributions
that only we can make. Perfect and bulletproof are seductive, but they
don't exist in the human experience. We must walk into the arena,
whatever it may be---a new relationship, an important meeting, our
creative process, or a difficult family conversation---with courage and
the willingness to engage. Rather than sitting on the sidelines and
hurling judgment and advice, we must dare to show up and let ourselves
be seen. This is vulnerability. This is daring greatly. Join me as we
explore the answers to these questions:

What drives our fear of being vulnerable? How are we protecting
ourselves from vulnerability? What price are we paying when we shut down
and disengage? How do we own and engage with vulnerability so we can
start transforming the way we live, love, parent, and lead?

INTRODUCTION: MY ADVENTURES IN THE ARENA

I looked right at her and said, "I frickin' hate vulnerability." I
figured she's a therapist---I'm sure she's had tougher cases. Plus, the
sooner she knows what she's dealing with, the faster we can get this
whole therapy thing wrapped up. "I hate uncertainty. I hate not knowing.
I can't stand opening myself to getting hurt or being disappointed. It's
excruciating. Vulnerability is complicated. And it's excruciating. Do
you know what I mean?" Diana nods. "Yes, I know vulnerability. I know it
well. It's an exquisite emotion." Then she looks up and kind of smiles,
as if she's picturing something really beautiful. I'm sure I look
confused because I can't imagine what she's picturing. I'm suddenly
concerned for her wellbeing and my own. "I said it was excruciating, not
exquisite," I point out. "And let me say this for the record, if my
research didn't link being vulnerable with living a Wholehearted life, I
wouldn't be here. I hate how it makes me feel." "What does it feel
like?" "Like I'm coming out of my skin. Like I need to fix whatever's
happening and make it better." "And if you can't?" "Then I feel like
punching someone in the face." "And do you?" "No. Of course not." "So
what do you do?" "Clean the house. Eat peanut butter. Blame people. Make
everything around me perfect. Control whatever I can---whatever's not
nailed down." "When do you feel the most vulnerable?" "When I'm in
fear." I look up as Diana responds with that annoying pause and
head-nodding done by therapists to draw us out. "When I'm anxious and
unsure about how things are going to go, or if I'm having a difficult
conversation, or if I'm trying something new or doing something that
makes me uncomfortable or opens me up to criticism or judgment." Another
annoying pause as the empathic nodding continues. "When I think about
how much I love my kids and Steve, and how my life would be over if
something happened to them. When I see the people

I care about struggling, and I can't fix it or make it better. All I can
do is be with them." "I see." "I feel it when I'm scared that things are
too good. Or too scary. I'd really like for it to be exquisite, but
right now it's just excruciating. Can people change that?" "Yes, I
believe they can." "Can you give me some homework or something? Should I
review the data?" "No data and no homework. No assignments or gold stars
in here. Less thinking. More feeling." "Can I get to exquisite without
having to feel really vulnerable in the process?" "No." "Well, shit.
That's just awesome." If you don't know anything about me from my other
books, my blog, or the TED videos that have gone viral online, let me
catch you up. If, on the other hand, you're already a little queasy from
the mention of a therapist, skip this chapter entirely and go straight
to the appendix about my research process. I have spent my entire life
trying to outrun and outsmart vulnerability. I'm a fifth-generation
Texan with a family motto of "lock and load," so I come by my aversion
to uncertainty and emotional exposure honestly (and genetically). By
middle school, which is the time when most of us begin to wrestle with
vulnerability, I began to develop and hone my vulnerability-avoidance
skills. Over time I tried everything from "the good girl" with my
"performperfect-please" routine, to clove-smoking poet, angry activist,
corporate climber, and out-of-control party girl. At first glance these
may seem like reasonable, if not predictable, developmental stages, but
they were more than that for me. All of my stages were different suits
of armor that kept me from becoming too engaged and too vulnerable. Each
strategy was built on the same premise: Keep everyone at a safe distance
and always have an exit strategy. Along with my fear of vulnerability, I
also inherited a huge heart and ready empathy. So, in my late twenties,
I left a management position at AT&T, got a job waiting tables and
bartending, and went back to school to become a social worker. When I
met with my boss at AT&T to resign, I'll never forget her response: "Let
me guess. You're leaving to become a social worker or an MTV VJ on
Headbanger's Ball?"

Like many of the folks drawn to social work, I liked the idea of fixing
people and systems. By the time I was done with my bachelor's degree
(BSW) and was finishing my master's degree (MSW), though, I had realized
that social work wasn't about fixing. It was and is all about
contextualizing and "leaning in." Social work is all about leaning into
the discomfort of ambiguity and uncertainty, and holding open an
empathic space so people can find their own way. In a word---messy. As I
struggled to figure out how I could ever make a career in social work
actually work, I was riveted by a statement from one of my research
professors: "If you can't measure it, it doesn't exist." He explained
that unlike our other classes in the program, research was all about
prediction and control. I was smitten. You mean that rather than leaning
and holding, I could spend my career predicting and controlling? I had
found my calling. The surest thing I took away from my BSW, MSW, and
Ph.D. in social work is this: Connection is why we're here. We are
hardwired to connect with others, it's what gives purpose and meaning to
our lives, and without it there is suffering. I wanted to develop
research that explained the anatomy of connection. Studying connection
was a simple idea, but before I knew it, I had been hijacked by my
research participants who, when asked to talk about their most important
relationships and experiences of connection, kept telling me about
heartbreak, betrayal, and shame---the fear of not being worthy of real
connection. We humans have a tendency to define things by what they are
not. This is especially true of our emotional experiences. By accident,
then, I became a shame and empathy researcher, spending six years
developing a theory that explains what shame is, how it works, and how
we cultivate resilience in the face of believing that we're not
enough---that we're not worthy of love and belonging. In 2006 I realized
that in addition to understanding shame, I had to understand the flip
side: "What do the people who are the most resilient to shame, who
believe in their worthiness---I call these people the Wholehearted---
have in common?" I hoped like hell that the answer to this question
would be: "They are shame researchers. To be Wholehearted, you have to
know a lot about shame." But I was wrong. Understanding shame is only
one variable that contributes to Wholeheartedness, a way of engaging
with the world from a place of worthiness. In The Gifts of Imperfection,
I defined ten

"guideposts" for Wholehearted living that point to what the Wholehearted
work to cultivate and what they work to let go of: 1. Cultivating
Authenticity: Letting Go of What People Think 2. Cultivating
Self-Compassion: Letting Go of Perfectionism 3. Cultivating a Resilient
Spirit: Letting Go of Numbing and Powerlessness 4. Cultivating Gratitude
and Joy: Letting Go of Scarcity and Fear of the Dark 5. Cultivating
Intuition and Trusting Faith: Letting Go of the Need for Certainty 6.
Cultivating Creativity: Letting Go of Comparison 7. Cultivating Play and
Rest: Letting Go of Exhaustion as a Status Symbol and Productivity as
Self-Worth 8. Cultivating Calm and Stillness: Letting Go of Anxiety as a
Lifestyle 9. Cultivating Meaningful Work: Letting Go of Self-Doubt and
"Supposed To" 10. Cultivating Laughter, Song, and Dance: Letting Go of
Being Cool and "Always in Control" As I analyzed the data, I realized
that I was about two for ten in my own life when in comes to
Wholehearted living. That was personally devastating. This happened a
few weeks before my forty-first birthday and sparked my midlife
unraveling. As it turns out, getting an intellectual handle on these
issues isn't the same as living and loving with your whole heart. I have
written in great detail in The Gifts of Imperfection about what it means
to be Wholehearted and about the breakdown spiritual awakening that
ensued from this realization. But what I want to do here is to share the
definition of Wholehearted living and share the five most important
themes that emerged from the data and which led me to the breakthroughs
I share in this book. It will give you an idea of what's ahead:
Wholehearted living is about engaging in our lives from a place of
worthiness. It means cultivating the courage, compassion, and connection
to wake up in the morning and think, No matter what gets done and how
much is left undone, I am enough. It's going to bed at night thinking,
Yes, I am imperfect and vulnerable and sometimes afraid,

but that doesn't change the truth that I am also brave and worthy of
love and belonging. This definition is based on these fundamental
ideals: 1. Love and belonging are irreducible needs of all men, women,
and children. We're hardwired for connection---it's what gives purpose
and meaning to our lives. The absence of love, belonging, and connection
always leads to suffering. 2. If you roughly divide the men and women
I've interviewed into two groups---those who feel a deep sense of love
and belonging, and those who struggle for it---there's only one variable
that separates the groups: Those who feel lovable, who love, and who
experience belonging simply believe they are worthy of love and
belonging. They don't have better or easier lives, they don't have fewer
struggles with addiction or depression, and they haven't survived fewer
traumas or bankruptcies or divorces, but in the midst of all of these
struggles, they have developed practices that enable them to hold on to
the belief that they are worthy of love, belonging, and even joy. 3. A
strong belief in our worthiness doesn't just happen---it's cultivated
when we understand the guideposts as choices and daily practices. 4. The
main concern of Wholehearted men and women is living a life defined by
courage, compassion, and connection. 5. The Wholehearted identify
vulnerability as the catalyst for courage, compassion, and connection.
In fact, the willingness to be vulnerable emerged as the single clearest
value shared by all of the women and men whom I would describe as
Wholehearted. They attribute everything---from their professional
success to their marriages to their proudest parenting moments---to
their ability to be vulnerable. I had written about vulnerability in my
earlier books; in fact, there's even a chapter on it in my dissertation.
From the very beginning of my investigations, embracing vulnerability
emerged as an important category. I also understood the relationships
between vulnerability and the other emotions that I've studied. But in
those previous books, I assumed that the relationships between
vulnerability and different constructs like shame, belonging, and
worthiness were coincidence. Only

after twelve years of dropping deeper and deeper into this work did I
finally understand the role it plays in our lives. Vulnerability is the
core, the heart, the center, of meaningful human experiences. This new
information created a major dilemma for me personally: On the one hand,
how can you talk about the importance of vulnerability in an honest and
meaningful way without being vulnerable? On the other hand, how can you
be vulnerable without sacrificing your legitimacy as a researcher? To be
honest, I think emotional accessibility is a shame trigger for
researchers and academics. Very early in our training, we are taught
that a cool distance and inaccessibility contribute to prestige, and
that if you're too relatable, your credentials come into question. While
being called pedantic is an insult in most settings, in the ivory tower
we're taught to wear the pedantic label like a suit of armor. How could
I risk being really vulnerable and tell stories about my own messy
journey through this research without looking like a total flake? What
about my professional armor? My moment to "dare greatly," as Theodore
Roosevelt once urged citizens to do, came in June 2010 when I was
invited to speak at TEDxHouston. TEDxHouston is one of many
independently organized events modeled after TED---a nonprofit
addressing the worlds of Technology, Entertainment, and Design that is
devoted to "Ideas Worth Spreading." TED and TEDx organizers bring
together "the world's most fascinating thinkers and doers" and challenge
them to give the talk of their life in eighteen minutes or less. The
TEDxHouston curators were unlike any event organizers I've known.
Bringing in a shame-and-vulnerability researcher makes most organizers a
little nervous and compels a few to get somewhat prescriptive about the
content of the talk. When I asked the TEDx people what they wanted me to
talk about, they responded, "We love your work. Talk about whatever
makes you feel awesome---do your thing. We're grateful to share the day
with you." Actually, I'm not sure how they made the decision to let me
do my thing, because before that talk I wasn't aware of having a thing.
I loved the freedom of that invitation and I hated it. I was back
straddling the tension between leaning into the discomfort and finding
refuge in my old friends, prediction and control. I decided to go for
it. Truthfully, I had no idea what I was getting into. My decision to
dare greatly didn't stem from self-confidence as much as it did from
faith in my research. I know I'm a good researcher, and I trusted that
the conclusions I had drawn from the data were valid and

reliable. Vulnerability would take me where I wanted or maybe needed to
go. I also convinced myself that it wasn't really a big deal: It's
Houston, a hometown crowd. Worst-case scenario, five hundred people plus
a few watching the live streaming will think I'm a nut. The morning
after the talk, I woke up with one of the worst vulnerability hangovers
of my life. You know that feeling when you wake up and everything feels
fine until the memory of laying yourself open washes over you and you
want to hide under the covers? What did I do? Five hundred people
officially think I'm crazy and it totally sucks. I forgot to mention two
important things. Did I actually have a slide with the word breakdown on
it to reinforce the story that I shouldn't have told in the first place?
I must leave town. But there was nowhere to run. Six months after the
talk, I received an e-mail from the curators of TEDxHouston
congratulating me because my talk was going to be featured on the main
TED website. I knew that was a good thing, a coveted honor even, but I
was terrified. First, I was just settling into the idea of "only" five
hundred people thinking I'm crazy. Second, in a culture full of critics
and cynics, I had always felt safer in my career flying right under the
radar. Looking back, I'm not sure how I would have responded to that
e-mail had I known that having a video go viral on vulnerability and the
importance of letting ourselves be seen would leave me feeling so
uncomfortably (and ironically) vulnerable and exposed. Today that talk
is one of the most viewed on TED.com, with more than five million hits
and translation available in thirty-eight languages. I've never watched
it. I'm glad I did it, but it still makes me feel really uncomfortable.
The way I see it, 2010 was the year of the TEDxHouston talk, and 2011
was the year of walking the talk---literally. I crisscrossed the country
speaking to groups ranging from Fortune 500 companies, leadership
coaches, and the military, to lawyers, parenting groups, and school
districts. In 2012, I was invited to give another talk at the main TED
conference in Long Beach, California. For me the 2012 talk was my
opportunity to share the work that has literally been the foundation and
springboard for all of my research---I talked about shame and how we
have to understand it and work through it if we really want to dare
greatly. The experience of sharing my research led me to write this
book. After discussions with my publisher about the possibility of a
business book and/or a parenting book, plus a book for teachers, I
realized that there

only needed to be one book because no matter where I went or with whom I
was speaking, the core issues were the same: fear, disengagement, and
yearning for more courage. My corporate talks almost always focus on
inspired leadership or creativity and innovation. The most significant
problems that everyone from C-level executives to the frontline folks
talk to me about stem from disengagement, the lack of feedback, the fear
of staying relevant amid rapid change, and the need for clarity of
purpose. If we want to reignite innovation and passion, we have to
rehumanize work. When shame becomes a management style, engagement dies.
When failure is not an option we can forget about learning, creativity,
and innovation. When it comes to parenting, the practice of framing
mothers and fathers as good or bad is both rampant and corrosive---it
turns parenting into a shame minefield. The real questions for parents
should be: "Are you engaged? Are you paying attention?" If so, plan to
make lots of mistakes and bad decisions. Imperfect parenting moments
turn into gifts as our children watch us try to figure out what went
wrong and how we can do better next time. The mandate is not to be
perfect and raise happy children. Perfection doesn't exist, and I've
found that what makes children happy doesn't always prepare them to be
courageous, engaged adults. The same is true for schools. I haven't
encountered a single problem that isn't attributed to some combination
of parental, teacher, administrative, and/or student disengagement and
the clash of competing stakeholders vying to define one purpose. I have
found that the most difficult and most rewarding challenge of my work is
how to be both a mapmaker and a traveler. My maps, or theories, on shame
resilience, Wholeheartedness, and vulnerability have not been drawn from
the experiences of my own travels, but from the data I've collected over
the past dozen years---the experiences of thousands of men and women who
are forging paths in the direction that I, and many others, want to take
our lives. Over the years I've learned that a surefooted and confident
mapmaker does not a swift traveler make. I stumble and fall, and I
constantly find myself needing to change course. And even though I'm
trying to follow a map that I've drawn, there are many times when
frustration and selfdoubt take over, and I wad up that map and shove it
into the junk drawer in my kitchen. It's not an easy journey from
excruciating to exquisite, but for me it's been worth every step. What
we all share in common---what I've spent the past several years talking
to leaders, parents, and educators about---is the truth that forms

the very core of this book: What we know matters, but who we are matters
more. Being rather than knowing requires showing up and letting
ourselves be seen. It requires us to dare greatly, to be vulnerable. The
first step of that journey is understanding where we are, what we're up
against, and where we need to go. I think we can best do that by
examining our pervasive "Never Enough" culture.

CHAPTER 1 SCARCITY: LOOKING INSIDE OUR CULTURE OF "NEVER ENOUGH" After
doing this work for the past twelve years and watching scarcity ride
roughshod over our families, organizations, and communities, I'd say the
one thing we have in common is that we're sick of feeling afraid. We
want to dare greatly. We're tired of the national conversation centering
on "What should we fear?" and "Who should we blame?" We all want to be
brave.

YOU can't swing a cat without hitting a narcissist." Granted, it wasn't
my most eloquent moment onstage. It also wasn't my intention to offend
anyone, but when I'm really fired up or frustrated, I tend to revert
back to the language instilled in me by the generations of Texans who
came before me. I swing cats, things get stuck in my craw, and I'm
frequently "fixin' to come undone." These regressions normally happen at
home or when I'm with family and friends, but occasionally, when I'm
feeling ornery, they slip out onstage. I've heard and used the
swinging-cat expression my entire life, and it didn't dawn on me that
more than a few of the thousand members of the audience were picturing
me knocking over self-important folks with an actual feline. In my
defense, while responding to numerous e-mails sent by audience members
who thought animal cruelty was inconsistent with my message of
vulnerability and connection, I did learn that the expression has
nothing to do with animals. It's actually a British Navy reference to
the difficulty of using a cat-o'-nine-tails in the tight quarters of a
ship. I know. Not so great either. In this particular instance, the
cat-swinging was triggered when a woman from the audience shouted out,
"The kids today think they're so special. What's turning so many people
into narcissists?" My less-thanstellar response verged on smart-alecky:
"Yeah. You can't swing a cat without hitting a narcissist." But it
stemmed from a frustration that I still feel when I hear the term
narcissism thrown around. Facebook is so narcissistic. Why do people
think what they're doing is so important? The kids today are all
narcissists. It's always me, me, me. My boss is such a narcissist. She
thinks she's better than everyone and is always putting other people
down. And while laypeople are using narcissism as a catchall diagnosis
for everything from arrogance to rude behavior, researchers and helping
professionals are testing the concept's elasticity in every way
imaginable. Recently a group of researchers conducted a computer
analysis of three decades of hit songs. The researchers reported a
statistically significant trend toward narcissism and hostility in
popular music. In line with their

hypothesis, they found a decrease in usages such as we and us and an
increase in I and me. The researchers also reported a decline in words
related to social connection and positive emotions, and an increase in
words related to anger and antisocial behavior, such as hate or kill.
Two of the researchers from that study, Jean Twenge and Keith Campbell,
authors of the book The Narcissism Epidemic, argue that the incidence of
narcissistic personality disorder has more than doubled in the United
States in the last ten years. Relying on yet another fine saying from my
grandmother, it feels like the world is going to hell in a handbasket.
Or is it? Are we surrounded by narcissists? Have we turned into a
culture of self-absorbed, grandiose people who are only interested in
power, success, beauty, and being special? Are we so entitled that we
actually believe that we're superior even when we're not really
contributing or achieving anything of value? Is it true that we lack the
necessary empathy to be compassionate, connected people? If you're like
me, you're probably wincing a bit and thinking, Yes. This is exactly the
problem. Not with me, of course. But in general...this sounds about
right! It feels good to have an explanation, especially one that
conveniently makes us feel better about ourselves and places the blame
on those people. In fact, whenever I hear people making the narcissism
argument, it's normally served with a side of contempt, anger, and
judgment. I'll be honest, I even felt those emotions when I was writing
that paragraph. Our first inclination is to cure "the narcissists" by
cutting them down to size. It doesn't matter if I'm talking to teachers,
parents, CEOs, or my neighbors, the response is the same: These
egomaniacs need to know that they're not special, they're not that
great, they're not entitled to jack, and they need to get over
themselves. No one cares. (This is the G-rated version.) Here's where it
gets tricky. And frustrating. And maybe even a little heartbreaking. The
topic of narcissism has penetrated the social consciousness enough that
most people correctly associate it with a pattern of behaviors that
include grandiosity, a pervasive need for admiration, and a lack of
empathy. What almost no one understands is how every level of severity
in this diagnosis is underpinned by shame. Which means we don't "fix it"
by cutting people down to size and reminding folks of their inadequacies
and smallness. Shame is more likely to be the cause of these behaviors,
not the cure.

LOOKING AT NARCISSISM THROUGH THE LENS OF VULNERABILITY Diagnosing and
labeling people whose struggles are more environmental or learned than
genetic or organic is often far more detrimental to healing and change
than it is helpful. And when we have an epidemic on our hands, unless
we're talking about something physically contagious, the cause is much
more likely to be environmental than a hardwiring issue. Labeling the
problem in a way that makes it about who people are rather than the
choices they're making lets all of us off the hook: Too bad. That's who
I am. I'm a huge believer in holding people accountable for their
behaviors, so I'm not talking about "blaming the system" here. I'm
talking about understanding the root cause so we can address the
problems. It's often helpful to recognize patterns of behaviors and to
understand what those patterns may indicate, but that's far different
from becoming defined by a diagnosis, which is something I believe, and
that the research shows, often exacerbates shame and prevents people
from seeking help. We need to understand these trends and influences,
but I find it far more helpful, and even transformative in many
instances, to look at the patterns of behaviors through the lens of
vulnerability. For example, when I look at narcissism through the
vulnerability lens, I see the shame-based fear of being ordinary. I see
the fear of never feeling extraordinary enough to be noticed, to be
lovable, to belong, or to cultivate a sense of purpose. Sometimes the
simple act of humanizing problems sheds an important light on them, a
light that often goes out the minute a stigmatizing label is applied.
This new definition of narcissism offers clarity and it illuminates both
the source of the problem and possible solutions. I can see exactly how
and why more people are wrestling with how to believe they are enough. I
see the cultural messaging everywhere that says that an ordinary life is
a meaningless life. And I see how kids that grow up on a steady diet of
reality television, celebrity culture, and unsupervised social media can
absorb this messaging and develop a completely skewed sense of the
world. I am only as good as the number of "likes" I get on Facebook or
Instagram.

Because we are all vulnerable to the messaging that drives these
behaviors, this new lens takes away the us-versus-those-damn-narcissists
element. I know the yearning to believe that what I'm doing matters and
how easy it is to confuse that with the drive to be extraordinary. I
know how seductive it is to use the celebrity culture yardstick to
measure the smallness of our lives. And I also understand how
grandiosity, entitlement, and admiration-seeking feel like just the
right balm to soothe the ache of being too ordinary and inadequate. Yes,
these thoughts and behaviors ultimately cause more pain and lead to more
disconnection, but when we're hurting and when love and belonging are
hanging in the balance, we reach for what we think will offer us the
most protection. There are certainly instances when a diagnosis might be
necessary if we are to find the right treatment, but I can't think of
one example where we don't benefit by also examining the struggle
through the lens of vulnerability. Something can always be learned when
we consider these questions: 1. What are the messages and expectations
that define our culture and how does culture influence our behaviors? 2.
How are our struggles and behaviors related to protecting ourselves? 3.
How are our behaviors, thoughts, and emotions related to vulnerability
and the need for a strong sense of worthiness? If we go back to the
earlier question of whether or not we're surrounded by people with
narcissistic personality disorder, my answer is no. There is a powerful
cultural influence at play right now, and I think the fear of being
ordinary is a part of it, but I also think it goes deeper than that. To
find the source, we have to pan out past the name-calling and labeling.
We've had the vulnerability lens zoomed in here on a few specific
behaviors, but if we pull out as wide as we can, the view changes. We
don't lose sight of the problems we've been discussing, but we see them
as part of a larger landscape. This allows us to accurately identify the
greatest cultural influence of our time---the environment that not only
explains what everyone is calling a narcissism epidemic, but also
provides a panoramic view of the thoughts, behaviors, and emotions that
are slowly changing who we are and how we live, love, work, lead,

parent, govern, teach, and connect with one another. This environment
I'm talking about is our culture of scarcity.

SCARCITY: PROBLEM

THE

NEVER-ENOUGH

A critical aspect of my work is finding language that accurately
represents the data and deeply resonates with participants. I know I'm
off when people look as if they're pretending to get it, or if they
respond to my terms and definitions with "huh" or "sounds interesting."
Given the topics I study, I know that I'm onto something when folks look
away, quickly cover their faces with their hands, or respond with
"ouch," "shut up," or "get out of my head." The last is normally how
people respond when they hear or see the phrase: Never
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ enough. It only takes a few seconds
before people fill in the blanks with their own tapes: Never good enough
Never perfect enough Never thin enough Never powerful enough Never
successful enough Never smart enough Never certain enough Never safe
enough Never extraordinary enough We get scarcity because we live it.
One of my very favorite writers on scarcity is global activist and
fundraiser Lynne Twist. In her book The Soul of Money, she refers to
scarcity as "the great lie." She writes: For me, and for many of us, our
first waking thought of the day is "I didn't get enough sleep." The next
one is "I don't have enough time." Whether true or not, that thought of
not enough occurs to us automatically before we even think to question
or examine it. We spend most of the hours and the days of our lives
hearing, explaining, complaining, or worrying about what we don't have
enough of....Before we even sit up in bed, before our feet touch the
floor, we're already inadequate, already behind, already losing, already
lacking something. And by the time we go to bed at night, our minds are
racing with a litany of what we didn't get, or didn't get done, that
day. We go to sleep burdened by those thoughts and wake up to that
reverie of lack....This internal condition of scarcity, this mindset of
scarcity, lives at the very heart of our jealousies, our greed, our
prejudice, and our arguments with life....(43-- 45).

Scarcity is the "never enough" problem. The word scarce is from the Old
Norman French scars, meaning "restricted in quantity" (c. 1300).
Scarcity thrives in a culture where everyone is hyperaware of lack.

Everything from safety and love to money and resources feels restricted
or lacking. We spend inordinate amounts of time calculating how much we
have, want, and don't have, and how much everyone else has, needs, and
wants. What makes this constant assessing and comparing so
self-defeating is that we are often comparing our lives, our marriages,
our families, and our communities to unattainable, media-driven visions
of perfection, or we're holding up our reality against our own fictional
account of how great someone else has it. Nostalgia is also a dangerous
form of comparison. Think about how often we compare ourselves and our
lives to a memory that nostalgia has so completely edited that it never
really existed: "Remember when...? Those were the days..."

THE SOURCE OF SCARCITY Scarcity doesn't take hold in a culture
overnight. But the feeling of scarcity does thrive in shame-prone
cultures that are deeply steeped in comparison and fractured by
disengagement. (By a shame-prone culture, I don't mean that we're
ashamed of our collective identity, but that there are enough of us
struggling with the issue of worthiness that it's shaping the culture.)
Over the past decade, I've witnessed major shifts in the zeitgeist of
our country. I've seen it in the data, and honestly, I've seen it in the
faces of the people I meet, interview, and talk to. The world has never
been an easy place, but the past decade has been traumatic for so many
people that it's made changes in our culture. From 9/11, multiple wars,
and the recession, to catastrophic natural disasters and the increase in
random violence and school shootings, we've survived and are surviving
events that have torn at our sense of safety with such force that we've
experienced them as trauma even if we weren't directly involved. And
when it comes to the staggering numbers of those now unemployed and
underemployed, I think every single one of us has been directly affected
or is close to someone who has been directly affected. Worrying about
scarcity is our culture's version of post-traumatic stress. It happens
when we've been through too much, and rather than coming together to
heal (which requires vulnerability), we're angry and scared and at each
other's throats. It's not just the larger culture that's suffering: I
found the same dynamics playing out in family culture, work culture,
school culture, and community culture. And they all share the same
formula of shame, comparison, and disengagement. Scarcity bubbles up
from these conditions and perpetuates them until a critical mass of
people start making different choices and reshaping the smaller cultures
they belong to. One way to think about the three components of scarcity
and how they influence culture is to reflect upon the following
questions. As you're reading the questions, it's helpful to keep in mind
any culture or social system that you're a part of, whether your
classroom, your family, your community, or maybe your work team: 1.
Shame: Is fear of ridicule and belittling used to manage people and/or
to keep people in line? Is self-worth tied to achievement,

productivity, or compliance? Are blaming and finger-pointing norms? Are
put-downs and name-calling rampant? What about favoritism? Is
perfectionism an issue? 2. Comparison: Healthy competition can be
beneficial, but is there constant overt or covert comparing and ranking?
Has creativity been suffocated? Are people held to one narrow standard
rather than acknowledged for their unique gifts and contributions? Is
there an ideal way of being or one form of talent that is used as
measurement of everyone else's worth? 3. Disengagement: Are people
afraid to take risks or try new things? Is it easier to stay quiet than
to share stories, experiences, and ideas? Does it feel as if no one is
really paying attention or listening? Is everyone struggling to be seen
and heard? When I look at these questions and think about our larger
culture, the media, and the social-economic-political landscape, my
answers are YES, YES, and YES! When I think about my family in the
context of these questions, I know that these are the exact issues that
my husband, Steve, and I work to overcome every single day. I use the
word overcome because to grow a relationship or raise a family or create
an organizational culture or run a school or nurture a faith community,
all in a way that is fundamentally opposite to the cultural norms driven
by scarcity, it takes awareness, commitment, and work...every single
day. The larger culture is always applying pressure, and unless we're
willing to push back and fight for what we believe in, the default
becomes a state of scarcity. We're called to "dare greatly" every time
we make choices that challenge the social climate of scarcity. The
counterapproach to living in scarcity is not about abundance. In fact, I
think abundance and scarcity are two sides of the same coin. The
opposite of "never enough" isn't abundance or "more than you could ever
imagine." The opposite of scarcity is enough, or what I call
Wholeheartedness. As I explained in the Introduction, there are many
tenets of Wholeheartedness, but at its very core is vulnerability and
worthiness: facing uncertainty, exposure, and emotional risks, and
knowing that I am enough. If you go back to the three sets of questions
about scarcity that I just posed and ask yourself if you'd be willing to
be vulnerable or to dare greatly in any setting defined by these values,
the answer for most of us is a resounding no. If you ask yourself if
these are conditions conducive

to cultivating worthiness, the answer is again no. The greatest
casualties of a scarcity culture are our willingness to own our
vulnerabilities and our ability to engage with the world from a place of
worthiness. After doing this work for the past twelve years and watching
scarcity ride roughshod over our families, organizations, and
communities, I'd say the one thing we have in common is that we're sick
of feeling afraid. We all want to be brave. We want to dare greatly.
We're tired of the national conversation centering on "What should we
fear?" and "Who should we blame?" In the next chapter we'll talk about
the vulnerability myths that fuel scarcity and how courage starts with
showing up and letting ourselves be seen.

CHAPTER 2 DEBUNKING THE VULNERABILITY

MYTHS Yes, we are totally exposed when we are vulnerable. Yes, we are in
the torture chamber that we call uncertainty. And, yes, we're taking a
huge emotional risk when we allow ourselves to be vulnerable. But
there's no equation where taking risks, braving uncertainty, and opening
ourselves up to emotional exposure equals weakness.

MYTH #1: WEAKNESS."

"VULNERABILITY

IS

The perception that vulnerability is weakness is the most widely
accepted myth about vulnerability and the most dangerous. When we spend
our lives pushing away and protecting ourselves from feeling vulnerable
or from being perceived as too emotional, we feel contempt when others
are less capable or willing to mask feelings, suck it up, and soldier
on. We've come to the point where, rather than respecting and
appreciating the courage and daring behind vulnerability, we let our
fear and discomfort become judgment and criticism. Vulnerability isn't
good or bad: It's not what we call a dark emotion, nor is it always a
light, positive experience. Vulnerability is the core of all emotions
and feelings. To feel is to be vulnerable. To believe vulnerability is
weakness is to believe that feeling is weakness. To foreclose on our
emotional life out of a fear that the costs will be too high is to walk
away from the very thing that gives purpose and meaning to living. Our
rejection of vulnerability often stems from our associating it with dark
emotions like fear, shame, grief, sadness, and disappointment---
emotions that we don't want to discuss, even when they profoundly affect
the way we live, love, work, and even lead. What most of us fail to
understand and what took me a decade of research to learn is that
vulnerability is also the cradle of the emotions and experiences that we
crave. Vulnerability is the birthplace of love, belonging, joy, courage,
empathy, and creativity. It is the source of hope, empathy,
accountability, and authenticity. If we want greater clarity in our
purpose or deeper and more meaningful spiritual lives, vulnerability is
the path. I know this is hard to believe, especially when we've spent
our lives thinking that vulnerability and weakness are synonymous, but
it's true. I define vulnerability as uncertainty, risk, and emotional
exposure. With that definition in mind, let's think about love. Waking
up every day and loving someone who may or may not love us back, whose
safety we can't ensure, who may stay in our lives or may leave without a
moment's notice, who may be loyal to the day they die or betray us
tomorrow--- that's vulnerability. Love is uncertain. It's incredibly
risky. And loving someone leaves us emotionally exposed. Yes, it's scary
and yes, we're

open to being hurt, but can you imagine your life without loving or
being loved? To put our art, our writing, our photography, our ideas out
into the world with no assurance of acceptance or appreciation---that's
also vulnerability. To let ourselves sink into the joyful moments of our
lives even though we know that they are fleeting, even though the world
tells us not to be too happy lest we invite disaster---that's an intense
form of vulnerability. The profound danger is that, as noted above, we
start to think of feeling as weakness. With the exception of anger
(which is a secondary emotion, one that only serves as a socially
acceptable mask for many of the more difficult underlying emotions we
feel), we're losing our tolerance for emotion and hence for
vulnerability. It starts to make sense that we dismiss vulnerability as
weakness only when we realize that we've confused feeling with failing
and emotions with liabilities. If we want to reclaim the essential
emotional part of our lives and reignite our passion and purpose, we
have to learn how to own and engage with our vulnerability and how to
feel the emotions that come with it. For some of us, it's new learning,
and for others it's relearning. Either way, the research taught me that
the best place to start is with defining, recognizing, and understanding
vulnerability. What really brings the definition of vulnerability up
close and personal are the examples people shared when I asked them to
finish this sentence stem: "Vulnerability is
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." Here are some of the replies: Sharing an
unpopular opinion Standing up for myself Asking for help Saying no
Starting my own business Helping my thirty-seven-year-old wife with
Stage 4 breast cancer make decisions about her will Initiating sex with
my wife Initiating sex with my husband Hearing how much my son wants to
make first chair in the orchestra and encouraging him while knowing that
it's probably not going to happen Calling a friend whose child just died
Signing up my mom for hospice care

The first date after my divorce Saying, "I love you," first and not
knowing if I'm going to be loved back Writing something I wrote or a
piece of art that I made Getting promoted and not knowing if I'm going
to succeed Getting fired Falling in love Trying something new Bringing
my new boyfriend home Getting pregnant after three miscarriages Waiting
for the biopsy to come back Reaching out to my son who is going through
a difficult divorce Exercising in public, especially when I don't know
what I'm doing and I'm out of shape Admitting I'm afraid Stepping up to
the plate again after a series of strikeouts Telling my CEO that we
won't make payroll next month Laying off employees Presenting my product
to the world and getting no response Standing up for myself and for
friends when someone else is critical or gossiping Being accountable
Asking for forgiveness Having faith Do these sound like weaknesses? Does
showing up to be with someone in deep struggle sound like a weakness? Is
accepting accountability weak? Is stepping up to the plate after
striking out a sign of weakness? NO. Vulnerability sounds like truth and
feels like courage. Truth and courage aren't always comfortable, but
they're never weakness. Yes, we are totally exposed when we are
vulnerable. Yes, we are in the torture chamber that we call uncertainty.
And, yes, we're taking a huge emotional risk when we allow ourselves to
be vulnerable. But there's no equation where taking risks, braving
uncertainty, and opening ourselves up to emotional exposure equals
weakness. When we asked the question "How does vulnerability feel?" the
answers were equally as powerful:

It's taking off the mask and hoping the real me isn't too disappointing.
Not sucking it in anymore. It's where courage and fear meet. You are
halfway across a tightrope, and moving forward and going back are both
just as scary. Sweaty palms and a racing heart. Scary and exciting;
terrifying and hopeful. Taking off a straitjacket. Going out on a
limb---a very, very high limb. Taking the first step toward what you
fear the most. Being all in. It feels so awkward and scary, but it makes
me human and alive. A lump in my throat and a knot in my chest. The
terrifying point on a roller coaster when you're about to tip over the
edge and take the plunge. Freedom and liberation. It feels like fear,
every single time. Panic, anxiety, fear, and hysteria, followed by
freedom, pride, and amazement---then a little more panic. Baring your
belly in the face of the enemy. Infinitely terrifying and achingly
necessary. I know it's happening when I feel the need to strike first
before I'm struck. It feels like free-falling. Like the time between
hearing a gunshot and waiting to see if you're hit. Letting go of
control. And the answer that appeared over and over in all of our
efforts to better understand vulnerability? Naked. Vulnerability is like
being naked onstage and hoping for applause rather than laughter. It's
being naked when everyone else is fully clothed. It feels like the naked
dream: You're in the airport and you're stark naked.

When discussing vulnerability, it is helpful to look at the definition
and etymology of the word vulnerable. According to the MerriamWebster
Dictionary, the word vulnerability is derived from the Latin word
vulnerare, meaning "to wound." The definition includes "capable of being
wounded" and "open to attack or damage." Merriam-Webster defines
weakness as the inability to withstand attack or wounding. Just from a
linguistic perspective, it's clear that these are very different
concepts, and in fact, one could argue that weakness often stems from a
lack of vulnerability---when we don't acknowledge how and where we're
tender, we're more at risk of being hurt. Psychology and social
psychology have produced very persuasive evidence on the importance of
acknowledging vulnerabilities. From the field of health psychology,
studies show that perceived vulnerability, meaning the ability to
acknowledge our risks and exposure, greatly increases our chances of
adhering to some kind of positive health regimen. In order to get
patients to comply with prevention routines, they must work on perceived
vulnerability. And what makes this really interesting is that the
critical issue is not about our actual level of vulnerability, but the
level at which we acknowledge our vulnerabilities around a certain
illness or threat. From the field of social psychology,
influence-and-persuasion researchers, who examine how people are
affected by advertising and marketing, conducted a series of studies on
vulnerability. They found that the participants who thought they were
not susceptible or vulnerable to deceptive advertising were, in fact,
the most vulnerable. The researchers' explanation for this phenomenon
says it all: "Far from being an effective shield, the illusion of
invulnerability undermines the very response that would have supplied
genuine protection." One of the most anxiety-provoking experiences of my
career was speaking at the TED Conference in Long Beach that I
referenced in the Introduction. In addition to all of the normal fears
associated with giving a filmed, eighteen-minute talk in front of an
intensely successful and high-expectation audience, I was the closing
speaker for the entire event. For three days I sat and watched some of
the most amazing and provocative talks that I've ever seen. After each
talk I slumped a little lower in my chair with the realization that in
order for my talk "to work" I'd have to give up trying to do it like
everyone else and I'd have to connect with the audience. I desperately

wanted to see a talk that I could copy or use as a template, but the
talks that resonated the most strongly with me didn't follow a format,
they were just genuine. This meant that I'd have to be me. I'd have to
be vulnerable and open. I'd need to walk away from my script and look
people in the eye. I'd have to be naked. And, oh, my God...I hate naked.
I have recurring nightmares about naked. When I finally walked onto the
stage the first thing I did was make eye contact with several people in
the audience. I asked the stage managers to bring up the houselights so
I could see people. I needed to feel connected. Simply seeing people as
people rather than "the audience" reminded me that the challenges that
scare me---like being naked---scare everyone else. I think that's why
empathy can be conveyed without speaking a word---it just takes looking
into someone's eyes and seeing yourself reflected back in an engaged
way. During my talk I asked the audience two questions that reveal so
much about the many paradoxes that define vulnerability. First I asked,
"How many of you struggle to be vulnerable because you think of
vulnerability as weakness?" Hands shot up across the room. Then I asked,
"When you watched people on this stage being vulnerable, how many of you
thought it was courageous?" Again, hands shot up across the room. We
love seeing raw truth and openness in other people, but we're afraid to
let them see it in us. We're afraid that our truth isn't enough--- that
what we have to offer isn't enough without the bells and whistles,
without editing, and impressing. I was afraid to walk on that stage and
show the audience my kitchen-table self---these people were too
important, too successful, too famous. My kitchen-table self is too
messy, too imperfect, too unpredictable. Here's the crux of the
struggle: I want to experience your vulnerability but I don't want to be
vulnerable. Vulnerability is courage in you and inadequacy in me. I'm
drawn to your vulnerability but repelled by mine. As I walked on the
stage, I focused my thoughts on Steve, who was sitting in the audience,
my sisters back in Texas, and some friends who were watching live from
TEDActive---an offsite location. I also drew courage from something that
I learned at TED---a very unexpected lesson on failure. The vast
majority of folks whom Steve and I met during the three days leading up
to my talk spoke openly about failing. It wasn't unusual for someone to
tell you about the two or three ventures or

inventions that had failed as they explained their work or talked about
their passions. I was blown away and inspired. I took a deep breath and
recited my vulnerability prayer as I waited for my turn: Give me the
courage to show up and let myself be seen. Then, seconds before I was
introduced, I thought about a paperweight on my desk that reads, "What
would you attempt to do if you knew you could not fail?" I pushed that
question out of my head to make room for a new question. As I walked up
to the stage, I literally whispered aloud, "What's worth doing even if I
fail?" I honestly don't remember much of what I said, but when it was
over I was back knee-deep in the vulnerability hangover AGAIN! Was the
risk worth it? Absolutely. I am passionate about my work and I believe
in what I've learned from my research participants. I believe honest
conversations about vulnerability and shame can change the world. Both
of the talks are flawed and imperfect, but I walked into the arena and
gave it my best shot. The willingness to show up changes us. It makes us
a little braver each time. And, I'm not sure how one measures the
success or failure of a talk, but the minute I was done I knew that even
if it flopped or drew criticism, it had been totally worth doing. In the
song "Hallelujah," Leonard Cohen writes, "Love is not a victory march,
it's a cold and it's a broken hallelujah." Love is a form of
vulnerability and if you replace the word love with vulnerability in
that line, it's just as true. From calling a friend who's experienced a
terrible tragedy to starting your own business, from feeling terrified
to experiencing liberation, vulnerability is life's great dare. It's
life asking, "Are you all in? Can you value your own vulnerability as
much as you value it in others?" Answering yes to these questions is not
weakness: It's courage beyond measure. It's daring greatly. And often
the result of daring greatly isn't a victory march as much as it is a
quiet sense of freedom mixed with a little battle fatigue.

MYTH #2: "I DON'T DO VULNERABILITY" When we were children, we used to
think that when we were grown up we would no longer be vulnerable. But
to grow up is to accept vulnerability. To be alive is to be vulnerable.
---Madeleine L'Engle

The definition and examples that you just read make busting the second
vulnerability myth a lot easier. I can't tell you how many times I've
heard people say, "Interesting topic, but I don't do vulnerability."
It's often buttressed by a gender or professional explanation: "I'm an
engineer---we hate vulnerability." "I'm a lawyer---we eat vulnerability
for breakfast." "Guys don't do vulnerability." Trust me, I get it. I'm
not a guy or an engineer or a lawyer, but I've spoken these exact words
a hundred times. Unfortunately, there is no "get out of vulnerability
free" card. We can't opt out of the uncertainty, risk, and emotional
exposure that's woven through our daily experiences. Life is vulnerable.
Look back at the list of examples. These are the challenges of being
alive, of being in a relationship, of being connected. Even if we choose
to stay out of relationships and opt for disconnection as a form of
protection, we're still alive and that means vulnerability happens. When
we operate from the belief that we "don't do vulnerability" it's
extremely helpful to ask ourselves the following questions. If we truly
don't know the answers, we can bravely ask someone with whom we are
close--- they'll probably have an answer (even if we don't want to hear
it): 1. "What do I do when I feel emotionally exposed?" 2. "How do I
behave when I'm feeling very uncomfortable and uncertain?" 3. "How
willing am I to take emotional risks?" Before I started doing this work,
my honest answers would have been: 1. Scared, angry, judgmental,
controlling, perfecting, manufacturing certainty. 2. Scared, angry,
judgmental, controlling, perfecting, manufacturing certainty. 3. At
work, very unwilling if criticism, judgment, blame, or shame was
possible. Taking emotional risks with the people I love was

always mired in fear of something bad happening---a total joy killer
that we'll explore in the "Armory" chapter. This questioning process
helps because, as you can see from my answers, regardless of our
willingness to do vulnerability, it does us. When we pretend that we can
avoid vulnerability we engage in behaviors that are often inconsistent
with who we want to be. Experiencing vulnerability isn't a choice---the
only choice we have is how we're going to respond when we are confronted
with uncertainty, risk, and emotional exposure. As a huge fan of the
band Rush, this seems like the perfect place to throw in a quote from
their song "Freewill": "If you choose not to decide, you still have made
a choice." In Chapter 4 we'll take a closer look at the conscious and
unconscious behaviors we use to protect ourselves when we believe we're
"not doing vulnerability."

MYTH #3: VULNERABILITY IS LETTING IT ALL HANG OUT One line of
questioning that I often get is about our "let it all hang out" culture.
Can't there be too much vulnerability? Isn't there such a thing as
oversharing? These questions are inevitably followed by examples from
celebrity culture. What about when Movie Star X tweeted about her
husband's suicide attempt? Or what about reality TV stars who share the
intimate details of their lives and their children's lives with the
world? Vulnerability is based on mutuality and requires boundaries and
trust. It's not oversharing, it's not purging, it's not indiscriminate
disclosure, and it's not celebrity-style social media information dumps.
Vulnerability is about sharing our feelings and our experiences with
people who have earned the right to hear them. Being vulnerable and open
is mutual and an integral part of the trust-building process. We can't
always have guarantees in place before we risk sharing; however, we
don't bare our souls the first time we meet someone. We don't lead with
"Hi, my name is Brené, and here's my darkest struggle." That's not
vulnerability. That may be desperation or woundedness or even
attention-seeking, but it's not vulnerability. Why? Because sharing
appropriately, with boundaries, means sharing with people with whom
we've developed relationships that can bear the weight of our story. The
result of this mutually respectful vulnerability is increased
connection, trust, and engagement. Vulnerability without boundaries
leads to disconnection, distrust, and disengagement. In fact, as we'll
explore in Chapter 4, "letting it all hang out" or boundaryless
disclosure is one way we protect ourselves from real vulnerability. And
the TMI (too much information) issue is not even a case of "too much
vulnerability"---vulnerability is bankrupt on its own terms when people
move from being vulnerable to using vulnerability to deal with unmet
needs, get attention, or engage in the shock-and-awe behaviors that are
so commonplace in today's culture. To more effectively dispel the myth
that vulnerability is a secretsharing-free-for-all, let's examine the
issue of trust. When I talk to groups about the importance of being
vulnerable, there's always a flood of questions about the need for
trust: "How do I know if I can trust someone enough to be vulnerable?"
"I'll only be vulnerable with someone if I'm sure they won't turn on
me."

"How can you tell who's got your back?" "How do we build trust with
people?"

The good news is that the answers to these questions emerged from the
data. The bad news is that it's a chicken-or-the-egg issue: We need to
feel trust to be vulnerable and we need to be vulnerable in order to
trust. There is no trust test, no scoring system, no green light that
tells us that it's safe to let ourselves be seen. The research
participants described trust as a slow-building, layered process that
happens over time. In our family, we refer to trust as "the Marble Jar."
In the middle of third grade, Ellen had her first experience with
betrayal. In many elementary school settings, third grade is a big move.
Students are no longer clustered with the K--2 crowd; they're now
navigating the Grade 3--5 group. During recess, she had confided in a
friend from her class about a funny, slightly embarrassing thing that
had happened to her earlier in the day. By lunchtime, all of the girls
in her peer group knew her secret and were giving her a hard time. It
was an important lesson, but also a painful one, because up to that
point she had never considered the possibility that someone would do
that. When she came home, she burst into tears and told me that she was
never going to tell anyone anything again. Her feelings were so hurt.
Listening, I felt my heart aching for her. To make matters worse, Ellen
told me that the girls were still laughing at her when they returned to
the classroom, so much so that her teacher separated them and took some
marbles out of the marble jar. Ellen's teacher had a large, clear glass
vase that she and the kids referred to as "the marble jar." She kept a
bag of colored marbles next to the jar, and whenever the class was
collectively making good choices, she would throw some marbles into the
jar. Whenever the class was acting out, breaking rules, or not
listening, the teacher would take marbles out of the jar. If and when
the marbles made it to the top of the jar, the students would be
rewarded with a celebration party. As much as I wanted to pull Ellen
close and whisper, "Not sharing with those girls is a great idea! That
way they'll never hurt us you again," I put my fears and anger aside,
and started trying to figure out how to talk to her about trust and
connection. As I was searching for the right way to translate my own
experiences of trust, and what I was learning about trust from the
research, I thought, Ah, the marble jar. Perfect.

I told Ellen to think about her friendships as marble jars. Whenever
someone supports you, or is kind to you, or sticks up for you, or honors
what you share with them as private, you put marbles in the jar. When
people are mean, or disrespectful, or share your secrets, marbles come
out. When I asked her if it made sense, she nodded her head with
excitement and said, "I've got marble jar friends! I've got marble jar
friends!" When I asked her to tell me about it, she described four
friends whom she could always count on, who knew some of her secrets and
would never tell, and who told her some of their secrets too. She said,
"These are the friends who ask me to sit with them, even if they've been
asked to sit at the popular kids' table." It was such a great moment for
both of us. When I asked her how her marble jar friends became marble
jar friends, she thought about it for a minute and replied, "I'm not
sure. How did your marble jar friends get their marbles?" After thinking
about it for a while, we both started blurting out our answers. Some of
hers were: They keep our secrets. They tell us their secrets. They
remember my birthday! They know who Oma and Opa are. They always make
sure I'm included in fun things. They know when I'm sad and ask me why.
When I miss school because I'm sick, they ask their moms to call to
check on me.

And mine? Exactly the same (except for me, Oma and Opa are Deanne and
David, my mom and stepdad). When my mom comes to Ellen or Charlie's
events, it's a great feeling to hear one of my friends say, "Hey,
Deanne! Good to see you." I always think, She remembered my mom's name.
She cares. She's paying attention. Trust is built one marble at a time.
The chicken-or-the-egg dilemma comes into play when we think about the
investment and leap that people in relationships have to make before the
building process ever begins. The teacher didn't say, "I'm not buying a
jar and marbles until I know that the class can collectively make good
choices." The jar was there on the first day of school. In fact, by the
end of the first day, she had already filled the bottom with a layer of
marbles. The kids didn't say, "We're not going to make good choices
because we

don't believe you'll put marbles in the jar." They worked hard and
enthusiastically engaged with the marble jar idea based on their
teacher's word. One of my favorite scholars in the field of
relationships is John Gottman. He's considered the country's foremost
couples researcher because of the power and accessibility of his
pioneering work on how we connect and build relationships. His book The
Science of Trust: Emotional Attunement for Couples is an insightful and
wise book on the anatomy of trust and trust building. In an article on
the University of California--Berkeley's "Greater Good" website
(www.greatergood.berkeley.edu), Gottman describes trust building with
our partners in a manner totally consistent with what I found in my
research and what Ellen and I call the marble jar: What I've found
through research is that trust is built in very small moments, which I
call "sliding door" moments, after the movie Sliding Doors. In any
interaction, there is a possibility of connecting with your partner or
turning away from your partner. Let me give you an example of that from
my own relationship. One night, I really wanted to finish a mystery
novel. I thought I knew who the killer was, but I was anxious to find
out. At one point in the night, I put the novel on my bedside and walked
into the bathroom. As I passed the mirror, I saw my wife's face in the
reflection, and she looked sad, brushing her hair. There was a sliding
door moment. I had a choice. I could sneak out of the bathroom and
think, I don't want to deal with her sadness tonight; I want to read my
novel. But instead, because I'm a sensitive researcher of relationships,
I decided to go into the bathroom. I took the brush from her hair and
asked, "What's the matter, baby?" And she told me why she was sad. Now,
at that moment, I was building trust; I was there for her. I was
connecting with her rather than choosing to think only about what I
wanted. These are the moments, we've discovered, that build trust. One
such moment is not that important, but if you're always choosing to turn
away, then trust erodes in a relationship---very gradually, very slowly.

When we think about betrayal in terms of the marble jar metaphor, most
of us think of someone we trust doing something so terrible that it
forces us to grab the jar and dump out every single marble. What's the
worst betrayal of trust you can think of? He sleeps with my best friend.
She lies about where the money went. He/she chooses someone over me.
Someone uses my vulnerability against me (an act of emotional treason
that causes most of us to slam the entire jar to the ground rather than
just dumping the marbles). All terrible betrayals, definitely, but there
is a particular sort of betrayal that is more insidious and equally
corrosive to trust. In fact, this betrayal usually happens long before
the other ones. I'm talking about the betrayal of disengagement. Of not
caring. Of letting the connection go. Of not being willing to devote
time and effort to the relationship. The word betrayal evokes
experiences of cheating, lying, breaking a confidence, failing to defend
us to someone else who's gossiping about us, and not choosing us over
other people. These behaviors are certainly betrayals, but they're not
the only form of

betrayal. If I had to choose the form of betrayal that emerged most
frequently from my research and that was the most dangerous in terms of
corroding the trust connection, I would say disengagement. When the
people we love or with whom we have a deep connection stop caring, stop
paying attention, stop investing, and stop fighting for the
relationship, trust begins to slip away and hurt starts seeping in.
Disengagement triggers shame and our greatest fears---the fears of being
abandoned, unworthy, and unlovable. What can make this covert betrayal
so much more dangerous than something like a lie or an affair is that we
can't point to the source of our pain---there's no event, no obvious
evidence of brokenness. It can feel crazy-making. We may tell a
disengaged partner, "You don't seem to care anymore," but without
"evidence" of this, the response is "I'm home from work every night by
six P.M. I tuck in the kids. I'm taking the boys to Little League. What
do you want from me?" Or at work, we think, Why am I not getting
feedback? Tell me you love it! Tell me it sucks! Just tell me something
so I know you remember that I work here! With children, actions speak
louder than words. When we stop requesting invitations into their lives
by asking about their day, asking them to tell us about their favorite
songs, wondering how their friends are doing, then children feel pain
and fear (and not relief, despite how our teenagers may act). Because
they can't articulate how they feel about our disengagement when we stop
making an effort with them, they show us by acting out, thinking, This
will get their attention. Like trust, most experiences of betrayal
happen slowly, one marble at a time. In fact, the overt or "big"
betrayals that I mentioned before are more likely to happen after a
period of disengagement and slowly eroding trust. What I've learned
about trust professionally and what I've lived personally boils down to
this: Trust is a product of vulnerability that grows over time and
requires work, attention, and full engagement. Trust isn't a grand
gesture---it's a growing marble collection.

MYTH #4: WE CAN GO IT ALONE Going it alone is a value we hold in high
esteem in our culture, ironically even when it comes to cultivating
connection. I get the appeal; I have that rugged individualism in my
DNA. In fact, one of my very favorite
break-up-kick-ass-no-one-can-hurt-me songs is Whitesnake's "Here I Go
Again." If you're a person of a certain age, I'd put money down that
you've rolled down the window and defiantly sung: "And here I go again
on my own....Like a drifter I was born to walk alone...." If Whitesnake
isn't your cup of tea, there are bootstrapping anthems in every
imaginable genre. In reality, walking alone can feel miserable and
depressing, but we admire the strength it conveys, and going it alone is
revered in our culture. Well, as much as I love the idea of walking
alone down a lonely street of dreams, the vulnerability journey is not
the kind of journey we can make alone. We need support. We need folks
who will let us try on new ways of being without judging us. We need a
hand to pull us up off the ground when we get kicked down in the arena
(and if we live a courageous life, that will happen). Across the course
of my research, participants were very clear about their need for
support, encouragement, and sometimes professional help as they
reengaged with vulnerability and their emotional lives. Most of us are
good at giving help, but when it comes to vulnerability, we need to ask
for help too. In The Gifts of Imperfection, I write, "Until we can
receive with an open heart, we are never really giving with an open
heart. When we attach judgment to receiving help, we knowingly or
unknowingly attach judgment to giving help." We all need help. I know I
couldn't have done it without reinforcements that included my husband
Steve, a great therapist, a stack of books a mile high, and friends and
family members who were on a similar journey. Vulnerability begets
vulnerability; courage is contagious. There's actually some very
persuasive leadership research that supports the idea that asking for
support is critical, and that vulnerability and courage are contagious.
In a 2011 Harvard Business Review article, Peter Fuda and Richard Badham
use a series of metaphors to explore how leaders spark and sustain
change. One of the metaphors is the snowball. The snowball starts
rolling when a leader is willing to be vulnerable with his or her
subordinates. Their research shows that this

act of vulnerability is predictably perceived as courageous by team
members and inspires others to follow suit. Supporting the metaphor of
the snowball is the story of Clynton, the managing director of a large
German corporation who realized that his directive leadership style was
preventing senior managers from taking initiative. The researchers
explain, "He could have worked in private to change his behavior---but
instead he stood up at an annual meeting of his top sixty managers,
acknowledged his failings, and outlined both his personal and
organizational roles. He admitted that he didn't have all of the answers
and asked his team for help leading the company." Having studied the
transformation that followed this event, the researchers report that
Clynton's effectiveness surged, his team flourished, there were
increases in initiative and innovation, and his organization went on to
outperform much larger competitors. Similar to the story above, my
greatest personal and professional transformations happened when I
started asking hard questions about how my fear of being vulnerable was
holding me back and when I found the courage to share my struggles and
ask for help. After running from vulnerability, I found that learning
how to lean into the discomfort of uncertainty, risk, and emotional
exposure was a painful process. I did believe that I could opt out of
feeling vulnerable, so when it happened---when the phone rang with
unimaginable news; or when I was scared; or when I loved so fiercely
that rather than feeling gratitude and joy I could only prepare for
loss---I controlled things. I managed situations and micromanaged the
people around me. I performed until there was no energy left to feel. I
made what was uncertain certain, no matter what the cost. I stayed so
busy that the truth of my hurting and my fear could never catch up. I
looked brave on the outside and felt scared on the inside. Slowly I
learned that this shield was too heavy to lug around, and that the only
thing it really did was keep me from knowing myself and letting myself
be known. The shield required that I stay small and quiet behind it so
as not to draw attention to my imperfections and vulnerabilities. It was
exhausting. I remember a very tender moment from that year, when Steve
and I were lying on the floor watching Ellen do a series of crazy,
arm-flinging, and knee-slapping dances and tumbles. I looked at Steve
and said, "Isn't it funny how I just love her that much more for being
so vulnerable and uninhibited and goofy. I could never do that. Can you
imagine knowing that you're loved like that?" Steve looked at me and
said, "I love you

exactly like that." Honestly, as someone who rarely risked vulnerability
and always steered clear of silly or goofy, it never dawned on me that
adults could love each other like that; that I could be loved for my
vulnerabilities, not despite them. All of the love and support I
received---especially from Steve and Diana, my therapist---allowed me to
slowly begin to take more risks, to show up at work and at home in new
ways. I took more chances and tried new things, like storytelling. I
learned how to set new boundaries and say no, even when I was terrified
that I was going to piss off a friend or squander a professional
opportunity that I'd regret. So far, I haven't regretted a single no.
Going back to Roosevelt's "Man in the Arena" speech, I also learned that
the people who love me, the people I really depend on, were never the
critics who were pointing at me while I stumbled. They weren't in the
bleachers at all. They were with me in the arena. Fighting for me and
with me. Nothing has transformed my life more than realizing that it's a
waste of time to evaluate my worthiness by weighing the reaction of the
people in the stands. The people who love me and will be there
regardless of the outcome are within arm's reach. This realization
changed everything. That's the wife and mother and friend that I now
strive to be. I want our home to be a place where we can be our bravest
selves and our most fearful selves. Where we practice difficult
conversations and share our shaming moments from school and work. I want
to look at Steve and my kids and say, "I'm with you. In the arena. And
when we fail, we'll fail together, while daring greatly." We simply
can't learn to be more vulnerable and courageous on our own. Sometimes
our first and greatest dare is asking for support.

CHAPTER 3 UNDERSTANDING AND COMBATING SHAME (AKA, GREMLIN NINJA WARRIOR
TRAINING) Shame derives its power from being unspeakable. That's why it
loves perfectionists---it's so easy to keep us quiet. If we cultivate
enough awareness about shame to name it and speak to it, we've basically
cut it off at the knees. Shame hates having words wrapped around it. If
we speak shame, it begins to wither. Just the way exposure to light was
deadly for the gremlins, language and story bring light to shame and
destroy it.

VULNERABILITY AND SHAME IN ONE BOOK! ARE YOU TRYING TO KILL US? OR
DEFENSE AGAINST THE DARK ARTS Last year, after I had finished a talk on
Wholehearted families, a man approached me on the stage. He stuck out
his hand and said, "I just want to say thank you." I shook his hand and
offered a kind smile as he looked down at the floor. I could tell that
he was fighting back tears. He took a deep breath and said, "I have to
tell you that I really didn't want to come tonight. I tried to get out
of it, but my wife made me." I chuckled. "Yeah, I get that a lot." "I
couldn't understand why she was so excited. I told her that I couldn't
think of a worse way to spend a Thursday night than listening to a shame
researcher. She said that it was really important to her and I had to
stop complaining, otherwise I'd ruin it for her." He paused for a few
seconds, then surprised me by asking, "Are you a Harry Potter fan?" I
stalled for a second while I tried to connect everything he was saying.
When I finally gave up, I answered his question. "Yes, I am a huge fan.
I've read all of the books several times, and I've watched and rewatched
the movies. I'm hardcore. Why?" He looked a little embarrassed before he
explained, "Well, I didn't know anything about you, and as my dread
built up about coming tonight, I kept picturing you as Snape. I thought
you'd be scary. I thought you'd be wearing all black and that you'd talk
slowly and in a deep, haunting voice---like the world was ending." I
laughed so hard that I almost spit out the water I was drinking. "I love
Snape! I'm not sure that I want to look like him, but he's my favorite
character." I immediately glanced over at my purse, which was still
tucked under the bottom of the podium. In it my keys were (and are)
attached to my beloved LEGO Snape keychain. We shared a laugh about his
Snape projection, then things got more serious. "What you said really
made sense to me. Especially the part about us being so afraid of the
dark stuff. What's the quote that you shared with the picture of the
twinkle lights?"

"Oh, the twinkle light quote. It's one of my favorites: 'Only when we're
brave enough to explore the darkness will we discover the infinite power
of our light.'" He nodded. "Yes! That one! I'm sure that's why I didn't
want to come. It's crazy how much energy we spend trying to avoid these
hard topics when they're really the only ones that can set us free. I
was shamed a lot growing up and I don't want to do that to my three
kids. I want them to know they're enough. I don't want them to be afraid
to talk about the hard shit with us. I want them to be shame resilient."
At this point we were both teary-eyed. I reached up and did that awkward
"are you a hugger?" gesture, then I gave him a big ol' hug. After we let
go of our this-stuff-is-hard-but-we-can-do-it embrace, he looked at me
and said, "I'm pretty bad at vulnerability, but I'm really good at
shame. Is getting past shame necessary for getting to vulnerability?"
"Yes. Shame resilience is key to embracing our vulnerability. We can't
let ourselves be seen if we're terrified by what people might think.
Often 'not being good at vulnerability' means that we're damn good at
shame." As I stumbled for better language to explain how shame stops us
from being vulnerable and connected, I remembered my very favorite
exchange from Harry Potter. "Do you remember when Harry was worried that
he might be bad because he was angry all of the time and had dark
feelings?" He enthusiastically answered, "Yes! Of course! The
conversation with Sirius Black! That's the moral of the entire story."
"Exactly! Sirius told Harry to listen to him very carefully, then he
said, 'You're not a bad person. You're a very good person who bad things
have happened to. Besides, the world isn't split into good people and
Death Eaters. We've all got both light and dark inside us. What matters
is the part we choose to act on. That's who we really are.'" "I get it,"
he sighed. "We all have shame. We all have good and bad, dark and light,
inside of us. But if we don't come to terms with our shame, our
struggles, we start believing that there's something wrong with
us---that we're bad, flawed, not good enough---and even worse, we start
acting on those beliefs. If we want to be fully engaged, to be
connected, we have to be vulnerable. In order to be vulnerable, we need
to develop resilience to shame." At this point, his wife was waiting by
the stage stairs. He thanked me, gave me another quick hug, and walked
away. Just as he reached the

bottom of the stairs, he turned back and said, "You may not be Snape,
but you're a damn good Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher!" It was a
conversation and a moment that I'll never forget. On the way home that
night, I thought about a line from one of the books where Harry Potter
was detailing the fate of several unsuccessful Defense Against the Dark
Arts teachers: "One sacked, one dead, one lost his memory, and one was
locked in a trunk for nine months." I remember thinking, "Sounds about
right." I won't go on with the Harry Potter metaphor because I'm sure
there's one or two of you out there who haven't had the chance to read
the books or see the films, but I have to say that J. K. Rowling's
incredible imagination has made teaching shame a lot easier and way more
fun. The allegorical power of Harry Potter lends itself to talking about
everything from the struggle between light and dark to the hero's
journey and why vulnerability and love are the truest marks of courage.
Having spent so long trying to describe and define unnamed emotions and
experiences, I find that Harry Potter has given me a treasure trove of
characters, monsters, and images to use in my teaching. For that, I'll
be forever grateful. I didn't set out to become a wild-eyed shame
evangelist or a Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher, but after
spending the past decade studying the corrosive effect that shame has on
how we live, love, parent, work, and lead, I've found myself practically
screaming from the top of my lungs, "Yes, shame is tough to talk about.
But the conversation isn't nearly as dangerous as what we're creating
with our silence! We all experience shame. We're all afraid to talk
about it. And, the less we talk about it, the more we have it." We have
to be vulnerable if we want more courage; if we want to dare greatly.
But as I told my Harry Potter friend, how can we let ourselves be seen
if shame has us terrified of what people might think? Let me give you an
example. You've designed a product or written an article or created a
piece of art that you want to share with a group of friends. Sharing
something that you've created is a vulnerable but essential part of
engaged and Wholehearted living. It's the epitome of daring greatly. But
because of how you were raised or how you approach the world, you've
knowingly or unknowingly attached your self-worth to how your product or
art is received. In simple terms, if they love it, you're worthy; if
they don't, you're worthless. One of two things happens at this point in
the process:

1. Once you realize that your self-worth is hitched to what you've
produced or created, it's unlikely that you'll share it, or if you do,
you'll strip away a layer or two of the juiciest creativity and
innovation to make the revealing less risky. There's too much on the
line to just put your wildest creations out there. 2. If you do share it
in its most creative form and the reception doesn't meet your
expectations, you're crushed. Your offering is no good and you're no
good. The chances of soliciting feedback, reengaging, and going back to
the drawing board are slim. You shut down. Shame tells you that you
shouldn't have even tried. Shame tells you that you're not good enough
and you should have known better. If you're wondering what happens if
you attach your self-worth to your art or your product and people love
it, let me answer that from personal and professional experience. You're
in even deeper trouble. Everything shame needs to hijack and control
your life is in place. You've handed over your self-worth to what people
think. It's panned out a couple of times, but now it feels a lot like
Hotel California: You can check in, but you can never leave. You're
officially a prisoner of "pleasing, performing, and perfecting." With an
awareness of shame and strong shame resilience skills, this scenario is
completely different. You still want folks to like, respect, and even
admire what you've created, but your self-worth is not on the table. You
know that you are far more than a painting, an innovative idea, an
effective pitch, a good sermon, or a high Amazon.com ranking. Yes, it
will be disappointing and difficult if your friends or colleagues don't
share your enthusiasm, or if things don't go well, but this effort is
about what you do, not who you are. Regardless of the outcome, you've
already dared greatly, and that's totally aligned with your values; with
who you want to be. When our self-worth isn't on the line, we are far
more willing to be courageous and risk sharing our raw talents and
gifts. From my research with families, schools, and organizations, it's
clear that shame-resilient cultures nurture folks who are much more open
to soliciting, accepting, and incorporating feedback. These cultures
also nurture engaged, tenacious people who expect to have to try and try
again to get it right--- people who are much more willing to get
innovative and creative in their efforts.

A sense of worthiness inspires us to be vulnerable, share openly, and
persevere. Shame keeps us small, resentful, and afraid. In shame-prone
cultures, where parents, leaders, and administrators consciously or
unconsciously encourage people to connect their self-worth to what they
produce, I see disengagement, blame, gossip, stagnation, favoritism, and
a total dearth of creativity and innovation. Peter Sheahan is an author,
speaker, and CEO of ChangeLabs™, a global consultancy building and
delivering large-scale behavioral change projects for clients such as
Apple and IBM. Pete and I had the chance to work together last summer
and I think his perspective on shame is spot on. Pete says, The secret
killer of innovation is shame. You can't measure it, but it is there.
Every time someone holds back on a new idea, fails to give their manager
much needed feedback, and is afraid to speak up in front of a client you
can be sure shame played a part. That deep fear we all have of being
wrong, of being belittled and of feeling less than, is what stops us
taking the very risks required to move our companies forward. If you
want a culture of creativity and innovation, where sensible risks are
embraced on both a market and individual level, start by developing the
ability of managers to cultivate an openness to vulnerability in their
teams. And this, paradoxically perhaps, requires first that they are
vulnerable themselves. This notion that the leader needs to be "in
charge" and to "know all the answers" is both dated and destructive. Its
impact on others is the sense that they know less, and that they are
less than. A recipe for risk aversion if ever I have heard it. Shame
becomes fear. Fear leads to risk aversion. Risk aversion kills
innovation.

The bottom line is that daring greatly requires worthiness. Shame sends
the gremlins to fill our heads with completely different messages of:
Dare not! You're not good enough! Don't you dare get too big for your
britches!

The term gremlin---as we are most familiar with it---comes from Steven
Spielberg's 1984 horror comedy Gremlins. Gremlins are those evil little
green tricksters who wreak havoc everywhere they go. They're
manipulative monsters that derive pleasure from destruction. In many
circles, including my own, the word gremlin has become synonymous with
"shame tape." For example, I was recently struggling to finish an
article. I called a good friend to tell her about my writer's block, and
she immediately responded by asking, "What are the gremlins saying?"
This is a very effective way of asking about the shame tapes---the
messages of self-doubt and self-criticism that we carry around in our
heads. My answer was "There are a few of them. One's saying that my
writing sucks and that no one cares about these topics. Another one's
telling me that I'm going to get criticized and I'll deserve it. And the
big one keeps saying, 'Real writers don't struggle like this. Real
writers don't dangle their modifiers.'"

Understanding our shame tapes or gremlins is critical to overcoming
shame because we can't always point to a certain moment or a specific
put-down at the hands of another person. Sometimes shame is the result
of us playing the old recordings that were programmed when we were
children or simply absorbed from the culture. My good friend and
colleague Robert Hilliker says, "Shame started as a two-person
experience, but as I got older I learned how to do shame all by myself."
Sometimes when we dare to walk into the arena the greatest critic we
face is ourselves. Shame derives its power from being unspeakable.
That's why it loves perfectionists---it's so easy to keep us quiet. If
we cultivate enough awareness about shame to name it and speak to it,
we've basically cut it off at the knees. Shame hates having words
wrapped around it. If we speak shame, it begins to wither. Just the way
exposure to light was deadly for the gremlins, language and story bring
light to shame and destroy it. Just like Roosevelt advised, when we dare
greatly we will err and we will come up short again and again. There
will be failures and mistakes and criticism. If we want to be able to
move through the difficult disappointments, the hurt feelings, and the
heartbreaks that are inevitable in a fully lived life, we can't equate
defeat with being unworthy of love, belonging, and joy. If we do, we'll
never show up and try again. Shame hangs out in the parking lot of the
arena, waiting for us to come out defeated and determined to never take
risks. It laughs and says, "I told you this was a mistake. I knew you
weren't \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ enough." Shame resilience is the ability to
say, "This hurts. This is disappointing, maybe even devastating. But
success and recognition and approval are not the values that drive me.
My value is courage and I was just courageous. You can move on, shame."
So, I'm not trying to kill you. I'm just saying, "We can't embrace
vulnerability if shame is suffocating our sense of worthiness and
connection." Strap yourself in, and let's get our heads and hearts
around this experience called shame, so we can get about the business of
truly living.

WHAT IS SHAME AND WHY IS IT SO HARD TO TALK ABOUT IT? (If you're pretty
sure that shame doesn't apply to you, keep reading; I'll clear that up
in the next couple of pages.) I start every talk, article, and chapter
on shame with the Shame 1-2-3s, or the first three things that you need
to know about shame, so you'll keep listening: 1. We all have it. Shame
is universal and one of the most primitive human emotions that we
experience. The only people who don't experience shame lack the capacity
for empathy and human connection. Here's your choice: Fess up to
experiencing shame or admit that you're a sociopath. Quick note: This is
the only time that shame seems like a good option. 2. We're all afraid
to talk about shame. 3. The less we talk about shame, the more control
it has over our lives. There are a couple of very helpful ways to think
about shame. First, shame is the fear of disconnection. We are
psychologically, emotionally, cognitively, and spiritually hardwired for
connection, love, and belonging. Connection, along with love and
belonging (two expressions of connection), is why we are here, and it is
what gives purpose and meaning to our lives. Shame is the fear of
disconnection---it's the fear that something we've done or failed to do,
an ideal that we've not lived up to, or a goal that we've not
accomplished makes us unworthy of connection. I'm not worthy or good
enough for love, belonging, or connection. I'm unlovable. I don't
belong. Here's the definition of shame that emerged from my research:
Shame is the intensely painful feeling or experience of believing that
we are flawed and therefore unworthy of love and belonging. People often
want to believe that shame is reserved for people who have survived an
unspeakable trauma, but this is not true. Shame is something we all
experience. And while it feels as if shame hides in our darkest corners,
it actually tends to lurk in all of the familiar places. Twelve "shame
categories" have emerged from my research:

Appearance and body image Money and work Motherhood/fatherhood Family
Parenting Mental and physical health Addiction Sex Aging Religion
Surviving trauma Being stereotyped or labeled Here are some of the
responses we received when we asked people for an example of shame:
Shame is getting laid off and having to tell my pregnant wife. Shame is
having someone ask me, "When are you due?" when I'm not pregnant. Shame
is hiding the fact that I'm in recovery. Shame is raging at my kids.
Shame is bankruptcy. Shame is my boss calling me an idiot in front of
the client. Shame is not making partner. Shame is my husband leaving me
for my next-door neighbor. Shame is my wife asking me for a divorce and
telling me that she wants children, but not with me. Shame is my DUI.
Shame is infertility. Shame is telling my fiancé that my dad lives in
France when in fact he's in prison. Shame is Internet porn. Shame is
flunking out of school. Twice. Shame is hearing my parents fight through
the walls and wondering if I'm the only one who feels this afraid. Shame
is real pain. The importance of social acceptance and connection is
reinforced by our brain chemistry, and the pain that results from social
rejection and disconnection is real pain. In a 2011 study

funded by the National Institute of Mental Health and by the National
Institute on Drug Abuse, researchers found that, as far as the brain is
concerned, physical pain and intense experiences of social rejection
hurt in the same way. So when I define shame as an intensely "painful"
experience, I'm not kidding. Neuroscience advances confirm what we've
known all along: Emotions can hurt and cause pain. And just as we often
struggle to define physical pain, describing emotional pain is
difficult. Shame is particularly hard because it hates having words
wrapped around it. It hates being spoken.

UNTANGLING SHAME, HUMILIATION, AND EMBARRASSMENT

GUILT,

In fact, as we work to understand shame, one of the simpler reasons that
shame is so difficult to talk about is vocabulary. We often use the
terms embarrassment, guilt, humiliation, and shame interchangeably. It
might seem overly picky to stress the importance of using the
appropriate term to describe an experience or emotion; however, it is
much more than semantics. How we experience these different emotions
comes down to self-talk. How do we talk to ourselves about what's
happening? The best place to start examining self-talk and untangling
these four distinct emotions is with shame and guilt. The majority of
shame researchers and clinicians agree that the difference between shame
and guilt is best understood as the difference between "I am bad" and "I
did something bad." Guilt = I did something bad. Shame = I am bad. For
example, let's say that you forgot that you made plans to meet a friend
at noon for lunch. At 12:15 P.M., your friend calls from the restaurant
to make sure you're okay. If your self-talk is "I'm such an idiot. I'm a
terrible friend and a total loser"---that's shame. If, on the other
hand, your self-talk is "I can't believe I did that. What a crappy thing
to do"---that's guilt. Here's what's interesting---especially for those
who automatically think, You should feel like a terrible friend! or A
little shame will help you keep your act together next time. When we
feel shame, we are most likely to protect ourselves by blaming something
or someone, rationalizing our lapse, offering a disingenuous apology, or
hiding out. Rather than apologizing, we blame our friend and rationalize
forgetting: "I told you I was really busy. This wasn't a good day for
me." Or we apologize halfheartedly and think to ourselves, Whatever. If
she knew how busy I am, she'd be apologizing. Or we see who is calling
and don't answer the phone at all, and then when we finally can't stop
dodging our friend, we lie: "Didn't you get my e-mail? I canceled in the
morning. You should check your spam folder." When we apologize for
something we've done, make amends, or change a behavior that doesn't
align with our values, guilt---not shame---

is most often the driving force. We feel guilty when we hold up
something we've done or failed to do against our values and find they
don't match up. It's an uncomfortable feeling, but one that's helpful.
The psychological discomfort, something similar to cognitive dissonance,
is what motivates meaningful change. Guilt is just as powerful as shame,
but its influence is positive, while shame's is destructive. In fact, in
my research I found that shame corrodes the very part of us that
believes we can change and do better. We live in a world where most
people still subscribe to the belief that shame is a good tool for
keeping people in line. Not only is this wrong, but it's dangerous.
Shame is highly correlated with addiction, violence, aggression,
depression, eating disorders, and bullying. Researchers don't find shame
correlated with positive outcomes at all---there are no data to support
that shame is a helpful compass for good behavior. In fact, shame is
much more likely to be the cause of destructive and hurtful behaviors
than it is to be the solution. Again, it is human nature to want to feel
worthy of love and belonging. When we experience shame, we feel
disconnected and desperate for worthiness. When we're hurting, either
full of shame or even just feeling the fear of shame, we are more likely
to engage in selfdestructive behaviors and to attack or shame others. In
the chapters on parenting, leadership, and education, we'll explore how
shame erodes our courage and fuels disengagement, and what we can do to
cultivate cultures of worthiness, vulnerability, and shame resilience.
Humiliation is another word that we often confuse with shame. Donald
Klein captures the difference between shame and humiliation when he
writes, "People believe they deserve their shame; they do not believe
they deserve their humiliation." If John is in a meeting with his
colleagues and his boss, and his boss calls him a loser because of his
inability to close a sale, John will probably experience that as either
shame or humiliation. If John's self-talk is "God, I am a loser. I'm a
failure"---that's shame. If his self-talk is "Man, my boss is so out of
control. This is ridiculous. I don't deserve this"---that's humiliation.
Humiliation feels terrible and makes for a miserable work or home
environment---and if it's ongoing, it can certainly become shame if we
start to buy into the messaging. It is, however, still better than
shame. Rather than internalizing the "loser" comment, John's saying to
himself, "This isn't about me." When we do that, it's less likely that
we'll shut down, act out, or fight back. We stay aligned with our values
while trying to solve the problem.

Embarrassment is the least serious of the four emotions. It's normally
fleeting and it can eventually be funny. The hallmark of embarrassment
is that when we do something embarrassing, we don't feel alone. We know
other folks have done the same thing and, like a blush, it will pass
rather than define us. Getting familiar with the language is an
important start to understanding shame. It is part of the first element
of what I call shame resilience.

I GET IT. SHAME IS BAD. SO WHAT DO WE DO ABOUT IT? The answer is shame
resilience. Note that shame resistance is not possible. As long as we
care about connection, the fear of disconnection will always be a
powerful force in our lives, and the pain caused by shame will always be
real. But here's the great news. In all my studies, I've found that men
and women with high levels of shame resilience have four things in
common---I call them the elements of shame resilience. Learning to put
these elements into action is what I call "Gremlin Ninja Warrior
training." We'll go through each of the four elements, but first I want
to explain what I mean by shame resilience. I mean the ability to
practice authenticity when we experience shame, to move through the
experience without sacrificing our values, and to come out on the other
side of the shame experience with more courage, compassion, and
connection than we had going into it. Shame resilience is about moving
from shame to empathy---the real antidote to shame. If we can share our
story with someone who responds with empathy and understanding, shame
can't survive. Self-compassion is also critically important, but because
shame is a social concept---it happens between people---it also heals
best between people. A social wound needs a social balm, and empathy is
that balm. Self-compassion is key because when we're able to be gentle
with ourselves in the midst of shame, we're more likely to reach out,
connect, and experience empathy. To get to empathy, we have to first
know what we're dealing with. Here are the four elements of shame
resilience---the steps don't always happen in this order, but they
always ultimately lead us to empathy and healing: 1. Recognizing Shame
and Understanding Its Triggers. Shame is biology and biography. Can you
physically recognize when you're in the grips of shame, feel your way
through it, and figure out what messages and expectations triggered it?
2. Practicing Critical Awareness. Can you reality-check the messages and
expectations that are driving your shame? Are they realistic?
Attainable? Are they what you want to be or what you think others
need/want from you?

3. Reaching Out. Are you owning and sharing your story? We can't
experience empathy if we're not connecting. 4. Speaking Shame. Are you
talking about how you feel and asking for what you need when you feel
shame? Shame resilience is a strategy for protecting connection---our
connection with ourselves and our connections with the people we care
about. But resilience requires cognition, or thinking, and that's where
shame has a huge advantage. When shame descends, we almost always are
hijacked by the limbic system. In other words, the prefrontal cortex,
where we do all of our thinking and analyzing and strategizing, gives
way to that primitive fight-or-flight part of our brain. In his book
Incognito, neuroscientist David Eagleman describes the brain as a "team
of rivals." He writes, "There is an ongoing conversation among the
different factions in your brain, each competing to control the single
output channel of your behavior." He lays out the dominant twoparty
system of reason and emotion: "The rational system is the one that cares
about analysis of things in the outside world, while the emotional
system monitors the internal state and worries whether things are good
or bad." Eagleman makes the case that because both parties are battling
to control one output---behavior---emotions can tip the balance of
decision making. I would say that's definitely true when the emotion is
shame. Our fight or flight strategies are effective for survival, not
for reasoning or connection. And the pain of shame is enough to trigger
that survival part of our brain that runs, hides, or comes out swinging.
In fact, when I asked the research participants how they normally
responded to shame before they started working on shame resilience, I
heard many comments like these: "When I feel shame, I'm like a crazy
person. I do stuff and say stuff I would normally never do or say."
"Sometimes I just wish I could make other people feel as bad as I do. I
just want to lash out and scream at everyone." "I get desperate when I
feel shame. Like I have nowhere to turn--- no one to talk to." "When I
feel ashamed, I check out mentally and emotionally. Even with my
family." "Shame makes you feel estranged from the world. I hide."

"One time I stopped to get gas and my credit card was declined. The guy
gave me a really hard time. As I pulled out of the station, my
three-year-old son started crying. I just started screaming, 'Shut
up...shut up...shut up!' I was so ashamed about my card. I went nuts.
Then I was ashamed that I yelled at my son." When it comes to
understanding how we defend ourselves against shame, I turn to the
wonderful research from the Stone Center at Wellesley. Dr. Linda
Hartling, a former relational-cultural theorist at the Stone Center and
now the director of Human Dignity and Humiliation Studies, uses the late
Karen Horney's work on "moving toward, moving against, and moving away"
to outline the strategies of disconnection we use to deal with shame.
According to Dr. Hartling, in order to deal with shame, some of us move
away by withdrawing, hiding, silencing ourselves, and keeping secrets.
Some of us move toward by seeking to appease and please. And some of us
move against by trying to gain power over others, by being aggressive,
and by using shame to fight shame (like sending really mean e-mails).
Most of us use all of these---at different times with different folks
for different reasons. Yet all of these strategies move us away from
connection---they are strategies for disconnecting from the pain of
shame. Here's a story about one of my own shame experiences that brings
life to all of these concepts. It's not one of my best moments, but it's
a good example of why it's important to cultivate and practice shame
resilience if we don't want to heap even more shame on top of a painful
situation. First, let me start with a little backstory. Turning down
speaking invitations is a vulnerable process for me. Years of pleasing
and perfecting have left me feeling less than comfortable with
disappointing people---the "good girl" in me hates letting people down.
The gremlins whisper, "They'll think you're ungrateful" and "Don't be
selfish." I also struggle with the fear that if I say no everyone is
going to stop asking. This is when the gremlins say, "You want more time
to rest? Be careful what you wish for---this work that you love could
all go away." My new commitment to setting boundaries comes from the
twelve years I've spent studying Wholeheartedness and what it takes to
make the journey from "What will people think?" to "I am enough." The
most connected and compassionate people of those I've interviewed set
and respect boundaries. I don't just want to research and travel all of
the time talking about being Wholehearted; I want to live it. That means
that I

turn down about 80 percent of the speaking requests that I receive. I
say yes when it works with my family calendar, my research commitments,
and my life. Well, last year I received an e-mail from a man who was
really angry with me because I wasn't able to speak at an event that he
was hosting. I turned down the invitation because it conflicted with a
family birthday. The e-mail was mean-spirited and jam-packed with
personal attacks. My gremlins were having a field day! Rather than
replying, I decided to forward it to my husband along with a little note
telling him exactly what I thought about this guy and his email. I
needed to discharge my shame and anger. Trust me, it was not "good girl"
e-mail. I can neither confirm nor deny using the word horseshit. Twice.
I hit Reply instead of Forward. The second my Mac laptop made the
airplane swooshing sound that it makes when you hit the Send button, I
screamed, "Come back! Please come back!" I was still staring at the
screen, totally immobilized by shame layered on shame, when the man
fired back a response along the lines of "Aha! I knew it! You are a
horrible person. You're not Wholehearted. You suck." The shame attack
was already in full swing. My mouth was dry, time was slowing down, and
I was seeing tunnel vision. I struggled to swallow as the gremlins
started whispering: "You do suck!" "How could you be so stupid?" They
always know exactly what to say. As soon as I could catch my breath, I
started murmuring, "Pain, pain, pain, pain, pain..." This strategy is
the brainchild of Caroline, a woman whom I interviewed early in my
research and then a couple of years later, after she had been practicing
shame resilience. Caroline told me that whenever she felt shame, she'd
immediately start repeating the word pain aloud. "Pain, pain, pain,
pain, pain, pain." She told me, "I'm sure it sounds crazy, and I
probably look like a nut, but for some reason it really works." Of
course it works! It's a brilliant way to get out of lizard-brain
survival mode and pull that prefrontal cortex back online. After one or
two minutes of "pain" chanting, I took a deep breath and tried to focus
myself. I thought, "Okay. Shame attack. I'm okay. What's next? I can do
this." I recognized the physical symptoms which allowed me to reboot my
thinking brain and remember the three ninja-warrior gremlin moves that

are the most effective path to shame resilience for me. And fortunately
I've been practicing these moves long enough to know that they are
totally counterintuitive and I have to trust the process: 1. Practice
courage and reach out! Yes, I want to hide, but the way to fight shame
and to honor who we are is by sharing our experience with someone who
has earned the right to hear it---someone who loves us, not despite our
vulnerabilities, but because of them. 2. Talk to myself the way I would
talk to someone I really love and whom I'm trying to comfort in the
midst of a meltdown: You're okay. You're human---we all make mistakes.
I've got your back. Normally during a shame attack we talk to ourselves
in ways we would NEVER talk to people we love and respect. 3. Own the
story! Don't bury it and let it fester or define me. I often say this
aloud: "If you own this story you get to write the ending. If you own
this story you get to write the ending." When we bury the story we
forever stay the subject of the story. If we own the story we get to
narrate the ending. As Carl Jung said, "I am not what has happened to
me. I am what I choose to become." Even though I knew that the most
dangerous thing to do after a shaming experience is to hide or bury our
story, I was afraid to make the call. But I did. I called both my
husband, Steve, and my good friend Karen. They gave me what I needed the
most: empathy, the best reminder that we're not alone. Rather than
judgment (which exacerbates shame), empathy conveys a simple
acknowledgment, "You're not alone." Empathy is connection; it's a ladder
out of the shame hole. Not only did Steve and Karen help me climb out by
listening and loving me, but they made themselves vulnerable by sharing
that they, too, had spent some time in the same hole. Empathy doesn't
require that we have the exact same experiences as the person sharing
their story with us. Neither Karen nor Steve had sent an e-mail like
that, but they were both intimately familiar with the imposter gremlins
and the "getting caught" feeling and the "Oh, shit!" experience. Empathy
is connecting with the emotion that someone is experiencing, not the
event or the circumstance. Shame dissipated the minute I realized that I
wasn't alone---that my experience was human.

Interestingly, Steve and Karen's responses were totally different. Steve
was more serious and more "Oh, man. I know that feeling!" Karen took an
approach that had me laughing in about thirty seconds. What the
responses shared in common was the power of "me too." Empathy is a
strange and powerful thing. There is no script. There is no right way or
wrong way to do it. It's simply listening, holding space, withholding
judgment, emotionally connecting, and communicating that incredibly
healing message of "You're not alone." My conversations with Steve and
Karen allowed me to move through shame, get back on my emotional feet,
and respond to the man's "I knew it!" e-mail from a place of
authenticity and self-worth. I owned my part in the angry exchange and
apologized for my inappropriate language. I also set clear boundaries
around future communications. I never heard from him again. Shame
thrives on secret keeping, and when it comes to secrets, there's some
serious science behind the twelve-step program saying, "You're only as
sick as your secrets." In a pioneering study, psychologist and
University of Texas professor James Pennebaker and his colleagues
studied what happened when trauma survivors---specifically rape and
incest survivors---kept their experiences secret. The research team
found that the act of not discussing a traumatic event or confiding it
to another person could be more damaging than the actual event.
Conversely, when people shared their stories and experiences, their
physical health improved, their doctor's visits decreased, and they
showed significant decreases in their stress hormones. Since his early
work on the effects of secret keeping, Pennebaker has focused much of
his research on the healing power of expressive writing. In his book
Writing to Heal, Pennebaker writes, "Since the mid-1980s an increasing
number of studies have focused on the value of expressive writing as a
way to bring about healing. The evidence is mounting that the act of
writing about traumatic experience for as little as fifteen or twenty
minutes a day for three or four days can produce measurable changes in
physical and mental health. Emotional writing can also affect people's
sleep habits, work efficiency, and how they connect with others." Shame
resilience is a practice and like Pennebaker, I think writing about our
shame experiences is an incredibly powerful component of the practice.
It takes time to cultivate that practice and courage to reach out and
talk about hard things. If you're reading this and thinking, I'd like to
be able to have these conversations with my partner or my friend or my

child---do it! If you're reading it and thinking, Shame has become a
management style around here, and it's no wonder that folks are
disengaged---we should talk about this---do it! You don't need to figure
it out first or master the information before you engage in
conversation. You just have to say, "I've been reading a book and
there's a chapter about shame. I'd love to talk about it with you. If I
lend you my book, will you take a look?" The next section is about men,
women, shame, and worthiness. I think you'll want to lend them this
chapter as well. What I learned about men and shame changed my life.

WEBS AND BOXES: HOW MEN AND WOMEN EXPERIENCE SHAME DIFFERENTLY For the
first four years of my study on shame, I focused solely on women. At
that time many researchers believed, and some today still believe, that
men and women's experiences of shame are different. I was concerned that
if I combined the data from men and women, I'd miss some of the
important nuances of their experiences. That I opted to just interview
women, I confess, was partially due to my mind-set that when it came to
worthiness, women were the ones struggling. At some level, I also think
my resistance was based on an intuitive sense that interviewing men
would be like stumbling into a new and strange world. As it turns out,
it was definitely a strange new world---a world of unspoken hurt. I got
a glimpse into that world in 2005 at the end of one of my lectures. A
tall, thin man who I'd guess was in his early sixties followed his wife
to the front of the room. He was wearing a yellow Izod golf sweater---an
image I'll never forget. I spoke with his wife for a few minutes as I
signed a stack of books that she'd bought for herself and her daughters.
As she started to walk away, her husband turned to her and said, "I'll
be right there---give me a minute." She clearly didn't want him to stay
and talk to me. She tried coaxing him with a couple of "C'mons," but he
didn't budge. I, of course, was thinking, Go with her, dude. You're
scaring me. After a few unsuccessful attempts, she walked toward the
back of the room, and he turned to face me at my book-signing table. It
started innocently enough. "I like what you have to say about shame," he
told me. "It's interesting." I thanked him and waited---I could tell
there was more coming. He leaned in closer and asked, "I'm curious. What
about men and shame? What have you learned about us?" I felt instant
relief. This wasn't going to take long because I didn't know much. I
explained, "I haven't done many interviews with men. I just study
women." He nodded and said, "Well. That's convenient." I felt the hair
on the back of my neck stand up in defense. I forced a smile and asked,
"Why convenient?" in the very high voice that I use

when I'm uncomfortable. He replied by asking me if I really wanted to
know. I told him yes, which was a half-truth. I was on my guard. Then
his eyes welled up with tears. He said, "We have shame. Deep shame. But
when we reach out and share our stories, we get the emotional shit beat
out of us." I struggled to maintain eye contact with him. His raw pain
had touched me, but I was still trying to protect myself. Just as I was
about to make a comment about how hard men are on each other, he said,
"Before you say anything about those mean coaches, bosses, brothers, and
fathers being the only ones..." He pointed toward the back of the room
where his wife was standing and said, "My wife and daughters---the ones
you signed all of those books for---they'd rather see me die on top of
my white horse than watch me fall off. You say you want us to be
vulnerable and real, but c'mon. You can't stand it. It makes you sick to
see us like that." Holding my breath, I had this very visceral reaction
to what he was saying. It hit me the way only truth can. He let out a
long sigh, and as quickly as he had begun, he said, "That's all I wanted
to say. Thanks for listening." Then he just walked away. I had spent
years researching women and hearing their stories of struggle. In that
moment, I realized that men have their own stories and that if we're
going to find our way out of shame, it will be together. So, this
section is about what I've learned about women, men, how we hurt each
other, and how we need each other to heal. What I've come to believe
about men and women now that I've studied both is that men and women are
equally affected by shame. The messages and expectations that fuel shame
are most definitely organized by gender, but the experience of shame is
universal and deeply human.

WOMEN AND THE SHAME WEB When I asked women to share their definitions or
experiences of shame, here's what I heard: Look perfect. Do perfect. Be
perfect. Anything less than that is shaming. Being judged by other
mothers. Being exposed---the flawed parts of yourself that you want to
hide from everyone are revealed. No matter what I achieve or how far
I've come, where I come from and what I've survived will always keep me
from feeling like I'm good enough. Even though everyone knows that
there's no way to do it all, everyone still expects it. Shame is when
you can't pull off looking like it's under control. Never enough at
home. Never enough at work. Never enough in bed. Never enough with my
parents. Shame is never enough. No seat at the cool table. The pretty
girls are laughing. If you recall the twelve shame categories
(appearance and body image, money and work, motherhood/fatherhood,
family, parenting, mental and physical health, addiction, sex, aging,
religion, surviving trauma, and being stereotyped or labeled), the
primary trigger for women, in terms of its power and universality, is
the first one: how we look. Still. After all of the
consciousness-raising and critical awareness, we still feel the most
shame about not being thin, young, and beautiful enough. Interestingly,
in terms of shame triggers for women, motherhood is a close second. And
(bonus!) you don't have to be a mother to experience mother shame.
Society views womanhood and motherhood as inextricably bound; therefore
our value as women is often determined by where we are in relation to
our roles as mothers or potential mothers. Women are constantly asked
why they haven't married or, if they're married, why they haven't had
children. Even women who are married and have one child are often asked
why they haven't had a second child. You've had your kids too far apart?
"What were you thinking?" Too close? "Why? That's so unfair to the
kids." If you're working outside the home, the first question is "What
about the children?" If you're not

working, the first question is "What kind of example are you setting for
your daughters?" Mother shame is ubiquitous---it's a birthright for
girls and women. But the real struggle for women---what amplifies shame
regardless of the category---is that we're expected (and sometimes
desire) to be perfect, yet we're not allowed to look as if we're working
for it. We want it to just materialize somehow. Everything should be
effortless. The expectation is to be natural beauties, natural mothers,
natural leaders, and naturally good parents, and we want to belong to
naturally fabulous families. Think about how much money has been made
selling products that promise "the natural look." And when it comes to
work, we love to hear, "She makes it look so easy," or "She's a
natural." As I found myself reading through the pages of definitions and
examples provided by women I kept envisioning a web. What I saw was a
sticky, complex spiderweb of layered, conflicting, and competing
expectations that dictate exactly: who we should be what we should be
how we should be When I think of my own efforts to be everything to
everyone--- something that women are socialized to do---I can see how
every move I make just ensnares me even more. Every effort to twist my
way out of the web just leads to becoming more stuck. That's because
every choice has consequences or leads to someone being disappointed.
The web is a metaphor for the classic double-bind situation. Writer
Marilyn Frye describes a double bind as "a situation in which options
are very limited and all of them expose us to penalty, censure, or
deprivation." If you take competing and conflicting expectations (which
are often unattainable from the get-go) you have this: Be perfect, but
don't make a fuss about it and don't take time away from anything, like
your family or your partner or your work, to achieve your perfection. If
you're really good, perfection should be easy. Don't upset anyone or
hurt anyone's feelings, but say what's on your mind.

Dial the sexuality way up (after the kids are down, the dog is walked,
and the house is clean), but dial it way down at the PTO meeting. And,
geez, whatever you do, don't confuse the two---you know how we talk
about those PTO sexpots. Just be yourself, but not if it means being shy
or unsure. There's nothing sexier than self-confidence (especially if
you're young and smokin' hot). Don't make people feel uncomfortable, but
be honest. Don't get too emotional, but don't be too detached either.
Too emotional and you're hysterical. Too detached and you're a
coldhearted bitch. In a US study on conformity to feminine norms,
researchers recently listed the most important attributes associated
with "being feminine" as being nice, pursuing a thin body ideal, showing
modesty by not calling attention to one's talents or abilities, being
domestic, caring for children, investing in a romantic relationship,
keeping sexual intimacy contained within one committed relationship, and
using our resources to invest in our appearance. Basically, we have to
be willing to stay as small, sweet, and quiet as possible, and use our
time and talent to look pretty. Our dreams, ambitions, and gifts are
unimportant. God forbid that some young girl who has the cure for cancer
tucked away in her abilities finds this list and decides to follow the
rules. If she does, we'll never know her genius--- and I feel sure of
that. Why? Because every successful woman whom I've interviewed has
talked to me about the sometimes daily struggle to push past "the rules"
so she can assert herself, advocate for her ideas, and feel comfortable
with her power and gifts. Even to me the issue of "stay small, sweet,
quiet, and modest" sounds like an outdated problem, but the truth is
that women still run into those demands whenever we find and use our
voices. When the TEDxHouston video went viral, I wanted to hide. I
begged my husband, Steve, to hack into the TED website and "bring the
entire thing down!" I fantasized about breaking into the offices where
they were keeping the video and stealing it. I was desperate. That was
when I realized that I had unconsciously worked throughout my career to
keep my work small. I loved writing for my community of readers, because
preaching to the choir is easy and relatively safe. The quick and global
spread of my work was exactly what I had always tried to avoid. I didn't
want the exposure,

and I was terrified of the mean-spirited criticism that's so rampant in
Internet culture. Well, the mean-spiritedness happened, and the vast
majority of it was directed to reinforcing those norms that we'd love to
believe are outdated. When a news outlet shared the video on their site,
a heated debate erupted in the comments section of their website about
(of course!) my weight. "How can she talk about worthiness when she
clearly needs to lose fifteen pounds?" On another site, a debate grew
about the appropriateness of mothers having breakdowns. "I feel sorry
for her children. Good mothers don't fall apart." Another commenter
wrote, "Less research. More Botox." Something similar happened when I
wrote an article on imperfection for CNN.com. To accompany the article,
the editor used a photo I had taken of a good friend who had "I am
Enough" written across the top of her chest. It's a beautiful photo that
I have hanging in my study as a reminder. Well, that fueled comments
like "She may believe that she's enough, but by the look of that chest,
she could use some more," and "If I looked like Brené Brown, I'd embrace
imperfection too." I know that these examples are symptomatic of the
cruelty culture that we live in today and that everyone is fair game,
but think about how and what they chose to attack. They went after my
appearance and my mothering---two kill shots taken straight from the
list of feminine norms. They didn't go after my intellect or my
arguments. That wouldn't hurt enough. So, no, those societal norms
aren't outdated, even if they're reductionist and squeeze the life out
of us, and shame is the route to enforcing them. Which is another
reminder of why shame resilience is a prerequisite for vulnerability. I
believe I dared greatly in my TEDxHouston talk. Talking about my
struggles was a courageous thing for me to do, given my drive to
self-protect and use research as armor. And the only reason I'm still
standing (and sitting here writing this book) is because I've cultivated
some pretty fierce shame resilience skills and I'm crystal clear that
courage is an important value to me. I clearly saw that these comments
triggered shame in me and I could quickly reality-check the messages.
Yes, they still hurt. Yes, I was pissed. Yes, I cried my eyes out. Yes,
I wanted to disappear. But I gave myself permission to feel these things
for a couple of hours or days, then I reached out, talked through my
feelings with people I trust and love, and I moved on. I felt more
courageous, more compassionate, more connected. (I also stopped reading
anonymous comments. If you're not in

the arena with the rest of us, fighting and getting your ass kicked on
occasion, I'm not interested in your feedback.)

HOW MEN EXPERIENCE SHAME When I asked men to define shame or give me an
answer, here's what I heard: Shame is failure. At work. On the football
field. In your marriage. In bed. With money. With your children. It
doesn't matter---shame is failure. Shame is being wrong. Not doing it
wrong, but being wrong. Shame is a sense of being defective. Shame
happens when people think you're soft. It's degrading and shaming to be
seen as anything but tough. Revealing any weakness is shaming.
Basically, shame is weakness. Showing fear is shameful. You can't show
fear. You can't be afraid ---no matter what. Shame is being seen as "the
guy you can shove up against the lockers." Our worst fear is being
criticized or ridiculed---either one of these is extremely shaming.
Basically, men live under the pressure of one unrelenting message: Do
not be perceived as weak. Whenever my graduate students were going to do
interviews with men, I told them to prepare for three things: high
school stories, sports metaphors, and the word pussy. If you're thinking
that you can't believe I just wrote that, I get it. It's one of my least
favorite words. But as a researcher, I know it's important to be honest
about what emerged, and that word came up all of the time in the
interviews. It didn't matter if the man was eighteen or eighty, if I
asked, "What's the shame message?" the answer was "Don't be a pussy."
When I first started writing about my work with men, I used the image of
a box---something that looked like a shipping crate---to explain how
shame traps men. Like the demands on women to be naturally beautiful,
thin, and perfect at everything, especially motherhood, the box has
rules that tell men what they should and shouldn't do, and who they're
allowed to be. But for men, every rule comes back to the same mandate:
"Don't be weak."

I'll never forget when a twenty-year-old man who was part of a small
group of college students that I was interviewing said, "Let me show you
the box." I knew he was a tall guy, but when he stood up, it was clear
that he was at least six foot four. He said, "Imagine living like this,"
as he crouched down and pretended that he was stuffed inside a small
box. Still hunched over, he said, "You really only have three choices.
You spend your life fighting to get out, throwing punches at the side of
the box and hoping it will break. You always feel angry and you're
always swinging. Or you just give up. You don't give a shit about
anything." At that point he slumped over on the ground. You could have
heard a pin drop in the room. Then he stood up, shook his head, and
said, "Or you stay high so you don't really notice how unbearable it is.
That's the easiest way." The students grabbed on to stay high like a
life preserver and broke into nervous laughter. This happens a lot when
you're talking about shame or vulnerability---anything to cut the
tension. But this brave young man wasn't laughing and neither was I. His
demonstration was one of the most honest and courageous things I've ever
had the privilege of seeing, and I know that the people in that room
were deeply affected by it. After the group interview, he told me about
his experiences growing up. He had been a passionate artist as a child,
and he winced as he described how he was sure from an early age that
he'd be happy if he could spend his life painting and drawing. He said
that one day he was in the kitchen with his dad and uncle. His uncle
pointed to a collection of his art that was plastered on the
refrigerator and said jokingly to his father, "What? You're raising a
faggot artist now?" After that, he said, his father, who had always been
neutral about his art, forbade him from taking classes. Even his mother,
who had always been so proud of his talent, agreed that it was "a little
too girly." He told me that he'd drawn a picture of his house the day
before all of this happened, and to that day it was the last thing he'd
ever drawn. That night I wept for him and for all of us who never got to
see his work. I think about him all of the time and hope he has
reconnected with his art. I know it's a tremendous loss for him, and I'm
equally positive that the world is missing out.

PAY NO ATTENTION TO THAT MAN BEHIND THE CURTAIN As I've learned more
about men and their experiences with shame, I still see that image of a
shipping crate with a big stamp across it that reads, "CAUTION: Do Not
Be Perceived as Weak." I see how boys are issued a crate when they're
born. It's not too crowded when they're toddlers. They're still small
and can move around a bit. They can cry and hold on to mamma, but as
they grow older, there's less and less wiggle room. By the time they're
grown men, it's suffocating. But just as with women, men are caught in
their own double bind. Over the past couple of years, especially since
the economic downturn, what I have started to see is the box from The
Wizard of Oz. I'm talking about the small, curtain-concealed box that
the wizard stands in as he's controlling his mechanical "great and
powerful" Oz image. As scarcity has grabbed hold of our culture, it's
not just "Don't be perceived as weak," but also "You better be great and
all powerful." This image first came to mind when I interviewed a man
who was in deep shame about getting "downsized." He told me, "It's
funny. My father knows. My two closest friends know. But my wife doesn't
know. It's been six months, and every morning I still get dressed and
leave the house like I'm going to work. I drive across town, sit in
coffee shops, and look for a job." I'm a skilled interviewer, but I can
imagine that the look on my face conveyed something like "How on earth
did you pull that off?" Without waiting for my next question, he
answered, "She doesn't want to know. If she already knows, she wants me
to keep pretending. Trust me, if I find another job and tell her after
I'm back at work, she'll be grateful. Knowing would change the way she
feels about me. She didn't sign up for this." I was not prepared to hear
over and over from men how the women--- the mothers, sisters,
girlfriends, wives---in their lives are constantly criticizing them for
not being open and vulnerable and intimate, all the while they are
standing in front of that cramped wizard closet where their men are
huddled inside, adjusting the curtain and making sure no one sees in and
no one gets out. There was a moment when I was driving home from an
interview with a small group of men and thought, Holy shit. I am the
patriarchy.

Here's the painful pattern that emerged from my research with men: We
ask them to be vulnerable, we beg them to let us in, and we plead with
them to tell us when they're afraid, but the truth is that most women
can't stomach it. In those moments when real vulnerability happens in
men, most of us recoil with fear and that fear manifests as everything
from disappointment to disgust. And men are very smart. They know the
risks, and they see the look in our eyes when we're thinking, C'mon!
Pull it together. Man up. As Joe Reynolds, one of my mentors and the
dean at our church, once told me during a conversation about men, shame,
and vulnerability, "Men know what women really want. They want us to
pretend to be vulnerable. We get really good at pretending." Covert
shame hurts just as much as overt shame. Take, for example, the man who
told me that he was always feeling shame with his wife around money. He
said the latest instance was when his wife came home and said, "I just
saw Katie's new house! It's amazing. She's so happy to finally get that
dream house. On top of that, she's going to quit working next year." He
told me his immediate response was rage. So he picked a fight with his
wife about her mother coming to visit, and then quickly disappeared to
another part of the house. As we were talking about this conversation,
he said, "It was shame. Why did she have to say that? I get it. Katie's
husband makes a lot of money. He takes better care of her. I can't
compete." When I asked him if he thought that it was her intention to
hurt him or shame him, he responded, "I'm not sure. Who knows? I turned
down a job that paid a lot more but required traveling three weeks out
of the month. She said she was supportive, and that she and the kids
would miss me too much, but now she makes little comments about money
all of the time. I have no idea what to think."

PISSED OFF OR SHUT DOWN I don't want to oversimplify something as
complex as the response to shame, but I have to say that when it comes
to men, there seem to be two primary responses: pissed off or shut down.
Of course, like women, as men develop shame resilience, this changes,
and men learn to respond to shame with awareness, self-compassion, and
empathy. But without that awareness, when men feel that rush of
inadequacy and smallness, they normally respond with anger and/or by
completely turning off. Once I had collected enough interviews to start
seeing strong patterns and themes, I scheduled interviews with several
male therapists who specialize in men's issues. I wanted to make sure
that I wasn't filtering what I heard from the men through my own
experiences. When I asked one of these therapists about the concept of
"pissed off or shut down," he told me this story to illustrate the
point. When he was a freshman in high school, he tried out and made the
football team. On the first day of practice, his coach told the boys to
line up on the line of scrimmage. The therapist had grown up playing a
lot of football in his neighborhood, but this was his first experience
on a field, in full pads, across from boys whose goal was to flatten
him. He said, "I was suddenly afraid. I was thinking about how much it
was going to hurt, and I guess that fear showed up on my face." He said
his coach yelled his last name and said, "Don't be a pussy! Get on the
line." He said he immediately felt shame coursing through his body. "In
that single moment, I became very clear about how the world works and
what it means to be a man: "I am not allowed to be afraid. "I am not
allowed to show fear. "I am not allowed to be vulnerable. "Shame is
being afraid, showing fear, or being vulnerable."

When I asked him what he did next, he looked me in the eye and said, "I
turned my fear into rage and steamrolled over the guy in front of me. It
worked so well that I spent the next twenty years turning my fear and
vulnerability into rage and steamrolling anyone who was across from me.
My wife. My children. My employees. There was no other way out from
underneath the fear and shame."

I heard such grief and clarity in his voice as he was saying this to me.
It made total sense. Fear and vulnerability are powerful emotions. You
can't just wish them away. You have to do something with them. Many men,
in fact, use very physiological descriptions when they talk to me about
"pissed off or shut down." It's almost as if shame, criticism, and
ridicule are physically intolerable. The therapist concluded, "I got
into therapy when my rage and my drinking were no longer manageable.
When it started costing me my marriage and my relationships with my
children. That's why I do the work I do today." Shame resilience---the
four elements we discussed in the previous chapter---is about finding a
middle path, an option that allows us to stay engaged and to find the
emotional courage we need to respond in a way that aligns with our
values.

I'M ONLY AS HARD ON OTHERS AS I AM ON MYSELF Just like the father coming
down on his budding artist son or the coach giving his player a hard
time, women can also be very hard on other women. We are hard on others
because we're hard on ourselves. That's exactly how judgment works.
Finding someone to put down, judge, or criticize becomes a way to get
out of the web or call attention away from our box. If you're doing
worse than I am at something, I think, my chances of surviving are
better. Steve and I met lifeguarding and coaching swimming. The big rule
in lifeguarding is to utilize any means possible before you actually
jump in and try to pull someone out of the water. Even though you're a
strong swimmer and the person you're trying to help is half your size, a
desperate person will do anything to save themselves---to grab a breath
---including drowning you in their effort to survive. The same is true
for women and the shame web. We're so desperate to get out and stay out
of shame that we're constantly serving up the people around us as more
deserving prey. What's ironic (or perhaps natural) is that research
tells us that we judge people in areas where we're vulnerable to shame,
especially picking folks who are doing worse than we're doing. If I feel
good about my parenting, I have no interest in judging other people's
choices. If I feel good about my body, I don't go around making fun of
other people's weight or appearance. We're hard on each other because
we're using each other as a launching pad out of our own perceived
shaming deficiency. It's hurtful and ineffective, and if you look at the
mean-girl culture in middle schools and high schools, it's also
contagious. We've handed this counterfeit survival mechanism down to our
children. In my interviews with teachers and school administrators, two
patterns emerged that speak directly to this issue. The first pattern
reported by faculty and principals was that often the children who are
engaging in the bullying behaviors or vying for social ranking by
putting down others have parents who engage in the same behaviors. When
it came to girls, the phrase that kept emerging from the interviews was
"The parents aren't upset by their daughters' behaviors; they're proud
of them for being popular." One school administrator likened this
behavior to the fathers who first ask, "Well, did he at least win the
fight?"

The other pattern, which has only emerged in the last couple of years,
is the age of the children when this starts happening. When I started
this work, bullying wasn't a hot topic, but as a shame researcher, I was
aware that it was a growing trend. In fact, I wrote an op-ed on bullying
and reality television for the Houston Chronicle over ten years ago.
Back then my focus was teenagers because the data pointed to adolescence
as the prime age range for these behaviors. In the past couple of years,
I'm hearing about girls and boys as young as first grade engaging in
these behaviors. How do we break this insidious pattern? Maybe by
deciding (and showing our children) that the solution to being stuck in
shame is not to denigrate others stuck just like us, but to join hands
and pull free together. For example, if we're at the grocery store, and
we push our cart past another mother whose child is screaming bloody
murder and throwing Cheerios on the floor, we have a choice. If we
choose to use the moment to confirm that we're better than she is, and
that she's stuck in the web in ways we are not, we will roll our eyes in
disapproval and walk by. Our other choice, though, is to flash that
mother our best "you're not alone---I've been there, sister" smile
because we know what she's feeling. Yes, empathy requires some
vulnerability, and we risk getting back a "mind your own damn business"
look, but it's worth it. It doesn't just loosen up the web for her. It
loosens it up for us the next time it's our child and our Cheerios---and
you can bet it will be. What gives me hope about our willingness to
extend a hand back and support each other is the increasing number of
men and women I encounter who are willing to risk vulnerability and
share their stories of shame resilience. I see this in formal and
informal mentoring programs. I see this from folks who are writing blogs
and sharing their experiences with readers. I see it in schools and
programs that not only are becoming increasingly less tolerant of
student bullying but are holding teachers, administrators, and parents
accountable for their behaviors. Adults are being asked to model the
Wholeheartedness that they want to see in the children. There is a quiet
transformation happening that is moving us from "turning on each other"
to "turning toward each other." Without question, that transformation
will require shame resilience. If we're willing to dare greatly and risk
vulnerability with each other, worthiness has the power to set us free.

IT'S NOT ABOUT THE BACK FAT: MEN, WOMEN, SEX, AND BODY IMAGE In 2006 I
met with twenty-two community college students, male and female, to talk
about shame. It was my first coed large group interview. At some point,
a young man in his early twenties explained how he had recently divorced
his wife after coming back from serving in the military and finding out
that she was having an affair. He said he wasn't surprised because he
never felt "good enough for her." He explained that he constantly asked
her what she needed and wanted, and that every time he got close to
meeting her needs, she "moved the goalpost another ten feet." A young
woman in the class spoke up and said, "Guys are the same way. They're
never satisfied either. We're never pretty, sexy, or skinny enough."
Within seconds a conversation broke out about body image and sex. The
discussion was mostly about how it's so scary to have sex with someone
you care about when you're worried about how your body looks. The young
women who started the conversation said, "It's not easy to have sex and
keep your stomach sucked in. How can we get into it when we're worried
about our back fat?" The young man who had shared the story of his
divorce slammed his hand down on his desk and shouted, "It's not about
the back fat! You're worried about it. We're not. We don't give a shit!"
The class fell completely quiet. He took a couple of deep breaths and
said, "Stop making up all of this stuff about what we're thinking! What
we're really thinking is 'Do you love me? Do you care about me? Do you
want me? Am I important to you? Am I good enough?' That's what we're
thinking. When it comes to sex, it feels like our life is on the line,
and you're worried about that crap?" At that point, half of the young
men in the room were so emotional that they had their faces in their
hands. A few girls were in tears, and I couldn't breathe. The young
woman who had brought up the body image issue said, "I don't understand.
My last boyfriend was always criticizing my body." The young vet who had
just brought us all to our knees replied, "That's because he's an
asshole. It's not because he's a guy. Some of us are just guys. Give us
a break. Please."

A middle-aged man in the group joined in, staring straight down at his
desk. "It's true. When you want to be with us...in that way...it makes
us feel more worthy. We stand a little taller. Believe in ourselves
more. I don't know why, but it's true. And I've been married since I was
eighteen. It still feels that way with my wife." Never in my life before
that moment did I think about men feeling vulnerable about sex. Never
did I consider that their self-worth was in any way on the line. I
didn't understand. So I interviewed many more men about the topic of
sexuality, shame, and worthiness, including mental health professionals.
In one of my final interviews on the topic, I sat down with a therapist
who had spent more than twenty-five years working with men. He explained
that from the time boys are eight to ten years old, they learn that
initiating sex is their responsibility and that sexual rejection soon
becomes the hallmark of masculine shame. He explained, "Even in my own
life, when my wife isn't interested, I still have to battle feelings of
shame. It doesn't matter if I intellectually understand why she's not in
the mood. I'm vulnerable and it's very difficult." When I asked him
about his work around addiction and pornography, he gave me an answer
that helped me understand that issue in an entirely new light. He said,
"For five bucks and five minutes, you think you're getting what you
need, and you don't have to risk rejection." The reason that response
was so revelatory to me was because it was so utterly different from
what women felt. After interviewing women for a decade, it was clear
that women see the issue of men and pornography as having to do with
their own inadequate appearance and/or their lack of sexual expertise.
At the end of my interview with this wonderful and wise man, he said, "I
guess the secret is that sex is terrifying for most men. That's why you
see everything from porn to the violent, desperate attempts to exercise
power and control. Rejection is deeply painful." Cultivating
intimacy---physical or emotional---is almost impossible when our shame
triggers meet head-on and create the perfect shame storm. Sometimes
these shame storms are directly about sex and intimacy, but often there
are outlying gremlins wreaking havoc in our relationships. Common issues
include body image, aging, appearance, money, parenting, motherhood,
exhaustion, resentment, and fear. When I asked men, women, and couples
how they practiced Wholeheartedness around these very sensitive and
personal issues, one answer came up again and again: honest, loving
conversations that require major vulnerability. We have to be able to
talk about how we feel, what we

need and desire, and we have to be able to listen with an open heart and
an open mind. There is no intimacy without vulnerability. Yet another
powerful example of vulnerability as courage.

THE WORDS WE CAN NEVER TAKE BACK Too close for missiles, I'm switching
to guns. ---Top Gun

When I talk to couples, I can see how shame creates one of the dynamics
most lethal to a relationship. Women, who feel shame when they don't
feel heard or validated, often resort to pushing and provoking with
criticism ("Why don't you ever do enough?" or "You never get it right").
Men, in turn, who feel shame when they feel criticized for being
inadequate, either shut down (leading women to poke and provoke more) or
come back with anger. For the first few years of our marriage, Steve and
I fell into this pattern. I remember one argument when we were both
angry beyond belief. After ten minutes of endless chiding on my part, he
turned to me and said, "Leave me alone for twenty minutes. I'm done. I
won't do this anymore." When he shut and locked the door, I got so mad
that I actually banged on the door and said, "Get back out here and
fight with me." In that moment, when I heard myself, I saw what was
happening. He was on the verge of shutting down or raging, and I was
feeling unheard and misunderstood. The result was mutual desperation.
Steve and I are heading into our eighteenth year of marriage, and this
year we'll celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of our first date. He
is, without question, the best thing that's ever happened to me. When we
got married, neither one of us had any idea what a good partnership
looked like or what it took to make it work. If you asked us today what
we believe is the key to our relationship, the answer would be
vulnerability, love, humor, respect, shame-free fighting, and blame-free
living. We learned some of that on our own through good ol' trial and
error, but we also learned from my work and the research participants
who were brave enough to share their stories with me. I'm so grateful to
them. I think we can all agree that feeling shame is an incredibly
painful experience. What we often don't realize is that perpetrating
shame is equally as painful, and no one does that with the precision of
a partner or a parent. These are the people who know us the best and who
bear witness to our vulnerabilities and fears. Thankfully, we can
apologize for shaming someone we love, but the truth is that those
shaming comments leave marks. And shaming someone we love around
vulnerability is the most serious of all security breaches. Even if we
apologize, we've done

serious damage because we've demonstrated our willingness to use sacred
information as a weapon. In The Gifts of Imperfection, I share the
definition of love that I developed based on my data. Here it is: We
cultivate love when we allow our most vulnerable and powerful selves to
be deeply seen and known, and when we honor the spiritual connection
that grows from that offering with trust, respect, kindness, and
affection. Love is not something we give or get; it is something that we
nurture and grow, a connection that can only be cultivated between two
people when it exists within each one of them---we can only love others
as much as we love ourselves. Shame, blame, disrespect, betrayal, and
the withholding of affection damage the roots from which love grows.
Love can only survive these injuries if they are acknowledged, healed,
and rare.

Developing this definition was one of the hardest things I've ever done.
Professionally, it just seemed arrogant to try to define something as
big and important as love. It felt like an endeavor best left to the
poets and artists. My motivation was not to "nail it," but to start a
conversation about what we need and want from love. I don't care if I'm
wrong, but let's talk about love. Let's have some conversations about
the experience that gives meaning to our lives. Personally, I fought the
data with everything I have. Over and over, I heard the idea of
self-love as a prerequisite to loving others, and I hated it. Sometimes
it's so much easier to love Steve and the kids than it is to love
myself. It's so much easier to accept their quirks and eccentricities
than it is to practice self-love around what I see as my deep flaws. But
in practicing self-love over the past couple of years, I can say that it
has immeasurably deepened my relationships with the people I love. It's
given me the courage to show up and be vulnerable in new ways, and
that's what love is all about. As we think about shame and love, the
most pressing question is this: Are we practicing love? Yes, most of us
are really good at professing it ---sometimes ten times a day. But are
we walking the talk? Are we being our most vulnerable selves? Are we
showing trust, kindness, affection, and respect to our partners? It's
not the lack of professing that gets us in trouble in our relationships;
it's failing to practice love that leads to hurt.

BECOMING REAL Do you remember how I mentioned earlier in the chapter
that researchers found that attributes such as nice, thin, and modest
were qualities that our culture associates with femininity? Well, when
looking at the attributes associated with masculinity in the US, the
same researchers identified the following: winning, emotional control,
risk-taking, violence, dominance, playboy, self-reliance, primacy of
work, power over women, disdain for homosexuality, and pursuit of
status. Understanding these lists and what they mean is critically
important to understanding shame and cultivating resilience. As I
explained in the beginning of the chapter, shame is universal, but the
messages and expectations that drive shame are organized by gender.
These feminine and masculine norms are the foundation of shame triggers,
and here's why: If women want to play by the rules, they need to be
sweet, thin, and pretty, stay quiet, be perfect moms and wives, and not
own their power. One move outside of these expectations and BAM! The
shame web closes in. Men, on the other hand, need to stop feeling, start
earning, put everyone in their place, and climb their way to the top or
die trying. Push open the lid of your box to grab a breath of air, or
slide that curtain back a bit to see what's going on, and BAM! Shame
cuts you down to size. I think it's important to add that for men
there's also a cultural message that promotes homophobic cruelty. If you
want to be masculine in our culture, it's not enough to be straight---
you must also show an outward disgust toward the gay community. The idea
of "do this or dislike these people if you want to be accepted into our
group" emerged as a major shame setup in the research. It doesn't matter
if the group is a church or a gang or a sewing circle or masculinity
itself, asking members to dislike, disown, or distance themselves from
another group of people as a condition of "belonging" is always about
control and power. I think we have to question the intentions of any
group that insists on disdain toward other people as a membership
requirement. It may be disguised as belonging, but real belonging
doesn't necessitate disdain. When I look at those eleven attributes of
masculinity, that's not the kind of man I want to spend my life with and
that's not how I want to raise my son. The word that comes to my mind
when I think about a life built around those qualities is lonely. The
picture in my mind goes back to the Wizard of Oz. He's not a real person
with human needs, but a

"great and powerful" projection of what a man is supposed to be. Lonely,
exhausting, and soul-sucking. When I talk to men and women with high
levels of shame resilience, they are keenly aware of these lists. They
keep those strictures in mind so that when shame starts creeping up on
them, or they find themselves fully in shame, they can reality-check
these "norms," thus practicing the second element of shame
resilience---critical awareness. Basically, they can choose consciously
not to play along. The man in shame says, "I'm not supposed to get
emotional when I have to lay off these people." The man practicing shame
resilience responds, "I'm not buying into this message. I've worked with
these guys for five years. I know their families. I'm allowed to care
about them." Shame whispers in the ear of the woman who's out of town on
business, "You're not a good mother because you're going to miss your
son's class play." She replies, "I hear you, but I'm not playing that
tape today. My mothering is way bigger than one class performance. You
can leave now." One of the most powerful ways that our shame triggers
get reinforced is when we enter into a social contract based on these
gender straitjackets. Our relationships are defined by women and men
saying, "I'll play my role, and you play yours." One of the patterns
revealed in the research was how all that role playing becomes almost
unbearable around midlife. Men feel increasingly disconnected, and the
fear of failure becomes paralyzing. Women are exhausted, and for the
first time they begin to clearly see that the expectations are
impossible. The accomplishments, accolades, and acquisitions that are a
seductive part of living by this contract start to feel like a Faustian
bargain. Remembering that shame is the fear of disconnection---the fear
that we're unlovable and don't belong---makes it easy to see why so many
people in midlife overfocus on their children's lives, work sixty hours
a week, or turn to affairs, addiction, and disengagement. We start to
unravel. The expectations and messages that fuel shame keep us from
fully realizing who we are as people. Today, I look back and feel so
grateful to women and men who have shared their stories with me. I'm
thankful for the people who were brave enough to say, "These are my
secrets and my fears, here's how they brought me to my knees, and here's
how I learned to stand in my worthiness again." I'm also indebted to the
man in the yellow Izod

sweater. His vulnerability and honesty set in motion work that has
forever changed my career and, more importantly, my life. As I look back
on what I've learned about shame, gender, and worthiness, the greatest
lesson is this: If we're going to find our way out of shame and back to
each other, vulnerability is the path and courage is the light. To set
down those lists of what we're supposed to be is brave. To love
ourselves and support each other in the process of becoming real is
perhaps the greatest single act of daring greatly. I'll leave you with
this passage from the 1922 children's classic The Velveteen Rabbit by
Margery Williams. My friend DeeDee Parker Wright sent it to me last year
with a note that said, "This is what being Wholehearted is all about." I
agree. It's a beautiful reminder of how much easier it is to become real
when we know we're loved: "Real isn't how you are made," said the Skin
Horse. "It's a thing that happens to you. When a child loves you for a
long, long time, not just to play with, but really loves you, then you
become Real." "Does it hurt?" asked the Rabbit. "Sometimes," said the
Skin Horse, for he was always truthful. "When you are Real, you don't
mind being hurt." "Does it happen all at once, like being wound up," he
asked, "or bit by bit?" "It doesn't happen all at once," said the Skin
Horse. "You become. It takes a long time. That's why it doesn't often
happen to people who break easily, or have sharp edges, or who have to
be carefully kept. Generally, by the time you are Real, most of your
hair has been loved off, and your eyes drop out, and you get loose in
the joints and very shabby. But these things don't matter at all,
because once you are Real, you can't be ugly, except to people who don't
understand."

CHAPTER 4 THE VULNERABILITY

ARMORY As children we found ways to protect ourselves from
vulnerability, from being hurt, diminished, and disappointed. We put on
armor; we used our thoughts, emotions, and behaviors as weapons; and we
learned how to make ourselves scarce, even to disappear. Now as adults
we realize that to live with courage, purpose, and connection---to be
the person whom we long to be---we must again be vulnerable. We must
take off the armor, put down the weapons, show up, and let ourselves be
seen.

THE word persona is the Greek term for "stage mask." In my work masks
and armor are perfect metaphors for how we protect ourselves from the
discomfort of vulnerability. Masks make us feel safer even when they
become suffocating. Armor makes us feel stronger even when we grow weary
from dragging the extra weight around. The irony is that when we're
standing across from someone who is hidden or shielded by masks and
armor, we feel frustrated and disconnected. That's the paradox here:
Vulnerability is the last thing I want you to see in me, but the first
thing I look for in you. If I were directing a play about the
vulnerability armory, the setting would be a middle school cafeteria and
the characters would be our eleven-, twelve-, and thirteen-year-old
selves. I pick this age because armor can be hard to see on adults. Once
we've worn it long enough, it molds to our shape and is ultimately
undetectable---it's like a second skin. Masks are the same way. I've
interviewed hundreds of participants who have conveyed the same fear: "I
can't take the mask off now---no one knows what I really look like. Not
my partner, not my kids, not my friends. They've never met the real me.
I'm not even sure who I am under here." Preteens or tweens, though, are
much different. Upper elementary school and middle school was where most
of us started to try on new and different forms of protection. At this
tender age, the armor is still awkward and ill fitting. Kids are clumsy
in their efforts to hide fear and self-doubt, which makes it easier for
observers to see exactly what armor they are using and why. And
depending on the level of shame and fear, most kids have yet to be
convinced that the heaviness of the armor or the suffocating nature of a
mask is worth the effort. They put on and take off personas and
protection without hesitation, sometimes in the same sentence: "I don't
care what those people think. They're so stupid. The dance is stupid.
Can you call their moms and find out what they're wearing? I hope I get
to dance." The after-school specials of my youth seemed to be dedicated
to exploring just these ideas. They brought us the mean boy who really
just wanted to be included and the know-it-all girl who was showing off
at school to hide her misery over her parents' recent divorce. Our

protection mechanisms may be more sophisticated now that we're adults,
but most of us learned about armor during these raw and impressionable
years, and most of us can be brought back to that place in a heartbeat.
From my personal experiences, I can tell you that the most difficult
thing about parenting a daughter in middle school is coming face-to-face
with the awkward, sweaty-palmed seventh-grader who lives inside me. My
instinct back then was to duck and run, and I often feel that impulse
creeping up on me when Ellen is in a struggle. I swear there are times
when she's describing a situation at school that I can actually smell my
middle school cafeteria. Whether we're fourteen or fifty-four, our armor
and our masks are as individualized and unique as the personal
vulnerability, discomfort, and pain we're trying to minimize. That's why
I was surprised to discover that we all share a small array of common
protection mechanisms. Our armor may be custom-made, but certain parts
of it are interchangeable. By prying open the doors of the armory, we
can expose to daylight the more universal bits and pieces and also
rummage through the closets that house less universal, but often
dangerous, items of vulnerability protection. If you're like me, it's
tempting to take this information and create your own after-school
special. As these shared mechanisms started to emerge from the data, my
first instinct was to label behavior and cast the people around me as
stereotypes: "She so wears this mask, and my neighbor totally uses this
armor." It's human nature to want to categorize and oversimplify, but I
think this misses the point. None of us uses just one of these shared
defenses. Most of us will be able to relate to almost all of them,
depending on the different circumstances we navigate. My hope is that a
peek inside the armory will help us to look inside ourselves. How do we
protect ourselves? When and how did we start using these defense
mechanisms? What would it take to make us put the armor away?

THE "ENOUGH" MANDATE For me the most powerful part of this research was
discovering the strategies that seem to empower people to take off the
masks and armor that I'm about to describe. I assumed that I'd find
unique strategies for each protection mechanism, similar to what emerged
in the ten guideposts I write about in The Gifts of Imperfection. But
that wasn't the case here. In the first chapter, I talked about "enough"
as the opposite of scarcity, and the properties of scarcity as shame,
comparison, and disengagement. Well, it appears that believing that
we're "enough" is the way out of the armor---it gives us permission to
take off the mask. With that sense of "enough" comes an embrace of
worthiness, boundaries, and engagement. This lay at the core of every
strategy illuminated by the research participants for freeing themselves
from their armor: I am enough (worthiness versus shame). I've had enough
(boundaries versus one-uping and comparison). Showing up, taking risks,
and letting myself be seen is enough (engagement versus disengagement).
As you read through this chapter, I think it's helpful for you to know
that every single person I interviewed spoke about struggling with
vulnerability. It's not as if there are lucky people among us who can
openly embrace vulnerability without reservation, hesitation, or fear.
When it comes to uncertainty, risk, and emotional exposure, what I heard
over and over were descriptions of people trying on some kind of armor
before finally letting it go: "My first instinct is to
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, but that never worked, so now I
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and that's changed my life." "I spent
years \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ until one day I tried
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and it made my marriage stronger."
Last year I gave a talk on vulnerability to 350 SWAT team officers,
parole officers, and jailers. (Yes, it was as intimidating as it
sounds.) A SWAT officer walked up to me after the talk and said, "The
only reason we listened to you is because you're just as bad at being
open as we are.

If you didn't wrestle with being vulnerable, we wouldn't trust you one
bit." Not only did I believe him, but I totally agreed. I trust the
strategies that I'm writing about here for two reasons. First, the
research participants who shared them with me had wrestled with the same
gremlins, discomfort, and self-doubt that we all face. Second, I've
practiced these strategies in my own life and know for a fact that they
aren't just game changers---they're lifesavers. The three forms of
shielding that I am about to introduce are what I refer to as the
"common vulnerability arsenal" because I have found that we all
incorporate them into our personal armor in some way. These include
foreboding joy, or the paradoxical dread that clamps down on momentary
joyfulness; perfectionism, or believing that doing everything perfectly
means you'll never feel shame; and numbing, the embrace of whatever
deadens the pain of discomfort and pain. Each shield is followed by
"Daring Greatly" strategies, all variants on "being enough" that have
proved to be effective at disarming the three common forms of shielding.

THE COMMON VULNERABILITY SHIELDS THE SHIELD: FOREBODING JOY Given that I
study emotions like shame, fear, and vulnerability, I hardly expected to
one day be telling you that exploring the construct of joy turned my
professional and personal life upside down. But it's true. In fact,
having spent several years studying what it means to feel joyful, I'd
argue that joy is probably the most difficult emotion to really feel.
Why? Because when we lose the ability or willingness to be vulnerable,
joy becomes something we approach with deep foreboding. This shift from
our younger self's greeting of joy with unalloyed delight happens slowly
and outside of our awareness. We don't seem to even know that it's
happening or why. We just know that we crave more joy in our lives, that
we are joy starved. In a culture of deep scarcity---of never feeling
safe, certain, and sure enough---joy can feel like a setup. We wake up
in the morning and think, Work is going well. Everyone in the family is
healthy. No major crises are happening. The house is still standing. I'm
working out and feeling good. Oh, shit. This is bad. This is really bad.
Disaster must be lurking right around the corner. Or we get promoted,
and our first thought is Too good to be true. What's the catch? We find
out we're pregnant, and we think, Our daughter is healthy and happy, so
something really bad is going to happen with this baby. I just know it.
We're taking our first family vacation, but rather than being excited,
we're making plans for the plane to go down or the ship to sink. We're
always waiting for the other shoe to drop. That expression originated in
the early 1900s, when new immigrants and people flooding to the cities
were crammed into tenement housing where you could literally hear your
upstairs neighbor taking off his shoes at night. Once you heard the
first shoe hit the floor you waited for the other shoe to drop. Even
though the world today is much safer in many ways than it was in the
early part of that century, and our life expectancy is far greater than
that of the folks who were listening for a second shoe to hit the floor,
the stakes feel so much higher to us. Most of us today think of the
other shoe as something terrifying: a terrorist attack, a natural
disaster, an E. coli outbreak in our local grocery store, a school
shooting.

When I started asking participants about the experiences that left them
feeling the most vulnerable, I didn't expect joy to be one of the
answers. I expected fear and shame, but not the joyful moments of their
lives. I was shocked to hear people say they were at their most
vulnerable when: Standing over my children while they're sleeping
Acknowledging how much I love my husband/wife Knowing how good I've got
it Loving my job Spending time with my parents Watching my parents with
my children Thinking about my relationship with my boyfriend Getting
engaged Going into remission Having a baby Getting promoted Being happy
Falling in love Not only was I shocked to hear these answers, I knew I
was in trouble. Before my 2007 breakdown spiritual awakening, foreboding
joy was one of my own unconscious pieces of armor. When I first made the
connection between vulnerability and joy reported by participants, I
could barely breathe. I had considered my constant disaster planning as
my little secret. I was convinced that I was the only one who stood over
my children while they slept and, in the split second that I became
engulfed with love and adoration, pictured something really terrible
happening to them. I was sure that no one but me pictured car wrecks and
rehearsed the horrific phone conversations with the police that all of
us dread. One of the first stories I heard was from a woman in her late
forties. "I used to take every good thing and imagine the worst possible
disaster," she told me. "I would literally picture the worst-case
scenario and try to control all of the outcomes. When my daughter got
into the college of her dreams, I just knew something bad would happen
if she moved too far away. I spent the entire summer before she left
trying to convince her to go to a local school. It crushed her
confidence and took the fun out of our last summer. It was a painful
lesson. Now I cross my fingers, stay grateful, pray, and try like hell
to push the bad images out of my head.

Unfortunately, I've passed that way of thinking down to my daughter.
She's increasingly afraid to try new things, especially when her life is
going well. She says she doesn't want to 'tempt fate.'" A man in his
early sixties told me, "I used to think the best way to go through life
was to expect the worst. That way, if it happened, you were prepared,
and if it didn't happen, you were pleasantly surprised. Then I was in a
car accident and my wife was killed. Needless to say, expecting the
worst didn't prepare me at all. And worse, I still grieve for all of
those wonderful moments we shared and that I didn't fully enjoy. My
commitment to her is to fully enjoy every moment now. I just wish she
was here, now that I know how to do that." These stories illustrate how
the concept of foreboding joy as a method of minimizing vulnerability is
best understood as a continuum that runs from "rehearsing tragedy" to
what I call "perpetual disappointment." Some of us, like the woman in
the first story, scramble to the bleakest worst-case scenario when joy
rears its vulnerable head, while others never even see joy, preferring
to stay in an unmoving state of perpetual disappointment. What the
perpetual-disappointment folks described is this: "It's easier to live
disappointed than it is to feel disappointed. It feels more vulnerable
to dip in and out of disappointment than to just set up camp there. You
sacrifice joy, but you suffer less pain." Both of these ends of the
continuum tell the same story: Softening into the joyful moments of our
lives requires vulnerability. If, like me, you've ever stood over your
children and thought to yourself, I love you so much I can barely
breathe, and in that exact moment have been flooded with images of
something terrible happening to your child, know that you're not crazy
nor are you alone. About eighty percent of the parents I've interviewed
acknowledged having that experience. The same percentage holds true for
the thousands of parents I've spoken to and worked with over the years.
Why? What are we doing and why on earth are we doing it? Once we make
the connection between vulnerability and joy, the answer is pretty
straightforward: We're trying to beat vulnerability to the punch. We
don't want to be blindsided by hurt. We don't want to be caught
off-guard, so we literally practice being devastated or never move from
self-elected disappointment. For those of us who rehearse tragedy,
there's a reason those images flood into our mind the second we're
overwhelmed with joy. When we spend our lives (knowingly or unknowingly)
pushing away vulnerability, we can't hold space open for the
uncertainty, risk, and emotional

exposure of joy. For many of us, there's even a physiological
response--- a "coming out of our skin" feeling. We're desperate for more
joy, but at the same time we can't tolerate the vulnerability. And our
culture assists in this doom-filled rehearsal: Most of us have a
stockpile of terrible images that we can pull from at the instant we're
grappling with vulnerability. I often ask audience members to raise
their hands if they've seen a graphically violent image in the past
week. About twenty percent of the audience normally raises their hands.
Then I reframe the question: "Raise your hand if you've watched the
news, CSI, NCIS, Law & Order, Bones, or any other crime show on TV." At
that point about eighty to ninety percent of the audience hands go up.
We have the images we need to activate foreboding joy right at our
neurological fingertips. We're visual people. We trust, consume, and
mentally store what we see. I remember recently being in the car with
Steve and the kids as we headed to San Antonio for a long weekend.
Charlie was performing his new kindergarten knock-knock joke routine for
us, and we were all cracking up---even his older sister. I started
welling up with joy, and in the split second that vulnerability, joy's
constant companion, hit me, I shuddered, recalling an image from the
news that showed an overturned SUV on I-10 and two empty car seats lying
on the ground next to the truck. My laughter turned to panic, and I
remember blurting out, "Slow down, Steve." He looked at me with a
puzzled expression and said, "We're stopped."

DARING GREATLY: GRATITUDE

PRACTICING

Even those of us who have learned to "lean into" joy and embrace our
experiences are not immune to the uncomfortable quake of vulnerability
that often accompanies joyful moments. We've just learned how to use it
as a reminder rather than a warning shot. What was the most surprising
(and life changing) difference for me was the nature of that reminder:
For those welcoming the experience, the shudder of vulnerability that
accompanies joy is an invitation to practice gratitude, to acknowledge
how truly grateful we are for the person, the beauty, the connection, or
simply the moment before us. Gratitude, therefore, emerged from the data
as the antidote to foreboding joy. In fact, every participant who spoke
about the ability to stay open to joy also talked about the importance
of practicing gratitude. This pattern of association was so thoroughly
prevalent in the data that I made a commitment as a researcher not to
talk about joy without talking about gratitude. It wasn't just the
relationship between joy and gratitude that took me by surprise. I was
also startled by the fact that research participants consistently
described both joyfulness and gratitude as spiritual practices that were
bound to a belief in human connectedness and a power greater than us.
Their stories and descriptions expanded on this, pointing to a clear
distinction between happiness and joy. Participants described happiness
as an emotion that's connected to circumstances, and they described joy
as a spiritual way of engaging with the world that's connected to
practicing gratitude. While I was initially taken aback by the
relationship between joy and vulnerability, it now makes perfect sense
to me, and I can see why gratitude would be the antidote to foreboding
joy. Scarcity and fear drive foreboding joy. We're afraid that the
feeling of joy won't last, or that there won't be enough, or that the
transition to disappointment (or whatever is in store for us next) will
be too difficult. We've learned that giving in to joy is, at best,
setting ourselves up for disappointment and, at worst, inviting
disaster. And we struggle with the worthiness issue. Do we deserve our
joy, given our inadequacies and imperfections? What about the starving
children and the war-ravaged world? Who are we to be joyful?

If the opposite of scarcity is enough, then practicing gratitude is how
we acknowledge that there's enough and that we're enough. I use the word
practicing because the research participants spoke of tangible gratitude
practices, more than merely having an attitude of gratitude or feeling
grateful. In fact, they gave specific examples of gratitude practices
that included everything from keeping gratitude journals and gratitude
jars to implementing family gratitude rituals. Actually, I learned the
most about gratitude practices and the relationship between scarcity and
joy that plays out in vulnerability from the men and women who had
experienced some of the most profound losses or survived the greatest
traumas. These included parents whose children had died, family members
with terminally ill loved ones, and genocide and trauma survivors. One
of the questions I'm most often asked is "Don't you get really depressed
talking to people about vulnerability and hearing about people's darkest
struggles?" My answer is no, never. That's because I've learned more
about worthiness, resilience, and joy from those people who courageously
shared their struggles with me than from any other part of my work. And
nothing has been a greater gift to me than the three lessons I learned
about joy and light from people who have spent time in sorrow and
darkness: 1. Joy comes to us in moments---ordinary moments. We risk
missing out on joy when we get too busy chasing down the extraordinary.
Scarcity culture may keep us afraid of living small, ordinary lives, but
when you talk to people who have survived great losses, it is clear that
joy is not a constant. Without exception, all the participants who spoke
to me about their losses, and what they missed the most, spoke about
ordinary moments. "If I could come downstairs and see my husband sitting
at the table and cursing at the newspaper..." "If I could hear my son
giggling in the backyard..." "My mom sent me the craziest texts---she
never knew how to work her phone. I'd give anything to get one of those
texts right now." 2. Be grateful for what you have. When I asked people
who had survived tragedy how we can cultivate and show more compassion
for people who are suffering, the answer was always the same: Don't
shrink away from the joy of your child because I've lost mine. Don't
take what you have for granted---celebrate it. Don't apologize for what
you have. Be grateful for it and share your

gratitude with others. Are your parents healthy? Be thrilled. Let them
know how much they mean to you. When you honor what you have, you're
honoring what I've lost. 3. Don't squander joy. We can't prepare for
tragedy and loss. When we turn every opportunity to feel joy into a test
drive for despair, we actually diminish our resilience. Yes, softening
into joy is uncomfortable. Yes, it's scary. Yes, it's vulnerable. But
every time we allow ourselves to lean into joy and give in to those
moments, we build resilience and we cultivate hope. The joy becomes part
of who we are, and when bad things happen---and they do happen---we are
stronger. It took me a couple of years to understand and integrate this
information, and to start to cultivate a gratitude practice. Ellen, on
the other hand, seemed to intuitively understand the importance of
acknowledging and owning joy. When she was in the first grade, we played
hooky one afternoon and spent the day at the park. At one point we were
on a paddleboat, feeding ducks stale bread that we had brought from
home, when I realized that she had stopped pedaling and was sitting
perfectly still in her seat. Her hands were wrapped around the bread
sack, her head was tilted back, and her eyes were closed. The sun was
shining on her uplifted face and she had a quiet smile on her face. I
was so struck by her beauty and her vulnerability that I could barely
catch my breath. I watched for a full minute, but when she didn't move,
I got a little nervous. "Ellie? Is everything okay, sweetie?" Her smile
widened and she opened her eyes. She looked at me and said, "I'm fine,
Mama. I was just making a picture memory." I had never heard of a
picture memory, but I liked the sound of it. "What's that mean?" "Oh, a
picture memory is a picture I take in my mind when I'm really, really
happy. I close my eyes and take a picture, so when I'm feeling sad or
scared or lonely, I can look at my picture memories." I'm not as
eloquent or poised as my then six-year-old daughter, but I've been
practicing. For me, expressing gratitude is still bumpier than it is
graceful or fluid. I still get overwhelmed with vulnerability in the
midst of joyful experiences. But now I've learned to literally say
aloud, "I'm feeling vulnerable and I'm so grateful for
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." Okay, this can be fairly awkward in
the middle of a conversation, but it's much better than the
alternative---catastrophizing and controlling.

Just recently, Steve told me that he was thinking about taking the kids
to his family's farmhouse in Pennsylvania while I was out of town for
work. I immediately thought it was a great idea, until I started
boarding the crazy train of Oh, my God, I can't let them fly without me;
what if something happens? Rather than picking a fight, being critical,
or making up something to quash the idea without revealing my
unreasonable fears (e.g., "That's a terrible idea. Airfare is really
high right now," or, "That's selfish. I want to go too."), I just said,
"Vulnerability. Vulnerability. I'm grateful for...for...the kids getting
to spend alone time with you and explore the country outside." Steve
smiled. He's well aware of my practice, and he knew I meant it. Before I
put this research on countering foreboding joy into practice, I never
knew how to get past that immediate vulnerability shudder. I didn't have
the information to get from what I feared, to how I actually felt, and
to what I really craved: gratitude-fueled joy.

THE SHIELD: PERFECTIONISM One of my favorite features on my blog is my
Inspiration Interviews series. It's special to me because I only
interview people whom I find truly inspirational---people who engage
with the world in a way that inspires me to be more creative and a
little bit braver with my own work. I've always asked interviewees the
same group of questions, and after the Wholehearted research emerged, I
started asking questions about vulnerability and perfectionism. As a
recovering perfectionist and an aspiring good-enough-ist, I'm always
finding myself skimming down the list to read the answer to this
question first: Is perfectionism an issue for you? If so, what's one of
your strategies for managing it? I ask this question because, in all of
my data collecting, I've never heard one person attribute their joy,
success, or Wholeheartedness to being perfect. In fact, what I've heard
over and over throughout the years is one clear message: "The most
valuable and important things in my life came to me when I cultivated
the courage to be vulnerable, imperfect, and self-compassionate."
Perfectionism is not the path that leads us to our gifts and to our
sense of purpose; it's the hazardous detour. I'm going to share a few of
my favorite answers from the interviews with you, but first I want to
tell you about the definition of perfectionism that bubbled up from the
data. Here's what I learned: Like vulnerability, perfectionism has
accumulated around it a considerable mythology. I think it's helpful to
start by looking at what perfectionism isn't: Perfectionism is not the
same thing as striving for excellence. Perfectionism is not about
healthy achievement and growth. Perfectionism is a defensive move. It's
the belief that if we do things perfectly and look perfect, we can
minimize or avoid the pain of blame, judgment, and shame. Perfectionism
is a twenty-ton shield that we lug around, thinking it will protect us,
when in fact it's the thing that's really preventing us from being seen.
Perfectionism is not self-improvement. Perfectionism is, at its core,
about trying to earn approval. Most perfectionists grew up being praised
for achievement and performance (grades, manners, rule following, people
pleasing, appearance, sports). Somewhere along the way, they adopted
this dangerous and debilitating belief system:

"I am what I accomplish and how well I accomplish it. Please. Perform.
Perfect." Healthy striving is self- focused: How can I improve?
Perfectionism is other-focused: What will they think? Perfectionism is a
hustle. Perfectionism is not the key to success. In fact, research shows
that perfectionism hampers achievement. Perfectionism is correlated with
depression, anxiety, addiction, and life paralysis or missed
opportunities. The fear of failing, making mistakes, not meeting
people's expectations, and being criticized keeps us outside of the
arena where healthy competition and striving unfolds. Last,
perfectionism is not a way to avoid shame. Perfectionism is a form of
shame. Where we struggle with perfectionism, we struggle with shame.
After using the data to bushwhack my way through the myths, I then
developed the following definition of perfectionism: Perfectionism is a
self-destructive and addictive belief system that fuels this primary
thought: If I look perfect and do everything perfectly, I can avoid or
minimize the painful feelings of shame, judgment, and blame.
Perfectionism is self-destructive simply because perfection doesn't
exist. It's an unattainable goal. Perfectionism is more about perception
than internal motivation, and there is no way to control perception, no
matter how much time and energy we spend trying. Perfectionism is
addictive, because when we invariably do experience shame, judgment, and
blame, we often believe it's because we weren't perfect enough. Rather
than questioning the faulty logic of perfectionism, we become even more
entrenched in our quest to look and do everything just right.
Perfectionism actually sets us up to feel shame, judgment, and blame,
which then leads to even more shame and self-blame: "It's my fault. I'm
feeling this way because I'm not good enough."

DARING GREATLY: APPRECIATING THE BEAUTY OF CRACKS Just as our
experiences of foreboding joy can be located on a continuum, I found
that most of us fall somewhere on a perfectionism continuum. In other
words, when it comes to hiding our flaws, managing perception, and
wanting to win over folks, we're all hustling a little. For some folks,
perfectionism may only emerge when they're feeling particularly
vulnerable. For others, perfectionism is compulsive, chronic, and
debilitating---it looks and feels like an addiction. Regardless of where
we are on this continuum, if we want freedom from perfectionism, we have
to make the long journey from "What will people think?" to "I am
enough." That journey begins with shame resilience, self-compassion, and
owning our stories. To claim the truths about who we are, where we come
from, what we believe, and the very imperfect nature of our lives, we
have to be willing to give ourselves a break and appreciate the beauty
of our cracks or imperfections. To be kinder and gentler with ourselves
and each other. To talk to ourselves the same way we'd talk to someone
we care about. Dr. Kristin Neff, a researcher and professor at the
University of Texas at Austin, runs the Self-Compassion Research Lab,
where she studies how we develop and practice self-compassion. According
to Neff, selfcompassion has three elements: self-kindness, common
humanity, and mindfulness. In her new book, Self-Compassion: Stop
Beating Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind, she defines each of
these elements: Self-kindness: Being warm and understanding toward
ourselves when we suffer, fail, or feel inadequate, rather than ignoring
our pain or flagellating ourselves with self-criticism. Common humanity:
Common humanity recognizes that suffering and feelings of personal
inadequacy are part of the shared human experience---something we all go
through rather than something that happens to "me" alone. Mindfulness:
Taking a balanced approach to negative emotions so that feelings are
neither suppressed nor exaggerated. We cannot ignore our pain and feel
compassion for it at the same time.

Mindfulness requires that we not "overidentify" with thoughts and
feelings, so that we are caught up and swept away by negativity. I love
how her definition of mindfulness reminds us that being mindful also
means not overidentifying with or exaggerating our feelings. For me,
it's so easy to get stuck in regret or shame or selfcriticism when I
make a mistake. But self-compassion requires an observant and accurate
perspective when feeling shame or pain. Neff has a great website where
you can take a self-compassion inventory and learn more about her
research. The Web address is www.selfcompassion.org. In addition to
practicing self-compassion (and trust me, like gratitude and everything
else worthwhile, it's a practice), we must also remember that our
worthiness, that core belief that we are enough, comes only when we live
inside our story. We either own our stories (even the messy ones), or we
stand outside of them---denying our vulnerabilities and imperfections,
orphaning the parts of us that don't fit in with who/what we think we're
supposed to be, and hustling for other people's approval of our
worthiness. Perfectionism is exhausting because hustling is exhausting.
It's a never-ending performance. I want to go back now to the
Inspiration Interviews series from my blog and share some of the
responses with you. In these responses I see the beauty of being
real---of embracing the cracks---and I'm inspired by the
self-compassion. I think they'll inspire you too. The first is from
Gretchen Rubin, the best-selling writer whose book The Happiness Project
is the account of the year she spent test-driving studies and theories
about how to be happier. Her new book, Happier at Home, focuses on the
factors that matter at home, such as possessions, marriage, time,
parenthood, neighborhood. Here's how she answered the question about
managing perfectionism: I remind myself, "Don't let the perfect be the
enemy of the good." (Cribbed from Voltaire.) A twenty-minute walk that I
do is better than the four-mile run that I don't do. The imperfect book
that gets published is better than the perfect book that never leaves my
computer. The dinner party of take-out Chinese food is better than the
elegant dinner that I never host.

Andrea Scher is a photographer, writer, and life coach living in
Berkeley, California. Through her e-courses "Superhero Photo" and "Mondo
Beyondo" and her award-winning blog Superhero Journal, Andrea inspires
others to live authentic, colorful, and creative lives. You can often
find her sitting on the kitchen floor, holding her new baby, and

asking her four-year-old son to leap so she can take a superhero
portrait. She writes here about perfectionism (I love her mantras!): I
was a competitive gymnast as a kid, got perfect attendance every year in
school, was terrified of getting anything worse than an A minus, and had
an eating disorder in high school. Oh, and I think I was the homecoming
queen. Yep. I think I have some issues with perfectionism! But I have
been working on it. As a kid, I equated being perfect with being
loved...and I think I still confuse the two. I often find myself doing
what Brené calls "the hustle for worthiness." That dance we do so that
people don't see how incredibly flawed and human we are. Sometimes I
have my self-worth wrapped up in what I do and how good I look doing it,
but mostly I am learning to let go. Parenthood has taught me a lot about
that. It's messy and humbling, and I am learning to show my mess. To
manage my perfectionism I give myself tons of permission to do things
that are good enough. I do things quickly (having two small children
will teach you how to do most tasks at lightning speed), and if it's
good enough, it gets my stamp of approval. I have a few mantras that
help: Quick and dirty wins the race. Perfection is the enemy of done.
Good enough is really effin' good.

Nicholas Wilton is the artist behind the beautiful illustrations on my
earlier book covers and my website. In addition to showings in gallery
exhibitions and inclusion in private collections, he is the founder of
the Artplane Method, a system of fundamental painting and intuition
principles that help enable the creative process. I absolutely love what
he writes about perfectionism and art. It completely aligns with the
research finding that perfectionism crushes creativity---which is why
one of the most effective ways to start recovering from perfectionism is
to start creating. Here's what Nick has to say: I always felt that
someone, a long time ago, organized the affairs of the world into areas
that made sense--- categories of stuff that is perfectible, things that
fit neatly in perfect bundles. The world of business, for example, is
this way---line items, spreadsheets, things that add up, that can be
perfected. The legal system---not always perfect, but nonetheless a
mind-numbing effort to actually write down all kinds of laws and
instructions that cover all aspects of being human, a kind of umbrella
code of conduct we should all follow. Perfection is crucial in building
an aircraft, a bridge, or a high-speed train. The code and mathematics
residing just below the surface of the Internet is also this way. Things
are either perfectly right or they will not work. So much of the world
we work and live in is based upon being correct, being perfect. But
after this someone got through organizing everything just perfectly, he
(or probably a she) was left with a bunch of stuff that didn't fit
anywhere---things in a shoe box that had to go somewhere. So in
desperation this person threw up her arms and said, "OK! Fine. All the
rest of this stuff that isn't perfectible, that doesn't seem to fit
anywhere else, will just have to be piled into this last, rather large,
tattered box that we can sort of push behind the couch. Maybe later we
can come back and figure where it all is supposed to fit in. Let's label
the box ART." The problem was thankfully never fixed, and in time the
box overflowed as more and more art piled up. I think the dilemma exists
because art, among all the other tidy categories, most closely resembles
what it is like to be human. To be alive. It is our nature to be
imperfect. To have uncategorized feelings and emotions. To make or do
things that don't sometimes necessarily make sense. Art is all just
perfectly imperfect. Once the word Art enters the description of what
you're up to, it is almost like getting a hall pass from perfection. It
thankfully releases us from any expectation of perfection. In relation
to my own work not being perfect, I just always point to the tattered
box behind the couch and mention the word Art, and people seem to
understand and let you off the hook about being perfect and go back to
their business.

There's a quote that I share every time I talk about vulnerability and
perfectionism. My fixation with these words from Leonard Cohen's song
"Anthem" comes from how much comfort and hope they give me as I

put "enough" into practice: "There's a crack in everything. That's how
the light gets in."

THE SHIELD: NUMBING If you're wondering if this section is about
addiction and you're thinking, This isn't about me, please read on. This
is about all of us. First, one of the most universal numbing strategies
is what I call crazy-busy. I often say that when they start having
twelve-step meetings for busyaholics, they'll need to rent out football
stadiums. We are a culture of people who've bought into the idea that if
we stay busy enough, the truth of our lives won't catch up with us.
Second, statistics dictate that there are very few people who haven't
been affected by addiction. I believe we all numb our feelings. We may
not do it compulsively and chronically, which is addiction, but that
doesn't mean that we don't numb our sense of vulnerability. And numbing
vulnerability is especially debilitating because it doesn't just deaden
the pain of our difficult experiences; numbing vulnerability also dulls
our experiences of love, joy, belonging, creativity, and empathy. We
can't selectively numb emotion. Numb the dark and you numb the light. If
you're also wondering if numbing refers to doing illegal drugs or having
a few glasses of wine after work---the answer is yes. I'm going to argue
that we need to examine the idea of "taking the edge off," and that
means considering the glasses of wine we drink while we're cooking
dinner, eating dinner, and cleaning up after dinner, our sixty-hour
workweeks, the sugar, the fantasy football, the prescription pills, and
the four shots of espresso that we drink in order to clear the fog from
the wine and Advil PM. I'm talking about you and me and the stuff we do
every day. When I looked at the data, my primary question was "What are
we numbing and why?" Americans today are more debt-ridden, obese,
medicated, and addicted than we ever have been. For the first time in
history, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has
announced that automobile accidents are now the second leading cause of
accidental death in the United States. The leading cause? Drug
overdoses. In fact, more people die from prescription drug overdoses
than from heroin, cocaine, and methamphetamine drug use combined. Even
more alarming is the estimate that less than 5 percent of those who died
from prescription drug overdoses obtained their drugs from the folks we
normally think of as street-corner drug dealers. The dealers today are
more likely to be parents, relatives, friends, and physicians. Clearly
there's a problem. We're desperate to feel less or more of

something---to make something go away or to have more of something else.
Having spent years working closely with addiction researchers and
clinicians, I had guessed that the primary driver of numbing would be
our struggles with worthiness and shame: We numb the pain that comes
from feeling inadequate and "less than." But that was only part of the
puzzle. Anxiety and disconnection also emerged as drivers of numbing in
addition to shame. As I'll explain, the most powerful need for numbing
seems to come from combinations of all three---shame, anxiety, and
disconnection. The anxiety described by the research participants
appeared to be fueled by uncertainty, overwhelming and competing demands
on our time, and (one of the big surprises) social discomfort.
Disconnection was tougher to nail down. I thought about using the term
depression rather than disconnection, but as I recoded the data, that's
not what I heard. I instead heard a range of experiences that
encompassed depression but also included loneliness, isolation,
disengagement, and emptiness. Again, what was really powerful for me,
personally and professionally, was seeing the strong pattern of shame
threading through the experiences of anxiety and/or disconnection. The
most accurate answers to the question about what drives numbing sound
more like the answers to "What's your sign?" Anxiety with shame rising.
Disconnection with shame rising. Anxiety and disconnection with shame
rising. Shame enters for those of us who experience anxiety because not
only are we feeling fearful, out of control, and incapable of managing
our increasingly demanding lives, but eventually our anxiety is
compounded and made unbearable by our belief that if we were just
smarter, stronger, or better, we'd be able to handle everything. Numbing
here becomes a way to take the edge off of both instability and
inadequacy. With disconnection it's a similar story. We may have a
couple of hundred friends on Facebook, plus a slew of colleagues,
real-life friends, and neighbors, but we feel alone and unseen. Because
we are hardwired for connection, disconnection always creates pain.
Feeling disconnected can be a normal part of life and relationships, but
when coupled with the shame of believing that we're disconnected because
we're not worthy of connection, it creates a pain that we want to numb.
One stop beyond disconnection is isolation, which presents real danger.
Jean Baker Miller and Irene Stiver, relational-cultural theorists from
the Stone Center at Wellesley College, have eloquently captured the

extremity of isolation. They write, "We believe that the most terrifying
and destructive feeling that a person can experience is psychological
isolation. This is not the same as being alone. It is a feeling that one
is locked out of the possibility of human connection and of being
powerless to change the situation. In the extreme, psychological
isolation can lead to a sense of hopelessness and desperation. People
will do almost anything to escape this combination of condemned
isolation and powerlessness." The part of this definition that is
critical to understanding shame is the sentence "People will do almost
anything to escape this combination of condemned isolation and
powerlessness." Shame often leads to desperation. And reactions to this
desperate need to escape from isolation and fear can run the gamut from
numbing to addiction, depression, self-injury, eating disorders,
bullying, violence, and suicide. As I thought back on my own numbing
history, understanding how shame magnifies anxiety and disconnection
provided me with answers to questions that I've had for years. I didn't
start drinking to drown my sorrows: I just needed something to do with
my hands. In fact, I'm convinced that if smart phones and the bejeweled
Chihuahuas that today's celebrities sport as accessories had been in
fashion when I was in my late teens, I never would have started smoking
and drinking. I drank and smoked to minimize my feelings of
vulnerability and to look busy when all of the other girls at my table
had been asked to dance. I literally needed something to do, something
to help me look busy. Twenty-five years ago it felt as if my only choice
was nursing a beer, stirring an amaretto sour, or fiddling with a
cigarette. I was alone at the table with no one and nothing to keep me
company except for my vices. For me, vulnerability led to anxiety, which
led to shame, which led to disconnection, which led to Bud Light. For
many of us, the literal chemical anesthetizing of emotions is just a
pleasant, albeit dangerous, side effect of behaviors that are more about
fitting in, finding connection, and managing anxiety. I quit drinking
and smoking sixteen years ago. In The Gifts of Imperfection, I write: I
wasn't raised with the skills and emotional practice needed to "lean
into discomfort," so over time I basically became a
take-the-edge-off-aholic. But they don't have meetings for that. And
after some brief experimenting, I learned that describing your addiction
that way in a traditional twelve-step meeting doesn't always go over
very well with the purists. For me, it wasn't just the dance halls, cold
beer, and Marlboro Lights of my youth that got out of hand---it was
banana bread, chips and queso, e-mail, work, staying busy, incessant
worrying, planning, perfectionism, and anything else that could dull
those agonizing and anxiety-fueled feelings of vulnerability.

Let's look at the Daring Greatly strategies for numbing.

DARING GREATLY: SETTING BOUNDARIES, FINDING TRUE COMFORT, AND
CULTIVATING SPIRIT When I interviewed the research participants, whom
I'd describe as living a Wholehearted life, about numbing, they
consistently talked about three things: 1. Learning how to actually feel
their feelings. 2. Staying mindful about numbing behaviors (they
struggled too). 3. Learning how to lean into the discomfort of hard
emotions. This all made perfect sense to me, but I wanted to know
exactly how you lean into anxiety and disconnection. So I started
interviewing people about this question specifically. As I expected,
there was more to it. These folks had elevated "enough" to whole new
levels. Yes, they practiced mindfulness and leaning, but they also set
serious boundaries in their lives. As I asked more pointed questions
about the choices and behaviors Wholehearted men and women made to
reduce anxiety, they explained that reducing anxiety meant paying
attention to how much they could do and how much was too much, and
learning how to say, "Enough." They got very clear on what was important
to them and when they could let something go. In Sir Ken Robinson's
wonderful 2010 TED talk on the learning revolution, he starts to explain
to the audience that he divides the world into two groups, then he stops
himself and with great humor says, "Jeremy Bentham, the great
utilitarian philosopher, once spiked this argument. He said, 'There are
two types of people in the world, those who divide people into two
types, and those who do not.'" Robinson paused and smiled. "Well, I do."
I loved that because as a researcher, I do too. But before I talk about
the two groups I identified, I want to say that this division is not
exactly as neat and tidy as two discrete groups, and at the same time it
almost is. Let's take a look. When it comes to anxiety, we all struggle.
Yes, there are different types of anxiety and certainly different
intensities. Some anxiety is hardwired and best addressed with a
combination of medication and

therapy, and some of it is environmental---we're overextended and
overstressed. What was interesting to me was how the participants could
be divided into two camps: Group A defined the challenge of anxiety as
finding ways to manage and soothe the anxiety, while Group B clearly
defined the problem as changing the behaviors that led to anxiety.
Participants from both groups often used today's dominating technology
as an example of an anxiety-producing source during the interviews, so
let's look at how these two groups thought differently about the daily
onslaught of e-mail, voicemail, and text messages. Group A: "I make a
pot of coffee after I tuck in my kids so I can take care of all the
e-mails between ten P.M. and midnight. If there are too many, I wake up
at four A.M. and start over again. I don't like getting to work with any
unanswered e-mail in my in-box. I'm exhausted, but they're answered."
Group B: "I've simply stopped sending unnecessary e-mails and asked my
friends and colleagues to do the same. I've also started setting the
expectation that it might take me a few days to respond. If it's
important, call me. Don't text or e-mail. Call. Better yet, stop by my
office." Group A: "I use red lights, grocery lines, and elevator rides
to stay on top of my calls. I even sleep with my phone in case someone
calls or I remember something in the middle of the night. One time I
called my assistant at four A.M. because I remembered that we needed to
add something to a motion that we were preparing. I was surprised that
she answered, but then she reminded me that I had told her to keep her
phone on her nightstand. I'll rest and let off steam when we're done.
Work hard. Play hard. That's my motto. And it doesn't take much to play
hard when you haven't slept in a while." Group B: "My boss, my friends,
and my family know that I don't take calls before nine A.M. or after
nine P.M. If the phone rings after or before those times, it's either a
wrong number or an emergency---a real emergency, not a work issue."

The participants who struggled the most with numbing, Group A, explained
that reducing anxiety meant finding ways to numb it, not changing the
thinking, behaviors, or emotions that created anxiety. I hated every
minute of this part of the research. I've always looked for better ways
to manage my exhaustion and anxiety. I wanted help "living like this,"
not suggestions on how to "stop living like this." My struggle mirrored
the struggle that I heard from the folks who talked the most about
numbing. The smaller group, Group B---the participants who addressed
anxiety at the root by aligning their lives with their values and
setting boundaries---fell on the Wholehearted continuum. When we asked
that group about the process of setting boundaries and limits to lower
the anxiety in their lives, they didn't hesitate to connect worthiness
with boundaries. We have to believe we are enough in order to say,
"Enough!" For women, setting boundaries is difficult because the shame
gremlins are quick to weigh in: "Careful saying no. You'll really
disappoint these folks. Don't let them down. Be a good girl. Make
everyone happy." For men, the gremlins whisper, "Man up. A real guy
could take this on and then some. Is the little mamma's boy just too
tired?"

We know that daring greatly means engaging with our vulnerability, which
can't happen when shame has the upper hand, and the same is true for
dealing with anxiety-fueled disconnection. The two most powerful forms
of connection are love and belonging---they are both irreducible needs
of men, women, and children. As I conducted my interviews, I realized
that only one thing separated the men and women who felt a deep sense of
love and belonging from the people who seemed to be struggling for it.
That one thing was the belief in their worthiness. It's as simple and
complicated as this: If we want to fully experience love and belonging,
we must believe that we are worthy of love and belonging. But before we
talk more about numbing and disconnection, I want to share two more
definitions with you. I shared my definition of love on page 105, here
are the definitions of connection and belonging that emerged from the
data. Connection: Connection is the energy that is created between
people when they feel seen, heard, and valued; when they can give and
receive without judgment. Belonging: Belonging is the innate human
desire to be part of something larger than us. Because this yearning is
so primal, we often try to acquire it by fitting in and by seeking
approval, which are not only hollow substitutes for belonging, but often
barriers to it. Because true belonging only happens when we present our
authentic, imperfect selves to the world, our sense of belonging can
never be greater than our level of self-acceptance. These definitions
are crucial to understanding how we become disconnected in our lives and
how to change. Living a connected life ultimately is about setting
boundaries, spending less time and energy hustling and winning over
people who don't matter, and seeing the value of working on cultivating
connection with family and close friends. Before I undertook this
research, my question was "What's the quickest way to make these
feelings go away?" Today my question is "What are these feelings and
where did they come from?" Invariably, the answers are that I'm not
feeling connected enough to Steve or the kids, and that this comes from
(take your pick) not sleeping enough, not playing enough, working too
much, or trying to run from vulnerability. What has changed for me is
that I know now that I can address these answers.

THE CARE AND FEEDING OF OUR SPIRITS One final question remains, and I
hear it a lot. People often ask, "Where is the line between pleasure or
comfort and numbing?" In response, author and personal growth teacher
Jennifer Louden has named our numbing devices "shadow comforts." When
we're anxious, disconnected, vulnerable, alone, and feeling helpless,
the booze and food and work and endless hours online feel like comfort,
but in reality they're only casting their long shadows over our lives.
In her book The Life Organizer, Louden writes, "Shadow comforts can take
any form. It's not what you do; it's why you do it that makes the
difference. You can eat a piece of chocolate as a holy wafer of
sweetness ---a real comfort---or you can cram an entire chocolate bar
into your mouth without even tasting it in a frantic attempt to soothe
yourself---a shadow comfort. You can chat on message boards for half an
hour and be energized by community and ready to go back to work, or you
can chat on message boards because you're avoiding talking to your
partner about how angry he or she made you last night." I found that
what emerged from the data was exactly what Louden points out: "It's not
what you do; it's why you do it that makes the difference." The
invitation is to think about the intention behind our choices and, if
helpful, to discuss these issues with family, close friends, or a
helping professional. There aren't any checklists or norms to help you
identify shadow comforts or other destructive numbing behavior. This
requires self-examination and reflection. Additionally, I would
recommend listening with great care if the people you love say that they
are concerned about you engaging in these types of behaviors. But
ultimately these are questions that transcend what we know and how we
feel---they're about our spirit. Are my choices comforting and
nourishing my spirit, or are they temporary reprieves from vulnerability
and difficult emotions ultimately diminishing my spirit? Are my choices
leading to my Wholeheartedness, or do they leave me feeling empty and
searching? For me, sitting down to a wonderful meal is nourishment and
pleasure. Eating while I'm standing, be it in front of the refrigerator
or inside the pantry, is always a red flag. Sitting down to watch one of
my favorite shows on television is pleasure. Flipping through channels
for an hour is numbing. As we think about nourishing or diminishing our
spirit, we have to consider how our numbing behaviors affect the people
around us---even

strangers. A couple of years ago, I wrote an op-ed about cell phones and
disconnection for the Houston Chronicle after witnessing how our
crazybusy, anxiety-fueled lifestyles affect other people. Food for
thought: Last week, while I was trying to enjoy my manicure, I watched
in horror as the two women across from me talked on their phones the
entire time they were getting their nails done. They employed head nods,
eyebrow raises, and fingerpointing to instruct the manicurists on things
like nail length and polish choices. I really couldn't believe it. I've
had my nails done by the same two women for ten years. I know their
names (their real Vietnamese names), their children's names, and many of
their stories. They know my name, my children's names, and many of my
stories. When I finally made a comment about the women on their cell
phones, they both quickly averted their eyes. Finally, in a whisper, the
manicurist said, "They don't know. Most of them don't think of us as
people." On the way home, I stopped at Barnes & Noble to pick up a
magazine. The woman ahead of me in line bought two books, applied for a
new "reader card," and asked to get one book gift-wrapped without
getting off of her cell phone. She plowed through the entire exchange
without making eye contact or directly speaking to the young woman
working at the counter. She never acknowledged the presence of the human
being across from her. After leaving Barnes & Noble, I went to a
drive-through fast food restaurant to get a Diet Dr Pepper. Right as I
pulled up to the window, my cell phone rang. I wasn't quite sure, but I
thought it might be Charlie's school calling, so I answered it. It
wasn't the school---it was someone calling to confirm an appointment. I
got off the phone as quickly as I could. In the short time it took me to
say, "Yes, I'll be at my appointment," the woman in the window and I had
finished our soda-for-money transaction. I apologized to her the second
I got off of the phone. I said, "I'm so sorry. The phone rang right when
I was pulling up and I thought it was my son's school." I must have
surprised her because she got huge tears in her eyes and said, "Thank
you. Thank you so much. You have no idea how humiliating it is
sometimes. They don't even see us." I don't know how it feels for her,
but I do know how it feels to be an invisible member of the service
industry. It can suck. I worked my way through undergrad and some of
graduate school by waiting tables and bartending. I worked in a very
nice restaurant that was close to campus and a hot spot for wealthy
college kids and their parents (parents who were visiting for the
weekend and treating their kids and their kids' friends to dinner). I
was in my late twenties and praying to finish my bachelor's degree
before I hit thirty. When the customers were kind and respectful, it was
OK, but one "waiter as object" moment could tear me apart.
Unfortunately, I now see those moments happening all of the time. I see
adults who don't even look at their waiters when they speak to them. I
see parents who let their young children talk down to store clerks. I
see people rage and scream at receptionists, then treat the
bosses/doctors/bankers with the utmost respect. And I see the insidious
nature of race, class, and privilege playing out in one of the most
historically damaging ways possible---the server/served relationship.
Everyone wants to know why customer service has gone to hell in a
handbasket. I want to know why customer behavior has gone to hell in a
handbasket. When we treat people as objects, we dehumanize them. We do
something really terrible to their souls and to our own. Martin Buber,
an Austrian-born philosopher, wrote about the differences between an
I-it relationship and an Iyou relationship. An I-it relationship is
basically what we create when we are in transactions with people whom we
treat like objects---people who are simply there to serve us or complete
a task. I-you relationships are characterized by human connection and
empathy. Buber wrote, "When two people relate to each other
authentically and humanly, God is the electricity that surges between
them." After spending a decade studying belonging, authenticity, and
shame, I can say for certain that we are hardwired for
connection---emotionally, physically, and spiritually. I'm not
suggesting that we engage in a deep, meaningful relationship with the
man who works at the cleaners or the woman who works at the
drive-through, but I am suggesting that we stop dehumanizing people and
start looking them in the eye when we speak to them. If we don't have
the energy or time to do that, we should stay at home.

Spirituality emerged as a fundamental guidepost in Wholeheartedness. Not
religiosity but the deeply held belief that we are inextricably
connected to one another by a force greater than ourselves---a force
grounded in love and compassion. For some of us that's God, for others
it's nature, art, or even human soulfulness. I believe that owning our
worthiness is the act of acknowledging that we are sacred. Perhaps
embracing vulnerability and overcoming numbing is ultimately about the
care and feeding of our spirits.

THE LESS FREQUENTED SHELVES IN THE ARMORY So far, we've cracked open the
armory doors to throw some light on the common arsenal that pretty much
everyone uses to keep themselves safe from vulnerability. Foreboding
joy, perfectionism, and numbing have emerged as the three most universal
methods of protection---what we call major categories of defense. In
this last part of the chapter, I want to briefly explore the less
frequented shelves in the armory where a few more masks and pieces that
form important subcategories of shielding are kept. Most of us are
likely to identify with one or more of these protection mechanisms, or,
at the very least, we will see slivers of ourselves reflected back from
their polished surfaces in a way that cultivates some understanding.

THE SHIELD: VIKING OR VICTIM I recognized this piece of armor when a
significant group of research participants indicated they had very
little use for the concept of vulnerability. Their responses to the idea
that vulnerability might have value ranged from dismissive and defensive
to hostile. What emerged from these interviews and interactions was a
lens on the world that essentially saw people divided into two groups
(ahem, like me and Sir Ken Robinson) that I call Vikings or Victims.
Unlike some participants who had intellectual or theoretical issues with
the value of vulnerability, these folks shared the belief that everyone
without exception belongs to one of two mutually exclusive groups:
Either you're a Victim in life---a sucker or a loser who's always being
taken advantage of and can't hold your own---or you're a Viking---
someone who sees the threat of being victimized as a constant, so you
stay in control, you dominate, you exert power over things, and you
never show vulnerability. As I coded the data from these interviews, I
kept thinking about the chapter in my dissertation on the French
philosopher Jacques Derrida and binary opposition (the pairing of
related terms that are opposite). While the respondents didn't all use
the same examples, a strong pattern of paired opposites emerged in the
language they used to describe their worldview: winner or loser, survive
or die, kill or be killed, strong or weak, leaders or followers, success
or failure, crush or be crushed. And in case those aren't clear enough
examples, there's the life motto of a high-achieving, take-no-prisoners
lawyer, "The world is divided into assholes and suckers. It's that
simple." The source of their Viking-or-Victim worldview was not
completely clear, but most attributed it to the values they had been
taught growing up, the experience of surviving hardships, or their
professional training. The majority of the participants who fell into
the group holding this view were men, but there were also women. It
makes sense that this is a somewhat gendered issue as many men, even men
who don't rely on this armor, talked about the win-lose-zero-sum-power
dynamic being taught and modeled as they grew up. And, don't forget,
winning, dominance, and power over women were part of the list of
masculine norms that we discussed in Chapter 3. In addition to
socialization and life experiences, many of these folks held jobs or
worked in cultures that reinforced the Viking-or-Victim

mentality: We heard this from servicemen and -women, veterans,
corrections and law-enforcement officers, and people working in
highperformance, supercompetitive cultures like law, technology, and
finance. What I don't know is if these folks sought careers that
leveraged their existing Viking-or-Victim belief system, or if their
work experiences shaped this win-or-lose take on life. My guess would be
that a larger percentage of folks belong to the former group, but I
don't have the data to do more than speculate. It's something we're
researching now. One issue that made these interviews some of the most
difficult was the honesty with which people spoke about the struggles in
their personal lives---dealing with high-risk behaviors, divorces,
disconnection, loneliness, addiction, anger, exhaustion. But rather than
seeing these behaviors and negative outcomes as consequences of their
Viking-orVictim worldview, they perceived them as evidence of the harsh
win-orlose nature of life. When I look at the statistics in more
vulnerability-intolerant Vikingor-Victim professions, I see a dangerous
pattern developing. And no place is this more evident than in the
military. The statistics on posttraumatic-stress-related suicides,
violence, addiction, and risk-taking all point to this haunting truth:
For soldiers serving in Afghanistan and Iraq, coming home is more lethal
than being in combat. From the invasion of Afghanistan to the summer of
2009, the US military lost 761 soldiers in combat in that country.
Compare that to the 817 who took their own lives over the same period.
And this number doesn't account for deaths related to violence,
high-risk behaviors, and addiction. Craig Bryan, a University of Texas
psychologist and suicide expert who recently left the air force, told
Time magazine that the military finds itself in a catch-22: "We train
our warriors to use controlled violence and aggression, to suppress
strong emotional reactions in the face of adversity, to tolerate
physical and emotional pain, and to overcome the fear of injury and
death. These qualities are also associated with increased risk for
suicide." Bryan then explained that the military can't decrease the
intensity of that conditioning "without negatively affecting the
fighting capability of our military." And he gave chilling expression to
the inherent danger of looking at the world through the Viking-orVictim
lens for those in the military when he noted, "Service members are,
simply put, more capable of killing themselves by sheer consequence of
their professional training." The situation may be at its

most extreme in the military, but if you look at the mental and physical
health statistics of police officers, you'll find the same thing. The
same holds true in organizations---when we lead, teach, or preach from a
gospel of Viking or Victim, win or lose, we crush faith, innovation,
creativity, and adaptability to change. Take away the guns, in fact, and
we find outcomes similar to those for soldiers and police in corporate
America. Lawyers---an example of a profession largely trained in win or
lose, succeed or fail---have outcomes that aren't much better. The
American Bar Association reports that suicides among lawyers are close
to four times greater than the rate of the general population. An
American Bar Association Journal article reported that experts on lawyer
depression and substance abuse attributed the higher suicide rate to
lawyers' perfectionism and on their need to be aggressive and
emotionally detached. And this mentality can trickle down into our home
lives as well. When we teach or model to our children that vulnerability
is dangerous and should be pushed away, we lead them directly into
danger and disconnection. The Viking or Victim armor doesn't just
perpetuate behaviors such as dominance, control, and power over folks
who see themselves as Vikings, it can also perpetuate a sense of ongoing
victimhood for people who constantly struggle with the idea that they're
being targeted or unfairly treated. With this lens, there are only two
possible positions that people can occupy---power over or powerless. In
the interviews I heard many participants sound resigned to Victim simply
because they didn't want to become the only alternative in their
opinion---Vikings. Reducing our life options to such limited and extreme
roles leaves very little hope for transformation and meaningful change.
I think that's why there's often a sense of desperation and feeling
"boxed in" around this perspective.

DARING GREATLY: REDEFINING SUCCESS, REINTEGRATING VULNERABILITY, AND
SEEKING SUPPORT To examine how the research participants moved from
Viking or Victim to engaging in vulnerability, there was a clear
distinction between those who operated from this belief system because
it's what they learned or it's a value they hold, and those who rely on
this life lens as a result of trauma. Ultimately the question that best
challenges the logic behind Viking or Victim for both groups is this:
How are you defining success? It turns out that in this win-or-lose,
succeed-or-fail paradigm, Vikings are not victorious by any metric that
most of us would label "success." Survival or winning may be success in
the midst of competition, combat, or trauma, but when the immediacy of
that threat is removed, merely surviving is not living. As I mentioned
earlier, love and belonging are irreducible needs of men, women, and
children, and love and belonging are impossible to experience without
vulnerability. Living without connection---without knowing love and
belonging---is not victory. Fear and scarcity fuel the Viking-or-Victim
approach and part of reintegrating vulnerability means examining shame
triggers; what's fueling the winor-lose fear? The men and women who made
the shift from this paradigm to Wholeheartedness all talked about
cultivating trust and connection in relationships as a prerequisite for
trying on a lesscombative way of engaging with the world. As far as
connection and the military is concerned, I'm not advocating for a
kinder, gentler fighting force---I understand the realities faced by
nations and the soldiers who protect them. What I am advocating is a
kinder, gentler public, one willing to embrace, support, and reach out
to the men and women we pay to be invulnerable on our behalf. Are we
willing to reach out and connect? A great example of how connection can
heal and transform is the work being done by Team Red, White and Blue
(TeamRWB.org). According to their mission statement, they believe the
most effective way to impact a veteran's life is through a meaningful
relationship with someone in their community. Their program pairs
wounded veterans with local volunteers. Together, they share meals,
attend the veteran's medical appointments, go to local sporting events,
and engage in other social

activities. This interaction allows veterans to grow in their community,
meet supportive people, and find new passions in life. My interest in
this work not only stemmed from my research, but also from an
extraordinary experience I had working with a group of veterans and
military family members on a shame resilience project in one of my
classes at the University of Houston. It changed my life. It made me
realize how much we, the public, can do for veterans, and why our
politics and beliefs about war shouldn't stop us from reaching out to
them with vulnerability, compassion, and connection. I will always be
grateful for that experience and for what I've learned interviewing
veterans about their experiences. For many of us who grieve over the
wounds of war, we're missing an opportunity for healing that's right in
front of us. Team RWB's motto, It's Our Turn!, is a call to action for
all of us who want to do something to support vets. I'm working with
them now and I invite everyone to find a way to reach out. Dare greatly
and take actions that communicate to veterans or military families that
they are not alone. Actions that communicate, "Your struggle is my
struggle. Your trauma is my trauma. Your healing is my healing."

TRAUMA AND DARING GREATLY We all struggle to understand why some people
who have survived trauma---be it combat, domestic violence, sexual or
physical abuse, or the quieter but equally devastating covert traumas of
oppression, neglect, isolation, or living in extreme fear or
stress---exhibit tremendous resilience and lead full, Wholehearted
lives, while others become defined by their trauma. They may become
perpetrators themselves of the violence they suffered, they struggle
with addiction, or they're unable to escape the feeling that they are
victims in situations where they're not. After studying shame for six
years, I knew that part of the answer was shame resilience---the people
with the most resilience intentionally cultivated the four elements that
we discussed in the earlier chapters. The other part of the answer felt
elusive to me until I started my new research interviewing people about
Wholeheartedness and vulnerability. Then it made perfect sense. If we're
forced into seeing the world through the Viking-or-Victim lens as a
survival mechanism, then it can feel impossible or even deadly to let go
of that worldview. How can we expect someone to give up a way of seeing
and understanding the world that has physically, cognitively, or
emotionally kept them alive? None of us is ever able to part with our
survival strategies without significant support and the cultivation of
replacement strategies. Putting down the Viking-or-Victim shield often
requires help from a professional--- someone who understands trauma.
Groups are also very helpful. The research participants who survived
trauma and are living Wholehearted lives spoke passionately about the
need to: Acknowledge the problem; Seek professional help and/or support;
Work through the accompanying shame and secrecy; And approach the
reintegration of vulnerability as a daily practice rather than a
checklist item. And while the importance of spirituality saturated all
of the interviews with the Wholehearted, it emerged as especially
important with the participants who consider themselves not only trauma
survivors, but also "thrivers."

THE SHIELD: LETTING IT ALL HANG OUT I see two forms of oversharing in
our culture. The first is what I call floodlighting, and the other is
the smash and grab. As we discussed in the chapter on vulnerability
myths, oversharing is not vulnerability. In fact, it often results in
disconnection, distrust, and disengagement.

THE SHIELD: FLOODLIGHTING To understand floodlighting, we have to see
that the intentions behind this kind of sharing are multifaceted and
often include some combination of soothing one's pain, testing the
loyalty and tolerance in a relationship, and/or hot-wiring a new
connection ("We've only known each other for a couple of weeks, but I'm
going to share this and we'll be BFFs now"). Unfortunately for all of us
who've done this (and I include myself in this group), the response is
normally the opposite of what we're looking for: People recoil and shut
down, compounding our shame and disconnection. You can't use
vulnerability to discharge your own discomfort, or as a tolerance
barometer in a relationship ("I'll share this and see if you stick
around"), or to fast-forward a relationship---it just won't cooperate.
Ordinarily, when we reach out and share ourselves---our fears, hopes,
struggles, and joy---we create small sparks of connection. Our shared
vulnerability creates light in normally dark places. My metaphor for
this is twinkle lights (I keep them in my house year-round as a
reminder). There's something magical about the idea of twinkle lights
shining in dark and difficult places. The lights are small, and a single
light is not very special, but an entire strand of sparkling lights is
sheer beauty. It's the connectivity that makes them beautiful. When it
comes to vulnerability, connectivity means sharing our stories with
people who have earned the right to hear them---people with whom we've
cultivated relationships that can bear the weight of our story. Is there
trust? Is there mutual empathy? Is there reciprocal sharing? Can we ask
for what we need? These are the crucial connection questions. When we
share vulnerability, especially shame stories, with someone with whom
there is no connectivity, their emotional (and sometimes physical)
response is often to wince, as if we have shone a floodlight in their
eyes. Instead of a strand of delicate lights, our shared vulnerability
is blinding, harsh, and unbearable. If we are on the receiving end, our
hands fly up and cover our faces, we squeeze our entire faces (not just
our eyes) shut, and we look away. When it's over, we feel depleted,
confused, and sometimes even manipulated. Not exactly the empathic
response that those telling the story were hoping for. Even for those of
us who study empathy and teach empathy skills, it's rare that we're able
to stay attuned when someone's oversharing has stretched us past our
connectivity with them.

DARING GREATLY: CLARIFYING INTENTIONS, SETTING BOUNDARIES, AND
CULTIVATING CONNECTION Much of the beauty of light owes its existence to
the dark. The most powerful moments of our lives happen when we string
together the small flickers of light created by courage, compassion, and
connection and see them shine in the darkness of our struggles. That
darkness is lost when we use vulnerability to floodlight our listener,
and the response is disconnection. We then use this disconnection as
verification that we'll never find comfort, that we're not worthy, that
the relationship is no good, or, in the case of oversharing to hot-wire
a connection, that we'll never have the intimacy that we crave. We
think, "Vulnerability is a crock. It's not worth it and I'm not worth
it." What we don't see is that using vulnerability is not the same thing
as being vulnerable; it's the opposite---it's armor. Sometimes we're not
even aware that we're oversharing as armor. We can purge our
vulnerability or our shame stories out of total desperation to be heard.
We blurt out something that is causing us immense pain because we can't
bear the thought of holding it in for one more second. Our intentions
may not be purging or blurting to armor ourselves or push others away,
but that's the exact outcome of our behaviors. Whether we're on the
purging end or the receiving end of this experience, selfcompassion is
critical. We have to give ourselves a break when we share too much too
soon, and we have to practice self-kindness when we feel like we weren't
able to hold space for someone who hit us with the floodlight. Judgment
exacerbates disconnection. Hearing this, sometimes people ask me how I
decide what to share and how to share it when it comes to my own work. I
share a lot of myself in my work, after all, and I certainly haven't
cultivated trusting relationships with all of you or all of the people
in the audiences where I speak. It's an important question, and the
answer is that I don't tell stories or share vulnerabilities with the
public until I've worked through them with the people I love. I have my
own boundaries around what I share and what I don't share and I stay
mindful of my intentions. First, I only share stories or experiences
that I've worked through and feel that I can share from solid ground. I
don't share what I define as "intimate" stories, nor do I share stories
that are fresh wounds. I did that

once or twice early in my career and it was pretty terrible. There's
nothing like staring into an audience of a thousand people who are all
giving you the floodlight look. Second, I follow the rule that I learned
in my graduate social work training. Sharing yourself to teach or move a
process forward can be healthy and effective, but disclosing information
as a way to work through your personal stuff is inappropriate and
unethical. Last, I only share when I have no unmet needs that I'm trying
to fill. I firmly believe that being vulnerable with a larger audience
is only a good idea if the healing is tied to the sharing, not to the
expectations I might have for the response I get. When I asked other
people who share their stories through blogs, books, and public speaking
about this, it turns out that they are very similar in their approaches
and intentions. I don't want the fear of floodlighting to stop anyone
from sharing their struggles with the world, but being mindful about
what, why, and how we share is important when the context is a larger
public. We're all grateful for people who write and speak in ways that
help us remember that we're not alone. If you recognize yourself in this
shield, this checklist might help: Why am I sharing this? What outcome
am I hoping for? What emotions am I experiencing? Do my intentions align
with my values? Is there an outcome, response, or lack of a response
that will hurt my feelings? Is this sharing in the service of
connection? Am I genuinely asking the people in my life for what I need?

THE SHIELD: THE SMASH AND GRAB If floodlighting is about misusing
vulnerability, the second form of oversharing is all about using
vulnerability as a manipulation tool. A smash-and-grab job is where a
burglar smashes in a door or a store window and grabs what s/he can;
it's sloppy, unplanned, and desperate. The smash and grab used as
vulnerability armor is about smashing through people's social boundaries
with intimate information, then grabbing whatever attention and energy
you can get your hands on. We see this most often in celebrity culture,
where sensationalism thrives. Unfortunately, teachers and school
administrators have told me that they see this same smash-and-grab
behavior in students as young as middle school kids. Unlike
floodlighting, which at least comes from a place of needing confirmation
of our worthiness, this purported disclosure of vulnerability feels less
real. I haven't interviewed enough people who engage in this behavior to
fully understand the motivation, but what's emerged so far is attention
seeking. Of course, worthiness issues can and do underpin attention
seeking, but in our social media world, it's increasingly difficult to
determine what's a real attempt to connect and what's performance. The
only thing I do know is that it's not vulnerability.

DARING GREATLY: INTENTIONS

QUESTIONING

This self-exposure instead feels one-directional, and for those who
engage in it an audience appears to be more desirable than intimate
connection. If we find ourselves engaging in a smash and grab, I think
the reality-check questions are the same as the ones in the section on
floodlighting. I think it's also important to ask, "What need is driving
this behavior?" and "Am I trying to reach, hurt, or connect with someone
specifically, and is this the right way to do it?"

THE SHIELD: SERPENTINING I'm not someone who typically enjoys slapstick
humor or screwball comedies. I much prefer a good romantic comedy or one
of those painfully slow, character-driven Miramax movies. That makes the
movie clip that I'm using as the metaphor for this particular
vulnerability protection mechanism seem odd. But honestly, every time I
watch this movie, I laugh so hard that my face hurts. Just thinking
about it makes me start laughing. The movie is the 1979 comedy The
In-Laws, starring Peter Falk and Alan Arkin. On the eve of their
children's wedding, dentist Sheldon Kornpett (played by Alan Arkin)
meets Vince Ricardo (played by Peter Falk). Sheldon is the bride's
father, and Vince is the groom's. Arkin's character is an anxious,
regimented, straitlaced dentist. Falk's character is a CIA operative who
appears to have gone rogue and who thinks nothing of car chases and
shootouts. As you've probably guessed, the lovable but reckless agent
drags the unsuspecting dentist into his farflung misadventures. The
movie is really corny, but Peter Falk is brilliant as the outrageous
agent and Alan Arkin is the perfect uptight straight man. My very
favorite scene is when Falk tells a terrified Arkin to avoid a flurry of
bullets by running in a zigzag pattern. They're totally exposed on an
airport runway while being shot at by multiple snipers, and his best
advice is "Serpentine, Shel! Serpentine!" At one point, the dentist
miraculously makes it to shelter, but then remembers that he didn't
serpentine, so he runs back into the line of fire so he can zigzag his
way back to cover. I'm totally into this, so I put the two-minute clip
on my website. Scroll down to the bottom of the page and you'll see it
(http://www.brenebrown.com/videos). I don't know why it cracks me up,
but I laugh out loud every time I see it. Maybe it's the visual of a
wild-eyed Peter Falk running back and forth, yelling, "Serpentine!"
Maybe it's because I remember watching it with my dad and brother and
falling out. To this day if things are getting tense in a family
conversation, one of us will nonchalantly say, "Serpentine," and we'll
all laugh. Serpentining is the perfect metaphor for how we spend
enormous energy trying to dodge vulnerability when it would take far
less effort to face it straight on. The image also conveys how fruitless
it is to think of

zigzagging in the face of something as expansive and all-consuming as
vulnerability. "Serpentining" means trying to control a situation,
backing out of it, pretending it's not happening, or maybe even
pretending that you don't care. We use it to dodge conflict, discomfort,
possible confrontation, the potential for shame or hurt, and/or
criticism (self- or other-inflicted). Serpentining can lead to hiding
out, pretending, avoidance, procrastination, rationalizing, blaming, and
lying. I have a tendency to want to serpentine when I feel vulnerable.
If I have to make a difficult call, I'll try to script both sides of it,
I'll convince myself that I should wait, I'll draft an e-mail while
telling myself that it's better in writing, and I'll think of a million
other things to do. I'll emotionally run back and forth until I'm
exhausted.

DARING GREATLY: BEING PRESENT, PAYING ATTENTION, MOVING FORWARD When I
catch myself trying to zigzag my way out of vulnerability, it always
helps to have Peter Falk's voice in my head shouting, "Serpentine,
Shel!" It makes me laugh, which forces me to breathe. Breathing and
humor are great ways to reality-check our behaviors and to start
engaging with vulnerability. Serpentining is draining, and running back
and forth to avoid something is not a good way to live. As I was trying
to come up with occasions when serpentining might be useful, I thought
about the advice that I once received from an old guy who lived in a
Louisiana swamp. My parents took my brother and me to fish in the
channels running through some swampland owned by the company my dad
worked for in New Orleans. The man who let us onto the property said,
"If a gator comes atcha, run a zigzag pattern---they're quick but they
ain't good at making turns." Well, a gator did lunge out of the water
and ate the end off my mom's fishing pole, but we never were chased.
And, as it turns out, the whole thing is a myth anyway. According to the
experts at the San Diego Zoo, we can easily outrun an alligator,
zigzagging or not. They max out at a speed of around ten or eleven miles
per hour, and more importantly, they can't run very far. They depend on
surprise attacks, not chasing down their prey. In that sense they're
very much like the gremlins that live in the shame swamplands and keep
us from being vulnerable. So, we don't need to serpentine; we just need
to be present, pay attention, and move forward.

THE SHIELD: CYNICISM, COOL, AND CRUELTY

CRITICISM,

If you decide to walk into the arena and dare greatly, you're going to
get kicked around. It doesn't matter if your arena is politics or the
PTO, or if your great dare is an article for your school newsletter, a
promotion, or selling a piece of pottery on Etsy---you're going to be on
the receiving end of some cynicism and criticism before it's over. There
may even be some plain ol' mean-spiritedness. Why? Because cynicism,
criticism, cruelty, and cool are even better than armor---they can be
fashioned into weapons that not only keep vulnerability at a distance
but also can inflict injury on the people who are being vulnerable and
making us uncomfortable. If we are the kind of people who "don't do
vulnerability," there's nothing that makes us feel more threatened and
more incited to attack and shame people than to see someone daring
greatly. Someone else's daring provides an uncomfortable mirror that
reflects back our own fears about showing up, creating, and letting
ourselves be seen. That's why we come out swinging. When we see cruelty,
vulnerability is likely to be the driver. When I say criticism, I don't
mean productive feedback, debate, and disagreement over the value or
importance of a contribution. I'm talking about put-downs, personal
attacks, and unsubstantiated claims about our motivations and
intentions. When I talk about cynicism, I don't mean healthy skepticism
and questioning. I'm talking about the reflexive cynicism that leads to
mindless responses like "That's so stupid," or "What a loser idea." Cool
is one of the most rampant forms of cynicism. Whatever. Totally Lame. So
uncool. Who gives a shit? Among some folks it's almost as if enthusiasm
and engagement have become a sign of gullibility. Being too excited or
invested makes you lame. A word that we've banned in our house along
with loser and stupid. In the introduction to the Chapter I talked about
adolescence as the starting line for the race to the armory. Cynicism
and cool are currency of the realm in middle and high school. Every
single student in my daughter's middle school wears a hoodie every
single day (even when it's 95 degrees outside). Not only do these
jackets shield vulnerability by being the ultimate in cool accessories,
but I'm pretty sure the kids think

of them as invisibility cloaks. They literally disappear inside them.
They're a way to hide. When the hoods are up and the hands are hidden in
the pocket, they scream disengagement. Too cool to care. As adults, we
can also protect ourselves from vulnerability with cool. We worry about
being perceived as laughing too loud, buying in, caring too much, being
too eager. We don't wear hoodies as often, but we can use our titles,
education, background, and positions as handles on the shields of
criticism, cynicism, cool, and cruelty: I can talk to you this way or
blow you off because of who I am or what I do for a living. And, make no
mistake, when it comes to this shield, handles are also fashioned out of
nonconformity and rejection of traditional status markers: I dismiss you
because you've sold out and you spend your life in a cubicle or I'm more
relevant and interesting because I rejected the trappings of higher
education, traditional employment, etc.

DARING GREATLY: TIGHTROPE WALKING, PRACTICING SHAME RESILIENCE, AND
REALITY CHECKING Over the course of one year, I interviewed artists,
writers, innovators, business leaders, clergy, and community leaders
about these issues, and how they stayed open to the constructive (albeit
difficult-to-hear) criticism while filtering out the mean-spirited
attacks. Basically I wanted to know how they maintained the courage to
keep on walking into the arena. I'll confess that I was motivated by my
own struggle to learn how to keep daring. When we stop caring about what
people think, we lose our capacity for connection. When we become
defined by what people think, we lose our willingness to be vulnerable.
If we dismiss all the criticism, we lose out on important feedback, but
if we subject ourselves to the hatefulness, our spirits get crushed.
It's a tightrope, shame resilience is the balance bar, and the safety
net below is the one or two people in our lives who can help us
reality-check the criticism and cynicism. I'm very visual, so I have a
picture of a person on a tightrope hanging over my desk to remind me
that working to stay open and at the same time to keep boundaries in
place is worth the energy and risk. I actually used a Sharpie to write
this across the balance bar: "Worthiness is my birthright." It's both a
reminder to practice shame resilience and a touchstone of my spiritual
beliefs. And in case I'm feeling more ornery than usual, I have a little
Post-it Note under my tightrope picture that reads, "Cruelty is cheap,
easy, and chickenshit." That's also a touchstone of my spiritual
beliefs. The research participants who had used criticism and cynicism
in the past as a way to protect themselves from vulnerability had some
very powerful wisdom to share about their transition to
Wholeheartedness. Many of them said that they grew up with parents who
modeled that behavior and that they weren't aware of how fully they had
mimicked it until they started investigating their own fear of being
vulnerable, trying new things, and engaging. These folks were not
egomaniacs who took pleasure in cutting down other people; in fact, they
were consistently harder on themselves than they were on other people.
So their mean-

spiritedness wasn't only directed outward, even if they admitted that
they often used it to lessen their own self-doubt. The first sentence of
the "daring greatly" quote from Theodore Roosevelt says a lot: "It's not
the critic who counts." And for the men and women I interviewed who
defined themselves as that critic, the "not counting" was definitely
felt. They often struggled with feeling dismissed and invisible in their
own lives. Criticizing was a way to be heard. When I asked how they
moved from hurtful criticism to constructive criticism and from cynicism
to contribution, they described a process that mirrored shame
resilience: understanding what triggered their attack, what it means
about their own sense of self-worth, talking to people they trust about
it, and asking for what they need. Many of these folks had to dig deep
about the cool issue. How did being perceived as cool become a driving
value and what was the cost of pretending that things didn't matter? The
fear of being vulnerable can unleash cruelty, criticism, and cynicism in
all of us. Making sure we take responsibility for what we say is one way
that we can check our intentions. Dare greatly and put your name on your
posted comments online. If you don't feel comfortable owning it, then
don't say it. And if you're reading this and you have control over
online sites that allow comments, then you should dare greatly and make
users sign in and use real names, and hold the community responsible for
creating a respectful environment. In addition to walking the tightrope,
practicing shame resilience, and cultivating a safety-net community that
supports me when I'm feeling attacked or hurt, I've implemented two
additional strategies. The first is simple: I only accept and pay
attention to feedback from people who are also in the arena. If you're
occasionally getting your butt kicked as you respond, and if you're also
figuring out how to stay open to feedback without getting pummeled by
insults, I'm more likely to pay attention to your thoughts about my
work. If, on the other hand, you're not helping, contributing, or
wrestling with your own gremlins, I'm not at all interested in your
commentary. The second strategy is also simple. I carry a small sheet of
paper in my wallet that has written on it the names of people whose
opinions of me matter. To be on that list, you have to love me for my
strengths and struggles. You have to know that I'm trying to be
Wholehearted, but I still cuss too much, flip people off under the
steering wheel, and have both Lawrence Welk and Metallica on my iPod.
You have to know and respect that I'm totally uncool. There's a great
quote from the movie

Almost Famous that says, "The only true currency in this bankrupt world
is what you share with someone else when you're uncool." To be on my
list, you have to be what I call a "stretch-mark friend"--- our
connection has been stretched and pulled so much that it's become part
of who we are, a second skin, and there are a few scars to prove it.
We're totally uncool with each other. I don't think anyone has more than
one or two people who qualify for that list. The important thing is not
to discount the stretch-mark friends to gain the approval of the
strangers who are being mean and nasty or are too cool. Nothing serves
as a better reminder of that than the immortal words of my friend Scott
Stratten, author of UnMarketing: "Don't try to win over the haters;
you're not the jackass whisperer."

CHAPTER 5

MIND THE GAP: CULTIVATING CHANGE AND CLOSING THE DISENGAGEMENT DIVIDE
Minding the gap is a daring strategy. We have to pay attention to the
space between where we're actually standing and where we want to be.
More importantly, we have to practice the values that we're holding out
as important in our culture. Minding the gap requires both an embrace of
our own vulnerability and cultivation of shame resilience--- we're going
to be called upon to show up as leaders and parents and educators in new
and uncomfortable ways. We don't have to be perfect, just engaged and
committed to aligning values with action.

MIND the Gap" first appeared in 1969 on the London Underground as a
warning to train passengers to be careful while stepping over the gap
between the train door and the station platform. It has since become the
name of a band and a movie, and the phrase has been captured on
everything from T-shirts to doormats. In our house we have a small,
framed "Mind the Gap" postcard that reminds us to pay attention to the
space between where we're standing and where we want to go. Let me
explain.

STRATEGY VERSUS CULTURE In the business world, there's an ongoing debate
about the relationship between strategy and culture, and the relative
importance of each. Just to define the terms, I think of strategy as
"the game plan," or the detailed answer to the question "What do we want
to achieve and how are we going to get there?" We all---families,
religious groups, project teams, teachers from the kindergarten
cluster---have game plans. And we all think about the goals we want to
accomplish and the steps we need to take to be successful. Culture, on
the other hand, is less about what we want to achieve and more about who
we are. Out of the many complex definitions of culture, including those
that weighed down my undergrad sociology textbooks, the one that
resonates the most with me is the simplest. As organizational
development pioneers Terrence Deal and Allan Kennedy explained it:
"Culture is the way we do things around here." I like this definition
because it rings true for discussions about all cultures---from the
larger culture of scarcity that I write about in the first chapter, to a
specific organizational culture, to the culture that defines my family.
Some form of the debate about what's more important, strategy or
culture, bubbles up in every conversation I have with leaders. One camp
subscribes to the famous quote often attributed to thought leader Peter
Drucker: "Culture eats strategy for breakfast." Other folks believe that
pitting one against the other creates a false dichotomy and that we need
both. Interestingly, I've yet to find a strong argument that strategy is
more important than culture. I think everyone agrees in theory that "who
we are" is at least as important as "what we want to achieve." While
some complain that the debate is old, and too chicken-or-theegg to be
helpful, I think it's a critically relevant discussion for
organizations. Maybe more importantly, I think examining these issues
can transform families, schools, and communities. "The way we do things
around here," or culture, is complex. In my experience, I can tell a lot
about the culture and values of a group, family, or organization by
asking these ten questions: 1. What behaviors are rewarded? Punished? 2.
Where and how are people actually spending their resources (time, money,
attention)?

3. What rules and expectations are followed, enforced, and ignored? 4.
Do people feel safe and supported talking about how they feel and asking
for what they need? 5. What are the sacred cows? Who is most likely to
tip them? Who stands the cows back up? 6. What stories are legend and
what values do they convey? 7. What happens when someone fails,
disappoints, or makes a mistake? 8. How is vulnerability (uncertainty,
risk, and emotional exposure) perceived? 9. How prevalent are shame and
blame and how are they showing up? 10. What's the collective tolerance
for discomfort? Is the discomfort of learning, trying new things, and
giving and receiving feedback normalized, or is there a high premium put
on comfort (and how does that look)? In each of the following sections
I'll talk about how these play out in our lives and what specifically I
look for, but first I want to talk about where this line of questioning
leads us. As someone who studies culture as a whole, I think the power
of these questions is their ability to shed light on the darkest areas
of our lives: disconnection, disengagement, and our struggle for
worthiness. Not only do these questions help us understand the culture,
they surface the discrepancies between "what we say" and "what we do,"
or between the values we espouse and the values we practice. My dear
friend Charles Kiley uses the term "aspirational values" to describe the
elusive list of values that reside in our best intentions, on the wall
of our cubical, at the heart of our parenting lectures, or in our
company's vision statement. If we want to isolate the problems and
develop transformation strategies, we have to hold our aspirational
values up against what I call our practiced values---how we actually
live, feel, behave, and think. Are we walking our talk? Answering this
can get very uncomfortable.

THE DISENGAGEMENT DIVIDE Here's my theory: Disengagement is the issue
underlying the majority of problems I see in families, schools,
communities, and organizations and it takes many forms, including the
ones we discussed in the "Armory" chapter. We disengage to protect
ourselves from vulnerability, shame, and feeling lost and without
purpose. We also disengage when we feel like the people who are leading
us---our boss, our teachers, our principal, our clergy, our parents, our
politicians---aren't living up to their end of the social contract.
Politics is a great, albeit painful, example of social contract
disengagement. Politicians on both sides of the aisle are making laws
that they're not required to follow or that don't affect them, they're
engaging in behaviors that would result in most of us getting fired,
divorced, or arrested. They're espousing values that are rarely
displayed in their behavior. And just watching them shame and blame each
other is degrading for us. They're not living up to their side of the
social contract and voter turnout statistics show that we're
disengaging. Religion is another example of social contract
disengagement. First, disengagement is often the result of leaders not
living by the same values they're preaching. Second, in an uncertain
world, we often feel desperate for absolutes. It's the human response to
fear. When religious leaders leverage our fear and need for more
certainty by extracting vulnerability from spirituality and turning
faith into "compliance and consequences," rather than teaching and
modeling how to wrestle with the unknown and how to embrace mystery, the
entire concept of faith is bankrupt on its own terms. Faith minus
vulnerability equals politics, or worse, extremism. Spiritual connection
and engagement is not built on compliance, it's the product of love,
belonging, and vulnerability. So, here's the question: We don't
intentionally create cultures in our families, schools, communities, and
organizations that fuel disengagement and disconnection, so how does it
happen? Where's the gap? The gap starts here: We can't give people what
we don't have. Who we are matters immeasurably more than what we know or
who we want to be. The space between our practiced values (what we're
actually doing, thinking, and feeling) and our aspirational values (what
we want to do, think, and feel) is the value gap, or what I call "the
disengagement

divide." It's where we lose our employees, our clients, our students,
our teachers, our congregations, and even our own children. We can take
big steps---we can even make a running jump to cross the widening value
fissures that we face at home, work, and school---but at some point,
when that divide broadens to a certain critical degree, we're goners.
That's why dehumanizing cultures foster the highest levels of
disengagement---they create value gaps that actual humans can't hope to
successfully navigate. Let's take a look at some common issues that
arise in the context of families. I'm using family examples because
we're all part of families. Even if we don't have children, we were
raised by adults. In each case a significant gap has grown between the
practiced values and the aspirational values, creating that dangerous
disengagement divide. 1. Aspirational values: Honesty and Integrity
Practiced values: Rationalizing and letting things slide Mom is always
telling her kids that honesty and integrity are important, and that
stealing and cheating in school won't be tolerated. As they pile into
the car after a long grocery shop, Mom realizes that the cashier didn't
charge her for the sodas in the bottom of the cart. Rather than going
back into the store, she shrugs and says, "Wasn't my fault. They're
making a mint anyway." 2. Aspirational values: Respect and
Accountability Practiced value: Fast and easy is more important Dad is
always driving home the importance of respect and accountability, but
when Bobby intentionally breaks Sammy's new Transformer, Dad is too busy
on his BlackBerry to sit down with the brothers and talk about how they
should treat each other's toys. Instead of insisting that Bobby needs to
apologize and make amends, he shrugs his shoulders, thinking, Boys will
be boys, and tells them both to go to their rooms. 3. Aspirational
values: Gratitude and Respect Practiced values: Teasing, taking for
granted, disrespect

Mom and Dad constantly feel underappreciated, and they're tired of their
children's disrespectful attitudes. But Mom and Dad themselves yell at
each other and call each other names. No one in the house says please or
thank you, including the parents. Moreover, Mom and Dad use put-downs
with their children and with each other, and everyone routinely teases
family members to the point of tears. The problem is that the parents
are looking for behaviors, emotions, and thinking patterns that their
children have never seen modeled. 4. Aspirational Value: Setting Limits
Practiced Values: Rebellion and cool are important Julie is seventeen
and her younger brother, Austin, is fourteen. Julie and Austin's parents
have a zero-tolerance policy for cigarettes, alcohol, and drugs.
Unfortunately, that policy isn't working. Both kids have been caught
smoking, and Julie has just been suspended because her teacher found
vodka in her water bottle at school. Julie looks at her parents and
screams, "You're such hypocrites! What about those wild parties y'all
used to throw in high school? What about that time when Mom went to
jail? Y'all thought that was so funny when you told us! You even showed
us pictures." Now, let's take a look at the power of aligned values: 1.
Aspirational Values: Emotional Connection and Honored Feelings Practiced
Values: Emotional Connection and Honored Feelings Mom and Dad have tried
to instill and model a "feelings first" ethic in their family. One
evening Hunter comes home from basketball practice and is clearly upset.
His sophomore year has been tough, and the basketball coach is really
riding him. He throws his bag down on the kitchen floor and heads
straight upstairs. Mom and Dad are in the kitchen making dinner, and
they watch Hunter as he disappears up to his room. Dad turns off the
burner, and Mom tells Hunter's younger brother that they're going to
talk to Hunter and to please give them some time alone with him. They go
upstairs together and sit on the edge of his bed. "Your mom and I know
these past few weeks have been really hard," Dad says. "We don't

know exactly how you feel, but we want to know. High school was tough
for both of us, and we want to be with you in this." This was such a
great example of minding the gap and cultivating engagement! In the
interview the father told me that it made all of them feel very
vulnerable and that they were all crying before it was over. He said
that sharing his high school struggles with his son really opened the
relationship between them. I want to stress that these examples aren't
fiction; they're from the data. And, no, we can't be perfect models all
of the time. I know I can't. But when our practiced values are routinely
in conflict with the expectations we set in our culture, disengagement
is inevitable. If Mom is exhausted after the grocery shop and drives
away without paying once, it might not be a big deal. If "I can get away
with it and it's not my fault" is her norm, she needs to adjust her
expectations around her kids' cheating. If she drives away without
paying but then sits her kids down and says, "I should have gone back in
and paid for the soda. It doesn't matter whose fault it was. I'm going
back to the store today"---well, that's incredibly powerful. The lesson
here is "I do want to live by my values and it's okay to be imperfect
and make mistakes in this house. We just need to make it right when we
can." The example about the vodka illustrates a common struggle I hear
from parents all of the time. "I was wild," they say. "I did things I
don't want my kids to do. Should I lie about my escapades?" As a former
wild person, I don't think the issue is whether to lie or not to lie.
It's about what we share and how we share it. First, not everything we
do or did is our children's business. Just as, when they're adults, not
everything they do is our business. So we should examine the motivation
for sharing a particular story and let the question about what we're
teaching drive our decision. Second, having an honest talk with our kids
about drugs and alcohol, and our experiences with either or both, can be
helpful. But framing our numbing or party experiences as cool war
stories and placing importance on being rebellious may eventually be at
odds with the values we want our children to develop. Remember the
debate about culture and strategy? I think both are important and I
think we need daring strategies to develop daring cultures. As these
examples of aspirational values versus practiced values demonstrate, if
we want to reconnect and reengage, we have to mind the gap.

Minding the gap is a daring strategy. We have to pay attention to the
space between where we're actually standing and where we want to be.
More importantly, we have to practice the values that we're holding out
as important in our culture. Minding the gap requires both an embrace of
our own vulnerability and cultivation of shame resilience---we're going
to be called upon to show up as leaders and parents and educators in new
and uncomfortable ways. We don't have to be perfect, just engaged and
committed to aligning values with action. We also need to be prepared:
The gremlins will be out in full force, as they love to sneak up just
when we're about to step into the arena, be vulnerable, and take some
chances. In the next two chapters, I'm going to use the concepts I've
introduced here to jump right in and tell you what I think we need to do
both to cultivate engagement and to transform the way we parent,
educate, and lead. These three questions will guide the following
chapters: 1. How does the culture of "never enough" affect our schools,
organizations, and families? 2. How do we recognize and combat shame at
work, school, and home? 3. What does minding the gap and daring greatly
look like in schools, organizations, and families?

CHAPTER 6

DISRUPTIVE ENGAGEMENT: DARING TO REHUMANIZE EDUCATION AND WORK To
reignite creativity, innovation, and learning, leaders must rehumanize
education and work. This means understanding how scarcity is affecting
the way we lead and work, learning how to engage with vulnerability, and
recognizing and combating shame. Make no mistake: honest conversations
about vulnerability and shame are disruptive. The reason that we're not
having these conversations in our organizations is that they shine light
in dark corners. Once there is language, awareness, and understanding,
turning back is almost impossible and carries with it severe
consequences. We all want to dare greatly. If you give us a glimpse into
that possibility, we'll hold on to it as our vision. It can't be taken
away.

Before we start this chapter, I want to clarify what I mean by "leader."
I've come to believe that a leader is anyone who holds her- or himself
accountable for finding potential in people and processes. The term
leader has nothing to do with position, status, or number of direct
reports. I wrote this chapter for all of us---parents, teachers,
community volunteers, and CEOs---anyone who is willing to dare greatly
and lead.

THE CHALLENGE OF LEADING IN A CULTURE OF "NEVER ENOUGH" In 2010 I had
the opportunity to spend a long weekend with fifty CEOs from Silicon
Valley. One of the other speakers at the retreat was Kevin Surace, the
then CEO of Serious Materials, and Inc. magazine's 2009 Entrepreneur of
the Year. I knew Kevin was going to speak about disruptive innovation so
in my first conversation with him, before either one of us had spoken to
the group and before he knew about my work, I asked him this question:
What's the most significant barrier to creativity and innovation? Kevin
thought about it for a minute and said, "I don't know if it has a name,
but honestly, it's the fear of introducing an idea and being ridiculed,
laughed at, and belittled. If you're willing to subject yourself to that
experience, and if you survive it, then it becomes the fear of failure
and the fear of being wrong. People believe they're only as good as
their ideas and that their ideas can't seem too 'out there' and they
can't 'not know' everything. The problem is that innovative ideas often
sound crazy and failure and learning are part of revolution. Evolution
and incremental change is important and we need it, but we're desperate
for real revolution and that requires a different type of courage and
creativity." Before that conversation I had never specifically asked the
leaders I'd interviewed about innovation, but everything Kevin was
saying fit with my data on work and education. I smiled and responded,
"It's true, isn't it? Most people and most organizations can't stand the
uncertainty and the risk of real innovation. Learning and creating are
inherently vulnerable. There's never enough certainty. People want
guarantees." He simply said, "Yes. Again, I'm not sure if there's a name
for the problem, but something related to fear keeps people from going
for it. They focus on what they already do well and they don't put
themselves out there." There was a slight pause in our conversation
before he looked at me and said, "So, I understand you're a researcher.
What exactly do you do?" I chuckled. "I study that something related to
fear---I'm a shame-andvulnerability researcher." When I got back to my
hotel room I grabbed my research journal and made notes about my
conversation with Kevin. As I thought about that

something related to fear, I remembered another set of notes that I had
written in that same journal. I flipped back until I found the field
notes that I had taken after talking to a group of middle school
students about their classroom experiences. When I asked them to
describe the key to learning, one girl gave the following reply while
the others passionately nodded their heads and said, "Yes! That's it!"
and "Exactly." "There are times when you can ask questions or challenge
ideas, but if you've got a teacher that doesn't like that or the kids in
the class make fun of people who do that, it's bad. I think most of us
learn that it's best to just keep your head down, your mouth shut, and
your grades high." As I reread this passage in my notes and thought
about my conversation with Kevin, I was overwhelmed. As a teacher I felt
heartbreak---we can't learn when our heads are down and our mouths are
shut. As a mother of a middle school student and a kindergartener, I
found it infuriating. As a researcher, it was the moment when I started
to realize how often the struggles of our education system and the
challenges we face in our workplaces mirror each other. I first
envisioned this as two separate discussions---one for educators and one
for leaders. But as I looked back on the data, I realized that teachers
and school administrators are leaders. C-level executives, managers, and
supervisors are teachers. No corporation or school can thrive in the
absence of creativity, innovation, and learning, and the greatest threat
to all three of these is disengagement. Given what I've learned from the
research, and what I've observed over the past couple of years as I've
worked with leaders from schools and companies of all sizes and types, I
believe we have to completely reexamine the idea of engagement. I call
it disruptive engagement for this reason. To reignite creativity,
innovation, and learning, leaders must rehumanize education and work.
This means understanding how scarcity is affecting the way we lead and
work, learning how to engage with vulnerability, and recognizing and
combating shame. Sir Ken Robinson speaks to the power of making this
shift in his appeal to leaders to replace the outdated idea that human
organizations should work like machines with a metaphor that captures
the realities of humanity. In his book Out of Our Minds: Learning to be
Creative, Robinson writes, "However seductive the machine metaphor may
be for industrial production, human organizations are not actually
mechanisms and people are not components in them. People have values and
feelings, perceptions, opinions, motivations, and biographies, whereas
cogs and

sprockets do not. An organization is not the physical facilities within
which it operates; it is the networks of people in it." Make no mistake:
Rehumanizing work and education requires courageous leadership. Honest
conversations about vulnerability and shame are disruptive. The reason
that we're not having these conversations in our organizations is that
they shine light in the dark corners. Once there is language, awareness,
and understanding, turning back is almost impossible and carries with it
severe consequences. We all want to Dare Greatly. If you give us a
glimpse into that possibility, we'll hold on to it as our vision. It
can't be taken away.

RECOGNIZING AND COMBATING SHAME Shame breeds fear. It crushes our
tolerance for vulnerability, thereby killing engagement, innovation,
creativity, productivity, and trust. And worst of all, if we don't know
what we're looking for, shame can ravage our organizations before we see
one outward sign of a problem. Shame works like termites in a house.
It's hidden in the dark behind the walls and constantly eating away at
our infrastructure, until one day the stairs suddenly crumble. Only then
do we realize that it's only a matter of time before the walls come
tumbling down. In the same way that a casual walk around our house won't
reveal a termite problem, a stroll through an office or a school won't
necessarily reveal a shame problem. Or at least we hope it's not that
obvious. If it is ---if we see a manager berating an employee or a
teacher shaming a student---the problem is already acute and more than
likely has been happening for a long time. In most cases, though, we
have to know what we're looking for when we assess an organization for
signs that shame may be an issue.

SIGNS THAT SHAME HAS PERMEATED THE CULTURE Blaming, gossiping,
favoritism, name-calling, and harassment are all behavior cues that
shame has permeated a culture. A more obvious sign is when shame becomes
an outright management tool. Is there evidence of people in leadership
roles bullying others, criticizing subordinates in front of colleagues,
delivering public reprimands, or setting up reward systems that
intentionally belittle, shame, or humiliate people? I've never been to a
shame-free school or organization. I'm not saying it doesn't exist, but
I doubt it. In fact, once I've explained how shame works, I normally
have one or two teachers approach me and explain that they use shame on
a daily basis. Most ask how to change that practice, but a few proudly
say, "It works." The best-case scenario is that it's a limited or
contained problem, rather than a cultural norm. One reason that I'm
confident that shame exists in schools is simply because 85 percent of
the men and women we interviewed for the shame research could recall a
school incident from their childhood that was so shaming, it changed how
they thought of themselves as learners. What makes this even more
haunting is that approximately half of those recollections were what I
refer to as creativity scars. The research participants could point to a
specific incident where they were told or shown that they weren't good
writers, artists, musicians, dancers, or something creative. I still see
this happening in schools all of the time. Art is graded on narrow
standards and kids as young as kindergarten are told they have creative
gifts. This helps explain why the gremlins are so powerful when it comes
to creativity and innovation. Corporations have their own struggles. The
Workplace Bullying Institute (WBI) defines bullying as "Repeated
mistreatment: sabotage by others that prevented work from getting done,
verbal abuse, threatening conduct, intimidation, and humiliation." A
2010 poll conducted by Zogby International for WBI reported that an
estimated 54 million American workers (37 percent of the US workforce)
have been bullied at work. Furthermore, another WBI report revealed that
52.5 percent of the time, bullied workers reported that employers
basically did nothing to stop the bullying. When we see shame being used
as a management tool (again, that means bullying, criticism in front of
colleagues, public reprimands, or

reward systems that intentionally belittle people), we need to take
direct action because it means that we've got an infestation on our
hands. And we need to remember that this doesn't just happen overnight.
Equally important to keep in mind is that shame is like the other "sh"
word. Like shit, shame rolls downhill. If employees are constantly
having to navigate shame, you can bet that they're passing it on to
their customers, students, and families. So, if it's happening and it
can be isolated to a specific unit, work team, or person, it has to be
addressed immediately and without shame. We learn shame in our families
of origin, and many people grow up believing that it's an effective and
efficient way to manage people, run a classroom, and parent. For that
reason, shaming someone who's using shame is not helpful. But doing
nothing is equally dangerous, not only for the people who are targets of
the shaming but also for the entire organization. Several years ago a
man came up to me after an event and said, "Interview me! Please! I'm a
financial advisor and you wouldn't believe what happens in my office."
When I met Don for the interview, he told me that in his organization
you choose your office each quarter based on your quarterly results: The
person with the best results chooses first and sends the person in the
desired office packing. He shook his head, and his voice cracked a bit
when he said, "Given that I've had the best numbers for the past six
quarters, you'd think I'd like that. But I don't. I absolutely hate it.
It's a miserable environment." He then told me how after the previous
quarterly results were in, his boss walked into his office, closed the
door, and told him that he had to move offices. "At first I thought my
numbers had dropped. Then he told me that he didn't care if I had the
best numbers or if I liked my office; the point was to terrorize the
other guys. He said, 'Busting their balls in public builds character.
It's motivating.'" Before the end of our interview, he told me he was
job hunting. "I'm good at my job and even enjoy it, but I didn't sign up
to terrorize people. I never knew why it felt so shitty, but after
hearing you talk, now I do. It's shame. It's worse than high school.
I'll find a better place to work, and you can be damn sure that I'm
taking my clients with me." In I Thought It Was Just Me, I tell the
following story about Sylvia, an event planner in her thirties who
jumped right into our interview by saying, "I wish you could have
interviewed me six months ago. I was a different person. I was so stuck
in shame." When I asked her what she

meant, she explained that she had heard about my research from a friend
and volunteered to be interviewed because she felt her life had been
changed by shame. She had recently had an important breakthrough when
she found herself on the "losers' list" at work. Apparently, after two
years of what her employer called "outstanding, winners' work," she had
made her first big mistake. The mistake cost her agency a major client.
Her boss's response was to put her on the "losers' list." She said, "In
one minute I went from being on the winners' board to being at the top
of the losers' list." I guess I must have winced when Sylvia referred to
the "losers' list" because, without my remarking at all, she said, "I
know, it's terrible. My boss has these two big dry-erase boards outside
of his office. One's the winners' list, and one board is for the
losers." She said for weeks she could barely function. She lost her
confidence and started missing work. Shame, anxiety, and fear took over.
After a difficult three-week period, she quit her job and went to work
for another agency. Shame can only rise so far in any system before
people disengage to protect themselves. When we're disengaged, we don't
show up, we don't contribute, and we stop caring. On the far end of the
spectrum, disengagement allows people to rationalize all kinds of
unethical behavior including lying, stealing, and cheating. In the case
of Don and Sylvia, they didn't just disengage; they quit and took their
talent to competitors. As we assess our organizations for signs of
shame, it's also important to be aware of external threats---forces
outside of our organizations that are influencing how both leaders and
employees feel about their work. As a teacher, the sister of two public
school teachers, and the sister-inlaw of a public high school
vice-principal, I don't have to look far for examples of this. Several
years ago my sister Ashley called me crying. When I asked her what was
wrong, she told me that the Houston Chronicle had published the name of
every schoolteacher in the Houston Independent School District along
with the bonus they received based on their students' standardized test
scores. I hadn't seen the paper that day and I was stunned. And I was
also confused. "Ashley, you teach kindergarten. Your kids don't take the
tests yet. Is your name in there?" Ashley explained that her name was in
there and that the paper reported that she got the lowest bonus
available. What they didn't report was that it was the highest bonus
available to kindergarten teachers.

Imagine doing that---reporting everyone's salaries or bonuses and
moreover reporting them inaccurately---to any other group of
professionals. "I'm in a total shame meltdown," Ashley said, still
crying. "All I've ever wanted to do was to be a teacher. I work my butt
off. I've hit up everyone in our family for money so I can buy school
supplies for the kids who can't afford them. I stay after and help the
parents help their kids. I don't get it. There are hundreds of teachers
like me, and do you read about that in the paper? No. And it's not just
about me. Some of the very best teachers I know volunteer to teach some
of the most challenging students without any thought about how it's
going to affect their scores or bonuses. They do it because they love
their work and they believe in the kids." Unfortunately, the "Scarlet
Letter" approach to teacher evaluation is not just happening in
Texas---it's become an accepted practice across the nation. The good
news is that people are finally daring greatly and speaking up. In
response to the New York State Court of Appeals ruling that teachers'
individual performance assessments could be made public, Bill Gates
wrote this in a New York Times op-ed: "Developing a systematic way to
help teachers get better is the most powerful idea in education today.
The surest way to weaken it is to twist it into a capricious exercise in
public shaming. Let's focus on creating a personnel system that truly
helps teachers improve." When I posted Gates's op-ed on my Facebook
page, many teachers left comments. I was moved by this response from a
veteran teacher: "For me, teaching is about love. It is not about
transferring information, but rather creating an atmosphere of mystery
and imagination and discovery. When I begin to lose myself because of
some unresolved pain or fears or the overpowering feelings of shame,
then I no longer teach...I deliver information and I think I become
irrelevant then." Teachers are not the only ones who wrestle with shame
delivered (usually in the public media) from outside of the
organization. I'm often asked to address this issue when I'm speaking
with professionals who are routinely vilified, disliked, or
misunderstood by the public---lawyers, dentists, and folks from the
financial industry are a few. We might roll our eyes and think, C'mon,
we love to hate them! But I can tell you from my experiences that it's
not fun to feel hated simply for doing work that means something to you,
and it can take a serious toll on individuals and cultures.

As leaders, the most effective thing we can do when this kind of media
abuse is happening is speak out, insist on accuracy and accountability,
and confront it head on with the people affected by it. We can't pretend
that it's not hurting our employees. On a personal level, we can resist
buying into and perpetuating the public stereotyping of professions that
by their nature operate in realms of personal stress.

THE BLAME GAME Here's the best way to think about the relationship
between shame and blame: If blame is driving, shame is riding shotgun.
In organizations, schools, and families, blaming and finger-pointing are
often symptoms of shame. Shame researchers June Tangney and Ronda
Dearing explain that in shame-bound relationships, people "measure
carefully, weigh, and assign blame." They write, "In the face of any
negative outcome, large or small, someone or something must be found
responsible (and held accountable). There's no notion of 'water under
the bridge.'" They go on to say, "After all, if someone must be to blame
and it's not me, it must be you! From blame comes shame. And then hurt,
denial, anger, and retaliation." Blame is simply the discharging of pain
and discomfort. We blame when we're uncomfortable and experience
pain---when we're vulnerable, angry, hurt, in shame, grieving. There's
nothing productive about blame, and it often involves shaming someone or
just being mean. If blame is a pattern in your culture, then shame needs
to be addressed as an issue.

COVER-UP CULTURE Related to blame is the issue of cover-ups. Just like
blame is a sign of shame-based organizations, cover-up cultures depend
on shame to keep folks quiet. When the culture of an organization
mandates that it is more important to protect the reputation of a system
and those in power than it is to protect the basic human dignity of
individuals or communities, you can be certain that shame is systemic,
money drives ethics, and accountability is dead. This is true in all
systems, from corporations, nonprofits, universities, and governments,
to churches, schools, families, and sports programs. If you think back
on any major incidents fueled by cover-ups, you'll see this pattern. In
an organizational culture where respect and the dignity of individuals
are held as the highest values, shame and blame don't work as management
styles. There is no leading by fear. Empathy is a valued asset,
accountability is an expectation rather than an exception, and the
primal human need for belonging is not used as leverage and social
control. We can't control the behavior of individuals; however, we can
cultivate organizational cultures where behaviors are not tolerated and
people are held accountable for protecting what matters most: human
beings. We won't solve the complex issues that we're facing today
without creativity, innovation, and engaged learning. We can't afford to
let our discomfort with the topic of shame get in the way of recognizing
and combating it in our schools and workplaces. The four best strategies
for building shame-resilient organizations are: 1. Supporting leaders
who are willing to dare greatly and facilitate honest conversations
about shame and cultivate shame-resilient cultures. 2. Facilitating a
conscientious effort to see where shame might be functioning in the
organization and how it might even be creeping into the way we engage
with our co-workers and students. 3. Normalizing is a critical
shame-resilience strategy. Leaders and managers can cultivate engagement
by helping people know what to expect. What are common struggles? How
have other people dealt with them? What have your experiences been?

4. Training all employees on the differences between shame and guilt,
and teaching them how to give and receive feedback in a way that fosters
growth and engagement.

MINDING THE GAP WITH FEEDBACK A daring greatly culture is a culture of
honest, constructive, and engaged feedback. This is true in
organizations, schools, and families. I know families struggle with this
issue; however, I was shocked to see "lack of feedback" emerge as a
primary concern in the interviews that focused on work experiences.
Today's organizations are so metric-focused in their evaluation of
performance that giving, receiving, and soliciting valuable feedback
ironically has become rare. It's even a rarity in schools where learning
depends on feedback, which is infinitely more effective than grades
scribbled on the top of a page or computer-generated, standardized test
scores. The problem is straightforward: Without feedback there can be no
transformative change. When we don't talk to the people we're leading
about their strengths and their opportunities for growth, they begin to
question their contributions and our commitment. Disengagement follows.
When I asked people why there was such a lack of feedback in their
organizations and schools, they used different language, but the two
major issues were the same: 1. We're not comfortable with hard
conversations. 2. We don't know how to give and receive feedback in a
way that moves people and processes forward. The good news is that these
are very fixable problems. If an organization makes the creation of a
feedback culture a priority and a practice, rather than an aspirational
value, it can happen. People are desperate for feedback---we all want to
grow. We just need to learn how to give feedback in a way that inspires
growth and engagement. Right off the bat, I believe that feedback
thrives in cultures where the goal is not "getting comfortable with hard
conversations" but normalizing discomfort. If leaders expect real
learning, critical thinking, and change, then discomfort should be
normalized: "We believe growth and learning are uncomfortable so it's
going to happen here---you're going to feel that way. We want you to
know that it's normal and it's an expectation here. You're not alone and
we ask that you stay open and lean into it." This is true at all levels
and in all organizations, schools,

faith communities, and even families. I've observed this pattern of
normalized discomfort in the Wholehearted organizations I've researched
and I've lived it in my classroom and with my family. I learned to teach
by immersing myself in books on engaged and critical pedagogy by writers
like bell hooks and Paulo Freire. At first, I was terrified by the idea
that if education is going to be transformative, it's going to be
uncomfortable and unpredictable. Now, as I begin my fifteenth year of
teaching at the University of Houston, I always tell my students, "If
you're comfortable, I'm not teaching and you're not learning. It's going
to get uncomfortable in here and that's okay. It's normal and it's part
of the process." The simple and honest process of letting people know
that discomfort is normal, it's going to happen, why it happens, and why
it's important, reduces anxiety, fear, and shame. Periods of discomfort
become an expectation and a norm. In fact, most semesters I have
students who approach me after class and say, "I haven't been
uncomfortable yet. I'm concerned." These exchanges often lead to
critically important conversations and feedback about their engagement
and my teaching. The big challenge for leaders is getting our heads and
hearts around the fact that we need to cultivate the courage to be
uncomfortable and to teach the people around us how to accept discomfort
as a part of growth. For the best guidance on how to give feedback that
moves people and processes forward, I turn to my social work roots. In
my experience the heart of valuable feedback is taking the "strengths
perspective." According to social work educator Dennis Saleebey, viewing
performance from the strengths perspective offers us the opportunity to
examine our struggles in light of our capacities, talents, competencies,
possibilities, visions, values, and hopes. This perspective doesn't
dismiss the serious nature of our struggles; however, it does require us
to consider our positive qualities as potential resources. Dr. Saleebey
proposes, "It is as wrong to deny the possible as it is to deny the
problem." One effective method for understanding our strengths is to
examine the relationship between strengths and limitations. If we look
at what we do best as well as what we want to change the most, we will
often find that the two are varying degrees of the same core behavior.
Most of us can go through the majority of our "faults" or "limitations"
and find strengths lurking within. For example, I can beat myself up for
being too controlling and micromanaging, or I can recognize that I'm
very responsible,

dependable, and committed to quality work. The micromanaging issues
don't go away, but by viewing them from a strengths perspective, I have
the confidence to look at myself and assess the behaviors I'd like to
change. I want to emphasize that the strengths perspective is not a tool
to simply allow us to put a positive spin on a problem and consider it
solved. But by first enabling us to inventory our strengths, it suggests
ways we can use those strengths to address the related challenges. One
way I teach this perspective to students is by requiring them to give
and receive feedback on their classroom presentations. When a student
presents, s/he receives feedback from every one of his or her
classmates. The students in the audience have to identify three
observable strengths and one opportunity for growth. The trick is that
they have to use their assessment of the strengths to make a suggestion
on how the individual might address the specified opportunity. For
example: Strengths 1. You captured my interest right away with your
emotional personal story. 2. You used examples that are relevant to my
life. 3. You concluded with actionable strategies that tied in with our
learning in the class. Opportunity Your stories and examples made me
feel connected to you and what you were saying, but I sometimes
struggled to read the PowerPoint and listen to you at the same time. I
didn't want to miss anything you were saying, but I worried about not
following the slides. You might experiment with fewer words on the
slides---or maybe even no slides. You had me without them.

The research has made this clear: Vulnerability is at the heart of the
feedback process. This is true whether we give, receive, or solicit
feedback. And the vulnerability doesn't go away even if we're trained
and experienced in offering and getting feedback. Experience does,
however, give us the advantage of knowing that we can survive the
exposure and uncertainty, and that it's worth the risk. One of the
greatest mistakes that I see people make in the feedback process is
"armoring up." To protect ourselves from the vulnerability of giving or
receiving feedback, we get ready to rumble (cue Jock Jams). It's easy to
assume that the feedback process only feels vulnerable for the person
receiving the feedback, but that's not true. Honest engagement around
expectations and behavior is always fraught with uncertainty,

risk, and emotional exposure for everyone involved. Here's an example.
Susan, the principal of a large high school, has to talk to one of her
teachers about several parent complaints. The parents have voiced
concerns about the teacher's cursing during class and making personal
calls on her cell phone while she allows her students to leave the
class, goof off, and make their own calls. In this situation "armoring
up" can take several forms. One is that Susan can fill out the probation
form and have it sitting on her desk when the teacher comes in. She'll
simply say, "Here's the complaint. I've written you up for the following
offenses. Sign here and don't let it happen again." She's knocked out
the meeting in three minutes flat. There's no feedback, no growth, no
learning, but it's over. The odds of the teacher changing her behaviors
are slim. Another way we armor up is by convincing ourselves that the
other person deserves to be hurt or put down. Like most of us, Susan is
more comfortable with anger than vulnerability, so she ratchets up her
confidence with a little self-righteousness. "I'm so sick of this. If
these teachers respected me, they'd never do stuff like this. I've had
it. She's been a problem since the first day I met her. You want to jack
around in class---go for it. I'll show you exactly how this works." The
opportunity for constructive feedback and relationship building turns
into a smackdown. Again, it's over but there is no feedback, no growth,
no learning and, more than likely, no change. I'll admit that I've got a
lot of "bring it on" in me. I'm scrappy, I think fast on my feet, and I
like my emotions with a little agency. I'm good at anger and only so-so
at vulnerability, so armoring up before a vulnerable experience is
attractive to me. Luckily, this work has taught me that when I feel
self-righteous, it means I'm afraid. It's a way to puff up and protect
myself when I'm afraid of being wrong, making someone angry, or getting
blamed.

SITTING ON THE SAME SIDE OF THE TABLE In my social work training, a lot
of attention was paid to how we talk to people, even down to where and
how we sit. For example, I would never talk to a client across a desk; I
would walk around my desk and sit in a chair across from the client so
there was nothing big and bulky between us. I remember the first time I
went in to see one of my social work professors about a grade. She got
up from behind her desk and asked me to take a seat at a small round
table she had in her office. She pulled up a chair and sat next to me.
In armoring up for that conversation, I had pictured her sitting behind
her big metal desk and me defiantly sliding my paper across it and
demanding an explanation for my grade. After she sat down next to me, I
put the paper on the table. As she said, "I'm so glad that you came in
to talk to me about your paper. You did a great job on this; I loved
your conclusion," and patted me on the back, I awkwardly realized that
we were on the same side of the table. Totally discombobulated, I
blurted, "Thank you. I worked really hard on it." She nodded and said,
"I can tell. Thank you. I took some points off for your APA formatting.
I'd like for you to focus on that and get it cleaned up. You could
submit this for publication, and I don't want the reference formatting
to hold you back." I was still confused. She thinks it's publishable?
She liked it? "Do you need some help with the APA formatting? It's
tricky and it took me years to get it down," she asked. (A great example
of normalizing.) I told her that I'd fix the references and I asked her
if she'd look at my revisions. She happily agreed and gave me a few tips
on the process. I thanked her for her time and left, grateful for my
grade and for a teacher who cared as much as she did. Today, "Sitting on
the same side of the table" is my metaphor for feedback. I used it to
create my Engaged Feedback Checklist: I know I'm ready to give feedback
when: I'm ready to sit next to you rather than across from you; I'm
willing to put the problem in front of us rather than between us (or
sliding it toward you);

I'm ready to listen, ask questions, and accept that I may not fully
understand the issue; I want to acknowledge what you do well instead of
picking apart your mistakes; I recognize your strengths and how you can
use them to address your challenges; I can hold you accountable without
shaming or blaming you; I'm willing to own my part; I can genuinely
thank you for your efforts rather than criticize you for your failings;
I can talk about how resolving these challenges will lead to your growth
and opportunity; and I can model the vulnerability and openness that I
expect to see from you. You can find a printed copy of this checklist on
my website (www.brenebrown.com).

How would education be different if students, teachers, and parents sat
on the same side of the table? How would engagement change if leaders
sat down next to folks and said, "Thank you for your contributions.
Here's how you're making a difference. This issue is getting in the way
of your growth, and I think we can tackle it together. What ideas do you
have about moving forward? What role do you think I'm playing in the
problem? What can I do differently to support you?" Let's go back to the
example with Susan, the principal who was armoring up for a smackdown.
If she read through this checklist she'd realize that she's not in a
place to give feedback, to be a leader. But with parenting complaints
stacking up on her desk, time is an issue for her and she knows the
situation needs to be addressed. It can be very difficult to move into
the right head and heart space to give feedback when we're under
pressure. So, how do we create a safe space for vulnerability and growth
when we're not feeling open? Armored feedback doesn't facilitate lasting
and meaningful change---I don't know a single person who can be open to
accepting feedback or owning responsibility for something when they're
being hammered. Our hardwiring takes over and we self-protect. Susan's
best bet is to model the openness that she hopes to see, and solicit
feedback from one of her colleagues. When I interviewed participants who
valued feedback and worked at it, they talked about the necessity of
soliciting feedback from their peers, asking for advice, and even
role-playing difficult situations. If we're not willing to ask for
feedback and receive it, we'll never be good at giving it. If Susan can
work through her own feelings so that she can be present with her
employee, she's much more likely to see the change that she's
requesting.

Some of you might be wondering, "Susan's employee problem is pretty
straightforward and small. Why would she need to spend time soliciting
feedback from one of her colleagues for a problem like that?" It's a
good question with an important answer: The size, severity, or
complexity of a problem doesn't always reflect our emotional reactivity
to it. If Susan can't get to the same side of the table with this
teacher, it doesn't matter how simple the problem is or how clear the
violation is. What Susan might learn from her peer is that she's really
triggered by this particular teacher or that she's armoring up because
unprofessional behavior is becoming a dangerous norm among this cluster
of teachers. Giving and soliciting feedback is about learning and
growth, and understanding who we are and how we respond to the people
around us is the foundation in this process. Again, there's no question
that feedback may be one of the most difficult arenas to negotiate in
our lives. We should remember, though, that victory is not getting good
feedback, avoiding giving difficult feedback, or avoiding the need for
feedback. Instead it's taking off the armor, showing up, and engaging.

THE COURAGE TO BE VULNERABLE I recently gave a talk at the University of
Houston's Wolff Center for Entrepreneurship. The program, which pairs
thirty-five to forty elite undergraduate students with mentors and
offers comprehensive business training, is ranked as the leading
undergrad entrepreneurship program in the United States. I was asked to
talk to the students about vulnerability and the power of story. During
the Q&A session after my talk, one of the students asked me a question
that I'm sure is often on the minds of people when I talk about
vulnerability. He said, "I can see how vulnerability is important, but
I'm in sales and I don't get what that looks like. Does being vulnerable
mean that if a customer asks me a question about a product and I don't
know the answer, I just say what I'm thinking: 'I'm new and I really
don't know what I'm doing?'" The students, who were all turned around
listening to him, turned back in their chairs and looked at me as if to
say, "Yeah, that seems lame. Are we really supposed to do that?" My
answer was no. And yes. In that scenario vulnerability is recognizing
and owning that you don't know something; it's looking the customer in
the eye and saying, "I don't know the answer to that, but I'll find out.
I want to make sure you have the correct information." I explained that
the unwillingness to engage with the vulnerability of not knowing often
leads to making excuses, dodging the question, or--- worst-case
scenario---bullshitting. That's the deathblow in any relationship, and
the one thing I've learned from talking to people who sell for a living
is that sales is all about relationships. So, while I wouldn't take that
tack with the customer, I do think there's some value in sharing the
feeling of not knowing what you're doing with someone---whether a mentor
who can offer support and guidance or a colleague who can help you learn
and normalize your experience. Imagine the stress and anxiety of not
knowing what you're doing, trying to convince a customer that you do,
not being able to ask for help, and not having anyone to talk to about
your struggle. This is how we lose people. It's too difficult to stay
engaged in these circumstances. We start cutting corners, we stop
caring, and we check out. After my talk, one of the mentors came up to
me and said, "I've been in sales my entire career, and let me tell you,
there's nothing more

important than having the courage to say, 'I don't know,' and 'I messed
up'---being honest and open is key to success in every part of our
lives." Last year I had the opportunity to interview Gay Gaddis, the
owner and founder of T3 (The Think Tank) in Austin, Texas. T3 is a top
integrated marketing firm that specializes in innovative marketing
campaigns that cut across all media. In 1989, Gay cashed in a
sixteenthousand-dollar IRA with the dream of starting an advertising
agency. Twenty-three years after opening with a handful of regional
accounts, Gay has built T3 into the nation's largest advertising agency
wholly owned by a woman. With offices in Austin, New York, and San
Francisco, T3 works with clients including Microsoft, UPS, JPMorgan
Chase, Pfizer, Allstate, Coca-Cola, and Sprite. Her dynamic business
acumen and corporate culture have led to national recognition. She has
been named one of Fast Company's Top 25 Women Business Builders,
Inc. magazine's Top 10 Entrepreneurs of the Year, and one of the top 25
Advertising Working Mothers of the Year by Working Mother magazine. Gay
and T3's family-friendly workplace program, "T3 and Under," was even
recognized by the White House. I jumped right into my interview with Gay
by telling her that a business journalist had recently told me that,
unlike leaders in corporations who are shielded by layers of systems,
entrepreneurs can't afford to be vulnerable. When I asked her what she
thought about that proposition, she smiled. "When you shut down
vulnerability, you shut down opportunity." Here's how she explained it:
"By definition, entrepreneurship is vulnerable. It's all about the
ability to handle and manage uncertainty. People are constantly
changing, budgets change, boards change, and competition means you have
to stay nimble and innovative. You have to create a vision and live up
to that vision. There is no vision without vulnerability." Knowing that
Gay spends a considerable amount of time teaching and mentoring, I asked
her what advice she gives new entrepreneurs about embracing uncertainty.
She said, "Success requires entrepreneurs to cultivate strong support
networks and good mentors. You need to learn how to shut out the noise
so you can get clear on how you feel and what you think, and then you do
the hard work. No question---it's all about vulnerability." Another
great example of the power of vulnerability---this time in a
corporation---is the leadership approach taken by Lululemon's CEO,
Christine Day. In a video interview with CNN Money, Day explained

that she was once a very bright, smart executive who "majored in being
right." Her transformation came when she realized that getting people to
engage and take ownership wasn't about "the telling" but about letting
them come into the idea in a purpose-led way, and that her job was
creating the space for others to perform. She characterized this change
as the shift from "having the best idea or problem solving" to "being
the best leader of people." The shift she described is the shift from
controlling to engaging with vulnerability---taking risks and
cultivating trust. And while vulnerability can sometimes make us feel
powerless, her shift was a total power move. Day has increased the
number of stores from 71 to 174, while total revenue has grown from
\$297 million to almost \$1 billion, and Lululemon's stock is up about
300 percent since its 2007 IPO. In a written interview with Day
accompanying the video, the idea of vulnerability as the birthplace of
creativity, innovation, and trust continued to play out---even when it
comes to failure and defeat. One of Day's leadership guideposts is
"finding the magic makers." As Day explained, "Taking responsibility,
taking risks, and having an entrepreneurial spirit are qualities we look
for in our employees. We want people who bring their own magic. Athletes
are great within our culture; they're used to winning as well as losing.
They know how to handle---and fix---defeat." Day also emphasized the
importance of allowing people to make mistakes: "Our golden rule? If you
screw up, you clean it up." In businesses, schools, faith
communities---any system, even families ---we can tell a lot about how
people engage with vulnerability by observing how often and how openly
you hear people saying: • I don't know. • I need help. • I'd like to
give it a shot. • It's important to me. • I disagree---can we talk about
it? • It didn't work, but I learned a lot. • Yes, I did it. • Here's
what I need. • Here's how I feel.

• I'd like some feedback. • Can I get your take on this? • What can I do
better next time? • Can you teach me how to do this? • I played a part
in that. • I accept responsibility for that. • I'm here for you. • I
want to help. • Let's move on. • I'm sorry. • That means a lot to me. •
Thank you.

For leaders, vulnerability often looks and feels like discomfort. In his
book Tribes: We Need You to Lead Us, Seth Godin writes, "Leadership is
scarce because few people are willing to go through the discomfort
required to lead. This scarcity makes leadership valuable....It's
uncomfortable to stand up in front of strangers. It's uncomfortable to
propose an idea that might fail. It's uncomfortable to challenge the
status quo. It's uncomfortable to resist the urge to settle. When you
identify the discomfort, you've found the place where a leader is
needed. If you're not uncomfortable in your work as a leader, it's
almost certain you're not reaching your potential as a leader." As I
looked over the data and read through my notes from the interviews I've
done with leaders, I wondered what students would say to teachers and
what teachers would say to their principals if they had the opportunity
to ask for the leadership they needed. I wondered what the customer
service representative would say to his boss and what she might ask of
her boss. What do we want people to know about us and what do we need
from them? As I started writing down the answers to these questions, I
realized that they sounded like a mandate; a manifesto. Here's what
emerged from these questions: The Daring Greatly Leadership Manifesto To
the CEOs and teachers. To the principals and the managers. To the
politicians, community leaders, and decisionmakers: We want to show up,
we want to learn, and we want to inspire. We are hardwired for
connection, curiosity, and engagement.

We crave purpose, and we have a deep desire to create and contribute. We
want to take risks, embrace our vulnerabilities, and be courageous. When
learning and working are dehumanized---when you no longer see us and no
longer encourage our daring, or when you only see what we produce or how
we perform---we disengage and turn away from the very things that the
world needs from us: our talent, our ideas, and our passion. What we ask
is that you engage with us, show up beside us, and learn from us.
Feedback is a function of respect; when you don't have honest
conversations with us about our strengths and our opportunities for
growth, we question our contributions and your commitment. Above all
else, we ask that you show up, let yourself be seen, and be courageous.
Dare Greatly with us. You can find a printed copy of this manifesto on
my website (www.brenebrown.com).

CHAPTER 7

WHOLEHEARTED PARENTING: DARING TO BE THE ADULTS WE WANT OUR CHILDREN TO
BE Who we are and how we engage with the world are much stronger
predictors of how our children will do than what we know about
parenting. In terms of teaching our children to dare greatly in the
"never enough" culture, the question isn't so much "Are you parenting
the right way?" as it is: "Are you the adult that you want your child to
grow up to be?"

PARENTING IN A CULTURE OF NEVER ENOUGH Most of us would love a
color-coded parenting handbook that answers all of our unanswerable
questions, comes with guarantees, and minimizes our vulnerability. We
want to know that if we follow certain rules or adhere to the method
espoused by a certain parenting expert, our children will sleep through
the night, be happy, make friends, achieve professional success, and
stay safe. The uncertainty of parenting can bring up feelings in us that
range from frustration to terror. Our need for certainty in an endeavor
as uncertain as raising children makes explicit "how-to-parent"
strategies both seductive and dangerous. I say "dangerous" because
certainty often breeds absolutes, intolerance, and judgment. That's why
parents are so critical of one another---we latch on to a method or
approach and very quickly our way becomes the way. When we obsess over
our parenting choices to the extent that most of us do, and then see
someone else making different choices, we often perceive that difference
as direct criticism of how we are parenting. Ironically, parenting is a
shame and judgment minefield precisely because most of us are wading
through uncertainty and self-doubt when it comes to raising our
children. After all, we rarely engage in selfrighteous judgment when we
feel confident about our decisions: I'm not going to practically knock
myself unconscious with a shaming eye roll about your nonorganic milk if
I feel good about what I'm feeding my children. But if doubt lurks
beneath my choices, that self-righteous critic will spring to life in
not-so-subtle parenting moments that happen because my underlying fear
of not being the perfect parent is driving my need to confirm that, at
the very least, I'm better than you. Somewhere buried deep inside our
hopes and fears for our children is the terrifying truth that there is
no such thing as perfect parenting and there are no guarantees. From
debates about attachment parenting and how much better they parent in
Europe to disparagement of "tiger moms" and helicopter parents, the
heated discussions that occupy much of the national parenting
conversation conveniently distract us from this important and difficult
truth: Who we are and how we engage with the world are much stronger
predictors of how our children will do than what we know about
parenting.

I'm not a parenting expert. In fact, I'm not sure that I even believe in
the idea of "parenting experts." I'm an engaged, imperfect parent and a
passionate researcher. As I mentioned in the introduction, I'm an
experienced mapmaker and a stumbling traveler. Like many of you,
parenting is by far my boldest and most daring adventure. From the very
beginning of my research on shame, I've always collected data on
parenting and paid close attention to how research participants talked
about being parented and about parenting. The reason is simple: Our
stories of worthiness---of being enough---begin in our first families.
The narrative certainly doesn't end there, but what we learn about
ourselves and how we learn to engage with the world as children sets a
course that either will require us to spend a significant part of our
life fighting to reclaim our self-worth or will give us hope, courage,
and resilience for our journey. There's no question that our behavior,
thinking, and emotions are both hardwired within us and influenced by
our environment. I wouldn't hazard a guess on the percentages, and I'm
convinced that we'll never have a precise nature/nurture breakdown. I
have no doubt, however, that when it comes to our sense of love,
belonging, and worthiness, we are most radically shaped by our families
of origin---what we hear, what we are told, and perhaps most
importantly, how we observe our parents engaging with the world. As
parents, we may have less control than we think over temperament and
personality, and less control than we want over the scarcity culture.
But we do have powerful parenting opportunities in other areas: how we
help our children understand, leverage, and appreciate their hardwiring,
and how we teach them resilience in the face of relentless "never
enough" cultural messages. In terms of teaching our children to dare
greatly in the "never enough" culture, the question isn't so much "Are
you parenting the right way?" as it is: "Are you the adult that you want
your child to grow up to be?" As Joseph Chilton Pearce writes, "What we
are teaches the child more than what we say, so we must be what we want
our children to become." Even though the vulnerability of parenting is
terrifying at times, we can't afford to armor ourselves against it or
push it away---it is our richest, most fertile ground for teaching and
cultivating connection, meaning, and love. Vulnerability lies at the
center of the family story. It defines our moments of greatest joy,
fear, sorrow, shame, disappointment, love, belonging, gratitude,
creativity, and everyday wonder. Whether we're

holding our children or standing beside them or chasing them down or
talking through their locked door, vulnerability is what shapes who we
are and who our children are. By pushing away vulnerability, we turn
parenting into a competition that's about knowing, proving, executing,
and measuring rather than being. If we put aside the question of "Who's
better?" and put down the yardsticks of school admissions, grades,
sports, trophies, and accomplishments, I think the vast majority of us
will agree that what we want for our children is what we want for
ourselves---we want to raise children who live and love with their whole
hearts. If Wholeheartedness is the goal, then above all else we should
strive to raise children who: Engage with the world from a place of
worthiness Embrace their vulnerabilities and imperfections Feel a deep
sense of love and compassion for themselves and others Value hard work,
perseverance, and respect Carry a sense of authenticity and belonging
with them, rather than searching for it in external places Have the
courage to be imperfect, vulnerable, and creative Don't fear feeling
ashamed or unlovable if they are different or if they are struggling
Move through our rapidly changing world with courage and a resilient
spirit For parents this means we are called upon to: Acknowledge that we
can't give our children what we don't have and so we must let them share
in our journey to grow, change, and learn Recognize our own armor and
model for our children how to take it off, be vulnerable, show up, and
let ourselves be seen and known Honor our children by continuing on our
own journeys toward Wholeheartedness Parent from a place of "enough"
rather than scarcity Mind the gap and practice the values we want to
teach Dare greatly, possibly more than we've ever dared before

In other words, if we want our children to love and accept who they are,
our job is to love and accept who we are. We can't use fear, shame,
blame, and judgment in our own lives if we want to raise courageous
children. Compassion and connection---the very things that give purpose
and meaning to our lives---can only be learned if they are experienced.
And our families are our first opportunities to experience these things.
In this chapter, I want to share what I've learned about worthiness,
shame resilience, and vulnerability specifically from my parenting
research. This work has profoundly transformed the way that Steve and I
think and feel about parenting. It has dramatically changed our
priorities, our marriage, and our day-to-day behaviors. Because Steve is
a pediatrician, we spend lots of time discussing parenting research and
various parenting models. My goal here is not to teach you how to
parent, but to share what might be a new lens through which to view the
great dare of raising Wholehearted children.

UNDERSTANDING SHAME

AND

COMBATING

It's a terrible myth to believe that once we have children, our journey
ends and theirs begins. For many of us, the most interesting and
productive times in our lives come after we have children. For the
majority of us, the greatest challenges and struggles also come in
midlife and later. Wholehearted parenting is not having it all figured
out and passing it down---it's learning and exploring together. And
trust me, there are times when my children are way ahead of me on the
journey, either waiting for me or reaching back to pull me along. As I
mentioned in the introduction, if you roughly divide the men and women
I've interviewed into two groups---those who feel a deep sense of love
and belonging, and those who struggle for it---only one variable
separates the groups: Those who feel lovable, who love, and who
experience belonging simply believe they are worthy of love and
belonging. I often say that Wholeheartedness is like the North Star: We
never really arrive, but we certainly know if we're headed in the right
direction. Raising children who believe in their worthiness requires us
to model that journey and that struggle. The important thing to know
about worthiness is that it doesn't have prerequisites. Most of us, on
the other hand, have a long list of worthiness
prerequisites---qualifiers that we've inherited, learned, and
unknowingly picked up along the way. Most of these prerequisites fall in
the categories of accomplishments, acquisitions, and external
acceptance. It's the if/when problem ("I'll be worthy when..." or "I'll
be worthy if..."). They may not be written down, and we may not even be
aware of the prerequisites, but we all have a list that says, "I'll be
worthy..." When I lose this weight If I get accepted into this school If
my wife's not cheating If we don't get divorced If I get promoted When I
get pregnant When he asks me out When we buy a house in this
neighborhood If no one finds out

Shame loves prerequisites. Our if/when worthiness list easily doubles as
the gremlins' to-do list. Don't let her forget that her mom thinks she
should lose that baby weight. Remind him that his new boss only respects
guys with MBAs. Poke her if she forgets that all of her friends made
partner last year. As parents, we help our children develop shame
resilience and worthiness by staying very mindful about the
prerequisites that we're knowingly or unknowingly handing down to them.
Are we sending them overt or covert messages about what makes them more
and less lovable? Or are we focusing on behaviors that need to change
and making it clear that their essential worthiness is not on the table?
I often tell parents that some of the most destructive covert messages
that we send our children stem from the feminine and masculine norms
that we discussed in Chapter 3. Are we overtly or covertly telling our
daughters that thin, nice, and modest are prerequisites for worthiness?
Are we teaching our girls to respect boys as tender and loving beings?
Are we sending messages to our sons that we expect them to be
emotionally stoic, to put money and status first, and to be aggressive?
Are we teaching our sons to respect women and girls as smart and capable
people, not objects? Perfectionism is another fount of prerequisites. In
a dozen years of studying worthiness, I'm convinced that perfectionism
is actually contagious. If we struggle with being, living, and looking
absolutely perfect, we might as well line our children up and slip those
little perfection straitjackets right over their heads. Just as a
reminder from Chapter 4, perfectionism is not teaching them how to
strive for excellence or be their best selves. Perfectionism is teaching
them to value what other people think over what they think or how they
feel. It's teaching them to perform, please, and prove. Unfortunately, I
have many examples from my own life. For instance, when Ellen got her
first tardy at school, she immediately broke down crying. She was so
upset about breaking the rules and upsetting her teacher or the
principal that she just fell apart. We kept telling her that it wasn't a
big deal and that everyone is late sometimes until she felt better. That
evening we celebrated surviving our first tardy with a little "tardy
party" after dinner. She finally agreed that it wasn't a big deal and
that other people probably didn't judge her for being human.
Fast-forward four days to Sunday morning. We're running late for church
and I'm in tears. "Why can't we ever get out of here on time! We're
going to be late!" Ellen looked up at me and earnestly asked, "Dad

and Charlie will be here in one minute. Are we missing something
important?" Without hesitating, I said, "No! I just hate walking in late
and sneaking down the aisle. It's the 9 o'clock service, not the 9:05
service." She looked confused for a second, then grinned as she said,
"It's not a big deal. Everyone's late sometimes. Remember? I'll throw a
tardy party for you when we get home." Sometimes prerequisites and
perfectionism are handed down in very subtle ways. One of the very best
pieces of parenting advice that I ever received was from the writer Toni
Morrison. It was May of 2000 and Ellen was just shy of her first
birthday. Ms. Morrison was on Oprah talking about her book The Bluest
Eye. Oprah said, "Toni says a beautiful thing about the messages that we
get about who we are when a child first walks into a room," and she
asked Ms. Morrison to talk about it. Ms. Morrison explained that it's
interesting to watch what happens when a child walks into a room. She
asked, "Does your face light up?" She explained, "When my children used
to walk in the room when they were little, I looked at them to see if
they had buckled their trousers or if their hair was combed or if their
socks were up....You think your affection and your deep love is on
display because you're caring for them. It's not. When they see you,
they see the critical face. What's wrong now?" Her advice was simple,
but paradigm-shifting for me. She said, "Let your face speak what's in
your heart. When they walk in the room my face says I'm glad to see
them. It's just as small as that, you see?" I literally think about that
advice every day---it's become a practice. When Ellen comes bounding
down the stairs dressed for school, I don't want my first comment to be
"Pull your hair back" or "Those shoes don't match your dress." I want my
face to convey how happy I am to see her ---to be with her. When Charlie
comes in the back door and he's sweaty and dirty from catching lizards,
I want to flash a smile before I say, "Don't touch anything until you
wash your hands." So often we think that we earn parenting points by
being critical, put out, and exasperated. Those first looks can be
prerequisites or worthiness-builders. I don't want to criticize when my
kids walk in the room, I want to light up! In addition to keeping a
mindful eye on prerequisites and perfectionism, we can help our children
keep and cultivate their sense of worthiness in another way, one that
relates back to what we learned about the differences between shame and
guilt. Research indicates that parenting is a primary predictor of how
prone our children will be to shame or guilt. In other words, we have a
lot of influence over how our

kids think about themselves and their struggles. Knowing as we do that
shame is positively correlated with addiction, depression, aggression,
violence, eating disorders, and suicide, and that guilt is inversely
correlated with these outcomes, we naturally would want to raise
children who use more guilt self-talk than shame. This means we need to
separate our children from their behaviors. As it turns out, there's a
significant difference between you are bad and you did something bad.
And, no, it's not just semantics. Shame corrodes the part of us that
believes we can do and be better. When we shame and label our children,
we take away their opportunity to grow and try on new behaviors. If a
child tells a lie, she can change that behavior. If she is a
liar---where's the potential for change in that? Cultivating more guilt
self-talk and less shame self-talk requires rethinking how we discipline
and talk to our children. But it also means explaining these concepts to
our kids. Children are very receptive to talking about shame if we're
willing to do it. By the time they're four and five, we can explain to
them the difference between guilt and shame, and how much we love them
even when they make bad choices. When Ellen was in kindergarten, her
teacher called me at home one afternoon and said, "I totally get what
you do now." When I asked her why, she said that earlier in the week,
she had looked over at Ellen, who was in the "Glitter Center" and said,
"Ellen! You're a mess." Apparently, Ellen got a very serious look on her
face and said, "I may be making a mess, but I'm not a mess." (That's the
day I became "that parent.") Charlie also gets the distinction between
shame and guilt. When I found our dog pulling food out of the trash can,
I scolded her by saying, "Bad girl!" Charlie came sliding around the
corner, shouting, "Daisy is a good girl who made a bad choice! We love
her! We just don't love her choices!" When I tried to explain the
difference by saying, "Daisy is a dog, Charlie," his response was, "Oh,
I see. Daisy is a good dog who made a bad choice." Shame is so painful
for children because it is inextricably linked to the fear of being
unlovable. For young children who are still dependent on their parents
for survival---for food, shelter, and safety---feeling unlovable is a
threat to survival. It's trauma. I'm convinced that the reason most of
us revert back to feeling childlike and small when we're in shame is
because our brain stores our early shame experiences as trauma, and when
it's triggered we return to that place. We don't have

the neurobiological research yet to confirm this, but I've coded
hundreds of interviews that follow this same pattern: "I don't know what
happened. My boss called me an idiot in front of my team and I couldn't
respond. All of a sudden I'm back in Mrs. Porter's second-grade class
and I'm speechless. I can't come back with one decent response." Or "My
son struck out for the second time and I couldn't see straight. I always
said I'd never do what my dad did to me, but there I was screaming at
him in front of his teammates. I'm not even sure how it happened." In
Chapter 3 we learned that the brain processes social rejection or shame
the same exact way it processes physical pain. I suspect we'll
eventually have the data to support my hypothesis about children storing
shame as trauma, but in the meantime I can say without hesitation that
childhood experiences of shame change who we are, how we think about
ourselves, and our sense of self-worth. We can work hard not to use
shame as a parenting tool, but our children are still going to encounter
shame in the outside world. The good news is that when children
understand the distinction between shame and guilt, and when they know
that we're interested and open to talking about these feelings and
experiences, they are much more likely to talk to us about the shaming
experiences they may encounter with teachers, coaches, clergy,
babysitters, grandparents, and other adults who have influence in their
lives. This is critically important because it gives us the opportunity
to "crop" shame the way we do photographs. I often use a scrapbook as a
metaphor to talk about the impact shame has on children. As parents,
once we learn about shame, we will more than likely realize that, yes,
we've shamed our children. It happens. Even to shame researchers. Given
the severity of the outcomes around shame, we'll also begin to worry
that the shaming moments that happen outside our home will define our
children, despite our best efforts in the family. And those experiences
will happen---name calling, put-downs, and teasing are rampant in our
culture of cruelty. The good news, however, is that we have a lot of
influence over how much power those experiences have in our children's
lives. Most of us can remember shaming events from childhood that felt
defining. But more than likely we remember them because we didn't
process those experiences with parents who were open to talking about
shame and committed to helping us cultivate shame resilience. I don't

blame my parents for that any more than I judge my grandmother letting
me stand next to her in the front seat while she was driving. They
didn't have access to the information we have today. Knowing what I do
now, I think about shame and worthiness in this way: "It's the album,
not the picture." If you imagine opening up a photo album, and many of
the pages are full of eight-by-ten photos of shaming events, you'll
close that album and walk away thinking, Shame defines that story. If,
on the other hand, you open that album and see a few small photos of
shame experiences, but each one is surrounded by pictures of worthiness,
hope, struggle, resilience, courage, failure, success, and
vulnerability, the shame experiences are only a part of a larger story.
They don't define the album. Again, we can't shameproof our children.
Our task instead is teaching and modeling shame resilience, and that
starts with conversations about what shame is and how it shows up in our
lives. The adults I interviewed who were raised by parents who used
shame as a primary parenting tool had much more difficulty believing in
their worthiness than the participants who experienced shame
occasionally and were able to talk about it with their parents. If you
have grown children and are wondering if it's too late to teach shame
resilience or to change the album, the answer is no. It's not too late.
The power of owning our stories, even the difficult ones, is that we get
to write the ending. Several years ago, I received a letter from a woman
who wrote: Your work changed my life in a very strange way. My mom saw
you speak at a church in Amarillo. Afterwards, she wrote me a long
letter that said, "I had no idea there was a difference between shame
and guilt. I think I shamed you your entire life. I meant to use guilt.
I never thought you weren't good enough. I did not like your choices.
But I shamed you. I can't take that back, but I need you to know that
you're the best thing that ever happened to me and I'm so proud to be
your mother." I couldn't believe it. My mom is seventy-five and I'm
fifty-five. It healed so much. And it changed everything, including the
way I parent my own kids.

In addition to helping our children understand shame, and use guilt
self-talk rather than shame self-talk, we have to be very careful about
shame leakage. Even if we don't shame our children, shame still shows up
in our lives in ways that can have a powerful affect on our family.
Basically, we can't raise children who are more shame resilient than we
are. I can encourage Ellen to love her body, but what really matters are
the observations she makes about my relationship with my own body. Damn
it. I can soothe Charlie's concerns that he might run the wrong
direction around the bases by telling him that he doesn't have to fully
understand the ins and outs of baseball before his first T-ball game,
but

does he observe me and Steve trying new things, making mistakes, and
failing without becoming self-critical? Damn it. Again. Lastly,
normalizing is one of the most powerful shame-resilience tools that we
can offer our children. Like I explained in the last chapter,
normalizing means helping our children know they're not alone and that
we've experienced many of the same struggles. This applies to social
situations, changes in their bodies, shaming experiences, feeling left
out, and wanting to be brave but feeling afraid. There's something
sacred that happens between a parent and a child when the parent says,
"Me too!" or shares a personal story that relates to their child's
struggle.

MINDING THE GAP: SUPPORTING OUR CHILDREN MEANS SUPPORTING EACH OTHER I
believe it's important at this point to pause to recognize the shaming
nature of parenting "values" debates. When you listen to conversations,
or read books and blogs, about controversial and/or divisive issues in
parenting, like how and where women labor, circumcision, vaccinations,
co-sleeping, feeding, etc., what you hear is shame and what you see is
hurt. Deep hurt. You see people---mostly mothers---engaging in the exact
same behaviors that I earlier defined as shaming: name calling,
putdowns, and bullying. Here's what I've come to believe about these
behaviors: You can't claim to care about the welfare of children if
you're shaming other parents for the choices they're making. Those are
mutually exclusive behaviors and they create a huge values gap. Yes,
most of us (myself included) have strong opinions on every one of those
topics, but if we really care about the broader welfare of children, our
job is to make choices that are aligned with our values and support
other parents who are doing the same. Our job is also to tend to our own
worthiness. When we feel good about the choices we're making and when
we're engaging with the world from a place of worthiness rather than
scarcity, we feel no need to judge and attack. It's easy to put up a
straw man in this argument and say, "So we're just supposed to ignore
parents who are abusing their children?" Fact: That someone is making
different choices from us doesn't in itself constitute abuse. If there's
real abuse happening, by all means, call the police. If not, we
shouldn't call it abuse. As a social worker who spent a year interning
at Child Protective Services, I have little tolerance for debates that
casually use the terms abuse or neglect to scare or belittle parents who
are simply doing things that we judge as wrong, different, or bad. In
fact, I've sworn off the good-bad parenting dichotomy simply because on
any given day you could file me under both good parent and bad parent,
depending on your perspective and how things are going for me. I just
don't see what value this judgmental frame adds to our lives or to the
larger parenting conversation. In fact, it's a shame storm waiting to
happen. To me the question of parenting values is about engagement.

Are we paying attention? Thinking through our choices? Open to learning
and being wrong? Curious and willing to ask questions? What I've learned
from my work is that there are a million ways out in the world to be a
wonderful, engaged parent, and some of them are going to bump up against
what I personally think about parenting. For example, Steve and I are
very strict about what we let the kids watch on TV---especially when it
comes to violence. We think about it, talk about it, and make the best
decisions we can. On the other hand, we've got friends who let their
children watch movies and shows that we don't allow Ellen or Charlie
watch. But you know what? They also think about it, talk about it, and
make the best decisions they can. They just came to a different
conclusion than we did, and I respect that. We recently found ourselves
on the other side of this issue when some good friends expressed
surprise that we let Ellen read The Hunger Games. Again, those parents
were also engaged in the question, and the conversation we had showed
mutual respect and empathy. Minding the gap can be particularly
challenging when honoring difference is one of our aspirational values.
I think the key is remembering that when other parents make different
choices than we're making, it's not necessarily criticism. Daring
greatly means finding our own path and respecting what that search looks
like for other folks.

MINDING THE GAP AND BELONGING Worthiness is about love and belonging,
and one of the best ways to show our children that our love for them is
unconditional is to make sure they know they belong in our families. I
know that sounds strange, but it's a very powerful and at times
heart-wrenching issue for children. On page 145, I defined belonging as
the innate human desire to be part of something larger than us. One of
the biggest surprises in this research was learning that fitting in and
belonging are not the same thing. In fact, fitting in is one of the
greatest barriers to belonging. Fitting in is about assessing a
situation and becoming who you need to be in order to be accepted.
Belonging, on the other hand, doesn't require us to change who we are;
it requires us to be who we are. When I asked a large group of eighth
graders to break into small teams and come up with the differences
between fitting in and belonging, their answers floored me: Belonging is
being somewhere where you want to be, and they want you. Fitting in is
being somewhere where you really want to be, but they don't care one way
or the other. Belonging is being accepted for you. Fitting in is being
accepted for being like everyone else. I get to be me if I belong. I
have to be like you to fit in. They nailed the definitions. It doesn't
matter where in the country I ask this question, or what type of school
I'm visiting, middle and high school students understand how this works.
They also talk openly about the heartache of not feeling a sense of
belonging at home. That first time I asked the eighth graders to come up
with the definitions, one student wrote, "Not belonging at school is
really hard. But it's nothing compared to what it feels like when you
don't belong at home." When I asked the students what that meant, they
used these examples: Not living up to your parents' expectations Not
being as cool or popular as your parents want you to be Not being as
smart as your parents

Not being good at the same things your parents were good at Your parents
being embarrassed because you don't have enough friends or you're not an
athlete or a cheerleader Your parents not liking who you are and what
you like to do When your parents don't pay attention to your life If we
want to cultivate worthiness in our children, we need to make sure they
know that they belong and that their belonging is unconditional. What
makes that such a challenge is that most of us struggle to feel a sense
of belonging---to know that we're a part of something, not despite our
vulnerabilities, but because of them. We can't give our children what we
don't have, which means we have to work to cultivate a sense of
belonging alongside our children. Here's an example of how we can grow
together and how our children are capable of great empathy. (There's
nothing that inspires that deep sense of belonging like shared empathy!)
When Ellen was in fourth grade, she came home from school one day and
burst into tears as soon as we shut the front door, then ran up to her
room. I immediately followed, then knelt down in front of her and asked
her what was wrong. Through her sniffles she said, "I'm so tired of
being the other! I'm sick of it!" I didn't understand, so I asked her to
explain what she meant by "the other." "We play soccer every day at
recess. Two popular kids are the captains and they pick the teams. The
first captain says, 'I'll take Suzie, John, Pete, Robin, and Jake.' The
second captain says, 'I'll take Andrew, Steve, Katie, and Sue, and we
can split the others.' Every single day I'm one of the others. I never
get to be named." My heart sank. She was sitting on the edge of her bed
with her head in her hands. I was so concerned when I followed her into
her room that I hadn't even flipped on the light. I couldn't stand the
vulnerability of seeing her sitting in the dark crying, so I walked over
to the light switch. It was divine intervention---the act of starting to
turn on the lights to alleviate my discomfort made me think of my
favorite quote about darkness and compassion from Pema Chödrön, who
writes: "Compassion is not a relationship between the healer and the
wounded. It's a relationship between equals. Only when we know our own
darkness well can we be present with the darkness of others. Compassion
becomes real when we recognize our shared humanity."

I left the light switch alone and walked back to sit with Ellen in the
literal and emotional dark. I put my arm around her shoulder and said,
"I know what it's like to be the other." She wiped her nose on the back
of her hand and said, "No, you don't. You're really popular." I
explained that I really do know what it feels like. I told her, "When I
feel like the other, I get angry and hurt, and I mostly feel small and
lonely. I don't need to be popular, but I want people to recognize me
and treat me like I matter. Like I belong." She couldn't believe it.
"You do know! That's exactly how I feel!" We snuggled on her bed, and
she told me about her recess experiences, and I told her about some of
my experiences in school when otherness is both powerful and painful.
About two weeks later, we were both at home when the mail arrived. I ran
to the door with great anticipation. I was scheduled to speak at a
starstudded event, and I was dying to see the publicity poster. It seems
weird now, but I was so excited at the idea of seeing my photo next to
the pictures of the movie stars. I sat down on the couch with the
poster, I unrolled it, and I started scanning like a madwoman. Just as I
was doing this, Ellen walked in and said, "Cool! Is that your poster?
Let me see!" As she walked over to the couch, she could tell my mood had
changed from anticipation to disappointment. "What's wrong, Mom?" I
patted the couch and she sat down next to me. I held the poster open,
and she traced the pictures with her finger. "I don't see you. Where are
you?" I pointed to a line on the poster under the celebrity photos that
said, "And others." Ellen leaned back against the sofa cushions, put her
head on my shoulder, and said, "Oh, Mom, I think you're the others. I'm
sorry." I didn't reply right away. I was feeling small both because
there was no picture and for caring that there was no picture. Ellen
leaned forward, looked at me, and said, "I know what that feels like.
When I'm the other, I feel hurt and small and lonely. We all want to
matter and belong." It turned out to be one of the best moments of my
life. We may not always have a sense of belonging on the recess
playground or at a big, fancy conference, but in that moment we knew
that we belonged where it mattered the most---at home. Parenting
perfection is not the goal. In fact, the best gifts---the best teaching
moments---happen in those imperfect moments when we allow children to
help us mind the gap.

Here's a powerful story about cultivating shame resilience and minding
the gap from Susan, a woman I interviewed a couple of years ago. Susan
was busy talking to a group of mothers at her kids' school while her
kids were standing close by waiting for her to take them home. The
mothers were discussing who would host the "Welcome Kinder Kids" party
for the new students. They all hated the thought of doing it, but the
one woman who volunteered to throw the party had "a filthy house." After
talking about this woman and her house for a few minutes, they agreed
that letting her host the party would reflect poorly on them and the
PTO. When they finished their discussion, Susan loaded up the kids (a
daughter in kinder, and two sons---one in first grade and another in
third grade) and started home. Susan's first-grade son randomly called
out from the backseat, "I think you're a great mom." Susan smiled and
said, "Well, thank you." A few minutes after they walked in the house,
the same child came up to her with big tears in his eyes. He looked at
Susan and said, "Do you feel bad about yourself? Are you okay?" Susan
said she was completely taken by surprise. She knelt down and said,
"No. Why? What's wrong?" Her son replied, "You always say that when
people get together and talk bad about someone just because they are
different, it means they might feel bad about themselves. You said that
when we feel good about who we are, we don't say mean things about other
people." Susan immediately recognized the warm wash of shame. She knew
that her son had overheard the conversation at the school. This is the
moment. The Wholehearted parenting moment. Can we tolerate the
vulnerability long enough to be with it for a minute? Or do we need to
discharge the shame and discomfort by redirecting our child or blaming
them for "crossing a line?" Can we take this opportunity to acknowledge
how wonderfully he's practicing empathy? Can we make mistakes and make
amends? If we want our kids to own and be honest about their
experiences, can we own ours? Susan looked at her son and said, "Thank
you so much for checking on me and asking me how I feel. I feel okay,
but I think I made a mistake. I need a little time to think about all of
this. You're right about one thing---I was saying hurtful things." After
Susan pulled herself together, she sat down with her son and they
talked. They discussed how easy it is to get caught up in a group
situation where everyone is talking about someone. Susan was honest and
admitted that she sometimes struggles with "what people think." She

said her son leaned into her and whispered, "Me too." They promised to
keep talking to each other about their experiences. Engagement means
investing time and energy. It means sitting down with our children and
understanding their worlds, their interests, and their stories. Engaged
parents can be found on both sides of all of the controversial parenting
debates. They come from different values, traditions, and cultures. What
they share in common is practicing the values. What they seem to share
is a philosophy of "I'm not perfect and I'm not always right, but I'm
here, open, paying attention, loving you, and fully engaged." There is
no question that engagement requires sacrifice, but that's what we
signed up for when we decided to become parents. Most of us have so many
competing demands on our time that it's easy to think, I can't sacrifice
three hours to sit down and review my son's Facebook page or sit with my
daughter while she explains every detail of the fourth grade science
fair scandal. I struggle with that too. But Jimmy Grace, a priest from
our Episcopal church, recently gave a sermon about the nature of
sacrifice and it totally shifted how I think about parenting. He
explained that in its original Latin form, sacrifice means to make
sacred or to make holy. I Wholeheartedly believe that when we are fully
engaged in parenting, regardless of how imperfect, vulnerable, and messy
it is, we are creating something sacred.

THE COURAGE TO BE VULNERABLE Before writing this section, I spread my
data all over my dining room table and asked myself this question: What
do parents experience as the most vulnerable and bravest thing that they
do in their efforts to raise Wholehearted children? I thought it would
take days to figure it out, but as I looked over the field notes, the
answer was obvious: letting their children struggle and experience
adversity. As I travel across the country there seems to be growing
concern on the part of parents and teachers that children are not
learning how to handle adversity or disappointment because we're always
rescuing and protecting them. What's interesting is that more often than
not, I hear this concern from the same parents who are chronically
intervening, rescuing, and protecting. It's not that our children can't
stand the vulnerability of handling their own situations, it's that we
can't stand the uncertainty, risk, and emotional exposure, even when we
know it's the right thing to do. I used to struggle with letting go and
allowing my children to find their own way, but something that I learned
in the research dramatically changed my perspective and I no longer see
rescuing and intervening as unhelpful, I now think about it as
dangerous. Don't get me wrong---I still struggle and I still step in
when I shouldn't, but I now think twice before I let my discomfort
dictate my behaviors. Here's why: Hope is a function of struggle. If we
want our children to develop high levels of hopefulness, we have to let
them struggle. And let me tell you, next to love and belonging, I'm not
sure I want anything more for my kids than a deep sense of hopefulness.
Experience with adversity, tenacity, and grit emerged in my research as
an important quality of Wholeheartedness. I was so grateful to see it
because it was one of the few qualities of Wholeheartedness that I had
at the time (remember in the introduction---I was two for ten). When I
went into the literature to search for a concept that had all of these
elements, I found C. R. Snyder's research on hope. I was shocked. First,
I thought hope was a warm, fuzzy emotion---the feeling of possibility.
Second, I was looking for something that I had thought of as being
scrappy and nicknamed "Plan B"---these folks could turn to Plan B when
Plan A fell apart. As it turns out, I was wrong about hope and right
about scrappy and Plan B. According to Snyder, who dedicated his career
to studying this

topic, hope isn't an emotion; it's a way of thinking or a cognitive
process. Emotions play a supporting role, but hope is really a thought
process made up of what Snyder calls a trilogy of goals, pathways, and
agency. In very simple terms, hope happens when: We have the ability to
set realistic goals (I know where I want to go). We are able to figure
out how to achieve those goals, including the ability to stay flexible
and develop alternative routes (I know how to get there, I'm persistent,
and I can tolerate disappointment and try again). We believe in
ourselves (I can do this!). So, hope is a combination of setting goals,
having the tenacity and perseverance to pursue them, and believing in
our own abilities. Hope is Plan B. And, here's the part that inspired me
to deal with my own vulnerability so I could step back and let my
children learn how to figure some things out on their own: Hope is
learned! According to Snyder, children most often learn hope from their
parents. To learn hopefulness, children need relationships that are
characterized by boundaries, consistency, and support. Children with
high levels of hopefulness have experience with adversity. They've been
given the opportunity to struggle and in doing that they learn how to
believe in themselves. Raising children who are hopeful and who have the
courage to be vulnerable means stepping back and letting them experience
disappointment, deal with conflict, learn how to assert themselves, and
have the opportunity to fail. If we're always following our children
into the arena, hushing the critics, and assuring their victory, they'll
never learn that they have the ability to dare greatly on their own. One
of my best lessons on this comes from an experience that I had with
Ellen. It began when I was still ten cars away from her in the swim team
pickup line. It was getting dark, so I could only make out her
silhouette, but that was enough: I could tell something was wrong by the
way she was standing. She flung herself into the front seat, and before
I could ask her about practice, she was in tears. "What happened? What's
wrong? Are you okay?" She stared out the window, drew a deep breath as
she wiped her tears on the sleeve of her hoodie, and said, "I have to
swim the 100

breaststroke at the meet on Saturday." I knew this was a really bad
thing in her world, so I tried not to seem relieved---which I was
because, in a crazy-but-normal-for-me fashion, I was already thinking
something really horrible had happened. "You don't understand. I can't
swim breaststroke. I'm terrible. You don't get it. I begged him not to
put me in that event." I was getting ready to respond with something
empathetic and encouraging as I pulled into the driveway, but just then
she looked me right in the eyes, put her hand on top of my hand, and
said, "Please, Mom. Please help me. I'm still going to be swimming when
the other girls are getting out of the pool and the next heat is getting
on the blocks. I'm really that slow." I couldn't swallow. I couldn't
think clearly. All of a sudden, I'm ten years old and I'm on the blocks
getting ready to swim for the Memorial Northwest Marlins. My dad is the
starter, and he's giving me the win-ordie look. I'm in the lane closest
to the wall---the slow lane. It's going to be a disaster. Moments
earlier, as I was sitting on the ready bench contemplating making a run
for my banana-seat bike leaning against the fence by the diving boards,
I overheard the coach say, "Let's just swim her up an age group. I'm not
sure she can finish the race, but it will be interesting." "Mom? Mom??
Mom!!! Are you listening to me? Will you help me? Will you talk to the
coach and see if he'll put me in another race?" The vulnerability felt
unbearable and I wanted to scream, "Yes! You don't have to swim any
event that you don't want to swim. EVER!" But I didn't. Calm was one of
my new Wholehearted practices, so I took a deep breath, counted to five,
and said, "Let me talk to your dad." After the kids went to bed, Steve
and I spent an hour debating the issue and finally agreed that she would
have to take it up with her coach. If he wanted her to swim that race,
she needed to swim it. As right as the decision felt, I hated every
minute of it, and I tried everything from picking a fight with Steve to
blaming the coach to venting my fear and discharging the vulnerability.
Ellen was upset when we told her this, and even more upset when she came
home from practice and told us that her coach thought it was important
for her to get an official time for the event. She folded her arms on
the table, put her head down, and cried. At one point she lifted up her
head and said, "I could just scratch the event. A lot of people miss
their heats." A part of me thought, Perfect! But then she said, "I won't

win. I'm not even good enough to get second or third place. Everyone is
going to be watching." This was the opportunity to move the levers---to
redefine what's important to her. To make our family culture more
influential than the swim meet, her friends, and the ultracompetitive
sports culture that is rampant in our community. I looked at her and
said, "You can scratch that event. I'd probably consider that option
too. But what if your goal for that race isn't to win or even to get out
of the water at the same time as the other girls? What if your goal is
to show up and get wet?" She looked at me as if I was crazy. "Just show
up and get in the water?" I explained that I had spent many years never
trying anything that I wasn't already good at doing, and how those
choices almost made me forget what it feels like to be brave. I said,
"Sometimes the bravest and most important thing you can do is just show
up." Steve and I made sure that we weren't with her when her heat was
called. When it was time for the girls to get on the blocks, I wasn't
sure if she'd be there, but she was. We stood at the end of her lane and
held our breath. She looked right at us, nodded her head, and snapped
her goggles into place. She was the last one out of the pool. The other
swimmers had already left the deck, and there were girls standing on the
blocks ready for the next heat. Steve and I screamed and cheered the
entire time. When she got out of the pool, she walked over to her coach,
who gave her a hug, then showed her something about her kick. When she
finally made her way to us, she was smiling and a little tearful. She
looked at her dad and me and said, "That was pretty bad, but I did it. I
showed up and I got wet. I was brave." I wrote the following parenting
manifesto because I need it. Steve and I need it. Putting down the
measuring stick in a culture that uses acquisitions and accomplishments
to assess worth is not easy. I use the manifesto as a touchstone, a
prayer, and a meditation when I'm wrestling with vulnerability or when
I've got that "never enough" fear. It reminds me of the finding that
changed and probably saved my life: Who we are and how we engage with
the world are much stronger predictors of how our children will do than
what we know about parenting. The Wholehearted Parenting Manifesto Above
all else, I want you to know that you are loved and lovable. You will
learn this from my words and actions---the lessons on love are in how I
treat you and how I treat myself. I want you to engage with the world
from a place of worthiness.

You will learn that you are worthy of love, belonging, and joy every
time you see me practice self-compassion and embrace my own
imperfections. We will practice courage in our family by showing up,
letting ourselves be seen, and honoring vulnerability. We will share our
stories of struggle and strength. There will always be room in our home
for both. We will teach you compassion by practicing compassion with
ourselves first; then with each other. We will set and respect
boundaries; we will honor hard work, hope, and perseverance. Rest and
play will be family values, as well as family practices. You will learn
accountability and respect by watching me make mistakes and make amends,
and by watching how I ask for what I need and talk about how I feel. I
want you to know joy, so together we will practice gratitude. I want you
to feel joy, so together we will learn how to be vulnerable. When
uncertainty and scarcity visit, you will be able to draw from the spirit
that is a part of our everyday life. Together we will cry and face fear
and grief. I will want to take away your pain, but instead I will sit
with you and teach you how to feel it. We will laugh and sing and dance
and create. We will always have permission to be ourselves with each
other. No matter what, you will always belong here. As you begin your
Wholehearted journey, the greatest gift that I can give to you is to
live and love with my whole heart and to dare greatly. I will not teach
or love or show you anything perfectly, but I will let you see me, and I
will always hold sacred the gift of seeing you. Truly, deeply, seeing
you. You can download a copy of this manifesto from my website
(www.brenebrown.com).

FINAL THOUGHTS It is not the critic who counts; not the man who points
out how the strong man stumbles, or where the doer of deeds could have
done them better. The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the
arena, whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood; who strives
valiantly; who errs, who comes short again and again, because there is
no effort without error and shortcoming; but who does actually strive to
do the deeds; who knows great enthusiasms, the great devotions; who
spends himself in a worthy cause; who at the best knows in the end the
triumph of high achievement, and who at the worst, if he fails, at least
fails while daring greatly.... ---Theodore Roosevelt

In the nine months that it took me to shape and prune a dozen years of
research into this book, I've revisited this quote at least one hundred
times. And truthfully, I normally come back to it in fits of rage or
with tearstained desperation, thinking, Maybe this is all bullshit, or
It's not worth the vulnerability. Just recently, after enduring a few
really meanspirited anonymous comments from a news website, I pulled the
quote down from the pinboard over my desk and spoke directly to the
sheet of paper, "If the critic doesn't count, then why does this hurt so
much?" The paper didn't respond. As I held the quote in my hand, I
remembered a conversation that I had just had with a guy in his very
early twenties. He told me that his parents sent him links to my TED
talks and he really liked the idea of Wholeheartedness and daring
greatly. When he told me that the talks inspired him to tell the young
woman he's been dating for several months that he loved her, I winced
and hoped for a happy ending to the story. No such luck. She told him
that she thought he was "awesome" but that she thought they should date
other people. When he got back to his apartment after talking to his
girlfriend, he told his two roommates what had happened. He said, "They
were both hunched over their laptops and without looking up one of them
was like 'What were you thinking, man?'" One of his roommates told him
that girls only like guys who are running the other way. He looked at me
and said, "I felt pretty stupid at first. For a second I was mad at
myself and even a little pissed at you.

But then I thought about it and I remembered why I did it. I told my
roommates, 'I was daring greatly, dude.'" He smiled when he told me,
"They stopped typing, looked at me, nodded their heads, and said, 'Oh.
Right on, dude.'" Daring greatly is not about winning or losing. It's
about courage. In a world where scarcity and shame dominate and feeling
afraid has become second nature, vulnerability is subversive.
Uncomfortable. It's even a little dangerous at times. And, without
question, putting ourselves out there means there's a far greater risk
of feeling hurt. But as I look back on my own life and what Daring
Greatly has meant to me, I can honestly say that nothing is as
uncomfortable, dangerous, and hurtful as believing that I'm standing on
the outside of my life looking in and wondering what it would be like if
I had the courage to show up and let myself be seen. So,
Mr. Roosevelt...I think you nailed it. There really is "no effort
without error and shortcoming" and there really is no triumph without
vulnerability. Now when I read that quote, even when I'm feeling kicked
around, all I can think is, Right on, dude.

APPENDIX Trust in Emergence: Grounded Theory and My Research Process
Caminante, no hay camino, se hace camino al andar. Traveler, there is no
path, the path must be forged as you walk.

This line from the Spanish poet Antonio Machado captures the spirit of
my research process and the theories that emerged from that process.
Initially I set out, on what I thought was a well-traveled path, to find
empirical evidence of what I knew to be true. I soon realized that
conducting research centering on what matters to research
participants--- grounded theory research---means there is no path and,
certainly, there is no way of knowing what you will find. The most
difficult challenges of becoming a grounded theory researcher are: 1.
Acknowledging that it is virtually impossible to understand grounded
theory methodology prior to using it, 2. Developing the courage to let
the research participants define the research problem, and 3. Letting go
of your own interests and preconceived ideas to "trust in emergence."
Ironically (or maybe not), these are also the challenges of Daring
Greatly and living a courageous life. Below is an overview of the
design, methodology, sampling, and coding processes that I use in my
research. Before we jump in, I want to acknowledge Barney Glaser and
Anselm Strauss for their pioneering work in qualitative research and for
developing grounded theory methodology. And, to Dr. Glaser, who was
willing to commute from California to serve as the methodologist on my
dissertation committee at the University of Houston: You literally
changed the way I see the world.

THE RESEARCH JOURNEY As a doctoral student, the power of statistics and
the clean lines of quantitative research appealed to me, but I fell in
love with the richness and depth of qualitative research. Storytelling
is my DNA, and I couldn't resist the idea of research as story-catching.
Stories are data with a soul and no methodology honors that more than
grounded theory. The mandate of grounded theory is to develop theories
based on people's lived experiences rather than proving or disproving
existing theories. Behavioral researcher Fred Kerlinger defines theory
as "a set of interrelated constructs or concepts, definitions, and
propositions that present a systematic view of phenomena specifying
relations among variables, with the purpose of explaining and predicting
the phenomena." In grounded theory we don't start with a problem or a
hypothesis or a literature review, we start with a topic. We let the
participants define the problem or their main concern about the topic,
we develop a theory, and then we see how and where it fits in the
literature. I didn't sign on to study shame---one of the most (if not
the most) complex and multifaceted emotions that we experience. A topic
that not only took me six years to understand, but an emotion that is so
powerful that the mere mention of the word shame triggers discomfort and
avoidance in people. I innocently started with an interest in learning
more about the anatomy of connection. After fifteen years of social work
education, I was sure of one thing: Connection is why we're here; it is
what gives purpose and meaning to our lives. The power that connection
holds in our lives was confirmed when the main concern about connection
emerged as the fear of disconnection; the fear that something we've done
or failed to do, something about who we are or where we come from, has
made us unlovable and unworthy of connection. I learned that we resolve
this concern by understanding our vulnerabilities and cultivating
empathy, courage, and compassion---what I call shame resilience. After
developing a theory on shame resilience, and getting clear about the
effect of scarcity on our lives, I wanted to dig deeper---I wanted to
know more. The problem is that there's only so much you can understand
about shame and scarcity by asking about shame and scarcity. I needed
another approach to get under the experiences. That's when I had the
idea to borrow a few principles from chemistry.

In chemistry, especially thermodynamics, if you have an element or
property that is too volatile to measure, you often have to rely on
indirect measurement. You measure the property by combining and reducing
related, less volatile compounds until those relationships and
manipulations reveal a measurement of your original property. My idea
was to learn more about shame and scarcity by exploring what exists in
their absence. I know how people experience and move through shame, but
what are people feeling, doing, and thinking when shame doesn't
constantly have a knife to their throats, threatening them with being
unworthy of connection? How are some people living right alongside us in
this culture of scarcity and still holding on to the belief that they
are enough? I knew these people existed because I had interviewed them
and used some of the incidents from their data to inform my work on
empathy and shame resilience. Before I dove back into the data, I named
this study "Wholehearted Living." I was looking for women and men living
and loving with their whole hearts despite the risks and uncertainty. I
wanted to know what they had in common. What were their main concerns,
and what were the patterns and themes that defined their
Wholeheartedness? I reported the findings from that study in The Gifts
of Imperfection and an academic journal article that will be published
in late 2012 or early 2013. Vulnerability has consistently emerged as a
core category in my work. It was a critical component in both my study
on shame and my study on Wholeheartedness, and there's even a chapter on
it in my dissertation on connection. I understood the relationships
between vulnerability and the other emotions that I've studied, but
after years of dropping deeper and deeper into this work, I wanted to
know more about vulnerability and how it worked. The grounded theory
that emerged from this investigation is the subject of this book and
another academic article in press.

DESIGN As I've mentioned, grounded theory methodology, as originally
developed by Glaser and Strauss and refined by Glaser informed the plan
of research for my studies. The grounded theory process consists of five
basic components: theoretical sensitivity, theoretical sampling, coding,
theoretical memoing, and sorting. These five components were integrated
by the constant-comparison method of data analysis. The goal of the
research was to understand the participants' "main concerns" related to
experiencing the topic being examined (e.g., shame, Wholeheartedness,
vulnerability). Once the main concerns emerged from the data, I
developed a theory that explains how the participants continually
resolve their concerns in their daily lives.

SAMPLE Theoretical sampling, the process of data collection that allows
for the generation of theory, was the primary sampling method that I
used in this study. When using theoretical sampling, the researcher
simultaneously collects, codes, and analyzes data and uses this ongoing
process to determine what data to collect next and where to find them.
In line with theoretical sampling, I selected participants based on the
analysis and coding interviews and secondary data. One important tenet
of grounded theory is the idea that researchers should not assume the
relevance of identity data, including race, age, gender, sexual
orientation, class, and ability. Although the relevance of these
variables was not assumed, purposive sampling (intentionally sampling
across identity data) was used with theoretical sampling to ensure that
a diverse group of participants were interviewed. At certain points
during my research, identity data indeed emerged as relevant, and in
these cases purposive sampling continued to inform the theoretical
sample. In categories where identity did not emerge as relevant,
theoretical sampling was used exclusively. I interviewed 750 female
participants, approximately 43 percent of whom identified themselves as
Caucasian, 30 percent as AfricanAmerican, 18 percent as Latina, and 9
percent as Asian-American. The female participants' ages ranged from
eighteen to eighty-eight years, with a mean of forty-one. I interviewed
530 men, approximately 40 percent of whom identified themselves as
Caucasian, 25 percent as African-American, 20 percent as Latino, and 15
percent identified as Asian. The mean age of the men interviewed was
forty-six (the range was eighteen to eighty). Although grounded-theory
methodology often yields theoretical saturation (the point at which no
new conceptual insights are generated and the researcher has provided
repeated evidence for his or her conceptual categories) with far fewer
than my total 1,280 participants, three interrelated theories emerged
with multiple core categories and numerous properties informing each
category. The nuanced and complex nature of shame resilience,
Wholeheartedness, and vulnerability necessitated the large sample size.
A basic tenet of grounded theory is "all is data." Glaser writes, "The
briefest comment to the lengthiest interview, written words in
magazines, books and newspapers, documents, observations, biases of self
and

others, spurious variables, or whatever else may come the researcher's
way in his substantive area of research is data for grounded theory." In
addition to the 1,280 participant interviews, I analyzed field notes
that I had taken on sensitizing literature, conversations with content
experts, and field notes from my meetings with graduate students who
conducted participant interviews and assisted with the literature
analysis. Additionally, I recorded and coded field notes on the
experience of taking approximately 400 master and doctoral social-worker
students through my graduate course on shame, vulnerability, and
empathy, and training an estimated 15,000 mental health and addiction
professionals. I also coded over 3,500 pieces of secondary data. These
include clinical case studies and case notes, letters, and journal
pages. In total, I coded approximately 11,000 incidents (phrases and
sentences from the original field notes) using the constant comparative
method (line-by-line analysis). I did all of this coding manually, as
software is not recommended in Glaserian-grounded theory. I collected
all of the data with the exception of 215 participant interviews that
were conducted by graduate social-work students working under my
direction. In order to ensure inter-rater reliability, I trained all
research assistants and I coded and analyzed all of their field notes.
Approximately half of the interviews were individual meetings and the
other half happened in dyads, triads, and groups. Interview times ranged
from forty-five minutes to three hours, with an average of approximately
sixty minutes. Adjusted conversational interviewing was utilized because
it is regarded as the most effective grounded theory approach to
interviewing.

CODING I used the constant comparative method to analyze the data line
by line, and then I developed memos to capture the emergent concepts and
their relationships. The primary focus of the analysis was identifying
the participants' main concerns and the emergence of a core variable. As
I conducted additional interviews, I reconceptualized categories and
identified the properties that inform each category. I used selective
coding when core concepts emerged and the data were saturated across
categories and across their properties. Grounded theory researchers are
required to conceptualize from the data. This approach is very different
from traditional qualitative methods that yield findings based on thick
description of data and participant quotes. To conceptualize shame,
Wholeheartedness, and vulnerability, and to identify the participants'
main concerns about these topics, I analyzed data line by line while
asking the following questions: What are the participants describing?
What do they care about? What are they worried about? What are the
participants trying to do? What explains the different behaviors,
thoughts, and actions? Again, I used the constant comparative method to
reexamine the data against the emerging categories and their related
properties.

LITERATURE ANALYSIS For the same reasons the grounded theorist allows
the research problem to emerge from the data, a full review of the
significant literature is conducted after the theory is generated from
the data. The literature reviews done in quantitative research and
traditional qualitative research serve as buttresses on both sides of
research findings---literature reviews are conducted to support the need
for new research, the research is conducted, findings emerge independent
of the literature, and the research is again supported by the literature
to demonstrate its contribution to the researcher's profession. In
grounded theory, data buttress the theory and the literature is part of
the data. I learned very quickly that grounded-theory researchers cannot
go into the literature review thinking, The theory has emerged, I'm
done, how does it fit? Instead, the grounded theorist must understand
that the literature review is actually a literature analysis and it is
not separate from the research but is a continuation of the process. The
references and related research quoted in this book both supported and
informed the emerging theories.

EVALUATING GROUNDED THEORY According to Glaser, grounded theories are
evaluated by assessing their fit, relevance, workability, and
modifiability. The theory has achieved "fit" when the categories of the
theory fit the data. Violations of fit occur when data are forced into
preformed categories or discarded in favor of keeping an existing theory
intact. In addition to fit, the theory must be relevant to the action of
the area. Grounded theories are relevant when they allow the core
problems and processes to emerge. Workability is achieved if the theory
can explain what happened, predict what will happen, and interpret what
is happening in an area of substantive or formal inquiry. There are two
criteria for evaluating whether a theory "works"---the categories must
fit and the theory must "work the core of what is going on." Working the
core means that the researcher has conceptualized the data in a way that
accurately captures the participants' main concerns and how they
continually address those concerns. Last, the principle of modifiability
dictates that the theory can never be more correct than its ability to
work the data; thus, as the latter reveals itself in research, the
former must constantly be modified. As an example, I look at the various
concepts that I presented in this book (e.g., the armory, minding the
gap, disruptive innovation, etc.) and ask, "Do these categories fit the
data? Are they relevant? Do they work the data?" The answer is yes, I
believe they accurately reflect what emerged from the data. Like shame
resilience theory, my quantitative colleagues will test my theories on
Wholeheartedness and vulnerability and we will push the knowledge
development process forward. As I look back on this journey, I realize
the deep truth in the quote I shared at the beginning of this chapter.
There really is no path. Because the research participants had the
courage to share their stories, experiences, and wisdom, I forged a path
that defined my career and my life. When I first realized and resented
the importance of embracing vulnerability and living a Wholehearted
life, I would tell people that I was hijacked by my own data. Now, I
know that I was rescued by it.

PRACTICING GRATITUDE It is not joy that makes us grateful; it is
gratitude that makes us joyful. ---Brother David Steindl-Rast

To my literary agents, Jo-Lynne Worley and Joanie Shoemaker: Thank you
for believing in me and in the work. To my manager, Murdoch Mackinnon:
"You're a great copilot. Here's to landing more planes." To my writing
teacher and editor, Polly Koch: I literally couldn't do it without you.
I'm so grateful. To Jessica Sindler, my editor at Gotham: Thank you for
your wisdom, insight, and the super-fun sleepover. I feel like I won the
editor lottery. To my publisher Bill Shinker and to the entire Gotham
team, Monica Benalcazar, Spring Hoteling, Pete Garceau, Lisa Johnson,
Anne Kosmoski, Casey Maloney, Lauren Marino, Sophia Muthuraj, Erica
Ferguson, and Craig Schneider: Thank you for your talent, patience, and
enthusiasm. Gratitude to the gang at Speaker's Office: Holli Catchpole,
Jenny Canzoneri, Kristen Fine, Cassie Glasgow, Marsha Horshok, Michele
Rubino, and Kim Stark: Hey JCan! Am I supposed to be in Edmonton? So
grateful for the talent and artistry of graphic designer Elan Morgan and
for the amazing work of artist Nicholas Wilton. Thanks to Vincent Hyman
for his editing talent and to Jayme Johnson of Worthy Marketing Group
for her communication and connection wisdom. Thank you to the friends
who challenge me to show up, be brave, and dare greatly: Jimmy Bartz,
Negash Berhanu, Shiferaw Berhanu, Farrah Braniff, Wendy Burks, Katherine
Center, Tracey Clark, Ronda Dearing, Laura Easton, Kris Edelheit,
Beverly and Chip Edens, Mike Erwin, Frieda Fromen, Peter Fuda, Ali
Edwards, Margarita Flores, Jen Grey, Dawn Hedgepeth, Robert Hilliker,
Karen Holmes, Andrea Corona Jenkins, Myriam Joseph, Charles Kiley, Jenny
Lawson, Jen Lee, Jen Lemen, Harriet Lerner, Elizabeth Lesser, Susie
Loredo, Laura Mayes, Mati Rose McDonough, Patrick Miller, Whitney Ogle,
Joe Reynolds, Kelly Rae Roberts, Virginia Rondero-Hernandez, Gretchen
Rubin,

Andrea Scher, Peter Sheahan, Diana Storms, Alessandra de Souza, Ria
Unson, Karen Walrond, Jess Weiner, Maile Wilson, Eric Williams, and
Laura Williams. To the curators of TEDx Houston: Javier Fadul, Kara
Matheny, and Tim DeSilva. Thank you for trusting me and taking a chance.
To the larger TED family: In 1998 I told Steve that my dream was to
start a national conversation about shame. Thank you for making that
dream come true. Thank you to Chris Anderson, Kelly Stoetzel, June
Cohen, Tom Rielly, Nicholas Weinberg, Mike Lundgren, and the entire team
of idea spreaders and dream makers. To my research assistants, Saba
Khonsari and Yolanda Villarreal: Thank you for your commitment,
patience, and hard work. To our parents: Deanne Rogers and David
Robinson, Molly May and Chuck Brown, Jacobina and Bill Alley, Corky and
Jack Crisci: Thanks for always believing in us, loving us so fiercely,
being totally crazy about our children, and teaching us to dare greatly.
To my sibs, Ashley and Amaya Ruiz; Barrett, Frankie, and Gabi Guillen;
Jason Brown; and Jen and David Alley: Thank you for the love, support,
laughter, tears, high fives, and fist bumps. To Steve, Ellen, and
Charlie: Y'all make everything possible. I don't know how I got so
lucky. I love you.

NOTES AND REFERENCES

INTRODUCTION p. 8

...developing a theory: Brown, Brené. (2009). Connections: A 12-session
psychoeducational shame-resilience curriculum. Center City, MN:
Hazelden. Brown, Brené. (2007). I Thought It Was Just Me (But It Isn't):
Telling the Truth About Perfectionism, Inadequacy, and Power. New York:
Penguin/Gotham Books. Brown, Brené. (2007). Shame resilience theory. In
Susan P. Robbins, Pranab Chatterjee, and Edward R. Canda (Eds.),
Contemporary human behavior theory: A critical perspective for social
work, rev. ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. Brown, Brené. (2006). Shame
resilience theory: A grounded theory study on women and shame. Families
in Society, 87, 1: 43--52. p. 9 The Gifts of Imperfection: Brown, B.
(2010). The gifts of imperfection: Letting go of who we think we should
be and embracing who we are. Center City, MN: Hazelden. p. 12 ...in my
dissertation: Brown, C.B. (2002). Acompañar: A grounded theory of
developing, maintaining and assessing relevance in professional helping.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 63(02). (UMI No. 3041999). p. 13
TEDxHouston p. 14 ... the main TED website p. 14 ... the main TED
conference in Long Beach, CA.

CHAPTER 1 SCARCITY: LOOKING INSIDE OUR CULTURE OF "NEVER ENOUGH" p. 20
Recently a group of researchers conducted a computer analysis: DeWall,
C. Nathan; Pond Jr., Richard S.; Campbell, W. Keith; Twenge, J. (2011).
Tuning in to psychological change: Linguistic markers of psychological
traits and emotions over time in popular US song lyrics. Psychology of
Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts 5, 3: 200--207. p. 20 The
Narcissism Epidemic: Twenge, J., and Campbell, K. (2009). The narcissism
epidemic: Living in the age of entitlement. New York: Simon and
Schuster. p. 25 The Soul of Money: Twist, L. (2003). The soul of money:
Transforming your relationship with money and life (New York: W. W.
Norton and Company), p. 44. p. 26 The word scarce: Merriam-Webster.
Retrieved January 2012. http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/

CHAPTER 2 DEBUNKING THE VULNERABILITY MYTHS p. 39 From the field of
health psychology: Aiken, L., Gerend, M., and Jackson, K. (2001).
Subjective risk and health protective behavior: Cancer screening and
cancer prevention. In A. Baum, T. Revenson, and J. Singer (Eds.),
Handbook of health psychology, pp. 727--746. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Apanovitch, A., Salovey, P., and Merson, M. (1998). The Yale-MTV study
of attitudes of American youth. Manuscript in preparation. p. 40 From
the field of social psychology: Sagarin, B., Cialdini, R., Rice, W., and
Serna, S. (2002). Dispelling the illusion of invulnerability: The
motivations and mechanisms of resistance to persuasion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 3: 536--541. p. 50 The Science of
Trust: Gottman, J. (2011). The science of trust: Emotional attunement
for couples. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 50 ... the University
of California--Berkeley's "Greater Good": John Gottman on Trust and
Betrayal. October 28, 2011. Retrieved February 2012.
http://greatergood.berkeley.edu/article/item/john_gottman_on_trust_and_betrayal/
(www.greatergood.berkeley.edu) p. 54 There's actually some very
persuasive leadership research: Fuda, P., and Badham, R. (2011). Fire,
snowball, mask, movie: How leaders spark and sustain change. Harvard
Business Review.
http://hbr.org/2011/11/fire-snowball-maskmovie-how-leaders-spark-and-sustain-change/ar/1

CHAPTER 3 UNDERSTANDING SHAME (AKA GREMLIN TRAINING)

AND

COMBATING

NINJA

WARRIOR

p. 71 In a 2011 study: Kross, E., Berman, M., Mischel, W., Smith, E. E.,
& Wager, T. (2011). Social rejection shares somatosensory
representations with physical pain. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 108, 15: 6270--6275. p. 71 The majority of shame
researchers: For the most comprehensive review of the shame and guilt
literature see Shame and Guilt by June Price Tangney and Ronda L.
Dearing (New York: Guilford Press, 2002). Additionally, I recommend this
edited volume: Shame in the Therapy Hour edited by Ronda Dearing and
June Tangney (American Psychological Association, 2011). p. 73 Shame is
highly correlated, and Researchers don't find...: The following books
and articles explore the relationships between shame and various
outcomes: Balcom, D., Lee, R., and Tager, J. (1995). The systematic
treatment of shame in couples. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy,
21: 55--65. Brown, B. (2007). I thought it was just me: Women reclaiming
power in a culture of shame. New York: Gotham. Brown, B (2006). Shame
resilience theory: A Grounded theory study on women and shame. Families
in Society, 87, 1: 43--52. Dearing, R., and Tangney, J. (Eds). (2011).
Shame in the therapy hour. American Psychological Association. Dearing,
R., Stuewig, J., and Tangney, J. (2005). On the importance of
distinguishing shame from guilt: Relations to problematic alcohol and
drug use. Addictive Behaviors, 30: 1392--1404. Ferguson, T. J., Eyre, H.
L., and Ashbaker, M. (2000). Unwanted identities: A key variable in
shame-anger links and gender differences in shame. Sex Roles, 42:
133--157.

Hartling, L., Rosen, W., Walker, M., and Jordan, J. (2000). Shame and
humiliation: From isolation to relational transformation (Work in
Progress No. 88). Wellesley, MA: The Stone Center, Wellesley College.
Jordan, J. (1989). Relational development: Therapeutic implications of
empathy and shame (Work in Progress No. 39). Wellesley, MA: The Stone
Center, Wellesley College. Lester, D. (1997). The role of shame in
suicide. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 27: 352--361. Lewis, H.
B. (1971). Shame and guilt in neurosis. New York: International
Universities Press. Mason, M. (1991). Women and shame: Kin and culture.
In C. Bepko (ed.), Feminism and addiction, pp. 175--194. Binghamton, NY:
Haworth. Nathanson, D. (1997). Affect theory and the compass of shame.
In M. Lansky and A. Morrison (Eds.), The widening scope of shame.
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic. Sabatino, C. (1999). Men facing their
vulnerabilities: Group processes for men who have sexually offended.
Journal of Men's Studies, 8: 83--90. Scheff, T. (2000). Shame and the
social bond: A sociological theory. Sociological Theory, 18: 84--99.
Scheff, T. (2003). Shame in self and society. Symbolic Interaction, 26:
239--262. Stuewig, J., Tangney, J. P., Mashek, D., Forkner, P., and
Dearing, R. (2009). The moral emotions, alcohol dependence, and HIV risk
behavior in an incarcerated sample. Substance Use and Misuse, 44:
449--471. Talbot, N. (1995). Unearthing shame is the supervisory
experience. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 49: 338--349. Tangney, J.
P., Stuewig, J., and Hafez, L. (in press). Shame, guilt and remorse:
Implications for offender populations. Journal of Forensic Psychiatry &
Psychology. Tangney, J. P., Stuewig, J., Mashek, D., and Hastings, M.
(2011). Assessing jail inmates' proneness to shame and guilt: Feeling
bad about the behavior or the self? Criminal Justice and Behavior, 38:
710--734. Tangney, J. P. (1992). Situational determinants of shame and
guilt in young adulthood. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
18: 199--206.

Tangney, J. P., and Dearing, R. (2002). Shame and guilt. New York:
Guilford. p. 73 Humiliation is another word: Klein, D. C. (1991). The
humiliation dynamic. An overview. The Journal of Primary Prevention, 12,
2: 93--122. p. 76 Incognito: Eagleman, D. (2011). Incognito: The secret
lives of the brain. New York: Pantheon. p. 77 Research from the Stone
Center at Wellesley: Hartling, L., Rosen, W., Walker, M., and Jordan, J.
(2000). Shame and humiliation: From isolation to relational
transformation (Work in Progress No. 88). Wellesley, MA: The Stone
Center, Wellesley College. p. 82 James Pennebaker's work: Pennebaker, J.
W. (2004). Writing to heal: A guided journal for recovering from trauma
and emotional upheaval. Oakland: New Harbinger Publications. Pennebaker,
J. W. (2010). Expressive writing in a clinical setting. The Independent
Practitioner, 30: 23--25. Petrie, K. J., Booth, R. J., and Pennebaker,
J. W. (1998). The immunological effects of thought suppression. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 75: 1264--1272. Pennebaker, J. W.,
Kiecolt-Glaser, J., and Glaser, R. (1988). Disclosure of traumas and
immune function: Health implications for psychotherapy. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56: 239--245. Richards, J. M., Beal,
W. E., Seagal, J., and Pennebaker, J. W. (2000). The effects of
disclosure of traumatic events on illness behavior among psychiatric
prison inmates. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109: 156--160. p. 82
Pennebaker, J. W. (2004). Writing to heal: A guided journal for
recovering from trauma and emotional upheaval. Oakland: New Harbinger
Publications. p. 88 Marilyn Frye describes a double bind: Frye, M.
(2001). Oppression. In M. Anderson and P. Collins (Eds.), Race, class
and gender: An anthology. New York: Wadsworth. p. 89 In a US study on
conformity to feminine norms: Mahalik, J. R., Morray, E.,
Coonerty-Femiano, A., Ludlow, L. H., Slattery, S. M., and Smiler, A.
(2005). Development of the conformity to feminine norms inventory. Sex
Roles, 52: 317--335.

p. 99 What's ironic (or perhaps natural) is that research tells us that
we judge people: Shrauger, S., and Patterson, M. (1974). Selfevaluation
and the selection of dimensions for evaluating others. Journal of
Personality, 42, 569--585. p. 100 I wrote an op-ed on bullying: Brown,
B. (September 30, 2002). Reality TV bites: Bracing for a new season of
bullies \[oped\]. Houston Chronicle, p. 23A. p. 107 Well, when looking
at the attributes associated with masculinity in the US: Mahalik, J. R.,
Locke, B., Ludlow, L., Diemer, M., Scott, R. P. J., Gottfried, M., and
Freitas, G. (2003). Development of the Conformity to Masculine Norms
Inventory. Psychology of Men and Masculinity, 4: 3--25. Brown, C. B.
(2002). Acompañar: A grounded theory of developing, maintaining and
assessing relevance in professional helping. Dissertation Abstracts
International, 63(02). (UMI No. 3041999). Brown, B. (2010). The gifts of
imperfection: Letting go of who we think we should be and embracing who
we are. Center City, MN: Hazelden. Brown, B. (2010). Shame resilience
theory. In S. P. Robbins, P. Chatterjee, and E. R. Canda (Eds.),
Contemporary human behavior theory: A critical perspective for social
work, rev. ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. p. 110 The Velveteen Rabbit:
Williams, Margery (1922). The velveteen rabbit. New York: Doubleday.

CHAPTER 4 THE VULNERABILITY ARMORY p. 131 Dr. Kristen Neff: Neff, K.
(2011). Self-compassion: Stop beating yourself up and leave insecurity
behind. New York: William Morrow. Neff, K. (2003). Self-compassion: An
alternative conceptualization of a healthy attitude toward oneself. Self
and Identity, 2: 85--101. Neff, K. (2003). The development and
validation of a scale to measure selfcompassion, Self and Identity, 2:
223--50. p. 133 Gretchen Rubin: http://www.gretchenrubin.com/ Rubin, G.
(2012). Happier at home: Kiss more, jump more, abandon a project, read
Samuel Johnson, and my other experiments in the practice of everyday
life. New York: Crown Archetype. Rubin, G. (2009). The happiness
project: Or, why I spent a year trying to sing in the morning, clean my
closets, fight right, read Aristotle, and generally have more fun. New
York: Harper. p. 133 Andrea Scher: http://www.superherojournal.com/ and
http://www.superherophoto.com/ p. 135 Nicholas Wilton:
http://nicholaswiltonpaintings.com/ and http://www.artplaneworkshop.com/
p. 137 Leonard Cohen: "Anthem," The Future, 1992, Columbia Records.
p. 138 The Centers for Disease Control: Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report (MMWR), November 2011: Vital Signs: Overdoses of Prescription
Opioid Pain Relievers--United States, 1999--2008. p. 138 Even more
alarming: Stutman, Robert. 2011 lecture at The UP Experience. This video
can be viewed here: http://www.thestutmangroup.com/media.html#video
p. 140 Jean Baker Miller and Irene Stiver: Miller, J. B., and Stiver, I.
P. (1997). The healing connection: How women form relationships in both
therapy and in life. Boston: Beacon Press. p. 142 In Sir Ken Robinson's
wonderful 2010 TED talk:
http://www.ted.com/talks/lang/en/sir_ken_robinson_bring_on_the_revolution.html
p. 146 Jennifer Louden: http://jenniferlouden.com/ Louden, J. (2007).
The life organizer: A woman's guide to a mindful year. Novato, CA: New
World Library. p. 147 The Houston Chronicle: Brown, B. (July 25, 2009).
Time to get off the phone \[op-ed\]. Houston Chronicle, p. B7. p. 152 My
dissertation: Brown, C. B. (2002). Acompañar: A grounded theory of
developing, maintaining and assessing relevance in professional helping.
Dissertation Abstracts International, 63(02). (UMI No. 3041999). p. 153
The statistics on post-traumatic-stress-related: Parrish, K. (2011),
Battaglia calls reducing suicides a top priority. American Forces Press
Service. US Department of Defense. Harrell, M., and Berglass,

N. (2011). Losing the battle: The challenge of military suicide. Center
for New American Security Policy Brief. p. 154 Craig Bryan, a University
of Texas psychologist: Thompson, M. (April 13, 2010). Is the army losing
its war on suicide? Time magazine. p. 154 The American Bar Association:
Weiss, D. C. (2009). Perfectionism, "psychic battering" among reasons
for lawyer depression. American Bar Association Journal. p. 156 Team
Red, White and Blue: http://www.teamrwb.org/ p. 164 The In-Laws: The
In-Laws (1979). Warner Bros. Pictures. p. 171 Almost Famous: Almost
Famous (2000). DreamWorks Studios. p. 171 Scott Stratten:
http://www.unmarketing.com/ Stratten, S. (2010). Unmarketing: Stop
marketing. Start engaging. Hoboken: Wiley.

CHAPTER 5 MIND THE GAP: CULTIVATING CHANGE AND CLOSING THE DISENGAGEMENT
DIVIDE p. 174 Terrence Deal and Allan Kennedy: Deal, T. and Kennedy, A.
(2000). Corporate cultures. The rites and rituals of corporate life. New
York: Perseus.

CHAPTER 6 DISRUPTIVE ENGAGEMENT: DARING TO REHUMANIZE EDUCATION AND WORK
p. 188 Sir Ken Robinson speaks: Robinson, K. (2011). Second Edition. Out
of our minds: Learning to be creative. Bloomington, MN: Capstone
Publishing. p. 190 The Workplace Bullying Institute:
http://www.workplacebullying.org/wbiresearch/2010-wbi-nationalsurvey/
p. 190 ...bullied at work: Deschenaux, J. (2007). Experts: Antibullying
policies increase productivity. Retrieved from
http://www.shrm.org/LegalIssues/EmploymentLaw p. 194 Bill Gates wrote
this in a New York Times op-ed: Gates, B. (February 22, 2012). Shame is
not the solution \[op-ed\]. The New York Times. p. 195 Shame researchers
June Tangney and Ronda Dearing explain: Tangney, J. P., and Dearing, R.
(2002). Shame and guilt. New York: Guilford. p. 198 Writers like bell
hooks and Paulo Freire: Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed.
New York: Continuum. hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education
as the price of freedom. New York: Routledge. p. 199 Dennis Saleebey:
Saleebey, D. (1996). The strengths perspective in social work practice:
Extensions and cautions. Social Work, 41, 3: 296--306. p. 209 In a video
interview with CNN/Money:
http://management.fortune.cnn.com/2012/03/16/lululemonchristine-day.
Retrieved March 2012. p. 211 Tribes: Godin, S. (2008). Tribes: We need
you to lead us. New York: Portfolio.

CHAPTER 7 WHOLEHEARTED PARENTING: DARING TO BE THE ADULTS WE WANT OUR
CHILDREN TO BE p. 223 One of the very best pieces of parenting advice:
The Oprah Winfrey Show. Harpo Studios. May 26, 2000. p. 239 C. R.
Snyder's research on hope: Snyder, C. R. (2003). Psychology of hope: You
can get there from here, paperback ed. New York: Free Press. Snyder, C
R., Lehman, Kenneth A., Kluck, Ben, and Monsson, Yngve. (2006). Hope for
rehabilitation and vice versa." Rehabilitation Psychology, 51, 2:
89--112. Snyder, C. R. (2002). Hope theory: Rainbows in the mind."
Psychological Inquiry, 13, 4: 249--75.

APPENDIX TRUST IN EMERGENCE: GROUNDED THEORY AND MY RESEARCH PROCESS
p. 252 Letting go of your own interests: Glaser, B., and Strauss, A.
(1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine. Glaser, B.
(1978). Theoretical sensitivity: Advances in the methodology of grounded
theory. Mill Valley, CA: Sociological Press. Glaser, B. (1992). Basics
of grounded theory: Emergence versus forming. Mill Valley, CA:
Sociological Press. Glaser, B. (1998). Doing grounded theory: Issues and
discussions. Mill Valley, CA: Sociological Press. Glaser, B. (2001). The
grounded theory perspective: Conceptualization contrasted with
description. Mill Valley, CA: Sociological Press. p. 252 Behavioral
researcher Fred Kerlinger defines theory: Kerlinger, Fred N. (1973).
Foundations of behavioral research. 2nd edition. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston. p. 253 After developing a theory on shame
resilience: Brown, 2004, 2005, 2009, 2010. p. 255 Originally developed
by Glaser and Strauss: Glaser, B., and Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery
of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine. p. 255 Refined by Glaser: Glaser,
1978, 1992, 1998, 2001. p. 255 When using theoretical sampling: Glaser,
1978. p. 255 One important tenet of grounded theory: Glaser, 1978, 1998,
2001. p. 256 A basic tenet of grounded theory is "all is data": Glaser,
1998. p. 257 Adjusted conversational interviewing: Glaser, 1978, 1998.
p. 258 Grounded theory researchers are required: Glaser, 1978, 1998,
2001. p. 258 ...theory is generated from the data: Glaser, 1978, 1998,
2001. p. 259 According to Glaser: Glaser, 1998.

p. 259 ...keeping an existing theory intact: Glaser, 1998. p. 259
...allow the core problems and processes to emerge: Glaser, 1992;
Glaser, 1998. p. 259 Work the core of what is going on: Glaser, 1998.
p. 260 ...the former must be constantly modified: Glaser, 1978.

INDEX abandonment, 52 academics, 12 acceptance, 219 accountability, 37,
178, 244 addiction and numbing, 137--38 and perfectionism, 130 and
shame, 73, 224 and trauma, 157 See also substance abuse
admiration-seeking behavior, 23 adolescence, 168 adversity, 240
advertising, 40 age and intimacy, 103 agency, 239 aggression, 73, 77,
224 alcohol abuse and numbing, 137--38, 140--41 and parenting, 180--81
and shame resilience, 98 Almost Famous (2000), 171 American Bar
Association (ABA), 154 American Bar Association Journal, 154 anger,
34--35, 96--98, 104 "Anthem" (Cohen), 137 anxiety and boundary setting,
142--46 and feedback, 199 and numbing, 138--397, 141 and shadow
comforts, 146--47 and workplace bullying, 192

apologizing, 72 appearance and intimacy, 103 and shame resilience,
101--4 and women's gender expectations, 86--88, 89--91 appeasement, 77
armor, emotional, 112--70 and avoidance, 164--66 and children, 113--15
and cynicism, 167--68 and feedback, 201--2, 202--6 and floodlighting,
159--60, 160--63 and foreboding joy, 117--22 and numbing, 137--41,
141--46 and parenting, 219 and perfectionism, 128--30, 131--37 and
practicing gratitude, 123--27 and redefining success, 155--57 and
scarcity, 115--17 armor, emotional and shame resilience, 168--70 and
smash-and-grab strategy, 163 and spiritual health, 146--51 and trauma,
157--58 and Viking-or-Victim worldview, 151--55 Artplane Method, 135--36
aspirational values, 175--76, 178--79, 179--82 attention-seeking
behavior, 52 attentiveness and belonging, 231--38 and cultural
influences, 173-- 82 and emotional avoidance, 166 and feedback, 197--202
importance of, 172 and organizational culture, 173--82 and parenting,
219, 229--31, 231--38 and self-compassion, 132 authenticity, 218
avoidance, emotional, 164--66, 166 awareness, 75

Badham, Richard, 54 becoming real, 107--11 belonging, 68, 231--38
Bentham, Jeremy, 142--43 betrayal, 47, 51 blame, 22, 130, 195--97 The
Bluest Eye (Morrison), 223 body image, 101--4 boundaries and emotional
armor, 142--46 and floodlighting, 159--60 and shame resilience, 78 and
vulnerability myths, 46, 56 brain physiology, 71, 76, 79--80, 226
British Navy, 19 Bryan, Craig, 154 Buber, Martin, 150 bullying, 73, 99,
101--1, 189--95 business environment corporate speeches, 15 and
disruptive engagement, 184 and organizational culture, 173--76 and
scarcity culture, 185--88 and vulnerability, 209 and workplace bullying,
189--95 career, 78, 95. See also business environment celebrity culture,
45, 163 cell phones, 147, 147--50 Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 138 ChangeLab™, 65 Charlie (son), 224--25, 229--31
child abuse, 230 Child Protective Services, 230 children and emotional
armor, 113--15 and practicing gratitude, 126--27 and shame resilience,
227--29 and vulnerability myths, 47--49, 52

See also parenthood Chödrön, Pema, 234 choices, 45 "Citizenship in a
Republic" (Roosevelt), 1, 56, 247--48 CNN.com, 90 CNN Money, 209
cognition, 76 Cohen, Leonard, 43, 137 comfort, 142--46 common humanity,
132 comparison and cultivating worthiness, 234 and the never-enough
culture, 26 and sources of scarcity, 28 compassion and parenting, 218,
244 and practicing gratitude, 125 and shame resilience, 74--75
competition, 153 confidence, 202 conflict avoidance, 164--66 coolness,
emotional, 167--68, 171, 179 corporate world, 15, 54--55, 189--95. See
also business environment; organizational culture couples, 50--51,
104--7 courage contagiousness of, 54 and leadership, 211 and the nature
of daring greatly, 248 and parenting, 219, 243 and shame resilience, 73,
80, 91 and vulnerability, 37, 41--42, 206--12, 238--45 covert shame, 96
cover-up culture, 195--97 creativity and disruptive engagement, 184 and
parenting, 218 and scarcity culture, 185--86 and vulnerability, 65--66,
208--12 criticism, 90, 92, 167--68, 170. See also feedback

cruelty, 90, 167--68, 170, 227 cultural influences and business
strategy, 173--76 and embracing vulnerability, 64--65 and foreboding
joy, 122 and gender norms, 107--9 and minding the gap, 181 and
narcissism, 23--24 and the never-enough culture, 20--21 and sources of
scarcity, 29 and Viking-or-Victim worldview, 151--55 and workplace
bullying, 189--95 curiosity, 212 customer service, 145--50 cynicism,
167--68, 169 Day, Christine, 209--10 Deal, Terrence, 174 Dearing, Ronda,
195 dehumanizing cultures, 177 depression and numbing, 139 and shame,
73, 224 and Viking-or-Victim worldview, 154--55 Derrida, Jacques, 152
diagnoses, 22 disappointment, 121, 124 disaster planning, 120--21
disconnection and disengagement and boundary setting, 142 the
disengagement divide, 176--82 and emotional armor, 116 and emotional
coolness, 167--68 and feedback, 197 and floodlighting, 160--61 and men's
shame, 96--98 and numbing, 139, 141 and organizational culture, 175--76
in relationships, 104

and shadow comforts, 146--48 and shame, 68, 73, 109, 224--25 and shame
resilience, 76, 76--78 and sources of scarcity, 28 vs. disruptive
engagement, 187--88 and vulnerability myths, 51--52 disruptive
engagement, 184--212 and blame, 195 and combating shame, 188--89 and
cover-up culture, 195--97 disruptive engagement and feedback, 197--202,
202--6 and scarcity culture, 185--88 and symptoms of shame, 189--95 and
vulnerability, 205--12 domestic violence, 157 double-bind situations, 88
Drucker, Peter, 174 drug abuse, 98, 137--38, 140--41 Eagleman, David, 76
eating disorders, 73, 224 education, 184, 202--6. See also school
settings Ellen (daughter) and emotional armor, 114 and gratitude, 126
and parenting decisions, 231 and perfectionism, 222--25 and practicing
gratitude, 126--27 and school settings, 233--36 and shame/guilt, 225,
228 and sliding-door moments, 50 and sports, 240--43 and vulnerability
myths, 47--49 embarrassment, 71--74 emotional accessibility, 12, 34--35,
89 emotional pain, 71 emotional system, 76 empathy

author's research on, 8--9 and cover-up cultures, 196 and cultivating
worthiness, 233 and floodlighting, 160 and narcissism, 21 and parenting,
231, 241 and shame, 68 and shame resilience, 76, 81--82 and social work,
7--8 and vulnerability, 48, 100 encouragement, 241 engagement, emotional
and emotional armor, 116 and feedback, 201, 202--6 and parenting, 237
and vulnerability, 248 See also social connection entitlement, 23
entrepreneurship, 206, 208 evangelists, 62 exit strategies, 7 expressive
writing, 82--83 failure, 15, 42, 56, 91 faith communities, 198, 210. See
also spirituality family and aspirational values, 178--79, 179--82 and
the disengagement divide, 177 and men's gender expectations, 84--85 and
shame resilience, 78--79 and vulnerability, 210 See also parenthood Fast
Company, 208 fear and cover-up cultures, 196 and feedback, 199 and
foreboding joy, 118--19 and fostering innovation, 186--87 and men's
shame, 91--92, 97

and practicing gratitude, 124 and understanding shame, 67 and
vulnerability, 2, 33--44, 52 and workplace bullying, 193 feedback,
202--6, 210--11, 213. See also criticism femininity, 107--10, 222
fight-or-flight response, 76 financial success, 25--26 floodlighting,
159--60, 160--63 foreboding joy, 117--22, 123, 127 "Freewill" (Rush), 45
Freire, Paulo, 198 Frye, Marilyn, 88 Fuda, Peter, 54 Gaddis, Gay, 207--8
Gates, Bill, 194 gender issues and men's shame, 91--94, 94--96, 96--98
and parenting, 222 and shame resilience, 74, 83--85, 85--91, 91--94,
94--96, 100--4 and shame triggers, 107--10 and vulnerability myths, 43
The Gifts of Imperfection (Brown), 9--10, 53--54, 105, 115, 141
goal-setting, 239--40 Gottman, John, 49--50 Grace, Jimmy, 238
grandiosity, 21, 23 gratitude and the disengagement divide, 178--79 and
emotional armor, 123--27 practicing gratitude, 125 Greater Good website,
50 gremlin ninja warrior training, 58, 74--82 guilt and parenting, 224
shame's association with, 224--25 and understanding shame, 71--74

"Hallelujah" (Cohen), 43 Happier at Home (Rubin), 133 happiness, 123 The
Happiness Project (Rubin), 133 Harry Potter series (Rowling), 59--60,
61--62 Hartling, Linda, 77 Harvard Business Review, 54 health
psychology, 39--40 helicopter parents, 216 "Here I Go Again"
(Whitesnake), 53 Hilliker, Robert, 67 honesty, 89, 178, 207 hooks, bell,
198 hopefulness, 239, 240 Horney, Karen, 77 Houston Chronicle, 100,
147--50, 193 Houston Independent School District, 193 Human Dignity and
Humiliation Studies, 77 humiliation, 71--74 The Hunger Games (Collins),
231 imperfection, 131--37, 218, 244. See also perfectionism Inc., 185,
208 incest survivors, 82 Incognito (Eagleman), 76 individualism, 53--56
influence-and-persuasion research, 40 The In-Laws (1979), 164--66
innovation and disruptive engagement, 184 and embracing vulnerability,
64--65 and scarcity culture, 185--86 Inspiration Interviews series, 128,
133 integrity, 178 interview process, 92 intimacy cultivating, 101--4
and floodlighting, 159--60 and men's gender expectations, 95

invulnerability myth, 43--45 I Thought It Was Just Me (Brown), 192
joyfulness, 117--22, 124--26 judgment and parenting, 215--16 and
perfectionism, 130 judgment and shame resilience, 98--101 Jung, Carl, 80
Kennedy, Allan, 174 Kiley, Charles, 175--76 Klein, Donald, 73--74
law-enforcement officers, 117 leadership and cover-up cultures, 196
Daring Greatly Leadership Manifesto, 212 defined, 185 and scarcity
culture, 185--88 and vulnerability, 208--12 L'Engle, Madeleine, 43 The
Life Organizer, 146--47 limbic system, 76 linguistics, 39--40 London
Underground, 172 loss, 124, 126 See also trauma Louden, Jennifer,
146--47 love definition of, 105 and parenting, 218 and understanding
shame, 69 and Wholeheartedness, 10--11 Lululemon, 209

management styles and shame resilience, 83 use of shame, 15 and
vulnerability myths, 55 and workplace bullying, 189--95 "Man in the
Arena." See "Citizenship in a Republic" (Roosevelt) marketing, 40
masculinity, 107--10, 222 masks, emotional. See armor, emotional
mean-girl culture, 99 media and foreboding joy, 122 and the never-enough
culture, 26 and sources of scarcity, 29 men and emotional vulnerability,
94--96 and gender norms, 83--85, 107-10 and shame resilience, 91--94
mental health, 102 mentoring, 100, 208--9 micromanagement, 55, 200
military service, 152--53, 153--54 Miller, Jean Baker, 140 minding the
gap. See attentiveness mobile phones, 148--50 Mondo Beyondo (blog), 133
Morrison, Toni, 223 motherhood, 86, 93, 103. See also parenthood music
industry, 20 nakedness, emotional. See vulnerability narcissism and
cultural trends, 20 and the never-enough culture, 19--21, 22--24 and
vulnerability, 22--24 National Institute of Mental Health, 71 National
Institute on Drug Abuse, 71 nature/nurture argument, 217 Neff, Kristin,
130--31

neuroscience, 71 never-enough culture. See scarcity New York State Court
of Appeals, 194 New York Times, 194 "no," saying, 56 normalizing
discomfort, 198 nostalgia, 26 numbing and boundary setting, 142--46
described, 137--41 and emotional armor, 117 and spiritual health,
146--50 opportunity, 208 Oprah, 223 ordinariness, 22, 24 organizational
culture and cover-up culture, 196--97 and feedback, 197--202 power of,
173--76 and Viking-or-Victim worldview, 153--55 Out of Our Minds
(Robinson), 188 pain, 71 parenthood and attentiveness, 229--31, 231--37
and foreboding joy, 119 overprotective parents, 238--39 and scarcity,
215--20 and self-compassion, 134 and shame, 15, 105, 215, 220--29 and
vulnerability, 237--38, 238--45 Wholehearted Parenting Manifesto,
244--45 patriarchal social structure, 95 Pearce, Joseph Chilton, 217
Pennebaker, James, 82 perfectionism appreciating imperfection, 131--37

and cultivating worthiness, 235--36 and embracing vulnerability, 67 and
emotional armor, 117, 128--30, 131--37 and the never-enough culture, 26
and parenting, 216, 222 and women's gender expectations, 85--91 physical
appearance and intimacy, 103 and shame resilience, 101--4 and women's
gender expectations, 87--88, 88--89 politics, 176--82 pornography, 103
post-traumatic stress, 27, 154 prefrontal cortex, 76 preventive
medicine, 39--40 professional life, 43. See also business environment
rage, 96--98, 104 rape survivors, 82 rational system, 76 reality
checking, 168--71 reality television, 23 rebellion, 179 rehearsing
tragedy, 121 rejection, sexual, 102 religion, 176--77 research, 12
respect and disengagement divide, 178 and leadership, 212 and parenting,
220, 233, 246 Reynolds, Joe, 95--96 ridicule, 92. See also criticism
risk and leadership, 212 and parenting, 238 and vulnerability myths, 34,
35--39 Robinson, Ken, 142, 152, 188 Roosevelt, Theodore, 1, 12--13, 56,
67, 170, 247--49

Rowling, J. K., 62 Rubin, Gretchen, 133 Rush, 45 sacrifice, 237--38
Saleebey, Dennis, 199 sales, 206--07 scarcity and disruptive engagement,
184 and emotional armor, 115--17 and foreboding joy, 117--22 and
leadership, 185--88 and the nature of daring greatly, 248 and the
never-enough culture, 18, 19--30 and parenting, 215--20, 229--30, 244
and practicing gratitude, 124 sources of, 27--30 and women's gender
expectations, 86 Scher, Andrea, 133 school settings and bullying, 99 and
cultivating worthiness, 233--34 and emotional armor, 113--14 and
feedback, 200--1, 202, 202--6 and signs of shame, 192--95 and
smash-and-grab strategy, 163 and vulnerability, 210 The Science of Trust
(Gottman), 50 secrecy and shame resilience, 82 and trauma, 158 and
vulnerability myths, 48--49 self-compassion, 75, 98, 161 Self-Compassion
(Neff), 131--33 Self-Compassion Research Lab, 131--32 self-confidence,
13, 88 self-destructive behaviors, 130 self-improvement, 129 self-love,
106

self-talk, 71--72 self-worth, 63--65, 102 Serious Materials, 185
serpentining, 164--66 service industry, 148 sexuality, 88, 101--4 shadow
comforts, 146--47 shame author's research on, 8--9 and brain processes,
226 categories of, 69, 86 covert, 96 and cover-up culture, 195--97
defining, 68--71 and disruptive engagement, 188 and embracing
vulnerability, 67--68 and emotional accessibility, 12 examples of, 70
and fear of ordinariness, 22 and gender norms, 107--10 impact on
relationships, 104-7 and judgment, 98--101 and men's gender
expectations, 94--96, 96--98 and narcissism, 21 and numbing, 141 and
parenting, 15, 104--5, 215, 220--29 and perfectionism, 67, 117, 130, 131
physiological responses to, 76, 80 recognizing and combating, 188--89
and sexuality and body image, 101--04 shame-prone cultures, 64--65 shame
tapes, 66 and social control, 73 and sources of scarcity, 28 symptoms
of, 73--74 and TED conference speech, 14--15 and trauma, 158--59
vocabulary of, 73--74 and vulnerability, 13, 59--68 and workplace
bullying, 191--92

shame resilience and cover-up cultures, 196 cultivating, 74--83, 107--10
and cultivating worthiness, 235--36 and embracing vulnerability, 64--65,
67--68 and emotional armor, 168--71 and humiliation, 73 and parenting,
220--29 and redefining success, 157 shame-resilient cultures, 64 and
trauma, 157 Sheahan, Peter, 65 shielding. See armor, emotional silence,
62 sliding-door moments, 50 Sliding Doors (1998), 50 smash-and-grab
strategy, 163 Snyder, C. R., 239--40 social connection and acceptance,
231--38 and boundary setting, 145--46 and brain processes, 226 and
emotional armor, 169 and floodlighting, 159--60, 160--63 and leadership,
212 and numbing, 139--40 and shame, 68 and shame resilience, 74, 76,
76--77, 170 and social contract disengagement, 176 and social ranking,
99 and social wounds, 75 studying, 8 and understanding shame, 68--69 and
Viking-or-Victim worldview, 153 and Wholeheartedness, 10--11 See also
disconnection and disengagement social control, 72--73 social media, 23
social psychology, 39--40 social work, 7--8, 230

sociopaths, 68 The Soul of Money (Twist), 25 Spielberg, Steven, 66
spirituality and emotional armor, 142--46 and numbing, 146--50 and
religious disengagement, 176--77 and shame resilience, 169 and trauma,
158 sports, 92, 96--98, 240--43 stereotypes, 115 Steve (husband) and
emotional support, 54 and emotional vulnerability, 55--56 and foreboding
joy, 122 and lifeguarding, 98--99 and parenting, 220, 229--30, 241--43
and practicing gratitude, 127 and relationship dynamics, 104--05 and
shame resilience, 81 Stone Center, 77, 140 Stratten, Scott, 171
stretch-mark friends, 171 Striver, Irene, 140 substance abuse and
numbing, 137--38, 140--41 and parenting, 180--81 and shame resilience,
98 and Viking-or-Victim worldview, 154--55 success, 129, 155--57
suicide, 154, 224 Superhero Journal, 131 "Superhero Photo" (e-course),
133 Surace, Kevin, 185--87 T3 (The Think Tank), 207--8 Tangney, June,
195 teachers, 99, 163, 187--89, 193--98, 208. See also school settings
team-of-rivals view of the brain, 76

Team Red, White and Blue, 156 technology, 143--44 TED conferences,
13--15, 42, 88--89, 142, 248 television, 122, 231 therapy, 5--7, 56, 97
tiger moms, 216 tightrope walking, 168-171 Time, 154 Top Gun (1986), 104
tragedy, 126. See also trauma training, 197 trauma and children, 225
post-traumatic stress, 27, 153 and practicing gratitude, 124 and sources
of scarcity, 27 survivors of, 82 and vulnerability myths, 157--58 trust
and shame resilience, 82 and sliding-door moments, 50 and vulnerability
myths, 46--53 twelve-step programs, 82 Twist, Lynn, 25 uncertainty and
emotional exposure, 7 and parenting, 215, 238, 244 and vulnerability,
32, 34 University of California---Berkeley, 50 University of Houston,
157, 199, 206, 252 University of Texas, 82, 131, 154 UnMarketing
(Stratten), 171 unspeakableness, 67, 69 values, 74, 177 The Velveteen
Rabbit (Williams), 110--11 veterans. See military service

victimhood. See Viking-or-Victim worldview Viking-or-Victim worldview,
151--54, 155--56, 158 violence, 73, 224 viral video of author, 7, 14, 89
voting, 176 vulnerability and boundary setting, 145 and courage, 206--12
and cultivating intimacy, 103 and cynicism, 170 defined, 2 descriptions
of, 37--39, 44--45 and disruptive engagement, 188 and emotional armor,
116, 167 and empathy, 100 and engagement, 248 etymology of, 39--40 and
feedback, 200--202, 203--04 and foreboding joy, 117--22 and fostering
innovation, 186 and going-it-alone myth, 53--56 and invulnerability
myth, 43--45 and judgment, 98 and leadership, 211 and limit setting,
179--82 and men's gender expectations, 95--96, 97 and narcissism, 22--24
and the nature of daring greatly, 16, 248--49 and numbing, 137, 141 and
opportunity, 208 and parenting, 217--18, 220, 236--37, 238--45 and
perfectionism, 128 and practicing gratitude, 123, 127 and redefining
success, 155--57 and the scarcity problem, 29--30 and shadow comforts,
146--47 and shame, 13, 59--68 and therapy, 5--7 and trauma, 157--58 and
trust myth, 46--53

and uncertainty, 7 and understanding shame, 73 and Viking-or-Victim
worldview, 151--55 vulnerable situations, 35--39 and weakness myth,
33--43 and Wholeheartedness, 10--12 weakness and men's shame, 91--94,
94--96 and vulnerability myths, 33--43 weight, 90, 99, 113, 221
Whitesnake, 53 Wholeheartedness and becoming real, 110--11 and boundary
setting, 142, 144--45 and cultivating intimacy, 103 described, 9--12 and
feedback, 171, 199 and parenting, 169, 218--20, 238--39, 242, 244 and
perfectionism, 128 and redefining success, 155--56 and scarcity problem,
29 and shame resilience, 16, 78 and spirituality, 151 and trauma,
157--58 Wilton, Nicholas, 135--36 Winfrey, Oprah, 223 withdrawal,
emotional, 64, 77--78 The Wizard of Oz (1939), 94 Wolff Center for
Entrepreneurship, 206 women and gender norms, 85--91, 107--10 and
judgment, 98--101 work environment. See business environment Working
Mother, 208 workplace bullying, 189--95 Workplace Bullying Institute
(WBI), 190 worst-case scenarios, 121 worthiness

and belonging, 231--38 and body image, 102 and boundary setting, 145 and
embracing vulnerability, 64--65, 66 and emotional armor, 116, 169 and
numbing, 138 and organizational culture, 175 and parenting, 216, 220,
221--22, 225, 229 and practicing gratitude, 124 and prerequisites,
221--24 and self-compassion, 132--33 and shame resilience, 83 and
smash-and-grab strategy, 163 and understanding shame, 68--69, 73 Wright,
DeeDee Parker, 110--11 writing, 66, 82 Writing to Heal (Pennebaker), 82
Zogby International, 190

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Brené Brown, Ph.D., LMSW is a research professor at the University of
Houston Graduate College of Social Work. She is a nationally renowned
speaker and has won numerous teaching awards, including the College's
Outstanding Faculty Award. Her groundbreaking research has been featured
on PBS, NPR, and CNN. Brené's 2010 TEDxHouston talk, The Power of
Vulnerability, is one of the top ten most viewed TED talks on TED.com,
with approximately 5 million viewers. Additionally, Brené gave the
closing talk at the 2012 TED conference, where she talked about shame,
courage, and innovation. She is also the author of The Gifts of
Imperfection (2010), I Thought It Was Just Me (2007), and Connections
(2009), a shame-resilience curriculum being facilitated by helping
professionals around the world. Brené lives in Houston with her husband,
Steve, and their two children, Ellen and Charlie.


