Joumal of Personality and Social Psychology 2012. Vol. 102. No, 2.
408-426

© 2011 American Psychological Association 0022-3514/11/\$I2.OO DOI:
IO.lO37/aOO25559

Separating Method Factors and Higher Order Traits of the Big Five: A
Meta-Analytic Multitrait-Multimethod Approach Luye Chang

Brian S. Connelly

University of Connecticut

University of Toronto

!

.

Alexis A. Geeza

.

Montclair State University Though most personality researchers now
recognize that ratings of the Big Five are not orthogonal, the field has
been divided about whether these trait intercorrelations are substantive
(i.e., driven by higher order factors) or artifactual (i.e., driven by
correlated measurement error). We used a meta-analytic
multitrait-multirater study to estimate trait correlations after common
method variance was controlled. Our results indicated that common method
variance substantially inflates trait correlations, and, once
controlled, correlations among the Big Five became relatively modest. We
then evaluated whether two different theories of higher order factors
could account for the pattem of Big Five trait correlations. Our results
did not support Rushton and colleagues' (Rushton & Irwing, 2008: Rushton
et al., 2009) proposed general factor of personality, but Digman's
(1997) a and ß metatraits (relabeled by DeYoung, Peterson, and Higgins
(2002) as Stability and Plasticity, respectively) produced viable fit.
However, our models showed considerable overlap between Stability and
Emotional Stability and between Plasticity and Extraversion, raising the
question of whether these metatraits are redundant with their dominant
Big Five traits. This pattem of findings was robust when we included
only studies whose observers were intimately acquainted with targets.
Our results underscore the importance of using a multirater approach to
studying personality and the need to separate the causes and outcomes of
higher order metatraits from those of the Big Five. We discussed the
implications of these findings for the array of research fields in which
personality is studied. Keywords: personality. Big Five, higher order
factors, multitrait-multimethod, meta-analysis Supplemental materials:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0025559.supp

Discovering all the ways people differ from each other has led
personality psychologists to pursue identifying the most fundamental and
core sources of individual differences. One prominent milestone in this
history has been the relatively simultaneous emergence of the Big Five
model (derived from the lexical approach; Allport & Odbert, 1936;
Goldberg, 1993) and the fivefactor model (derived from the questionnaire
approach; Costa & McCrae, 1992; Digman, 1990). Four of the five factors
identified in these models overlap strongly: Conscientiousness depicts
the tendency to control behavior in pursuit of goals. Emotional
Stability refiects vulnerability to emotional turmoil, Agreeableness
captures tendencies to maintain social relations by minimizing confiict,
and Extraversion reflects the sensitivity to reward and

; j,\_

energy of goal pursuit. Though the models differ in their interpretation
of the fifth factor (labeled Openness in the five-factor model and
Intellect in the Big Five model), contemporary research (DeYoung,
Quilty, & Peterson, 2007; DeYoung, Shamosh, Green, Braver, & Gray, 2009)
suggests that Openness and Intellect represent separable mesofacet
traits stemming from a core tendency toward exploring and understanding
the surrounding world. ' On the whole, the wide base of research that
has supported development of these models suggests that people differ on
five general dimensions. These dimensions govem the way individuals
manage responsibilities (Conscientiousness), negative emotions
(Emotional Stability), and relations with others (Agreeableness) and how
they seek out affiliation (Extraversion) and experiential/ infiuential
stimulation (Openness). The Big Five/five-factor model has not only
provided a meaningful framework for understanding the fundamental
dimensions on which people differ, but it has also allowed for a common
language for describing research findings across a wide array of
domains. Specifically, the Big Five aligns the panoply of personality
traits that psychologists have measured with five focal fac-

This article was published Online First October 3, 2011. Luye Chang,
Department of Psychology, University of Connecticut: Brian S. Connelly,
Department of Management, University of Toronto: Alexis A. Geeza, School
of Business, Montclair State University. We thank David A. Kenny, Janet
Bames-Farrell, Julie M. McCarthy, and Ulrich Schimmack for their helpful
comments on earlier versions of this manuscript. Correspondence
conceming this article should be addressed to Luye Chang, Department of
Psychology, University of Connecticut, 406 Babbidge Rd., Unit 1020,
Storrs, CT 06269-1020; E-mail: luye.chang® uconn.edu I

' Although we use the label of Openness to Experience throughout this
article to describe the fifth factor, this is not intended to exclude
its Intellect component. ' •

408

METHOD AND HIGHER-ORDER FACTORS OF THE BIG HVE tors. This taxonomy
bridges the multitude of research realms in which personality is
studied. Knowing that, for instance, a common core factor of
Extraversion underlies sociability, assertiveness, energy, and positive
emotions has had important implications for how these traits are
studied: these more specific traits are likely to have at least some
common genetic, biological, and developmental causes, and they are also
likely to predict a common set of criteria. Therefore, how the
underlying factor structure of personality traits is configured directs
ways that traits are aligned within a nomological net and streamlines
personality research more broadly. The organization of personality has
been commonly conceptualized as a hierarchical structure (Eysenck, 1947;
Hampson, John, & Goldberg, 1986; Markon, 2009) in which the Big Five are
composed of narrower facet traits, which in tum comprise specific
cognitive, behavioral, and emotional responses. Different facets within
a factor represent more specific characteristics, but their covariation
indicates shared variance associated with a meaningful and more general
underlying personality characteristic. The Big Five traits were
originally extracted and conceptualized as orthogonal constructs with
little to no shared variance across the five factors. Thus,
historically, the Big Five have represented the highest level in
personality's hierarchy (Costa & McCrae, 1992; Goldberg, 1993). However,
ensuing research has found moderate to strong correlations between these
supposedly orthogonal constructs in both meta-analyses (Mount, Barrick.
Scullen, & Rounds, 2005; Ones, 1993) and in studies using multiple
personality inventories (Barbaranelli & Caprara, 2000; Benet-Mariinez &
John, 1998; Hong, Paunonen, & Slade, 2008). Thus, a large body of
research has now shown that substantial correlations exist between these
traits' measures. Researchers have proposed a number of explanations for
the correlations found between Big Five traits, which can be categorized
into two general perspectives. One line of theories argues that the five
factors are correlated constructs caused by higher order factors
(metatraits) that represent an even higher level of the personality
sphere than has been studied previously. Other researchers have proposed
that the five constructs are essentially orthogonal, but the
correlations shown in ratings of the five traits are artifactually
caused by correlated measurement errors (e.g., response biases). We
elaborate on these two sets of interpretations in tum.

Interpretation 1: The Big Five Traits' Covariation Is Caused by
Superordinate Trait Constructs Some researchers have posited that the
correlations between the Big Five reflect the presence of more
fundamental "metatrait(s)" occupying higher level of the personality
hierarchy. Presently, two different higher order factor models have been
proposed, which we refer to as the Stability/Plasticity model and the
general factor of personality model.

The Stahility/Plasticity Model Upon finding that Conscientiousness,
Emotional Stability, and Agreeableness tend to factor together and that
Extraversion and Openness tend to factor together. Digman (1997)
proposed that two higher order metatrait factors underlie the Big Five.
Digman identified the former of these factors as a and the latter as ß,
but DeYoung et al. (2002) subsequently relabeled these metatraits as

409

Stability and Plasticity. With linkages even to Freudian notions of ego
control (Freud, 1930) and behaviorist notions of socialization (Skinner,
1971; Watson, 1929), Stability (Digman's a) represents an individual's
core and underlying ability to socially adapt through avoiding impulsive
disruptions that threaten achieving work or personal goals
(Conscientiousness), establishing harmonious social relationships
(Agreeableness), and coping effectively with stress and negative
emotions (Emotional Stability; DeYoung, 2010; Digman, 1997). Drawing
from humanistic emphases on personal growth (Maslow, 1950; Rogers,
1961), Plasticity (Digman's ß) represents a core generative capacity for
novel exploration in social (Extraversion) and intellectual/experiential
(Openness) domains. Although these tendencies become differentiated in
more specific manifestations at the Big Five level. Stability and
Plasticity capture fundamental personality tendencies toward sustaining
goal directedness (Stability) and developing new goal directions
(Plasticity; DeYoung, 2010). Beyond having links to classic
psychoanalytic, humanistic, and behavioristic personality theories, the
two metatraits have enriched the theoretical understanding of the Big
Five model by aligning it with other contemporary personality trait
theories (Digman, 1997; Markon, Krueger, & Watson, 2005). Stability's
emphasis on impulse control and anxiety avoidance has strong conceptual
links to Tellegen and Waller's (2008) Constraint superfactor, Eysenck's
(1970) Psychoficism (with the addition of Neuroticism), Block and
Block's (1980) Ego Control, and Gray's (1991) behavioral inhibition
system. On the other hand, the prominence of reward sensitivity in
Plasticity ties it to Tellegen and Waller's Positive Emotionality,
Eysenck's depiction of Extraversion, some aspects of Block and Block's
Ego Resiliency, and Gray's behavioral activation system. Building from
these theoretical linkages, researchers have developed theories about
the neurobiological basis of Stability and Plasticity that may manifest
through many narrower personality traits. DeYoung et al. (2002) argued
that the underpinnings of Stability and Plasticity refiect individual
differences in the functioning of the serotonergic and central
dopaminergic systems, resjjectively. Individuals high in Stability may
be especially sensitive to serotonin, which regulates emotional,
motivational, and circadian processes, whereas individuals high in
Plasticity may be especially sensitive to dopamine, which mediates
approach behavior, positive affect, and reward sensitivity. Accordingly,
the initial discovery of these two metatraits has excited many
personality psychologists because they seem to bridge the five factors
with other theoretical models and enrich understanding of cybemedc
processes involving the Big Five traits (DeYoung, 2010). Enthusiasm
about Stability and Plasticity has emerged across multiple fields of
psychology beyond the core domain of personality. In clinical
psychology, Markon et al. (2005) argued that normal personality and
abnormal personality could be best integrated in a framework where
Stability and Plasticity represent the highest level of the integrative
personality structure. Behavioral genetics research has begun to
decompose genetic and environmental sources of phenotypic variance in
Stability and Plasticity (McCrae et al., 2008; Riemann & Kandier, 2010).
In industrial and organizational psychology. Ones and colleagues (Ones,
1993; Ones & Viswesvaran, 2(X)1 ; Ones, Viswesvaran, & Dilcheri, 2005)
have argued that a class of measures referred to as CriterionFocused
Occupational Personality Scales (COPS, which tend to correlate with
Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, and Agree-

410

CHANG, CONNELLY, AND GEEZA

ableness) are direct indicators of Stability. COPS have been found to
predict important workplace behavioral criteria like job performance
markedly better than Big Five personality measures, and Ones and
Viswesvaran (2001) have argued that Stability may be more relevant than
Big Five traits for predicting at least some broader, multifaceted
behaviors. In a similar vein, Hirsh, De Young, and Peterson (2009) found
that Stability and Plasticity predicted a broader range of restraint and
engagement behaviors than did the Big Five. Thus, the emergence of
stability and plasticity has begun to reshape the way researchers across
many fields think about personality traits---and about which traits may
be most fundamental, relevant, and influential.

The General Factor of Personality Model More recently, some researchers
(Musek, 2007; Rushton & Irwing, 2008) proposed that a single general
factor of personality (GFP) lies even beyond Stability and Plasticity at
the apex of traits' structure. Individuals high in this GFP are
agreeable, extraverted, emotionally stable, conscientious, and
intellectually open (Rushton et al., 2009)---core characteristics that
make these individuals likely to lead successful and satisfying lives.
Rushton and colleagues build an evolutionary theoretical basis for this
general factor from Differential K theory (Rushton & Irwing, 2008;
Rushton et al., 2009). Differential K theory emphasizes that animals
(including humans) use different adaptive strategies. People with high
levels of GFP have genetically inherited greater fitfulness to survive
natural selection, whereas people with the low levels of GFP have more
offspring to enhance their genetic survival (though these offspring
receive less investment). Rushton's conceptualization of a GFP
represents a radical departure from a field that has typically
emphasized traits' multidimensionality. In contrast, the general factor
discriminates "good" and "bad" personality traits, linking good traits
to capable, successful, valuable individuals while aligning "bad" to
unfitted, ineffective groups of people. Research examining the GFP has
yielded mixed findings. Since Musek (2007), several meta-analyses
(Rushton et al., 2009; van der Linden, Nijenhuis, & Bakker, 2010) and
primary studies using multiple raters (Rushton et al., 2009) or multiple
inventories (Zawadzki & Strelau, 2010) have found this general factor
across the Big Five factors. The GFP has predicted personality outcomes
like likability, popularity, affect, and performance more strongly than
Big Five ratings (Erdle & Rushton, 2010; van der Linden, Nijenhuis, &
Bakker, 2010; van der Linden, Schölte, Cillessen, Nijenhuis, & Segers,
2010). Adding further support, GFP saturation in Big Five ratings was
relatively unaffected when variance associated with social desirability
scales and self-esteem was partialled out (Erdle & Rushton, 2011;
Rushton & Erdle, 2010). However, a number of personality psychologists
have levied critiques of this research on the GFP, noting it is a weak,
indeterminant factor whose importance can be substantially overestimated
when items/scales are reverse-scored (Revelle, Witt, & Condon, 2010). In
addition, de Vries (2011) failed to replicate van der Linden, Schölte,
et al. (2010) analyses but instead found support for five modestly
correlated factors. Finally, authors have also argued that the GFP will
dissipate once items are framed with neutral social desirability
(Bäckström, Bjorklund, & Larsson;

2009) or allowed to have secondary factor loadings (Ashton, Lee,
      Goldberg, & de Vries, 2009). Despite increasing criticism of the
      GFP model within personality domain, interest in researching and
      applying the GFP has spread across other fields of psychology.
      Researchers have examined the genetic bases of the GFP in twin
      studies (Figueredo & Rushton, 2009; Loehlin & Martin, 2011;
      Rushton et al., 2009). In industrial/organizational psychology,
      the GFP was linked to job performance (van der Linden, Nijenhuis,
      et al., 2010) and drop out from military training (van der Linden,
      Nijenhuis, Cremers, & van de Ven, 2011). In clinical psychology,
      Rushton and Irwing (2009) found that the GFP was associated with
      personality and other psychological disorders. More generally,
      researchers have begun to build a nomological net for the GFP by
      evaluating its relationship with variables like childhood
      temperament (Zawadzki & Strelau, 2010), general intelligence
      (Schermer & Vemon, 2010), emotional intelligence (Mclntyre, 2010),
      affect, and self-esteem (Erdle & Rushton, 2010). Thus, despite
      some criticism, research on the GFP appears to be spreading across
      fields of psychology that incorporate personality.

Interpretation 2: The Covariation Among the Big Five Factors Is
Artifactual In stark contrast to these substantive hypotheses about
covariance among the five factors, many researchers have argued that the
covariation between Big Five traits is not substantive but artifactual
(e.g., Biesanz & West, 2004; Costa & McCrae, 1992; McCrae & Costa, 1995,
1999). Namely, there may be a common method bias factor shared across
the trait ratings that falsely creates the appearance of a higher order
factor. For example, unidimensional response tendencies like
acquiescence or social desirability could create the appearance of a
general factor of personality even among orthogonal Big Five constmcts.
In addition, many researchers have emphasized that the method factors
underlying personality responses could be multidimensional. For example,
individuals have separable tendencies to respond to positively worded
items and negatively worded items (positive vs. negative valence;
Almagor, Tellegen, & Waller, 1995) and different forms of socially
desirable responding (e.g., impression management vs. selfdeceptive
enhancement; Paulhus, 1984; Paulhus & John, 1998). Beyond even simple
response tendencies, raters' implicit personality theories may mean that
raters contaminate one trait's ratings with another trait's cues
(Borkenau, 1992; Schneider, 1973). Fundamentally, researchers endorsing
the artifactual perspective have argued that the covariation of traits'
ratings substantially overestimates the covariation of trait
manifestations in behaviors, thoughts, and feelings. If the covariance
of Big Five ratings is purely artifactual, identifying genetic,
environment, and biological causes of Stability and Plasticity or the
GFP would have little meaning beyond understanding response tendencies.
Similarly, studying the affective, cognitive, and behavioral outcomes of
these supposed higher order factors would likely obscure the effects of
the true trait drivers of those effects at the Big Five level. In
real-world applications of personality measures like clinical diagnosis
or the selection of job applicants, inappropriately focusing on these
"artifactual" higher order factors could wrongly reward biased
respondents with a job offer or punish candid respondents with a harsher
diagnosis than might otherwise be realized by

METHOD AND HIGHER-ORDER FACTORS OF THE BIG HVE differentiating among the
Big Five. Thus, separating method and substance of higher order factors
has critical implications for how personality is studied and how its
measures are applied.

Disentangling Correlated Constructs From Correlated Errors: A Multirater
Approach Although multiple perspectives exist to explain the pattem of
correlations typically found between Big Five trait ratings, these
perspectives can be couched generally within this framework of
correlated errors versus higher order factors. The crux of evaluating
the relative merit of the two rival interpretations necessitates a
multirater approach. Such an approach is based on the premise that
measurement errors should not be correlated across rating sources. If
trait ratings remain correlated even across different raters, these
correlations can only reflect correlated constructs because measurement
artifacts should be independent across raters. This is precisely the
logic underlying the multitrait-multimethod (MTMM) approach to assessing
convergent and discriminant validity (Campbell & Fiske, 1959). Moreover,
pairing a MTMM design with conflrmatory factor analyses (CFA) allows
researchers to examine whether trait ratings' correlations are due to
common method bias or true construct level correlations. Despite the
rapid proliferation of theorizing and researching higher order
metatraits, the handful of MTMM studies have reached frustratingly
discrepant conclusions. Some studies have found that cross-rater trait
factors are correlated (e.g., Barbaranelli, Fida, Paciello, Di Giunta, &
Caprara, 2(X)8; Borkenau & Ostendorf, 1990; Riemann & Kandier, 2010),
and some have found that they are orthogonal (Biesanz & West, 2004).
Some studies have found Stability and Plasticity factors to emerge even
after common method effects have been controlled (Anusic, Schimmack,
Pinkus, & Lockwood, 2009; DeYoung, 2006; Rushton et al., 2009), and some
have noted that Stability and Plasticity also represent implicit
personality theories localized within raters (Biesanz & West, 2004;
McCrae et al., 2008). One study has found a general factor of
personality that emerges across raters (Rushton et al., 2009), whereas
others have found essentially orthogonal Stability and Plasticity
factors (DeYoung, 2006) and general factors that are not correlated
across raters (Anusic et al., 2009). These MTMM studies represent some
of the most methodologically rigorous designs that the field of
psychology has to offer, soliciting at times not only multiple raters
but also multiple occasions (e.g., Biesanz & West, 2004) and twin
samples to examine genetic and environmental bases of higher order
factors (McCrae et al., 2008; Rushton et al., 2009). Yet the discrepant
conclusions across the results of these studies are as frustrating as
contentious. Researchers have generally attributed discrepancies in
conclusions to methodological differences. For example, DeYoung (2006)
argued that the choice of instruments or the choice of raters in Biesanz
and West's study (2004) produced low interrater reliabilities and,
resultantly, low trait intercorrelations (though the interrater
reliabilities in Biesanz and West fall within credibility intervals of
meta-analytic estimates in Connelly & Ones, 2010, 2010, for, friends). A
simpler source for these discrepant findings may simply be statistical
artifacts such as sampling error. Even though the previous studies have
laudably collected data from a large total number of raters, the number
of targets is smaller, making studies more susceptible to sampling
error. Given that MTMM-CFA

411

models are demanding in terms of the number of parameters to be
estimated, sampling error may snowball across the MTMM correlation
matrices used in these studies. Thus, precision in the estimates of MTMM
correlations is necessary for drawing firm conclusions about the
presence of higher order factors. One path toward such precision is
through meta-analysis. That is, by pooling data across samples,
meta-analyses minimize the effect of sampling error on MTMM correlations
compared with findings in primary data (Hedges & Olkin, 1985; Hunter &
Schmidt, 2004). Beyond the effects of sampling error alone, correlations
may differ across studies simply because of differences in statistical
artifacts like measurement error or range restriction. Some forms of
meta-analysis (e.g.. Hunter & Schmidt, 2004) correct meta-analytic
estimates of correlations' means and variances for the attenuating
effects of statistical artifacts like measurement error. Last, once
variability in correlations across studies due to sampling error and
statistical artifacts has been accounted for, meta-analysis provides a
systematic method for investigating whether correlation differences are
associated with any study-level moderators. Thus, meta-analysis offers
an especially valuable approach to inform the literature on higher order
factors of the Big Five by overcoming and accounting for discrepancies
caused by sampling error, statistical artifacts, and differences in
study methodologies. In the present study, we used a meta-analytic MTMM
intercorrelation matrix as input in CFA to estimate the effects of
correlated traits, common method biases, and higher order trait factors.
Many researchers have combined meta-analysis with stmctural equation
modeling (SEM) or CFA (e.g., Behrens, 1997; Colquitt, LePine, & Noe,
2000; Fried, Shirom, Gilboa, & Copper, 2008; Hom, Caranikas-Walker,
Pmssia, & Griffeth, 1992; Klein, Wesson, Hollenbeck, Wright, & DeShon,
2001), even in estimating MTMM models (e.g.. Bowler & Woehr, 2006).
Viswesvaran and Ones (1995) provided a general guideline for conducting
meta-analytic SEM/CFA analyses. Although there have been a number of
MTMM primary studies in personality, with some directly examining higher
order factors of the Big Five, the current study is the first to use
meta-analysis with MTMM data to investigate higher order factors of the
Big Five. Finally, we also examined whether the pattem of findings we
observed is robust when including only studies using raters closely
acquainted with targets (family, friends, and roommates).

Method Meta-Analytic Design and Database The primary goal of our
meta-analysis was to obtain a 5 (trait: the Big Five) X 3 (method:
self-ratings. Informant 1 ratings, and Informant 2 ratings)
meta-analytic correlation matrix. Large-scale meta-analytic correlations
have already been estimated for some correlations in this matrix; when
possible, we used intercorrelations from these sources. Meta-analytic
SEM/CFA studies have often culled correlations from existing
meta-analyses to increase the precision of their estimates, particularly
when studies come from a wide and vaiying set of literatures (e.g..
Fried et al., 2008; Heller, Watson, & Hies, 2004; Zimmerman & Damold,
2009). Speciflcally, we drew monotrait-heteromethod (MTHM) correlations
from Connelly and Ones's (2010) meta-analyses of interrater
reliabilities (Informant 1 trait ratings correlated with Informant 2

CHANG, CONNELLY, AND GEEZA

412

ratings of the same trait) and self-informant correlations (selfratings
correlated with Informant 1 and Informant 2 ratings of the same trait).
In addition, we used self heterotrait-monomethod (HTMM) correlations
from Mount et al.'s (2005) meta-analysis. The remaining correlations for
this MTMM matrix were metaanalyzed in the present study. Specifically,
these were: informant heterotrait-monomethod (HTMM) correlations,
self-informant heterotrait-heteromethod (HTHM) correlations, and
informantinformant heterotrait-heteromethod (HTHM) correlations. We
adopted three strategies for collecting articles that could contribute
data. First, we reviewed a database of 596 articles, dissertations, and
unpublished manuscripts compiled by Connelly and Ones (2010) for their
meta-analysis on informant-report accuracy and predictive validity.
Second, we used PsycINFO to locate articles published since Connelly and
Ones's database was compiled by searching with the string
"f)ersonality/trait/temperament and peer/
informant/spouse/friend/roommate/stranger/discriminant validity/
intercorrelations/zero-acquaintance/thin slices of behavior/multirater/
multirater/multimethod/multimethod." Third, we contacted researchers who
often conduct personality research using informant ratings to request
unpublished data. In total, 967 articles and unpublished sources were
reviewed for potential inclusion in our database. Studies had to meet
several criteria to be included in this database. First, the study must
have reported the sample size along with one of the following: (a)
correlations between self-ratings and informant ratings of personality
traits (e.g., self-ratings of Agreeableness correlated with friend
ratings of Extraversion); (b) trait rating correlations within
non-self-raters (e.g., correlations between the same friend's ratings of
Agreeableness and Extraversion); (c) correlations between personality
traits across different non-self-raters (e.g., one friend's rating of
Agreeableness correlated with a different friend's rating of
Extraversión).\^ Second, to enhance homogeneity in the traits being
rated, we included only samples using measures developed within the
theoretical framework of the Big Five/five-factor model.\^ Third, to
avoid samples in which personality was more susceptible to development
or change, studies had to sample "normal" targets who were adolescents
or older (e.g., studies whose targets were affiicted with trauma were
excluded). Fourth, we excluded studies that measured informant ratings
using peer nomination procedures in which a group of participants
individually nominated the person most characteristic of an item, with
an individual's score refiecting the number of nominations received.
Peer nomination procedures are problematic because they present a
trade-off between interrater reliability and range restriction: if
interrater reliability is strong, discriminating information is
available only for those scoring at the extreme end of the trait. In
total, we located 44 studies comprising 45 independent samples that
satisfied our inclusion criteria to be metaanalyzed in the current
study.

Coding of Articles

¡

For each correlation presented, we recorded the correlation's magnitude,
the sample size, a description of the sample of targets and raters, and
descriptions of the personality measures being correlated. We also coded
information to study whether our findings would be robust when separated
by the type of informant providing the ratings. We identified whether
the rater was intimately acquainted with the target. The tyjjes of
informant raters

used in the study were initially classified using the taxonomy presented
in Connelly and Ones (2010), with family members, friends, and roommates
being identified as high-intimacy raters. Each article was coded by one
of two doctoral students trained in coding and conducting meta-analysis.
Coder agreement was examined by having 10% of the sources reviewed by
both doctoral student coders. Agreement between the coders about whether
studies met the inclusion criteria was 100%, and coders had coding
discrepancies on only four articles (94% agreement). These discrepancies
were resolved after review and discussion with the second author, a
junior professor with experience conducting meta-analyses in
personality.

Meta-Analytic Procedure Three sets of intercorrelations were
meta-analyzed to supplement existing meta-analyzed estimates in building
the MTMM matrix: self-informant heterotrait-heteromethod (HTHM)
correlations, informant heterotrait-monomethod (HTMM) correlations, and
informant-informant heterotrait-heteromethod (HTHM) correlations. Among
the studies contributing data, many studies averaged trait ratings from
multiple informants (e.g., a correlation between self-ratings of
Extraversion and the average of three friends-ratings of Agreeableness).
This is problematic in that using more raters predictably renders higher
reliability (and consequently, higher correlations) than a single rater.
To address this issue, correlations in the database derived from
multiple informants were individually disattenuated for the interrater
reliability of k raters and then reattenuated for the reliability of one
rater following procedures described in Connelly and Ones (2010)."

\^ As an anonymous reviewer suggested, we also meta-analyzed only
studies providing a full MTMM correlation matrix. Adding this Inclusion
criterion did not materially change estimates of trait factor
correlations or higher order factors' ability to capture this pattem of
correlations. ' Initially, we collected, coded, and analyzed our data
including samples using non-Big Five/Ff\^ measures of "normal" (i.e.,
nonpsychopathological) personality traits that were coded according to
the five-factor model and examined theoretical origin of the measure as
a meta-analytic moderator. Including this broader set of samples
produced an identical pattem of results to those presented here and is
available from the authors. To save space, we present only the analyses
using the five-factor inventories. •\* This procedure potentially
overestimates the magnitude of informant heterotrait-monomethod (HTMM)
correlations. Although averaging across multiple informants would
increase HTMM correlations due to increased reliability (which is
accounted for by the disattenuation/reattenuation procedure), averaging
across multiple informants also reduces the correlated errors between
traits arising from common method bias. Reducing the correlated errors
reduces HTMM correlations when a composite average of informants ratings
is used instead a single informant (David A. Kenny, personal
communication. May 4, 2010). To examine this potential issue, we
separately meta-analyzed HTMM correlations that came from single
informants (A' = 5,112) and from multi-informant composites that had
been adjusted using the disattenuation/reattenuation procedure (N =
2.599). Meta-analytic mean point estimates from single-informant studies
were virtually identical to those of multi-informant composites
(differing by less than .04 correlation points with no systematic
pattem) with each showing no reduction in variability around mean
correlations. Thus, we conducted HTMM analyses pooling together samples
that used single informants and samples that used multiple informants.
\_.

METHOD AND HIGHER-ORDER FACTORS OF THE BIG HVE In our MTMM matrix, we
were interested in representing the overlap in raters' latent trait
perceptions rather than the overlap in raters' observed trait ratings.
We estimated these correlations using the Hunter and Schmidt (2004)
meta-analytic procedure and correcting for unreliability. We made these
corrections with artifact distributions from Viswesvaran and Ones (2000)
for self-ratings and from Connelly (2008) for informant ratings. These
corrected correlations refiect the overlap in raters' latent perceptions
of traits (rather than the overlap of observed measures). Because
studies typically used samples that were not directly restricted in
range, no corrections were made for range restriction.

Meta-Analytic Output In the meta-analysis output, total sample size {N)
and number of independent samples {K) indicate the amount of data
contributing to each meta-analytic correlation. The sample-sized
weighted average of observed correlations Cr\^hJ ^u^d its standard
deviation {SD,\^) depict the distribution of correlations observed from
individual studies. Meta-analytically corrected mean correlations (p)
and accompanying standard deviations {SD\^) describe the distribution of
latent trait correlations that have been corrected for unreliability.
The residual standard deviation in correlations {SD\^J corresponds to
the remaining variance in correlations after subtracting variance due to
statistical artifacts (sampling error and unreliability) from total
variance.

Results In the following sections, we first present meta-analytic
results of intercorrelations between Big Five traits within and across
information sources. These results synthesize the discriminant validity
of personality ratings for self-ratings and informant ratings. Next, we
use CFA to examine trait factor correlations, method effects, and models
of higher order factors beyond Big Five. Last, we investigate whether
the same pattem of trait correlations, method effects, and higher order
factors emerges when correlations are meta-analyzed for high-intimacy
rater subgroup.

Meta-Analytic Results The first goal of this study was to compare the
covariation of Big Five traits within versus across rating sources. In
doing so, we examined the convergent and discriminant validity of
ratings across sources. Table 1 presents meta-analytic results of these
HTMM correlations for informants. The corrected HTMM correlations in
Table 1 range from p = .04 to p = .27, with an average across these
meta-analytic estimates of p = .16. There are moderate intercorrelations
between Emotional Stability, Conscientiousness, and Agreeableness (p =
.27, .16, and .24, respectively). Extraversion generally correlates
weakly with other traits except for Openness to Experience (p = .22).
For convergent validity and discriminant validity to be strong, MTHM
correlations should be strong and larger than HTMM correlations. Hence,
HTMM correlations in Table 1 can be compared with corrected interrater
reliability and self-informant consensus (MTHM correlations) from
Connelly and Ones (2010). Whereas the HTMM correlations in Table 1
ranged from p = .04 to p = .27, the MTHM correlations reported in
Connelly and Ones

413

ranged from p = .32 to p = .49. These findings bolster longstanding
notions about convergent and discriminant validity of personality
ratings. The nonzero trait intercorrelations in Table 1 may stem from
two potential causes: (a) common method bias in informants' ratings or
(b) true correlations among Big Five traits. The two explanations can be
distinguished by examining HTHM correlations. If HTHM correlations are
of comparable magnitude to HTMM correlations, correlations in Table 1
represent true correlations among latent traits. On the contrary, if
HTHM correlations are substantially lower than HTMM correlations, the
results in Table 1 are more likely to refiect common method bias than
true correlations between traits. Table 2 presents the meta-analytic
results for HTHM correlations between self-ratings and informant
ratings, and Table 3 shows the meta-analytic results for HTHM
correlations across two different informants. Table 2 shows corrected
self-informant HTHM correlations ranging from p = ---.06 to p = . 10,
with an average across these meta-analytic estimates of p = .03.
Similarly the informant-informant HTHM correlations in Table 3 range
from p = -.00 to p = .10, with an average across the meta-analytic
corrected correlations of p = .04. The HTHM correlations from Tables 2
and 3 are uniformly substantially lower than their counterpart HTMM
correlations in Table 1. The pattem of correlations observed in Table 1
fails to hold for HTHM correlations. These findings suggest that common
method bias largely accounts for the trait correlations within informant
ratings. True correlations between traits appear to be weaker, though
these correlations are attenuated by the imperfect convergent validities
across raters. Finally, it is also important to examine how much
variability was present around meta-analytic mean correlations. The
SD\^es values in Tables 1-3 indicate variability in correlations after
accounting for variability expected from sampling error and variability
in reliabilities, whereas the SD\^ values estimate the variability in
true correlations across studies. Note that the HTMM correlations in
Table 1 generally show moderate variability around metaanalytic means
(e.g., SD\^ values range from SD\^ = .11 to SD\^ = .18), indicating some
potential room for study-level moderators to operate. However,
correlations for the HTHM correlations in Table 2 and Table 3 are
clustered much more tightly around their meta-analytic estimates (most
SD\^ \< .10), leaving little room for study-level moderators to operate.
In CFA terms, this implies that though some studies may find stronger or
weaker common method effects, most do not differ substantially in
estimating crossinformant trait intercorrelations.

Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) Results Data input and model
estimation. To fit CFA models, we created a meta-analytic MTMM matrix by
assembling corrected correlations from three sources: (a) trait
intercorrelations from meta-analysis results presented in the preceding
section (shown in Tables 1-3), (b) trait intercorrelations of
self-ratings from Mount et al. (2005), and (c) interrater reliability
and self-informant consensus from Connelly and Ones (2010). The MTMM
correlation matrix was then submitted to CFA models with AMOS 18.0.
Following procedures outlined in Viswesvaran and Ones (1995), we
calculated the harmonic mean across the total sample sizes {N) of each
meta-analytic correlation in the MTMM matrix. This

414

CHANG, CONNELLY, AND GEEZA

Table 1 Meta-Analysis Results for Informant's Heterotrait-Monomethod
Correlations Variable Info Info Info Info Info Info Info Info Info Info

ES - Info Ex ES - Info OE ES - Info A ES - Info C Ex --- Info OE Ex -
Info A Ex - Info C OE - Info 1 A OE - Info 1 C A - Info 1 C

N

K

6,857 6,605 6,950 7,117 6,605 7,070 6,857 6,349 6,805 6,882

25 24

.11 .07

.02

26

.22 .13

.02

26 24

.18

m m .02 .

26 25

àlO \<,(&

.02 .02

23 25 25

.it

.12

m .02 "

.20

.01

SD,..

P

SD,

.12 .11 .15 .12 .11 .12 .11 .14 .14 .10

.13 .09 .27 .16 .22 .12 .04 .19 .14 .24

.15 .13 .18 .14 .13 .14 .13 .17 .17 .11

Note. N = total sample size; K = no. of independent samples; Info =
informant raters; ES = Emotional Stability; Ex = Extraversion; OE =
Openness to Experience: A = Agreeableness; C = Conscientiousness; r\^, =
sample size weighted mean observed correlations; SD,j,\_ = standard
deviation of sample size weighted mean observed correlations; 5D„s =
residual standard deviations in correlations; p = corrected score
correlations; SD\^ = standard deviation of corrected score correlation.

harmonic mean (A\^harm = 4,841) was used as the sample size of the
matrix and represents a more conservative estimate of sample size than
the total N across all samples. We created this matrix with two
informants in order to make use of the cross-informant HTHM correlations
presented in Table 3. We assumed HTMM correlations and self-informant
HTHM correlations to be equal for Informants 1 and 2 when we created
this meta-analytic correlation matrix and thus duplicated correlations
as necessary to complete the full matrix. This logic is essentially
equivalent to that of studies in which raters are randomly assigned as
"Peer 1" and "Peer 2." This has two imporiant consequences for
estimating CFA models from this matrix. First, some correlations in the
matrix were not uniquely estimated (i.e., were the same for Informants 1
and 2). Thus, whereas AMOS calculates degrees of

freedom based on the number of "known" values in the input matrix (120
values) minus the number of parameters being estimated (Olsen & Kenny,
2006), our matrix has fewer uniquely known values (only 70 values).
Thus, we hand-calculated degrees of freedom and fit statistics by
subtracting this difference from the degrees of freedom. These adjusted
degrees of freedom appear throughout with the subscript "adj." Second,
because the distinction between Informants 1 and 2 was arbitrary and
their correlations overlapped, we constrained parameter estimates for
Informants 1 and 2 to be equal. Two fit indices were employed for CFA
model estimation that are less affected by sample size and thus are more
appropriate when the input matrix is derived meta-analytically: the
TuckerLewis index (TLI) and the x\^\^4f ratio. TLI, also known as NNFI

Table 2 Meta-Analysis Results for Trait Intercorrelations Between
Self-Ratings and Informant Ratings Variable

N

K

Self ES - Info Ex Self ES - Info OE Self ES - Info A Self ES - Info C
Self Ex -- Info ES Self Ex •- Info OE Self Ex -- Info A Self Ex -- Info
C Self OE - Info ES Self OE - Info Ex Self OE - Info A Self OE - Info C
Self A - Info ES Self A - Info Ex Self A - Info OE Self A - InfoC Self
C - Info ES Self C - Info Ex Self C - Info OE Self C - Info A

10.753 9.206 10.513 9,140 10,261 9,026 10,346 9,826 9,372 . 9,860 9.858
9,646 9.781 9,409 8.953 9,534 9.531 9,862 8,953 9,105

48 40 48 41 45 40 47 44 41 44 44 43 44 43 39 42 42 44 39 41

,

.06 .03 .07 .06 .02 .04 .00 -.02 -.03 .07 -.02 -.03 .07 .04 .03 .04 .02
.02 -.04 .01

5D..,

5D„,

P

SD,

.10 .07 .12 .08 .11 .09 .11 .10 .12

.07 .03 .10

.08

.03 .03

.08 .04 .09 .08 .03 .05 .00 -.02 -.03 .10 -.02 -.04 .09 .05 .04 .06 .03
.02 -.06 .01

.09 .03 .13 .07 .12 .09 .11 .09 .12 .04 .04 .04 .11 .03 .02 .09 .08 .06
.09 .09

.07 .07 .11 .07 .07 .10 .09 .08 .10 .09

.05 .09 .07 .08 .07 .10 .03 .09

.02 .01 .07 .06 .05 .07 .07

Note. N = total sample size; K = number of independent samples; Self =
self-raters; Info = informant raters; ES = Emotional Stability; Ex =
Extraversion; OE = Openness to Experience; A = Agreeableness; C =
Conscientiousness; r,\^, = sample size weighted mean observed
correlations; SD\^\^ = standard deviation of sample size weighted mean
observed correlations; SD\^\^ = residual standard deviations in
correlations; p = corrected score correlations; SD = standard deviation
of corrected score correlation. . .,

METHOD AND HIGHER-ORDER FACTORS OF THE BIG FIVE

415

Table 3

Meta-Analysis Results for Trait Intereorrelations Between Different
Informant-Ratings

Info Info Info Info Info Info Info Info Info Info

Variable

N

K

ES - Info 2 Ex ES - Info 2 OE ES - Info 2 A ES - Info 2 C Ex - Info 2 OE
Ex - Info 2 A Ex - Info 2 C OE - Info 2 A OE - Info 2 C A - Info 2 C

,783 ,783 ,783 ,783 ,783 ,783 ,783 ,783 .783 .783

1

7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7

.03 .01 ,08 ,06 .06 .02 .00 .02 .00 .05

.00

.00 .01 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00

.00 .00 .04 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00

.00

p

SD,

.04 .01 .10 .08 .08 .03 .00 .02 .00 .06

.00 .00 .05 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00

Note. N = total sample size; K = number of independent samples; Info =
informant raters; ES = Emotional Stability; Ex = Extraversion; OE =
Openness to Experience; A = Agreeableness; C = Conscientiousness; r„\^,
= sample size weighted mean observed correlations; 5D,,,, = standard
deviation of sample size weighted mean observed correlations; SD\^\^ =
residual standard deviations in correlations; p = corrected score
correlations; SD\^ = standard deviation of corrected score correlation.

(nonnormed fit index), is an improvement over the normed-fit index
(NFI). While NFI is sensitive to sample size, TLI is relatively
independent of it. x\^ is a chi-square statistic comparing the tested
model and the independence model with the saturated model. Most
researchers interpret TLI values exceeding .95 and X\^/c/f ratios below
5.0 as indicating good fit (Schermelleh-Engel, Moosbrugger, & Müller,
2003). However, more important than models reaching a particular cutoff
of y\^ldfanà TLI fit statistics is comparing the relative fit of nested
models to draw conclusions (Kline, 2005). We grouped our CFA models in
three sets: classic MTMM models, models specifying higher order factors
beyond the Big Five, and multiple-method models that specify multiple
method factors within each rater. We compared the fit and parameters of
these CFA models to address three questions. First, are there
substantial trait and method factors in personality ratings? Second,
does a general factor or Stability and Plasticity factors account for
the covariance between Big Five traits? Third, does the effect of Big
Five traits, higher order traits, or method factors change when method
factors are partitioned into within-rater a and ß artifact factors? The
fit of these sets of models is presented in Table 4, and we discuss
findings related to these three questions in tum. MTMM models. To
understand basic factors affecting personality ratings, we fit a series
of classic MTMM CFA models (see Figure 1 A). The
orthogonal-traits-no-method (OTNM) model represents the classic
perspective that Big Five are orthogonal factors at the highest level of
personality structure but yielded a poor fit (TLI = .50, x^/df^di =
173.49). Allowing trait factors to correlate (TLI = .73, x\^\^dfad\] \~
93.87) and specifying orthogonal method factors (TLI = .88, x\^^í^ífadj
= 42.34) individually improved the model notably. Specifying both method
factors and correlated traits rendered the best MTMM model (TLI = .95,
x\^/i%dj = 17.51). These results combined to suggest that covariation
among trait ratings is partly attributable to common method variance,
but true covariance among trait factors indeed exists.' Table 5 presents
the trait and method factor loadings of the correlated traits,
orthogonal methods (CTOM) model. Trait loadings were stronger on average
than method loadings (average \^.rait = -62 vs. average `\n`{=tex},ethod
= -44). These findings support personality's convergent and discriminant
validity. For Agreeable-

ness and Conscientiousness, self and informants have comparable levels
of trait loadings (Agreeableness: X\^\^,, == .54 and X¡nformant = .59;
Conscientiousness; ,\^,f = .59 and \^¡„formant = -61), suggesting that
self-raters and informant raters converge similarly on these personality
traits. However, self-raters' trait loadings were stronger than
informants' for Emotional Stability (X.,„j, = .69 vs. = -60) and
Openness = .66 vs. X,„i, = 58) but weaker for Extraversion (X\^\^\^, =
.61 vs. X,,\^;, = .68). Emotional Stability and Openness to Experience
are traits low in visibility (trait cues are more likely to be inwardly
held than outwardly expressed), whereas Extraversion is the trait that
is highest in visibility (John & Robins, 1993). Consistent with Vazire's
(2010) self-observer knowledge asymmetry (SOKA) model, these findings
suggest that self-ratings serve as better indicators when traits are low
in visibility but informants' ratings are preferred for traits
especially high in visibility. Table 6 presents correlations between the
five trait factors from the CTOM model (and from the correlated traits,
no methods \[CTNM\] model for comparison). Factor correlations from CTOM
model ranged from ip = - . 1 0 to (p = .29. The highest correlation is
between Extraversion and Openness (ip = .29), with Emotional Stability
also showing modest correlations with Agreeableness (\^p = .26) and
Conscientiousness (ip = .18). Note that these correlations between the
Big Five from the CTOM model are considerably lower than the
correlations observed in previous studies that have used single raters
(e.g., Digman, 1997; Ones, 1993; van der Linden, Nijenhuis, et al.,
2010). Similarly, the trait factor correlations in the CTOM

' We controlled for common method variance by specifying orthogonal
method factors (correlated traits, orthogonal methods, or CTOM model)
rather than allowing uniqueness to correlate within raters (correlated
traits, correlated within raters methods, the CTCU model) because the
CTOM model is more parsimonious. In the absence of specific theoretical
models about the relationships of particular traits' uniquenesses,
parsimony is more appropriate. Compared with the CTCU model, the CTOM
model will be conservative in estimating common method effects and thus
may somewhat overestimate trait factor correlations. However, we also
tested higher order factor models controlling for common method with CU
rather than OM factors; the pattem of findings across models were no
different.

CHANG, CONNELLY, AND GEEZA

416

> \< 2 g 3

€ oí cao

' " 73

00 s; '

.-• u D 4J

caos

I 12

oí

S I2

il

r

ia

im !

S I I O \* Tt f

1/1

- 

•Ë OO

U c

I I

I.  

o O \^\^ in V) I/)

l^-fS^N

'u

II

rr, r\^ (T) tfi tT)

S \>Ô « «

-2? o s .2

Ö oo « oí

g II

; z s G ";=•\<:

m •\* m t-. \^\

i

ov » --- o ---; ---. rf O Ö

¡gfe-s II S ,

s\<\<o

aD

ll

METHOD AND HIGHER-ORDER FACTORS OF THE BIG FIVE

417 GFP

.--- ••;

..-\*"

(

Self }

(' 01

}

"-s?...

l' 02

)

""••;4

)

OTNM: solid lines otily; CTNM: solid and dotted lines; OTOM: solid and
dashed lines; CTOM: solid, dotted and dashed lines.

GFP Model: solid and dotted lines; a & ß model; solid and dashed lines.

OE

r{

;

0 1 II 02 Ex II Ex

Self OE

T 01 OE

O2 OE

a & ß Artifact (OT) Model: solid lines; a & ß Artifact (CT) Model: solid
and dotted lines. Figure I. Three sets of confirmatory factor-analytic
models of Big Five trait ratings from multiple raters: MTMM
(monotrait-monomethod) models (Panel A), higher order factor models
(Panel B), and artifact models (Panel C). OTNM = orthogonal traits, no
methods; CTNM = correlated traits, no methods; OTOM = orthogonal traits,
orthogonal methods; CTOM = correlated traits, orthogonal methods; ES =
Emotional Stability; A = Agreeableness; C = Conscientiousness; Ex =
Extraversion; OE = Openness to Experience; Self = self-ratings; O =
informant-ratings; GFP = general factor of personality beyond the Big
Five; a = alpha factor beyond Emotional Stability, Agreeableness, and
Conscientiousness; ß = Beta factor beyond Extraversion and Openness to
Experience.

model are also smaller than those in the CTNM model where no method
factors are specified. This pattern of findings indicates that trait
correlations decrease considerably when common method variance in trait
ratings is controlled. Hence, studies using single raters will
overestimate trait correlations substantially because trait
intercorrelations are severely inflated by common method bias. Higher
order factor models. Despite this general decrease in the magnitude of
trait factor correlations when method factors are specified, modest
trait factor correlations remained in the CTOM model. This suggests that
the trait correlations observed in the CTOM model are meaningful and may
be the outcome of higher order trait factors accounting for their
covariation. Thus, we examined more parsimonious models with
second-order trait factors that could account for the remaining trait
factor covariation observed in the CTOM model.

GFP model. Based on Rushton's theory, we first estimated a model with
only one second-order factor (GFT) on which the Big Five trait factors
are all loaded (orthogonal method factors were also specified). This
model is shown graphically in Figure IB, delineated by solid and dotted
lines. Table 4 shows that this GFP model yielded markedly worse fit than
the CTOM model (TLI = .91 vs. 95, x\^/#adj = 30.97 vs. 17.51 for GFP and
CTOM model, respectively). The Big Five traits (ES, Ex, OE, A, and C)
were not strongly or consistently loaded on the general factor (Xg\^ =
.57, kj¡\^ = .03, `\oE `{=tex}= -.09,  A = .48, and `\c =`{=tex} -38),
which appeared more like Stability (Digman's a) than a tme general
factor. These results indicate that a single general factor beyond Big
Five traits does not effectively account for the covariance between Big
Five trait factors. a and ß metatraits model. We next tested whether
specifying two correlated second-order factors can account for trait
córrela-

418

CHANG, CONNELLY, AND GEEZA Table 5

Factor Loadings for the Correlated Traits, Orthogonal Methods (CTOM)
Model Methods

Traits Rater/trait Self ES Ex OE A C Info 1 & 2 ES Ex OE A C Mean

ES

Ex

Self

OE

.69 .61

.:

.62

\^.

.41

.59

.54 .60

.66

.36

.54

.30 .21

.60

.68 .59

.50 .38

.61 .65

.65

Info 1 & 2

.62

.57

.60

.51

.36

Note. ES = Emotional Stability; Ex = Extraversion; OE = Openness to
Experience; A = Agreeableness; C • Conscientiousness; Self =
self-ratings; Info 1 & 2 = informant ratings.

tions. This model is shown graphically in Figure IB, specified by solid
and dashed paths. Thus, Emotional Stability, Conscientiousness, and
Agreeableness were loaded on a second-order Stability factor labeled as
a, and Extraversion and Openness to Experience were loaded on a
Plasticity factor labeled as ß. Consistent with past research (Anusic et
al., 2009; DeYoung, 2006), a and ß factors were allowed to correlate,
and again we specified self and informant method factors underlying
raters' trait perceptions. The original a and ß metatraits model yielded
a negative residual variance for the Extraversion trait factor; fixing
this error variance to zero produced a proper solution and resulted in
minimal decrements of model fit. The modified a and ß metatraits model
fit comparably to the CTOM model (TLI = .95 vs. 95, x\^\^Cdj = 18.04
vs. 17.51 for a and ß metatrait model and CTOM, respectively). These
findings suggest that the a and ß metatraits model effectively accounts
for the modest correlations that were found between the Big Five trait
factors. Table 7 presents parameter estimates from the modified a and ß
metatraits model. Note that the second-order factor loadings differ
substantially across the Big Five traits. Specifically, a obtained a
strong loading from Emotional Stability (X\^s = .67), but rather weak
loadings from Agreeableness (X\^ = .39) and Conscientiousness (Xc =
.27). Similarly, Extraversion was heavily loaded on ß

(XEX \~ 1 00)' whereas the loading for Openness to Experience was only
XQE = .29. The imbalance denotes that Stability mainly consists of
Emotional Stability, and Plasticity consists mainly of Extraversion.
Note, though, that Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Openness trait
factors each remain markedly distinct from their second-order trait
factors, such that most of the variance in these three Big Five trait
factors is unique variance not associated with Stability or Plasticity
metatrait factors. Past research has noted these trends for stronger
Stability loadings for Emotional Stability (DeYoung, 2006) and stronger
Plasticity loadings for Extraversion (Markon et al., 2005), but the
results observed here are more pronounced than those previously
observed. Thus, although the a and ß metatraits model may be effective
in modeling the correlations between trait factors. Stability only has a
strong infiuence on Emotional Stability, and Plasticity appears entirely
redundant with Extraversion. Note also that the correlation between
Stability and Plasticity metatrait factors is only ip„ß = .12. This
correlation is considerably weaker than that reported from previous
research (e.g., (p„ß = .45 for DeYoung et al, 2002, and (p„ß = .72 for
Bäckström, 2007), where researchers have argued for a hierarchical model
with a general factor at the apex subsuming Stability and Plasticity.
Such past studies finding strong correlations between Stability and

Table 6 Big Five Trait Factors Intercorrelations for the Correlated
Traits, Orthogonal Methods (CTOM) Model and Correlated Traits, No
Methods (CTNM) Model ES

Ex

OE

A

C

\<m A

.11 -.01 .26 .18

.14 .39 --- .00 -.10

.45 .21 .19

c

.22 --- .29 .07 -.04

.39 .09 .04 .37 ---

Trait

ES Ex

.13

Note. Correlations from CTNM model are above the diagonal, while
correlations from CTOM model are below the diagonal. ES = Emotional
Stability; Ex = Extraversion; OE = Openness to Experience; A =
Agreeableness; C = Conscientiousness.

METHOD AND HIGHER-ORDER FACTORS OF THE BIG HVE

419

Table 7 Factor Loadings for a and ß Metatraits (Modified) Model Big Five
traits Rater/trait Self ES Ex OE A C Info 1 & 2 ES Ex OE A C Traits ES A
C

ES

Ex

Methods

OE

Self

.65

.63 .40 .32 .56 .59

.70 .60 .54 .58 .60

Metatraits

Info I & 2

.30 .21 .35 .56 .34

.69 .59 .59 .62

.67 .39 .27

DX

1.00 .29

OE Mean

.65

.65

.62

.57

.60

.50

.35

.44

.65

Note. ES = Emotional Stability; Ex = Extraversion; OE = Openness to
Experience; A = Agreeableness; C = Conscientiousness; a = alpha factor
beyond Emotional Stability, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness; ß =
beta factor beyond Extraversion and Openness to Experience.

Plasticity have typically relied on single raters, whereas the
Stability-Plasticity correlation from multirater studies has been
markedly weaker (e.g., DeYoung, 2006, where (p„ß = .07). Our
meta-analytic MTMM approach in the current study bolsters the Undings
from these multirater studies that the correlation between Stability and
Plasticity is drastically reduced once common method variance is
controlled. Given the relative orthogonality of Stability and
Plasticity---along with the poor fit of the GFP model---these results
indicate that there is little possibility that a meaningful general
factor of personality lies beyond the Big Five traits. Given that
Stability and Plasticity metatraits are dominated by Emotional Stability
and Extraversion, respectively, we considered the possibility that
Stability is simply Emotional Stability (which has causal effects on
Conscientiousness and Agreeableness) and that Plasticity is simply
Extraversion (which has a causal effect on Openness). This logic is
consistent with Markon et al.'s (2005) notion that the Five Factor Model
is an unbalanced hierarchy, with some traits (like Emotional Stability)
existing at higher levels of abstraction than others. Accordingly, we
tested a model with Emotional Stability predicting Conscientiousness and
Agreeableness and with Extraversion predicting Openness to Experience
(referred to as the unbalanced Big Five hierarehy model). Interestingly,
this model fit almost as well as the a and ß metatraits model (TLI = .95
vs.95, x\^/\<//adj = 19.45 versus 18.04 for unbalanced hierarchy model
and a and ß metatraits model, respectively). The causal paths were not
particularly strong, though (\^c-Es - -20, XA-ES - -26, and X.OE-EX ---
-29), but were close to

the paths from a and ß in the a and ß metatraits model. Given the strong
and comparable fit of this model, the extent to which Stability and
Plasticity are meaningfully distinct from Emotional Stability and
Extraversion warrants further investigation.

a and ß artifacts models. Finally, we consider one additional
manifestation of Stability and Plasticity. Previous research (Biesanz &
West, 2004; McCrae et al., 2008) argued that Stability and Plasticity
might act as method artifacts within raters rather than (or in addition
to) reflecting substantive factors across raters. For example, each
rater might have a separate a artifact factor that is uncorrelated
across raters, as well as a ß artifact factor that is uncorrelated
across raters. Such a/ß artifact factors would reflect implicit
personality theories that raters use when providing personality ratings
rather than "true" Stability and Plasticity metatraits because the oi/ß
ariifacts are orthogonal across raters. To further explore whether Big
Five trait covariance is due to higher order factors, separate rater
artifacts, or both, we tested several artifact models. We adjusted the
OTOM model such that each method factor was split into two method
factors. For example, the self method factor was divided into two
separate, correlated method factors: self a underiay self ES, self A,
and self C, and self ß captured self Ex and self OE. It is interesting
that when Big Five trait factors were kept orthogonal (shown graphically
in Figure IC, with only solid paths specified), fit statistics improved
beyond the OTOM model. However, allowing trait factors to correlate
beyond two separate method factors further improved model (Figure IC,
specified by solid and dotted paths). These results suggest method
artifacts may be better conceptualized as two separate a and ß artifacts
arising from raters' implicit personality theories, yet trait
intercorrelations remained even after method artifacts were separated
into two artifact factors. Again, specifying a general factor (GFP)
beyond Big Five failed to account for trait covariance, but introducing
two second-order factors (a and ß metatraits) did (TLI = .98, x\^/
df,\^\^ = 8.53).

CHANG, CONNELLY, AND GEEZA

420

Table 8 presents parameter estimates of a and ß metatraits -Iartifact
model. Emotional Stability (XES= 66) and Extraversion (Xgj= 1.00)
remained the predominant component of Stability and Plasticity
metatraits, respectively, with the remaining Big Five traits receiving
substantially weaker loadings. In general, informant perceptions have
smaller loadings on a and ß artifacts than self-rater perceptions (a;
Xinfo\^\^n, = .41 compared with X\^eif = .62; ß: Xinf\^rmam = -40
compared with X\^eif = 63). Thus self-raters rely more on implicit
personality theories that high Emotional Stability is associated with
high Agreeableness and high Conscientiousness, while low Extraversion is
aligned with low Openness to Experience. In contrast, informants use
more general response tendencies, such as giving high ratings to all
personality traits when they have a generally positive impression of the
target. This finding aligns with the fact that informant ratings yielded
larger correlations betweena and ß artifacts than self-ratings ((p = .63
vs. 9 = .42). Because informants rely more on general response
tendencies, the two method artifacts (a and ß) tend to share more common
variance.

about whether higher order factors subsume the Big Five are generally
unaffected if the method factors are separated into correlated a and ß
artifact components.

To further evaluate the possibility of an unbalanced hierarchy
accounting for the correlations between the Big Five, we replaced the a
and ß metatraits in the ci and ß meta-traits -\^ artifacts model with
Emotional Stability predicting Conscientiousness and Agreeableness and
Extraversion predicting Openness to Experience. This unbalanced Big Five
hierarchy model fit slightly worse than the a and ß metatraits -f-
artifact model (TLI = .97 vs .98, X^/df^j = 12.24 vs. 8.53) but was more
parsimonious. The causal paths were generally weak (X\^. = .18; X\^ =
24; XQE = 1 9 ) and were slightly weaker than Agreeableness,
Conscientiousness, and Openness's loadings on their respective a/ß
factors from the a and ß metatrait + artifacts model. Thus, the general
findings

De Young (2006) argued that Biesanz and West (2004) observed extremely
weak Big Five correlations due to low interrater reliability across
informants. Normally, ratings from intimate informants (such as spouse,
family members, friends, and so on) produce higher interrater
reliability than ratings from less intimate raters (Connelly & Ones,
2010; Funder & Colvin, 1988; Geeza, Connelly & Chang, 2010,). Therefore,
we created a subgroup incorporating only intimate raters (i.e., family
members, friends, and roommates) and compared the meta-analyses and CFA
results with the whole sample (CFA results shown in Table 9). The
intimate-rater group demonstrated highly consistent findings with the
whole sample across CFA models. Correlating trait factors and

Examining Rater Intimacy as a Meta-Analytic Moderator Collectively, the
three sets of models led to the following findings; (a) trait rating
intereorrelations largely stem from common method variance, but the Big
Five traits remain modestly correlated; (b) two separate method factors
captured the trait covariance better than a single method factors; (c)
the GFP does not account well for the covariance of the Big Five; (d) a
and ß metatraits may exist, but they are large redundant with Emotional
Stability and Extraversion, respectively. Although variability around
meta-analytic mean correlations was generally small for HTHM
correlations, we wanted to ensure that the findings observed were robust
even when informant correlations were subgrouped on high versus low
intimacy with the target.

Table 8 Factor Loadings for a and ß Metatraits + Artifact (Modified)
Model a artifact

Big Five traits Rater/trait Self ES Ex OE A

ES

Ex

OE

A

Mean

C

Self

•

••

'r

Metatrait

ß artifact

Info 1 & 2

Self

Info 1 & 2

a

ß

M

.69

.72

.56 .59 .54 .57

c Info 1 & 2 ES Ex OE A C Traits ES A C Ex OE

- 

.64 .30

.60 .70

j M -, .59

.58 .35 .66 .39 .24 1.00 .19

.65

.63

.60

.57

.60

.62

.41

.63

.40

.43

.60

Note. ES = Emotional Stability; Ex = Extraversion; OE = Openness to
Experience; A = Agreeableness; C = Conscientiousness; a Artifact = alpha
factor within raters; ß Artifact = beta factor within raters; a = alpha
factor beyond Emotional Stability, Agreeableness and Conscientiousness;
ß = beta factor beyond Extraversion and Openness to Experience. • -j ';

METHOD AND HIGHER-ORDER FACTORS OF THE BIG FIVE

specifying method factors was necessary to improve model fit, such that
the CTOM model was the best classic MTMM model (TLI = .97, x^fdf^dj =
5.58). Specifying a and ß metatraits accounted for the correlations
between trait factors, whereas specifying a general factor of
personality did not. Both a substantive (across raters) and an
artifactual (within-rater) component were identified for Stability and
Plasticity, as evident by the strong fit of the a and ß metatraits +
artifacts model (TLI = .98, X'^df^dj = 4.97).

Discussion The primary aims of the present study were to estimate the
magnitude of covariance between Big Five traits and to disentangle two
rival perspectives accounting for such covariation. This study has
implications for both understanding the theoretical structure of
personality and for measuring personality across many areas of
psychology. We discuss these implications in tum.

Implications for Understanding the Theoretical Structure of Personality
The long-statiding debate regarding whether the covariation among Big
Five trait ratings is driven by method artifacts or higher order factors
has major implications for considering which traits are broadest and
most fundamental. Specifically, if the Big Five traits intercorrelations
are caused by common method bias (i.e., response tendencies within
raters), the Big Five are very likely to represent the most fundamental
and most abstract personality

421

dimensions on which people differ. In contrast, if the Big Five are
truly correlated traits with higher order factors, the higher level
traits may reflect more fundamental aspects of personality warranting
explorations of their biological, developmental, and evolutionary bases.
Our results indicate that the Big Five trait correlations originate in
large part from artifactual common method variance. This is evident in
observing (a) stronger trait correlations within raters (HTMM) than
trait correlations across raters (HTHM), (b) improved model fit when
method factors are specified in CFA models, and (c) strong loadings of
the trait perceptions on method factors. The fact that method factors
inflate trait intercorrelations underscores the absolute necessity of
using a multimethod (rater) approach to investigating personality's
higher order structure. Wheti studies use a single rater for each target
(e.g., Digman, 1997; Musek, 2007; Rushton & Irwing, 2009), trait
intercorrelations will be substantially overestimated. Hence, though
proponents of both the a and ß metatraits model and the GFP model can
undoubtedly cite impressively lengthy lists of studies purportedly
showing higher order factors to underlie the Big Five, we caution
against lending much weight to those studies that have not used a
multimethod (and preferably a multirater) approach. Even after
accounting for the infiuence of common method bias, our study found that
some weak correlations (generally, \< .20) remained among Big Five trait
factors. When we examined whether GFP or a and ß models accounted for
this covariance among the Big Five factors, our results strongly and
consistently indicated that the GFP model was not plausible. Models
loading

Table 9 Confirmatory Factor Analysis Model Fit Indices (Whole Sample
vs. Subgroups) Whole sample Factor model MTMM model OTNM CTNM OTOM CTOM
Higher order factor model GFP (OM) a and ß metatraits Unbalanced Big
Eive hierarchy (OM) Artifact models Artifact a and ß (OT) Artifact a and
ß (CT) GFP + a and ß artifact a and ß metatraits + artifact Unbalanced
Big Five hierarchy (a and ß artifact)

High-intimacy raters

TLI

x'/df..,,

TLI

.50 .73 .88 .95

173.49 93.87 43.34 17.51

.62 •.82

.91 •.95 .95 •.93 .98 .97 •.98 .97

X'W/adJ

•.97

55.43 27.40 14.37 5.58

30.97 18.04 19.45

•.93 •.96 .95

10.86 7.39 7.74

24.11 7.44 12.80 8.53 12.24

•.94 •.98 •.97 •.97 •.97

9.56 3.24 5.28 4.65 5.73

•.91

Note, x' = Chi-square statistics; df\^\^j = degrees of freedom adjusted
for model constraints and matrix redundancy; x'/df\^oi = relative chi
square; TLI = Tucker-Lewis index; MTMM = multitrait-multimethod; OTNM =
orthogonal traits, no methods; CTNM = correlated traits, no methods;
OTOM = orthogonal traits, orthogonal methods; CTOM = correlated traits,
orthogonal methods: a and ß metatraits (modified) = a and ß higher order
factors beyond Big Five with orthogonal methods (Ex disturbance variance
fixed to be 0); GFP (OM) = a single general factor beyond Big Five (with
orthogonal methods); Artifact a and ß (OT) = artifact a and ß factors
within raters (with orthogonal traits); Artifact a and ß (CT) = a and ß
factors within raters (with correlated traits); GFP + a and ß artifact =
a single general factor beyond Big Five with artifact a and ß factors
within raters: a and ß metatraits + lulifact (modified) = a and ß higher
order factors beyond Big Five with artifact a and ß factors within each
information source (Ex disturbance variance fixed to be 0); Unbalanced
Big Five hierarchy (OM) = orthogonal methods and Big Five traits (ES
predicted A and C, while Ex predicted OE); Unbalanced Big Five Hierarchy
(a and ß artifact) = artifact a and ß factors within raters and Big Five
traits (ES predicted A and C, while Ex predicted OE). Models marked with
asterisk (•) yielded negative error variances for one or more variables.
Fixing them to 0 afforded a proper solution without markedly changing
the model fit.

422

CHANG, CONNELLY, AND GEEZA

the Big Five trait factors on a common GFP factor showed marked
decreases in fit compared with models with the trait factors freely
correlating, and the loadings of the Big Five trait factors on the GFP
factor were generally weak. Even in a and ß models, the correlation
between Stability and Plasticity metatraits was generally less than ip =
.15, leaving little room for a general factor. The findings observed
here stand in stark contrast to a number of studies (e.g.. Bäckström et
al., 2009; Erdle, Irwing, Rushton, & Park, 2010; Musek, 2007) and
meta-analyses (Rushton & Irwing, 2008; van der Linden, Nijenhuis, et
al., 2010) that have found a general factor to underlie the Big Five.
However, most of these studies have used a single rater, and the general
factor identified in these studies more likely corresponds to the strong
method factors we observed than to one superordinate personality factor.
Understanding the sources of this common method variance represents
important directions for studying personality measurement and person
perception. However, notions that "a single, harmonized superfactor"
(Rushton & Irwing, 2008, p. 679) underlies all personality traits (and
other individual differences like intelligence, longevity, sexuality,
and fecundity) to determine evolutionary fitfuhiess are not supported in
the present multitrait-multimethod meta-analysis. Although some
personality psychologists have strongly vocalized concems about GFP
research (e.g., de Vries, 2011; Revelle, Wilt, & Condon, 2010), finding
that the GFP is artifactual is especially pertinent for the many fields
of psychology beginning research on how studying the Five Factors can be
complemented by research on a supposed GFP. In contrast, our findings
showed that the a and ß model was one plausible theoretical model
consistent with the pattem of intercorrelations. Across all measurement
models and moderator analyses, a and ß models fit about as well as
models in which Big Five traits were allowed to freely intercorrelate.
These findings indicate that two relatively independent metatrait
factors can parsimoniously account for the correlations among the Big
Five traits, even after common method variance is controlled. However,
Stability and Plasticity did not have uniformly strong factor loadings
from their subordinate Big Five traits: Stability was mainly defined by
Emotional Stability, whereas Plasticity tended to be defined by
Extraversion. Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, and Openness to
Experience only moderately loaded on Stability and Plasticity factors.
Thus, these traits' placement in personality's nomological net will be
driven more by their unique variance than by variance associated with a
higher order metatrait. Indeed, when we specified models in which no
Stability or Plasticity metatraits were specified, but instead causal
paths were drawn from Emotional Stability to Conscientiousness and
Agreeableness and from Extraversion to Openness, these more parsimonious
models fit nearly as well as both the correlated trait models and the a
and ß models. It is not surprising that Emotional Stability and
Extraversion would stand out among the Big Five; some manifestation of
these traits appears in nearly all trait theories (e.g., Eysenck, 1970;
Tellegen & Waller, 2008), and Extraversion and Emotional Stability
generally reach the highest in Markon et al.'s (2005) hierarchical
integration of normal and abnormal trait theories. However, our results
indicate that Stability may be nothing more than Emotional Stability,
and Plasticity may be nothing more than Extraversion. Of course,
evaluating the redundancy of hierarchically organized constmcts is a
thomier issue beyond factor analytic solutions. Whereas testing nested
CFA models is an especially useful

tool for examining whether theoretical models will fail to account for a
pattem of observed correlations (as was the case with the GFP models),
finding strong fit for a model indicates that it is one plausible model
among a (potentially) larger set of plausible models (Kline, 2005;
Raykov & Marcoulides, 2001). Fully evaluating constmct redundancy
necessarily entails comparing the nomological net in which the two
proposed constmcts lie (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955). That is, if Stability
is meaningfully different from Emotional Stability and Plasticity is
meaningfully different from Extraversion, each metatrait should show
different pattems of correlations with at least some extemal variables
other than those observed for their dominant Big Five trait. In
addition, at least some of the genetic, developmental, and biological
causes and behavioral, emotional, and cognitive outcomes of
Conscienfiousness, Agreeableness, and Openness should stem from
Stability and Plasticity. So far, only two studies have directly
examined the predictive validity of Stability and Plasticity, finding
that Stability and Plasticity predicted extemalizing behavior (DeYoung,
Peterson, Séguin, & Tremblay, 2008) and the constraint and engagement of
behaviors (Hirsh et al., 2009). However, these models did not test
whether Stability and Plasticity predict above and beyond the Big Five
traits (and beyond Emotional Stability and Extraversion especially).
Though it remains to be seen how redundant the nomological nets are of
Stability with Emotional Stability and Plasticity with Extraversion,
findings from the present study suggest that the constmct overlap is
substantial enough that differential prediction in multirater studies
may be minimal. Finding only modest trait factor intercorrelations and
generally weak effects of metatraits sends a positive message for a
field that, for the past 20 years, has organized and reported findings
at the level of the Big Five. Our results show that most of the trait
variance in each of the five factors is unique to each trait. This
uniqueness places an upper limit on the extent to which the Big Five may
stem from common causes and indicates that most of the Big Five's
predictions comes from traits' unique rather than shared variance. Thus,
although the Big Five may have some modest causal effects on one another
(e.g.. Emotional Stability affecting Conscientiousness), studying
personality at the level of the five factors is likely to be more
fmitful than at the level of higher order factors.

Implications for Collecting and Using Personality Measures . In addition
to having implications for how the stmcture of personality traits should
be conceptualized, these results provide information about how
personality inventories satisfy fundamental tenets of measurement. This
study has confirmed robust convergent and discriminant validity of
personality ratings across rating sources. This is refiected by finding
(a) stronger MTHM correlations than HTMM and HTHM correlations and (b)
heavy loadings of raters' trait perceptions on trait factors. This is a
fundamental message for all domains that use personality measures for
research or practical purposes. Finding that trait ratings correspond
across raters essentially suggests that personality measures effectively
capture the intended traits. Such results offer researchers and
practitioners confidence in using personality measures in wideranging
contexts.

METHOD AND HIGHER-ORDER FACTORS OF THE BIG FIVE As encouraging as
convergent and discriminant validity is, the results also show clear
evidence that personality ratings from a single rater generally is
partly contaminated by common method bias. Common method bias blurs the
distinction between different traits, thereby infiating trait
intercorrelations. That is, trait ratings from a single rater are not
solely an indication of true standing of the target's personality
traits, but also bias from the rater's response tendencies. One approach
researchers and practitioners can use to minimize common method bias is
soliciting personality ratings from multiple raters. When personality
ratings are averaged across multiple raters, the variance in ratings
shared across raters (i.e., trait factors) increases, whereas the
variance idiosyncratic to individual raters (i.e., method factors)
declines. Hence, using multiple ratings provides a way to attenuate
contamination from method factors and increase convergence among
different raters. In addition, our meta-analyses of HTMM correlations
showed moderate variability around mean correlations, suggesting that
some study-level moderators (e.g., type of sample or inventory used)
affect method variance saturation. Similar variability has been observed
in others' meta-analyses of self-report HTMM correlations (Mount et al.,
2005; van der Linden, Nijenhuis, et al., 2010). Systematic study of
these moderators is an important direction for future research that will
also permit informed comparison of the method variance of self-reports
vs. observer reports of personality. In addition, inspecting trait and
method loadings provides more insight into trait characteristics.
Compared with self-raters, informants have stronger trait loadings on
Extraversion but weaker loadings on Emotional Stability and Openness to
Experience. The latter two traits. Emotional Stability and Openness to
Experience, are recognized as low-visibility traits. Framed another way,
informants have little access to seeing to what extent a person is
Emotionally Stable or Open to Experience. By contrast. Extraversion is a
highly visible trait, and accordingly informants can give even more
accurate Extraversion ratings than self-raters. Thus, the advantages for
self-raters vs. informant raters may depend on the trait being rated.
While informant ratings have advantages in rating highly visible traits
(i.e.. Extraversion), self-raters have advantages in rating traits of
low visibility (i.e.. Openness to Experience). One interesting finding
of this study is that Stability and Plasticity also refiect implicit
personality theories that raters use when giving personality ratings.
Finding the infiuence of these implicit personality theories in our
study is consistent with McCrae et al.'s (2008) findings that
self-raters and informants both use cognitive schémas to cluster traits
together. Interestingly, our results showed that the a and ß artifact
factors were more distinct for self-raters than for informants,
suggesting that the common method variance of self-raters may contain
more implicit personality theories, whereas method variance for
informants may simply refiect more general response tendencies. However,
finding such implicit personality theories suggests that it will be
fruitful for personality researchers to explore mechanisms that
encourage respondents to rely less on these implicit personality
theories when responding.

Limitations and Directions for Future Research In weighing the
conclusions about personality structure and factors affecting
personality measurement, several limitations should be bome in mind.
First, we used CFA to aid interpretations

423

of our meta-analytic MTMM correlation matrix. CFA and SEM were developed
to analyze covariance matrices rather than correlation matrices. Cudeck
(1989) noted from Monte Carlo studies that using correlation matrices
rather than covariance matrices can potentially alter the form of the
model's structure, misestimate omnibus test statistics, and misestimate
standard errors. However, because our meta-analysis combined data from
many studies--- across which the measurement scales used varied
widely---metaanalyzing covariance matrices would not be practical or
meaningful. This problem is faced by all meta-analytic CFA/SEM studies
(e.g.. Bowler & Woehr, 2006; Colquitt et al., 2000; Verhaeghen &
Salthouse, 1997). Thus, the large sample sizes and more accurate
parameter estimates afforded by using meta-analytic data generally come
with the trade-off of having to use correlation matrices rather than
covariance matrices. Fortunately, research using actual data have
generally demonstrated that SEM solutions remained robust regardless of
whether correlation or covariance matrices were used (Hom et al., 1992;
Tett & Meyer, 1993). However, future research with especially large
samples might explore whether analysis of covariance matrices afford the
same conclusions as those drawn here. Second, we specified the method
factors in our CFA models to be orthogonal across raters. Thus, we
assumed that the response tendencies of one particular rater are
independent from those of another rater and that any correspondence
across raters would be the result of true trait correlations rather than
correlated response tendencies. We chose to keep method factors
orthogonal across raters because there was substantive theoretical
reasons to expect raters' general method factors to correlate (i.e., GFP
theory); specifying method factor correlations across raters could have
potentially underestimated the correlations between trait factors and
the effects of a substantive general factor. However, emerging research
has shown that response tendencies of raters are not distributed
randomly throughout social networks; rather, individuals who tend to
rate themselves leniently tend to have informant raters who rate
leniently (Srivastava, Guglielmo, & Beer, 2010), suggesting that method
factors might not truly be orthogonal across raters. To the extent that
method factors are indeed correlated, the trait factor intercorrelations
and loadings on higher level factors will be overestimates. Third, and
as discussed above, the present study focused exclusively on the
covariance among personality ratings to draw conclusions about the
presence of higher order factors beyond the Big Five. However, the
factor analytic approach in the present study is one of several
components of modeling and defining the jjersonality sphere (Block,
1995a, 1995b; McAdams, 1992). Thus, research on higher order metatraits
should also be informed about whether the set or subset of Big Five
traits has some common genetic, neurological,or developmental basis and
whether they predict a common set of behavioral, attitudinal, emotional,
or cognitive outcomes. In addition, if support for these metatraits
emerges, researchers should also develop, validate, and conduct research
using direct indicators of these metatraits. Finally, Ashton et
al. (2009) illustrated the possibility of blended variables as an
altemative interpretation of Big Five trait intercorrelations. These
blended variables are loaded on multiple factors, which essentially
represent measures of compound traits. While we acknowledge the
plausibility of blended variables, explicitly addressing this question
is beyond the methodological and

CHANG, CONNELLY, AND GEEZA

424

analytic capability of the current study. We particularly excluded
compound traits when coding studies to keep our database clean, yet
future studies would offer more insights with respect to how pervasive
blended variables exist among existing personality inventories and the
infiuence they exert on infiating trait correlations.

Conclusion Though multirater studies have produced apparently discrepant
pattems of findings over the past decade about the existence of a higher
order factor structure above the Big Five, the present meta-analytic
integration affords the field with several general conclusions. First,
the Big Five are not truly orthogonal traits, though common method
(rater) variance does substantially infiate the correlations between Big
Five trait ratings. Second, Rushton's general factor of personality does
not well account for the pattem of Big Five correlations, but
Digman/DeYoung's Stability and Plasticity factors represent one viable
theoretical model. However, our findings suggest that the discriminant
validity of Stability from Emotional Stability and Plasticity from
Extraversion may be dubious, and future research should examine whether
the nomological nets of these proposed metatraits can be disentangled
from that of their dominant Big Five trait. Such research on the
structure of personality is critical as it will ultimately inform the
way personality traits are conceptualized, studied, and applied across
an assortment of psychology's subdisciplines.

References References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included
in the meta-analysis that are discussed in the text. For a complete
list, go to http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0025559.supp Allport, G. W., & H.
Odbert. (1936). Trait names; A psycho-lexical study. Psychological
Review Monographs, 7, 211. Almagor, M., Tellegen, A., & Waller. N. G.
(1995). The Big Seven model: A cross-cultural replication and further
exploration of the basic dimensions of natural language trait
descriptors. Joumal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 300-307.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.69.2.300 Anusic. I.. Schimmack, U.. Pinkus, R. T.,
& Lockwood, P. (2009). The nature and structure of correlations among
Big Five ratings: The haloalpha-beta model. Joumal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 97, 1142-1156. doi:10.1037/a0017159 Ashton, M. C ,
Lee, K., Goldberg. L. R.. & de Vries. R. E. (2009). Higher order factors
of personality: Do they exist? Personality and Social Psychology Review,
12, 79-91. doi:10.1177/1088868309338467 Bäckström, M. (2007). Higher
order factors in a five-factor personality inventory and its relation to
social desirability. European Joumal of Psychological Assessment, 23,
63-70. doi:10.1027/1015-5759.23.2.63 Bäckström, M., Björklund, F., &
Larsson, M. R. (2009). Five-factor inventories have a major general
factor related to social desirability which can be reduced by framing
items neutrally. Joumal of Research in Personality, 43, 335-344.
doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2008.12.013 »Barbaranelli, C , & Caprara, G. V.
(2000). Measuring the Big Five in self-report and other ratings: A
multitrait-multimethod study. European Joumal of Psychological
Assessment, 16, 31-43. doi:10.1027//10155759.16.1.31 Barbaranelli, C ,
Fida, R., Paciello. M., Di Giunta. L.. & Caprara, G. V. (2008).
Assessing personality in early adolescence through self-report and
other-ratings a multitrait-multimethod analysis of the BFQ-C.
Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 876-886. doi: 10.1016/
j.paid.2OO7.10.014

Behrens, I. T. (1997). Does the White Racial Identity Attitude Scale
measure racial identity? Joumal of Counseling Psychology, 44, 3-12.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.44.1.3 Benet-Martinez, V., & John, O. P. (1998).
Los Cinco Grandes across cultures and ethnic groups:
Multitrait-multimethod analyses of the Big Five in Spanish and English.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 729-750.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.75.3.729 \*Biesanz, J. C , & West, S. G. (2004).
Towards understanding assessments of the Big Five:
Multitrait-multimethod analyses of convergent and discriminant validity
across measurement occasion and type of informant. Joumal of
Personality, 72, 845-876. doi: 10.1111/j.00223506.2004.00282.x Block. J.
(1995a). A contrarian view of the five-factor approach to personality
description. Psychological Bulletin, / / 7, 187-215. doi : 10.1037/
0033-2909.117.2.187 Block, J. ( 1995b). Going beyond the Five Factors
given: Rejoinder to Costa and McCrae (1995). and Goldberg and Saucier
(1995). Psychological Bulletin, 117, 226-229.
doi:l0.1037/0033-2909.117.2.226 Block, J. H., & Block, J. (1980). The
role of ego control and ego resiliency in the organization of behavior.
In W. A. Collins (Ed.), Development of cognition, affect, and social
relations (Vol. 13, pp. 39-101). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Borkenau, P.
(1992). Implicit personality theory and the five-factor model. Journal
of Personality, 60, 295-327. doi:10.1 1 1 l/j.14676494.1992.tb00975.x
Borkenau. P., & Ostendorf, F. (1990). Comparing exploratory and
confirmatory factor analysis: A study on the 5-factor model of
personality. Personality and Individual Differences, 11, 515-524.
doi:10.1016/01918869(90)90065-Y Bowler. M. C , & Woehr, D. J. (2006). A
meta-analytic evaluation of the impact of dimension and exercise factors
on assessment center ratings. Joumal of Applied Psychology, 91,
1114-1124. doi:10.1037/00219010.91.5.1114 Campbell. D. T., & Fiske, D.
W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation by the
multitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56, 81-105.
doi:10.1037/h0046016 Colquitt. J. A., LePine. J. A., & Noe. R. A.
(2000). Toward an integrative theory of training motivation: A
meta-analytic path analysis of 20 years of research. Joumal of Applied
Psychology, 85, 678-707. doi: 10.1037/ 0021-9010.85.5.678 Connelly, B.
S. (2(X)8). The reliability, convergence, and predictive validity of
personality ratings: An other perspective. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation. Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN. Connelly, B. S.. & Ones, D. S. (2010). An other
perspective on personality: Meta analytic integration of observers'
accuracy and predictive validity. Psychological Bulletin, 136,
1092-1122. doi:10.1037/a0021212 Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992).
Four ways five factors are basic. Personality and Individual
Differences, 13, 653-665. doi:I0.I016/01918869(92)90236-1 Cronbach, L.
J., & Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests.
Psychological Bulletin, 52, 281-302. doi:10.1037/h0040957 Cudeck, R.
(1989). Analysis of correlation matrices using covariance structure
models. Psychological Bulletin, 105, 317-327. doi:10.1037/
0033-2909.105.2.317 de Vries, R. E. (2011). No support for a general
factor of personality in a reanalysis of Van der Linden et al. (2010).
Personality and Individual Differences, 50, 512-516.
doi:10.l016/j.paid.2010.11.020 »DeYoung, C. G. (2006). Higher-order
factors of the Big Five in a multi-informant sample. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 1138-1151.
doi:l0.1037/0022-35l4.91.6.1138 DeYoung, C. G. (2010). Toward a theory
of the Big Five. Psychological Inquiry, 21, 26-33.
doi:l0.1080/10478401003648674 DeYoung, C. G., Peterson. J. B., &
Higgins. D. M. (2002). Higher-order

METHOD AND HIGHER-ORDER FACTORS OF THE BIG FIVE factors of the Big Five
predict conformity: Are there neuroses of health? Personality and
Individual Differences, 33, 533-552. doi: 10.1016/ S0191-8869(01)00171-4
De Young, C. G.. Peterson, J. B.. Séguin, J. R., & Tremblay, R. E.
(2008). Externalizing behavior and the higher order factors of the Big
Five. Joumal of Abnormal Psychology, ¡17, 947-953. doi :10.1037/aOO
13742 De Young, C. G., Quilty. L. C , & Peterson, J. B. (2007). Between
facets and domains: 10 aspects of the Big Five. Joumal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 93, 880-896. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.93.5.880 De
Young, C. G.. Shamosh, N. A., Green, A. E.. Braver, T. S., & Gray, J. R.
(2009). Intellect as distinct from openness: Differences revealed by
fMRI of working memory. Joumal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97,
883-892. doi:10.1037/a0016615 Digman, J. M. (1990). Personality
structure: Emergence of the five-factor model. Annual Review of
Psychology, 41, 417-440. doi: 10.1146/ annurev.ps.41.020190.002221
Digman, J. M. (1997). Higher-order factors of the Big Five. Joumal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 1246-1256.
doi:10.1037/00223514.73.6.1246 Erdle, S., Irwing, P., Rushton, J. P., &
Park, J. (2010). The general factor of personality and its relation to
self-esteem in 628,640 Internet respondents. Personality and Individual
Differences, 48, 343-346. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2009.09.004 Erdle. S.. &
Rushton. J. (2010). The general factor of personality, BISBAS,
expectancies of reward and punishment, self-esteem, and positive and
negative affect. Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 762766.
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2010.01.025 Erdle, S., & Rushton, J. (2011). Does
self-esteem or social desirability account for a general factor of
personality (GFP) in the Big Five? Personality and Individual
Differences, 50, 1152-1154. doi:10.1016/ j.paid.2010.12.038 Eysenck. H.
J. (1947). Dimensions of personality. Oxford England: Kegan Paul.
Eysenck, H. J. (1970). The structure of human personality. New York. NY:
Methuen. Figueredo, A. J., & Rushton, J. (2009). Evidence for shared
genetic dominance between the general factor of personality, mental and
physical health, and life history traits. Twin Research and Human
Genetics, 12, 555-563. doi: 10.1375/twin. 12.6.555 Freud, S. (1930).
Civilization and its discontents. Oxford, England: Hogarth. Fried, Y.,
Shirom, A., Gilboa. S.. & Cooper. C. L. (2008). The mediating effects of
job satisfaction and propensity to leave on role stress-job performance
relationships: Combining meta-analysis and structural equation modeling.
Intemational Joumal of Stress Management, 15, 305-328.
doi:10.1037/a0013932 Funder, D. C , & Colvin. C. R. (1988). Friends and
strangers: Acquaintanceship, agreement, and the accuracy of personality
judgment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 149-158.
doi: 10.1037/00223514.55.1.149 Geeza, A. A.. Connelly. B. S.. & Chang,
L. (2010. April). A meta-analytic examination of consistency in
informants ' perspectives across contexts. Paper presented at the annual
conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational
Psychologists, Atlanta, GA. Goldberg. L. R. (1993). The structure of
phenotypic personality traits. American Psychologist, 48, 26-34.
doi:10.l037/0003-066X.48.1.26 Gray. J. A. (1991 ). Neural systems,
emotion, and personality. In J. Madden, IV (Ed.), Neurobiology of
learning, emotion, and affect (pp. 273-306). New York, NY: Raven Press.
Hampson, S. E., John, O. P., & Goldberg, L. R. (1986). Category breadth
and hierarchical structure in personality: Studies of asymmetries in
judgments of trait implications. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 37-54. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.51.1.37

425

Hedges, L., & Olkin, 1. (1985). Statistical methods for meta-analysis.
Orlando. FL: Academic Press. Heller, D., Watson, D., & Hies, R. (2004).
The role of person versus situation in life satisfaction: A critical
examination. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 574-600. doi:
10.1037/0033-2909.130.4.574 Hirsh, J. B., De Young. C. G., & Peterson,
J. B. (2009). Metatraits of the Big Five differentially predict
engagement and restraint of behavior. Journal of Personality, 77,
1085-1102. doi:10.111 l/j.14676494.2009.00575.x Hom, P. W.,
Caranikas-Walker, F., Prussia, G. E., & Griffeth. R. W. (1992). A
meta-analytical sU\^uctural equations analysis of a model of employee
turnover. Joumal of Applied Psychology, 77, 890-909. doi:
10.1037/0021-9010.77.6.890 Hong, R. Y., Paunonen, S. V., & Slade, H. P.
(2008). Big Five personality factors and the prediction of behavior: A
multitrait-multimethod approach. Personality and Individual Differences,
45, 160-166. doi: 10.10I6/j.paid.20O8.O3.015 Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt,
F. L. (2004). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting error and bias in
research findings. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. John, O. P., & Robins, R. W.
(1993). Determinants of interjudge agreement on personality traits: The
Big Five domains, observability, evaluativeness, and the unique
perspective of the self. Joumal of Personality, 61, 521-551.
doi:10.1111/j.l467-6494.1993.tb00781.x Klein, H. J., Wesson, M. J.,
Hollenbeck. J. R., Wright, P. M.. & DeShon, R. P. (2001). The assessment
of goal commitment: A measurement model meta-analysis. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Proces.?es, 85, 32-55.
doi:l0.1006/obhd.2000.2931 Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles and practice
of structural equation modeling (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Loehlin, J. C , & Martin, N. G. (2011). The general factor of
personality: Questions and elaborations. Joumal of Research in
Personality, 45, 44-49. doi:10.10l6/j.jrp.2010.11.008 Markon, K. E.
(2009). Hierarchies in the structure of personality traits. Social and
Personality Psychology Compass, 3, 812-826. doi: 10.1111/ j .
1751-9004.2009.00213.x Markon, K. E.. Krueger, R. F.. & Watson, D.
(2005). Delineating the structure of normal and abnormal personality: An
integrative hierarchical approach. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 88, 139157. doi:10.1037/0022-35l4.88.1.139 Maslow, A.
(1950). Self-actualizing people: A study of psychological health. In
Personality' symposia: Symposium No. I on values (pp. 1134). New York,
NY: Grune & Stratton. McAdams, D. P. (1992). The five-factor model in
personality: A critical appraisal. Joumal of Personality, 60, 329-361.
doi: 10.1111/j.14676494.1992.tb00976.x McCrae, R. R.. & Costa, P. T.
(1995). Positive and negative valence within the five-factor model.
Journal of Research in Personality, 29, 443-460. doi:
10.1006/jrpe.l995.1026 McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1999). A
five-factor theory of personality. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.),
Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 139-153). New
York. NY: Guilford Press. McCrae. R. R., Yamagata, S., Jang, K. L..
Riemann, R.. Ando. J.. Ono, Y., . . . Spinath, F. M. (2008). Substance
and artifact in the higher-order factors of the Big Five. Joumal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 442-455.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.95.2.442 Mclntyre, H. H. (2010). Gender
differences in the nature and linkage of higher-order personality
factors to trait and ability emotional intelligence. Personality and
Individual Differences, 48, 617-622. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2009.12.019
Mount, M. K., Barrick, M. R., Scullen, S. M., & Rounds, J. (2005).
Higher-order dimensions of the Big Five personality traits and the big
six vocational interest types. Personnel Psychology, 58, 447-478. doi:
10.1111/J.1744-6570.2005.00468.X

426

CHANG, CONNELLY. AND GEEZA

Musek, I. (2007). A general factor of personality: Evidence for the Big
One in the five-factor model. Joumal of Research in Personality, 41,
12131233. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2007.02.003 Olsen, I. A., & Kenny, D. A.
(2006). Structural equation modeling with interchangeable dyads.
Psychological Methods, II. 127-141. doi: 10.I037/I082-989X.11.2.127
Ones, D. S. (1993). The construct validity of integrity tests.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Tippie College of Business,
University of Iowa, Iowa City. Ones, D. S., & Viswesvaran, C. (2001).
Integrity tests and other criterionfocused occupational personality
scales (COPS) used in personnel selection. Intemational Joumal of
Selection and Assessment, 9, 31-39. doi:10.1111/1468-2389.00161 Ones, D.
S., Viswesvaran, C , & Dilchert, S. (2005). Personality at work: Raising
awareness and correcting misconceptions. Human Performance, 18, 389-404.
doi:10.1207/sl5327043hupl804_5 Paulhus. D. L. (1984). Two-component
models of socially desirable responding. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 46, 598-609. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.46.3.598 Paulhus,
D. L., & John, O. P. (1998). Egoistic and moralistic biases in
self-perception: The interplay of self-deceptive styles with basic
traits and motives. Joumal of Personality, 66, 1025-1060. doi:
10.1111/14676494.00041 Raykov, T., & Marcoulides, G. A. (2001). Can
there be infinitely many models equivalent to a given covariance
structure model? Structural Equation Modeling, 8, 142-149. doi:
10.1207/S 15328007SEM0801_8 Revelle, W., Wilt, J., & Condon, D. (2010).
Levels of personality. European Joumal of Personality, 24, 420-422.
Riemann, R., & Kandier, C. (2010). Construct validation using
multitraitmultimethod twin data: The case of a general factor of
personality. European Joumat of Personality, 24, 258-277.
doi:10.1002/per.760 Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Oxford
England: Houghton Mifflin. Rushton, J. P., Bons, T. A., Ando, J., Hur,
Y.-M.. Irwing, P., Vemon, P. A., . . . Barbaranelli, C. (2009). A
general factor of personality from multitrait-multimethod data and
cross-national twins. Twin Research and Human Genetics, 12, 356-365.
doi:10.1375/twin.l2.4.356 Rushton, J. P., & Erdle, S. (2010). No
evidence that social desirability response set explains the general
factor of personality and its affective correlates. Twin Research and
Human Genetics, 13, 131-134. doi: 10.1375/twin.l3.2.131 Rushton, J. P.,
& Irwing, P. (2008). A general factor of personality (GEP) from two
meta-analyses of the Big Five: Digman (1997) and Mount, Barrick,
Scullen, and Rounds (2005). Personality and Individual Differences, 45,
679-683. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2008.07.0l5 Rushton, J. P., & Irwing, P.
(2009). A general factor of personality (GFP) from the Multidimensional
Personality Questionnaire. Personality and Individual Differences, 47,
571-576. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2009.05.011 Schermelleh-Engel, K..
Moosbrugger, H., & Müller, H. (2003). Evaluating the fit of structural
equation models: Tests of significance and descriptive goodness-of-fit
measures. Methods of Psychological Research, 8, 23-74. Schermer, J. A.,
& Vemon, P. A. (2010). The correlation between general intelligence (g),
a general factor of personality (GEP), and social desirability.
Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 187-189. doi:
10.1016/j.paid.2009.l0.003

Schneider, D. J. (1973). Implicit personality theory: A review.
Psychological Bulletin, 79, 294-309. doi:10.1037/h0034496 Skinner, B. E.
(1971). Beyond freedom and dignity. New York, NY: Knopf/Random House.
Srivastava. S., Guglielmo, S., & Beer, J. S. (2010). Perceiving others'
personalities: Examining the dimensionality, assumed similarity to the
self, and stability of perceiver effects. Joumal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 98, 520-534. doi:10.1037/a0017057 Tellegen, A., &
Waller, N. G. (2008). Exploring personality through test construction:
Development of the Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire. In G. J.
Boyle, G. Matthews, & D. H. Saklofske (Eds.), The Sage handbook
ofpersonality theory and assessment: Vol 2. Personality measurement and
testing (pp. 261-292). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Tett, R. P., & Meyer, J.
P. (1993). Job satisfaction, organizational commitment, turnover
intention, and turnover: Path analyses based on metaanalytic findings.
Personnel Psychology, 46, 259-293. doi: 10.1111/ j . 1744-6570.1993
.tbOO874.x van der Linden, D.. Nijenhuis, J. t., & Bakker, A. B. (2010).
The general factor of personality: A meta-analysis of Big Five
intercorrelations and a criterion-related validity study. Joumal of
Research in Personality, 44, 315-327. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2010.03.003 van
der Linden, D., Nijenhuis, J. t.. Cremers, M., & van de Ven, C. (2011 ).
General factors of personality in six datasets and a criterion-related
validity study at the Netherlands armed forces. Intemational Joumal of
Selection and Assessment, 19, 157-169.
doi:10.1111/j.14682389.2011.00543.x van der Linden, D., Schölte, R. H.
J., Cillessen, A. H. N., Nijenhuis, J. t., & Segers, E. (2010).
Classroom ratings of likeability and popularity are related to the Big
Five and the general factor of personality. Joumal of Research in
Personality. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2010.08.007 Vazire, S. (2010). Who knows
what about a person? The self-other knowledge asymmetry (SOKA) model.
Joumal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 281-300. doi:
10.1037/aOO 17908 Verhaeghen, P., & Salthouse, T. A. (1997).
Meta-analyses of agecognition relations in adulthood: Estimates of
linear and nonlinear age effects and structural models. Psychological
Bulletin, 122, 231-249. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.122.3.231 Viswesvaran, C
, & Ones, D. S. (1995). Theory testing: Combining psychometric
meta-analysis and structural equation modeling. Personnel Psychology,
48, 865-885. doi:10.1 U l/j.I744-6570.1995.tb01784.x Viswesvaran, C , &
Ones, D. S. (2000). Measurement error in "Big Eive factors" personality
assessment: Reliability generalization across studies and measures.
Educational and Psychological Measurement, 60, 224235.
doi:10.1177/00131640021970475 Watson, J. B. (1929). Psychology from the
standpoint of a behaviorist (3rd ed.). Oxford, England: Lippincott.
Zawadzki, B., & Strelau, J. (2010). Structure of personality: Search for
a general factor viewed from a temperament perspective. Personality and
Individual Differences, 49, 77-82. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2010.03.025
Zimmerman, R. D., & Damold, T. C. (2009). The impact of job performance
on employee turnover intentions and the voluntary tumover process: A
meta-analysis and path model. Personnel Review, 38, 142158. doi:
10.1108/00483480910931316

Received November 22, 2010 Revision received July 22, 2011 Accepted
August 22, 2011 •

A correction to this article appears on page 389.

Copyright of Journal of Personality & Social Psychology is the property
of American Psychological Association and its content may not be copied
or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the
copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print,
download, or email articles for individual use.


