The 16 Personality Types Profiles, Theory, & Type Development

Copyright © 2013 Published by Inquire Books ISBN 978-0-9792168-3-1 A.J.
Drenth

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form,
electronic or mechanical, except for brief quotations, without written
permission from the author. Myers-Briggs Type Indicator®, Myers-Briggs®,
and MBTI® are trademarks or registered trademarks of the Myers-Briggs
Type Indicator Trust in the United States and other countries.

Introduction We come to personality typology seeking clarity about who
we are and how we should live. If the world is a stage, home to
innumerable acts and actors, we want to know our role and the story we
are living out. Typology helps us understand our natural roles and
strengths. It also provides valuable guidance and insight with respect
to our careers, relationships, and personal growth. Historically, most
typologies have focused exclusively on conscious personality traits,
such as being warm, friendly, quirky, analytical, etc. And while
understanding our conscious personality is certainly useful and
important, it really only gives us half the story. The other half,
explored by Freud, Jung, and others, is home to our less conscious or
subconscious personality---the beliefs, attitudes, needs, and desires
that live beneath our conscious radar. It is only through understanding
both halves, our conscious and less conscious personality, that we
ascertain a more comprehensive grasp of who we are and how we can grow
and develop. Carl Jung, a pioneer in the field of typology and author of
the 1913 classic, Psychological Types, always kept at least one eye on
the unconscious. For Jung, the conscious personality was really only the
tip of the iceberg. In this vein, Jung devoted much time and energy to
exploring subconscious symbols and archetypes, as well as what he dubbed
the personal and collective unconscious. Despite Jung's heroic and
trailblazing efforts, he would not have the last word on the unconscious
personality. Jung's successors have further illuminated the less
conscious personality functions, granting particular attention to the
inferior function. This can be seen, for instance, in Marie-Louise Von
Franz's exploration of the inferior function in Jung's Typology (1971),
as well as Naomi Quenk's 1993 book, Beside Ourselves (later renamed, Was
That Really Me?). For the last decade or so, my colleague Elaine
Schallock and I have continued to refine and develop type theory, giving
careful consideration to the conscious as well as the less conscious
features of the personality types. In My True Type, I provide in-depth
analyses of each of the personality preferences (E, I, S, N, T, F, J, P)
and functions (Ti, Te, Fi, Fe, Si, Se, Ni, Ne), which lay the foundation
for this book's personality profiles.

Before diving into the profiles, however, we need to do some preliminary
groundwork, some of which is excerpted from My True Type. This is to
ensure that readers have the necessary tools and background for
understanding the underlying theory and language employed in the type
profiles. The Preferences & Functions According to Myers and Briggs,
each personality type has four basic preferences: Introversion (I) or
Extraversion (E), Sensing (S) or Intuition (N), Thinking (T) or Feeling
(F), and Judging (J) or Perceiving (P). For example, INFJs prefer I, N,
F, and J more than E, S, T, and P. This does not mean that INFJs never
utilize E, S, T, or P, but when given the chance, they prefer to use I,
N, F, or J. To illustrate what a personality preference is, I like to
compare it to handedness. As we all know, a right-handed person will
prefer to use her right hand for the majority of tasks, especially those
requiring fine motor skills, such as writing. This of course doesn't
mean that she never uses her left hand, but only that it tends to play
more of a supportive, rather than a dominant or leading, role. The same
is true for our personality preferences. While we may at times use our
non-dominant preferences, in most situations we prefer to lead with our
dominant ones. Not only does this feel more comfortable and natural, but
typically produces better results. Of the eight preferences, four of
them---Sensing, Intuition, Thinking, and Feeling---also double as
functions. Extraversion and Introversion do not qualify as functions
because, according to Jung, they primarily represent our preferred
direction of energy and attention. Extraverts direct their energy and
attention outwardly, toward people, objects, events, possibilities, etc.
Introverts, by contrast, direct their focus inwardly, toward
themselves---their own thoughts, feelings, intuitions, sensations, etc.
Not only did Jung believe that individuals were characteristically
Introverted or Extraverted, but also that each function assumes an
introverted or extraverted direction. Thus, when S, N, T, and F are
directed inwardly (I) or outwardly (E), we end up with eight functions
(Si, Se, Ni, Ne, Ti, Te, Fi, Fe).

But what about Judging and Perceiving? Why aren't they considered
functions? The answer is they do play a role in the functions, only less
explicitly. Namely, Sensing and Intuition are considered to be
Perceiving functions. They are in charge of absorbing, extracting,
retaining, or synthesizing information. Thinking and Feeling are Judging
functions. Their purpose is to evaluate information and make decisions
that contribute to structure, order, and predictability. Hence, the
eight functions can be subdivided into Judging and Perceiving functions
as follows: The Judging Functions: Introverted Thinking (Ti) Extraverted
Thinking (Te) Introverted Feeling (Fi) Extraverted Feeling (Fe) The
Perceiving Functions: Introverted Sensing (Si) Extraverted Sensing (Se)
Introverted Intuition (Ni) Extraverted Intuition (Ne) The Functional
Stack Each personality type uses four functions that comprise its
functional stack. These functions are ordered according to their
relative degree of strength and development, as well as their
availability for conscious employment. The most developed and conscious
function is called the "dominant function," which is followed by the
auxiliary, tertiary, and inferior functions respectively. The dominant
function represents the core strength and defining characteristic of
each type. When engrossed in an activity that fully engages the dominant
function, we tend to feel alert and alive, doing what we were "born to
do." The auxiliary function, which can also be useful and readily
developed, might be viewed as the co-pilot or sidekick to the dominant.
Falling toward the bottom of the functional stack, the tertiary and
inferior are less conscious and less developed than the top two
functions. However diminutive their conscious presence, the less
conscious functions cannot be ignored. As we will soon

discuss, the inferior function, in particular, plays a prominent role in
each type's personality dynamics. Dominant Function: "The Captain;" the
signature tool and strength of the personality type Auxiliary Function:
"The Sidekick;" chief assistant to the dominant function Tertiary
Function: "The Adolescent;" relatively unconscious and undeveloped
Inferior Function: "The Child;" the least conscious and developed of the
four functions Here is the INTP's functional stack, which we'll use an
example: Dominant Function: Introverted Thinking (Ti) Auxiliary
Function: Extraverted Intuition (Ne) Tertiary Function: Introverted
Sensing (Si) Inferior Function: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) In considering
the INTP's functional stack, you may have noticed something curious.
Namely, INTPs (and all other types for that matter) use a Thinking,
Feeling, Sensing, and Intuiting function. This may be a bit confusing at
first, since there is no indication of Sensing (S) or Feeling (F) in
their I, N, T, or P preferences. If you look carefully, however, you
will notice that their S and F functions are situated below their T and
N functions. This tells us that INTPs prefer to use T and N (or more
specifically Ti and Ne) more than S (i.e., Si) or F (i.e., Fe). J-P
Criteria Observant readers may have noticed another curious fact about
INTPs' functional stack, namely, that despite their status as a P type,
their dominant function (Ti) is actually a Judging function. The other
IP types (i.e., ISTP, INFP, ISFP) also employ a dominant Judging
function (Ti or Fi). The situation is reversed for IJs (i.e., INTJ,
ISTJ, INFJ, ISFJ), who use a dominant Perceiving function (Ni or Si).
This of course makes things more complicated when it

comes to understanding IPs and IJs as Judgers versus Perceivers. While
this issue is addressed in great depth in My True Type, for now, you
should work to familiarize yourself with the following J-P criteria: 1.
A given type's J-P designation (i.e., the fourth letter of the type)
refers largely to its outer (i.e., extraverted) presentation. Hence, J
types will extravert a Judging attitude (firm, decisive, opinionated,
etc.), while P types will display a Perceiving attitude (open, flexible,
receptive, etc.). 2. For Extraverts, the nature of the dominant function
(i.e., its status as a Judging or Perceiving function) matches their J-P
designation. For example, ENTPs' dominant function, Ne, is a Perceiving
function and ENTJs' dominant function, Te, is a Judging function. 3. For
Introverts, things are more confusing, since the nature of their
dominant function opposes their J-P designation. We saw this with INTPs
above. Namely, despite being classified as a P type, INTPs' dominant
function (Ti) is a Judging function. To understand why INTPs and other
IPs are considered P rather than J types, refer to number one above. 4.
In light of the above, we can make the following associations between
the functions and preferences of the various types: Si = SJ types (i.e.,
Si used as the dominant or auxiliary) Se = SP types Ni = NJ types Ne =
NP types Ti = TP types Te = TJ types Fi = FP types Fe = FJ types The
Inferior Function The inferior function is a less well-known and
less-emphasized subject in personality typology. This is not because it
is terribly difficult to understand, but because it requires a certain
amount of background knowledge about the interplay of the functions in
the functional stack.

To a certain extent, each function (i.e., dominant, auxiliary, tertiary,
inferior) has its own needs, desires, and agenda. Each wants to have a
say in the overall psychic economy. Just as democratic governments
strive to integrate the diverse voices of their constituents, each
personality type must find ways of integrating the needs and desires of
its four functions. Because the inferior function, sometimes called the
lost, missing, or repressed function, is the most unconscious of a
type's four functions, it is the most difficult to access and integrate.
This is why it is commonly symbolized in dreams as being buried deep
underground, undersea, or in a dark forest. Despite its relative
unconsciousness, the inferior function cannot be simply ignored or
dismissed as unimportant. To the contrary, it is impossible to achieve
psychospiritual wholeness without it! Indeed, the life quest for all
types is well viewed as centered on discovering and integrating their
"missing function." This quest has been symbolized in religious and
literary myths for millennia (e.g., searching for the "promised land" or
"Holy Grail"). In his book, Jung's Four and Some Philosophers, Thomas
King nicely outlines this quest for the elusive inferior function: "The
time comes when the individual feels life is empty; something is
missing. The original sense of purpose is gone and one is dispirited and
confused. At this point the individual feels called to make a difficult
search for the rejected (i.e., inferior) function...The individual sets
out on a difficult and unfamiliar journey (e.g., "a sea voyage," "a
venture into the forest") to locate the missing function." Here King
suggests that we all reach a point in our lives where we suffer what we
might call "dominant function fatigue." In other words, we get bored
with the humdrum of our dominant function and feel compelled to explore
something new and exciting. In King's view, this is a central reason we
turn to the inferior function. The inferior engenders a type of
experience characteristically distinct from the dominant. Consider the
difference, for instance, in seeing and experiencing the world through
the lens of logic (T) versus that of the heart (F), or from the point of
view of a philosopher (N) versus that of an athlete (S). In light of the
stark distinctions, the inferior function is often experienced as
magical, mysterious, exciting, or blissful. Some have described it as "a
whole new world." It thereby serves as a powerful source of life energy
and motivation. This is why all types display a strong appetite for, and
curiosity toward, their

inferior function. The "Dark Side" of the Inferior Function We've seen
how the inferior can offer relief from "dominant function fatigue" and
serve as a powerful source of energy and motivation for all types.
Unfortunately, accessing, much less integrating, the inferior is no
small feat. Doing so typically entails a protracted power struggle with
the dominant function, one which often entails some measure of pain and
suffering. In this respect, the religious myths are correct in
suggesting that the road to redemption is often revealed through
suffering (e.g., "refinement through fire"). Fortunately, such suffering
can be minimized if we can better understand some of the traps and
pitfalls of the inferior function. Because of its relative
unconsciousness, the inferior function is responsible for many of our
childish, naive, extreme, or delusional thoughts and behaviors. Just as
a child fails to realistically apprehend and comprehend the world, so
too with the inferior function. For instance, when a typically logical T
type imagines love (F) in the manner of a fairy tale, we know he is
doing so through the naïve and idealistic lens of his inferior F
function. Despite its ability to distort, exaggerate, or idealize
reality, the inferior function is still hard to resist. Because it can
be so blissful (e.g., strong feelings of love and infatuation for a
thinker), it can easily become a source of addiction. Like all
addictions, it may inspire various obsessive, compulsive, or otherwise
unhealthy behaviors. When "in the grip" of the inferior function, we may
feel locked into certain moods, attitudes, or behaviors that are not
easily escaped. We may also become increasingly narrow-minded,
irrational, self-indulgent, and irritable. So like any addiction, what
begins with a sense of intense pleasure can eventually take a turn for
the worse. In many ways synonymous with the "ego" (in its negative
sense), the inferior function is also more sensitive and touchy than the
other functions in the functional stack. Individuals who "push our
buttons" have usually discovered a way to offend, irritate, or threaten
our inferior function. The sort of childish sensitivity and
defensiveness associated with the inferior function is closely related
to what are commonly described as "ego issues" (e.g., hypersensitivity,
ego defensiveness, excessive pride or self-righteousness, etc.).

The inferior function is also a common culprit in type misdiagnoses. For
instance, an INFP in the grip of her inferior function (Te) is more apt
to mistake herself for a Thinking (e.g., INTP) or Judging type (e.g.,
INFJ). It is also unfortunate that the confusion caused by the inferior
function and other confounding factors has caused many people to
prematurely give up on typology or dismiss it as unscientific.
Strategies for Dealing with the Inferior Function Because it can be
experienced as heavenly or hellish, blissful or addictive, all types
(especially individuals in Phase II of development) have a love-hate,
"can't live with or without it" relationship with their inferior
function. In attempting to navigate the complex challenges associated
with the inferior, individuals typically employ one or more of the
following strategies: avoiding-indulging, crutching, and
understanding-integrating. In working to avoid the darker elements of
their inferior function, many people will try a "cold turkey" approach,
ignoring or avoiding the desires of the inferior at all costs. Or, they
may binge on the inferior for a while and then swing to the opposite
extreme of avoiding it. This is the same bipolar, "love-hate" pattern we
see in all addictive behaviors. Another common strategy for dealing with
the inferior involves the use of "crutches" that serve to appease or
placate it. Examples of crutching include things like persisting in
unhealthy relationships (e.g., codependency), clinging to a comforting
set of beliefs, or continuing in an unsatisfying job for the sake of
financial security. Such crutches may serve to quell, at least
temporarily, inferiorrelated concerns. The degree to which crutching is
viewed as good or bad will largely depend on the individual. More
idealistic types may tend to see it as a cop-out, as settling for
mediocrity rather than excellence. Others may be more content with
crutching, perhaps seeing it as a necessary part of human life. The last
strategy for dealing with the inferior function is working to better
understand and integrate it. This involves learning about our type's
inferior function and how it has historically manifested in our lives.
This may include considering things like: How the inferior has
influenced our interests and motivations The ways in which we have
indulged, avoided, or crutched it

Its relationship to our deepest fears or concerns Its role in
ego-related behavior, such as hypersensitivity or defensiveness Its
influence on our ideals and identity, especially our self-ideals The
ways we've tried to pair or integrate it with our dominant function In
conducting this sort of life analysis, it can be surprising to discover
the extent to which the inferior function has influenced our thoughts,
behaviors, attitudes, and interests. But by bringing these matters into
the light of consciousness, we become more self-aware and less easily
swayed by the whims and desires of the inferior function. Type
Development & Integration Type development involves the development and
integration of all the functions in the functional stack, including the
inferior function. This of course doesn't happen overnight, but unfolds
gradually over the lifespan. The process of type development consists of
three general phases. Phase I: Emergence of the Dominant Function
Extending from early childhood into late adolescence, Phase I of type
development is characterized by the emergence and differentiation of the
dominant function, along with the relative repression of the other
functions. Through this process, the personality becomes divided into
conscious and less conscious aspects, with the dominant function serving
as the primary seat of conscious awareness and the main tool for
navigating life. Phase II: The Dominant-Inferior Tug-of-War Once the
dominant function reaches a certain threshold of conscious supremacy,
the inferior function starts knocking at the door in order to offer us
something different. As we saw earlier, the inferior promises a new and
intriguing type of experience, one which is characteristically distinct
from that of the dominant. As the voice of the inferior gets louder, the
inner tension between the dominant and inferior grows stronger. Once we
hear the siren call of the inferior and sample what it has to offer, we
cannot help but come back for more. But because the inferior is so
unconscious, we often feel forced to leave the dominant function behind
in order to seek out

or explore the inferior. Doing so can certainly be fun for a while,
since, as we've seen, the inferior can engender what amounts to a
drug-like high. But like any drug, the highs of the inferior are
fleeting and are almost always followed by lows. Hence, many people
begin to tire of constantly looking for their next high. Ultimately,
they may conclude that the emotional rollercoaster of indulging the
inferior function is not a sustainable or satisfying enterprise. The
challenge then, which is the same for any addict, is finding a viable
alternative to the highs of the inferior. We may try to quit the
inferior "cold turkey," only to find that life feels dull or arid
without it. This leaves us with three basic options, which we discussed
earlier, for handling the inferior: indulging-avoiding it, crutching it,
or integrating it. Since the latter is central to Phase III, the two
mainstays of Phase II are crutching the inferior and alternating between
indulging and avoiding it. One of the most common ways we crutch the
inferior is attaching ourselves to an externality that embodies the
characteristics of our inferior function. We often do this unwittingly
in the type of careers or romantic partner we select. This is why, for
instance, we see so many F types pursuing characteristically T career
fields (e.g., computers, math, science, economics, accounting).
Psychologically, this can be understood as F types pursuing or crutching
their inferior T function. The same "opposites attract" phenomenon
occurs in our relationships. Pairing with our opposite type is really an
outer manifestation of our inner desire to permanently secure or
integrate our inferior function. Unfortunately, many people ultimately
come to regret decisions that were brokered by their inferior function.
They may wish they could have first properly integrated the inferior so
as to avoid the need to crutch it externally through a career or
relationship. Phase II also entails significant development and
refinement of the auxiliary function. As the second most conscious
function, the auxiliary is easier to develop and integrate than the
tertiary or inferior. The dominant-auxiliary pairing is generally
experienced as more compatible and less polarized than the
dominant-inferior duo. The auxiliary function therefore serves as an
important bridge between the dominant and inferior function. In many
respects, developing and integrating the auxiliary represents an
important first step toward the full

integration that occurs in Phase III. Phase III: Integration Because
integration of the functional stack doesn't happen overnight,
transitioning to Phase III is often a "two steps forward, one step back"
sort of affair. Individuals who enter Phase III have often had their
fair share of personal failures, including many associated with the
inferior function. In Phase III, the functions work together in a more
supportive and complementary fashion. Rather than leapfrogging between
the dominant and inferior functions (e.g., the bipolar behavior seen in
Phase II), those in Phase III learn to stay grounded in their dominant
function as they explore, develop, and integrate their less conscious
functions. Grounding ourselves in the dominant function means always
staying connected to our typological strengths. For instance, it is
perfectly healthy for ISTPs to employ their inferior function (Fe) in
their interactions with others. But in order to stay grounded, they
cannot check their dominant Ti at the door. If ISTPs become engrossed in
self-pity, sentimentalism, romantic idealism, or other inferior Fe
states, they have typically lost touch with their Ti. Those in Phase III
also become skilled in achieving what psychologist Mihalyi
Csikszentmihalyi calls a "flow state." Flow states are characterized by
deep absorption in an activity, the optimal amount of challenge and
stimulation, and a sense of progress toward a meaningful goal. In a
state of flow, we forget about ourselves and our concerns, and "become
one with" the activity. The sense of "being in the zone" or "losing
track of time" are also characteristic of the flow experience. According
to Csikszentmihalyi, most people enjoy the flow state so much that they
want to experience it as often as possible. I think it is entirely
reasonable to equate the flow state with the integrated state.
Typologically speaking, flow is most likely to occur when we are using
our type's strengths and can move fluidly among our functions. In my
experience, this tends to occur when performing activities that heavily
engage our dominant and auxiliary (and to some extent, tertiary)
functions. While the inferior function often supplies some of the
interest in, or motivation for, the activity, sustainable flow
experiences typically do not entail direct or intensive use of the
inferior function. In other words, the inferior function is involved,
but in a less overt

manner. This allows it to be included and integrated, but in more of a
"behind the scenes" sort of way. Unfortunately, it can at times be easy
to confuse a Phase II instance of indulging the inferior function with a
Phase III flow state. After all, both can be quite pleasurable and
engaging. While the difference between the two is real, it can at times
be rather subtle. One difference is Phase II is more apt to involve
anxiety, obsessiveness, and/or a spike in adrenaline, whereas Phase III
is characterized by a sense of calm and relaxation. Moreover, in Phase
II, there is a sense of being gripped by the activity and therefore of
not being fully in control of oneself. Those in Phase III, by contrast,
feel more in control and are thus less apt to fall into destructive
attitudes or behaviors. Although the nature of an activity plays a role
in whether we achieve a state of flow or whether we fall "into the grip"
of the inferior function, the state of mind we bring to an activity is
equally important. Ideally, the right activity would combine with the
proper state of mind to make way for easy and routine obtainment of the
integrated flow state.

Type Profiles

INFJ INFJs are the rarest of the 16 types, constituting only 1-3% of the
general population. Unlike INTJs, in which males predominate, there is
greater gender parity among INFJs, with near equal numbers of males and
females. INFJs are "old souls." Many grow up feeling wiser than would be
predicted by their chronological age. Having discovered the benefits of
their Introverted Intuition (Ni) quite early in life, INFJs grow to
trust its judgments and insights. Even as children and adolescents, they
may find themselves advising and counseling their friends and siblings,
or even adult family members. They tend to feel happiest and most
fulfilled when helping and enlightening others through their insights.
Because of their strength of intuition (and commensurate detachment from
the physical realm), many INFJs report feeling like aliens in the world.
One INFJ described her experience as a constant feeling of Deja-Vu.
Others report feelings of disembodiment. The fact is that many INFJs
(and INTJs) seem to experience the world and their bodies differently
than other types do. It is therefore not uncommon for INFJs to question
their own sanity. INFJs see two people in everyone. They see the public
persona, the outer shell, which everyone else sees. But more important,
their Ni provides a deeper sense or impression people, penetrating
appearances and revealing hidden motives and intentions. Consequently,
INFJs often feel they can see people more clearly than those people can
see themselves. To best understand INFJs, or other IJ types, it is
necessary to recognize the full implications of their dominant function,
Introverted Intuition (Ni), being a Perceiving function (see my recent
book, My True Type, for more on this). Namely, INFJs are far less
serious inwardly than they typically appear outwardly. Their inner world
is well described as playful, imaginative, colorful, mischievous, and
daring. They love playing with ideas, perspectives, theories, images,
symbols, and metaphors. INFJs also enjoy listening to music, watching
movies and television, and engaging with people. Perhaps more than
anything, they love spending time

engrossed in meaningful conversation, which allows them to engage both
their Ni and auxiliary Fe functions. One reason INFJs love talking is it
affords them the opportunity to help others through their insights.
Because of their loquaciousness, INFJs may at times be mistaken for
Extraverts. A signature feature of INFJs (and INTJs) is a deep concern
for quality. They long to see their Ni ideals materialized in physical
reality (Se). Consider the following excerpt from My True Type: "While
Se attends the appearance of things, Ni is concerned with their deeper
qualities and substantiveness...While INJs are to some extent concerned
with appearances, they are more attuned to the underlying quality and
craftsmanship of things...ensuring that things are substantive,
thoughtfully-crafted, and otherwise amenable to their Ni tastes. NFJs,
in particular, often exhibit the most refined (or what other types may
deem expensive or pretentious) tastes of all types. The popular
television comedy, Frasier, is a great example. Much of the show's humor
revolves around the sophisticated snobbiness of Frasier (ENFJ) and his
brother Niles (INFJ). This includes flaunting linguistic formalisms and
a high-brow vocabulary, as well as frequent allusions to fine dining,
classical music, designer clothing, and the like." Like INFPs, INFJs can
struggle with depression. This may stem from feeling chronically
unheard, useless, or misunderstood. Because Ni perceives the world so
differently and profoundly, INFJs often experience a sense of loneliness
and isolation, even when they are with other people. Depression may also
relate to feeling that their ideals and insights are not being
recognized or actualized in the world. They may see the world as deaf
to, or unconcerned with, the truths that they have to proclaim. They may
therefore question their value in a world that seems indifferent to
their insights. INFJs' Functional Stack & Personality Type Development
INFJs' functional stack is composed of the following functions:
Dominant: Introverted Intuition (Ni) Auxiliary: Extraverted Feeling (Fe)
Tertiary: Introverted Thinking (Ti)

Inferior: Extraverted Sensing (Se) Like the other types, INFJs'
personality type development can be broadly conceived according to three
phases: Phase I (Childhood) Phase I of INFJs' type development is
characterized by the emergence and differentiation of their dominant
function, Introverted Intuition (Ni). As Introverts, they may also show
significant development of their auxiliary function, Extraverted Feeling
(Fe), which can serve as a helpful extraverted tool for navigating the
world of people. The Ni-Fe function pair makes INFJs particularly
well-equipped to read and evaluate people, including their underlying
motives. Since Ni is a Perceiving function, it would be wrong to
consider INFJs closedminded at any point in their development.
Nonetheless, during Phase I, INFJs can appear more opinionated,
closed-minded, or melodramatic. Even if their judgments are precociously
accurate, Phase I INFJs may lack some discernment regarding the
appropriate time and way to express those judgments. Moreover, their
Ni-Fe conclusions have yet to be honed and tempered by their tertiary
Ti, making them more reluctant to carefully review or revise them. Phase
II (Adolescence-30s) Once Ni reaches a certain level of consciousness
and differentiation, INFJs' inferior function, Extraverted Sensing (Se),
enters the picture and begins to play a more influential and often
mischievous role. INFJs are not immune from the dominant-inferior
wrestlings described in our Introduction, making this phase as
challenging for them as it is for other types. Phase II INFJs may also
begin to open up and further refine their judgments by way of their
tertiary function, Introverted Thinking (Ti). Phase III (30s, 40s, &
Beyond) If all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase
III, INFJs become increasingly aware of the insidious ways of their
inferior Se. As they become more aware of their inferior and learn to
function more authentically as INFJs, they experience greater balance
between their Ni and Se. They learn that integrating their Se happens
naturally and indirectly as they go about

authentically using their Ni and Fe. As they cultivate conditions that
support their natural strengths, Phase III INFJs come to experience a
heightened sense of peace, wholeness, and satisfaction. INFJs' Dominant
Function: Introverted Intuition (Ni) Intuition is generally considered a
subconscious process. It is often contrasted with more conscious types
of rational thought. Because Intuition is commonly associated with the
unconscious, it is often thought to have a certain magical quality,
capable of delivering comprehensive answers or solutions suddenly
---"out of the blue." One of the central features of Intuition is its
capacity to synthesize information. It is sensitive to patterns and
similarities, quickly seeing connections among disparate pieces of data.
By seeing how everything is connected and interrelated, it is capable of
discerning universal laws and structures. What is interesting about
types with dominant Intuition, including INFJs, is that this Intuitive
process, which for non-Intuitives is largely unconscious, is more
accessible and observable in consciousness. This seems particularly true
for INTJs and INFJs, whose Intuition is directly inwardly rather than
being fused with the outside world. INJs have the good fortune of
witnessing and consciously participating in a mysterious process which
for other types is entirely unconscious. Because Ni affords INFJs a more
intimate relationship with the workings of what most people call the
subconscious mind, INFJs' routine existence often assumes a sort of
dreamlike quality. For INFJs, there is less of a distinction between
their ordinary waking state and the experience of sleep. At times, this
can make it difficult to separate dream from reality, making nightmares
all the more disturbing for this type. It is little wonder that many
INJs, including Jung himself, find dream analysis so intriguing and
important. Because of their ready access to subconscious or subliminal
information, INFJs are commonly viewed as profound, insightful, and
sometimes even psychic or prophetic. While not diminishing the unique
capacities of INFJs, Ni can be rational, non-magical terms. In order to
understand Ni, it is first necessary to understand INFJ's inferior
function, Extraverted Sensing (Se). For INFJs, Se functions
subconsciously and

is constantly gathering copious amounts of sensory information from the
environment. Meanwhile, their Ni is constantly working to process and
synthesize this incoming data, like assembling pieces of a puzzle.
Eventually, it manages to construct an impression or vision of what is
happening. Because other types are not privy to the workings of this
Ni-Se processing loop, it can seem as though INFJs' insights are magical
or divinely inspired. In reality, INFJs cannot see the future, but are
simply more skilled than most at accurately discerning what is happening
in a given situation. This allows them to better envision how things
might unfold should they continue along their current course. This
ability to accurately "see" is why INFJs are sometimes described as
prophets or seers. It is often said that human beings rely more heavily
on vision than we do our other senses. This seems especially true of
INFJs, who often ascribe a strong visual element to their Ni. INFJs
often "think" by way of images rather than words. Their intuitions often
manifest in the form of symbols, images, dreams, or patterns. This is
consistent with Jung's characterization of the Ni type as a dreamer or
seer. There is a distinct visual character to these notions, which is
why vision-related terms---foresight, insight, seer, visionary,
etc.---are invariably used in describing INFJs. The visual nature of Ni
might also tie into INFJs' inferior Se, which is also a highly visual
function. The difference is that Se is attuned to the specifics and
details of the environment, whereas Ni is more concerned with forming an
impression or theory of what is happening based on the totality of
incoming sensory information. INFJs' propensity for processing
information visually may contribute to one of their signature strengths:
reconciling opposites. One advantage of visual processing is it doesn't
have the same rules or impediments of verbal processing. In some cases,
problems may be better solved by employing images or symbols rather than
by other means. It should not surprise us that Jung himself hailed the
value of imagery and symbols. For Jung, symbols were critical for
dealing with paradoxes, including the challenge of reconciling opposing
psychological functions, which he dubbed "the type problem." INFJs'
Auxiliary Function: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) INFJs use Extraverted
Feeling (Fe) as their auxiliary function. As the most interpersonal of
all the functions, Fe is attuned to surveying and improving
interpersonal feelings and morale. Like other FJ types, INFJs work to
cultivate

"good feelings" in the interpersonal environment. In order to survey
others' feelings, Fe contributes to INFJs' ability to read emotional
expressions and body language. This, in combination with their Se and
Ni, allow them to effectively read, understand, and relate to others.
Interestingly, INFJs can have a more difficult time with perceiving and
understanding their own emotions. This is due to the fact that their
Feeling function is directed outwardly (i.e., extraverted) rather than
inwardly. Unlike INFPs, whose Feeling function is introverted (Fi),
INFJs are less equipped to manage their emotions independently.
Inwardly, they deal in the currency of Intuition (Ni) and Thinking (Ti).
Hence, when INFJs find themselves in emotionally taxing circumstances,
they often turn to others for aid and support. Fe also entails an
extraversion of judgment. INFJs utilize their Fe to express their
thoughts, feelings, opinions, and grievances. Fe gives voice and shape
to INFJs' feelings and intuitions. In many cases, INFJs do not fully
understand the nature of an Ni insight until given the opportunity to
verbalize it. They may have a hunch or a gut feeling, but the content of
the intuition can remain somewhat nebulous until it is expressed via
their Fe. Assuming they have not been severely censored in their
upbringing, INFJs are generally happy to share their feelings and
perspectives. In fact, given the right opportunity, INFJs will often
talk at length about their feelings and intuitions. Unlike FP types, who
generally prefer a more dialogical format, INFJs are inclined toward
monologues, which allow them to fully flesh out their ideas on a certain
topic. INFJs' Fe can present differently among strangers than it does
with their intimates. In larger groups, INFJs may seem consistently
cheery as part of their attempt to cultivate good feelings. Many INFJs
have a good sense of humor and can be funny and engaging. Enlisting
their vivid imaginations and knack for metaphor, they can also make good
storytellers. In the company of close confidants, however, INFJs use
their Fe to be more open and direct with their grievances. Since some
INFJs feel like tortured souls, their commentary may take on a
characteristically negative tone. They may seem moody, pessimistic,
discontented, or restless. They can also seem fairly intense in their
communication when infused with the emotion of Fe. Consequently, their
expressions can seem exaggerated, dramatic, or irrational, especially to
Thinking types. They differ in this respect from INFPs, who are less
disposed to melodrama in their verbiage. INFJs can also be susceptible
to self-pity and selfloathing, seeing themselves as victims. They may
curse the fact that life isn't

fair, feeling that they always end up with the short end of the stick.
For INFJs, expressing themselves through their Fe is critical to their
psychological and physical health and well-being. Even if doing so does
not provide them with immediate solutions to the problem at hand, they
tend to feel better once they have expressed their feelings, whether
through words or tears. This is especially important for the mates or
friends of INFJs to recognize. While not necessarily looking for others
to solve their problems, INFJs value emotional support, empathy, and
reassurance. Without such an outlet, INFJs can begin to feel isolated
and depressed, turning to their inner fantasy world as a means of
escape. And while fantasizing may seem helpful in the short-term, it can
make the real world seem even less tolerable and exacerbate existing
frustrations toward life. Even if not to the same extent as EFJs, INFJs
can be warm, welcoming, loyal, giving, and self-sacrificing. At the same
time, as Introverts, they need time to themselves to recharge their
proverbial batteries. This creates an ongoing, even lifelong, struggle
for INFJs, trying to balance their own needs and desires with those of
others. INFJs may also experience value conflicts between their Ni and
Fe. For example, they may be asked by a friend or relative to donate to
a cause they don't believe in. This puts them in the difficult position
of deciding between honoring their own perspectives (Ni) and maintaining
the harmony of the relationship (Fe). Since INFJs can have difficulty
saying no, they will often opt to oblige others, even while inwardly
regretting doing so. INFJs may experience similar issues in school. On
the one hand, they are disposed to questioning the veracity of what the
teacher or other students are saying, not to mention issues of
character. On the other hand, they want to please the teacher and
maintain external harmony. This can leave them feeling torn between
their allegiance to truth (Ni) and to people (Fe). Because of the
strength of their Fe, INFJs need to be careful not to abandon their Ni
in the face of outward pressures. Since Ni is their best and most
reliable compass for navigating life, when they lose track of it, INFJs
can easily feel lost, restless, and frustrated. Hence, when it comes to
decision-making, INFJs are wise to listen primarily to their own inner
voice. INFJs' Tertiary Function: Introverted Thinking (Ti)

The role of Introverted Thinking (Ti) in INFJs is to open and further
refine their Fe judgments. Ti can help INFJs think more critically and
analytically. It can serve as an aid and check to their Ni-Fe, helping
them discern where their ideas might fit into existing categories and
frameworks of knowledge. It adds an element of logic that is less
apparent in the earlier phases of their type development. For instance,
INFJs who grew up in a religious home may be disposed to interpreting
their insights through the lens of their childhood faith tradition. As
they develop their Ti, however, they might come to question whether that
wisdom might be better understood in psychological terms. What INFJs may
perceive as a negative or difficult feature of their Ti is its tendency
to generate self-doubt. As Ti butts up against the insights offered by
their Ni, INFJs may temporarily distrust their most cherished and
utilized mode of knowing---their Intuition. But personal growth is never
easy, not for any type. With time, INFJs settle into a healthy balance
between their Ni and Ti, intuitively knowing how to apply their Ti
without spoiling the insights proffered by their Intuition. Less
developed INFJs may see little need to use or develop their Ti. Since
their Ni-Fe pairing provides them with strong convictions about truth,
taking an additional step to Ti may seem unnecessary. With time and
maturity, however, INFJs can grow increasingly comfortable with their Ti
and recognize its inherent value. INFJs' Inferior Function: Extraverted
Sensing (Se) As is true for other types, INFJs are prone to experience a
protracted power struggle between their dominant and inferior function
(i.e., Phase II of type development), one which often entails
significant pain and hardship. Fortunately, this hardship can be
minimized by gaining a better understanding of their inferior function,
Extraverted Sensing (Se), as well as potential ways of integrating it.
Generally speaking, the inferior nature of Se makes INFJs less naturally
attuned to the concrete details or physical elements of life. While
their Se takes in plenty of sensory data about the physical world, this
information is synthesized and experienced through the lens of intuition
(Ni). So instead of noticing specifics about people or the environment,
INFJs are more apt to experience what we might call an impression. They
get a general sense (i.e., intuition) of people or

things, such as whether an individual seems psychospiritually healthy or
unhealthy. While INFJs are experts when it comes to these sorts of
general impressions, they can be rather oblivious to external specifics
and details (Se). In experiencing the world through the filter of Ni,
INFJs often report a perpetual sense of déjà vu or strange alienation
with respect to their physical surroundings. One of our INFJ readers
described it this way: "I will literally just be sitting at dinner and
suddenly realize that I am a physical being in a room surrounded by so
many things I didn't realize for the past hour. This can be a confusing
and frightening experience." This is not to say that INFJs are
unaffected by their environs. As "highly sensitive persons (HSPs),"
their nervous system is highly permeable and sensitive to all sorts of
stimuli. This can make them more susceptible to being overwhelmed or
overstimulated than other types. In some cases, because of their N-S
disconnect, they may not realize that they are overstimulated until it's
too late. I observed one INFJ, for instance, who seemed to be enjoying
herself at a rather loud, strobe light laden concert. But not long after
it was over, she experienced a debilitating headache and what seemed to
be a "crash" of her nervous system. Somehow, she had managed to remain
unaware of the sensory overload until she was effectively incapacitated
by it. INFJs report similar experiences with extended shopping
excursions. While they may enjoy themselves for a while, sustained use
of Se (i.e., browsing), combined with the noise and commotion of crowds,
can result in a subconscious sensory overload or exhaustion that
eventually catches up with them. In short, INFJs have a tenuous
relationship with the physical environment. Not only can the S world
seem quite strange and foreign to them, but if they are not careful, it
can overwhelm them. This is why INFJs, especially as children, can be
leery of new S experiences, such as trying new foods or physical
actions. Intuitively realizing their tenuous grasp on the S world, they
tend to "error on the safe side." As adults, however, INFJs may
gradually open themselves to new S experiences. I have known a number of
INFJs, for instance, who are bona fide "foodies," seeing every meal as
an opportunity to experience new sensual delights. This

points to the love-hate relationship that all types have with the
inferior function. Depending on the circumstances, inferior function
experiences may be perceived as scary, stressful, blissful, or
intriguing. Impracticality The inferior nature of their Se also makes
INFJs the most impractical of all types, especially with respect to ST
matters. This is partly due to their ST obliviousness and partly to
their desire to remain in their inner N world and to ignore certain S
duties. Because of their ST shortcomings, INFJs are prone to struggle
with subsistencerelated fears. Feeling that ST matters are in many
respects beyond their sphere of control, they may fret about things like
losing their job or not having enough money. INFJ parents may fear that
their obliviousness to physical reality might somehow compromise the
safety or well-being of their children. To compensate, INFJs may turn to
other types to help them handle life's S details. This can allay their S
fears and help them feel okay about remaining in their N playground.
Unfortunately, society is not always sympathetic to this sort of
arrangement, perhaps seeing the INFJ as lazy, incompetent, or too weak
to handle the pressures of life. On a lighter note, INFJs may also
showcase their impractical nature in their wardrobe choices. They may,
for instance, own 20 pairs of high heels but not a single pair of
comfortable walking shoes, perhaps ascribing it to their concern for
"style over comfort." Or, they may live in a rather sparsely furnished
living space due to difficulties either finding the "right" furnishings
or having inadequate funds to purchase them. Unlike NFPs, they are
typically unwilling to settle for hodgepodge or makeshift options. For
INFJs, something either fits with their overall Ni vision or it doesn't.
Settling for something less than ideal is not an option. Mind-Body
Disconnect Another way in which Sensing is "missing" from INFJs' typical
experience is their disconnectedness with their own body. One of our
INFJ readers described his experience this way: "I regularly forget to
eat, or put it off because of the effort it takes to prepare

sustenance or because it may detract from the pleasure of being in my
mind...I don't like to physically "do" much of anything. It is also very
startling for me to be touched without invitation, which seems to jerk
me out of my mind and forces me to pay attention to sensation. There are
also times I try to grasp my present reality and suddenly feel afraid. I
look around and think, "I am in this body... in this house... with these
walls... around these people... and they are my family... who are these
people?" Thinking about these things can upset my stomach or may even
cause me to hyperventilate. It's not that I don't love my family. It's
just when I try to focus on the here and now, it can be pretty
terrifying, as if I'm an ancient being suddenly waking up in someone
else's body." Elaine Schallock, in her post, How INJs Approach their
Body and Physical Needs, put it this way: "For INJs there is an extreme
level of distrust, even demonization, of the body and its processes
because S remains so alien and out of the INJ's control. Physiological
responses are not well understood and often not accurately perceived;
even supposedly "pleasurable" physiological feelings are regularly
repressed and/or dismissed as unwanted. So-called "thrill seeking" which
brings up butterflies of excitement for other types can be a source of
anguish for Ni types who may experience that bodily response as pain,
nausea, or dizziness..." Schallock continues: "Long-term physical
suffering is seen as the epitome of the worst kind of evil and the
deepest of their fears. If this occurs, INJs are likely to go into an
extreme state of grip behavior as they are poorly equipped to deal with
acute physical pain. They may become angry and incredulous, convinced
that the body is lashing out against them somehow. Some INJs react by
becoming positively punitive, putting themselves with even more physical
stress by doing things like slamming back a potentially unsafe dose of
NSAIDS or exercising to the point of injury. They tend not to react
gently or respectfully toward the body, blaming and disciplining when
things go awry." Clearly, S difficulties can transport INFJs into a dark
place, one that may involve turning against themselves (i.e., against
their own bodies) in extreme or unhealthy ways.1 In trying to compensate
for this mind-body disconnect, INFJs may subject themselves to regimens
(sometimes severe or harsh) of diet, exercise, and medical check-ups.
Without these sorts of structures and

checkpoints in place, they may worry that their mind-body disconnect
might precipitate, or render them oblivious to, a potentially serious
health crisis. S, N, and Work One of the most difficult realities for
INFJs is that, in order for their Ni to work optimally, their Se needs
must first be adequately satisfied. In other words, the potency of their
Ni to some extent rests on their S livelihood. This is typically not a
problem for INFJs as children, since their S subsistence is supplied by
their parents. But once INFJs hit adulthood and are expected to "fend
for themselves," they are suddenly faced with a more difficulty reality.
Namely, while INFJs would love to get paid for their Ni talents, they
feel they must first have a stable S platform to stand on. Ideally, such
a platform would not only meet their basic subsistence needs, but would
also satisfy their aesthetic preferences and their need for a safe and
quiet setting. Now if INFJs happen to choose rewarding Ni-Fe work from
the get-go (e.g., counseling), work that also happens to be financially
generous, then they may be lucky enough to circumvent this problem. But
those who choose either the wrong career or one with lower pay may
loathe the fact that some sort of serious sacrifice must be made. In
this situation, they may feel forced to either take a higher-paying, but
ultimately less satisfying job, or to suffer ongoing S deficits that may
hamstring their N productivity. Aesthetics and Perfectionism INFJs are
aesthetes. They love beautiful things and are sensitive to the
aesthetics of their surroundings. As dominant Ns, this is often
experienced as sensitivity to ambience, that is, to the general mood or
impression of a given setting. Unlike NFPs, who typically display more
Bohemian or eclectic tastes, INFJs gravitate toward more formal,
structured, and "themed" spaces. When vacationing, for instance, NFPs
are typically satisfied with inexpensive or makeshift options, such as
camping, hostels, or affordable hotels. INFJs (or ENFJs), by contrast,
will gravitate toward more posh or formal accommodations, such as four
or five-star hotels. While NFPs like the quirky and casual, NFJs prefer
the fine and formal. Again, the television show Frasier is a good, even
if somewhat hyperbolic, example of INFJs' lifestyle preferences.
Although INFJs are most concerned with the overall feel of a space, they
also

recognize that the whole is made up of parts. So what typically happens
is INFJs discern a general vision or theme for their living environment,
and then gradually work to populate that vision with individual pieces.
While the vision (Ni) part typically comes rather easily to INFJs,
materializing it and filling in its details (Se) almost always proves
more difficult and stressful. Indeed, this is where INFJs' notorious
perfectionism is apt to rear its head. This is also why making art can
be a stressful affair for INFJs, as they struggle to perfectly
materialize (Se) their Ni vision. Some INFJs may sacrifice everything,
even their own health, to ensure their vision finds a perfect
incarnation. In such a state of mind, even the smallest deviation from
their ideal may feel like the end of the world. In her article, The
"Other Side" of the INFJ, Elaine Schallock suggests that INFJs are
particularly apt to fall prey to their perfectionistic dark side when
their work is on public display. She gives the following example: "An
INFJ responsible for planning a large wedding anniversary party for her
parents does everything in her power in the planning mode to make sure
the soiree is beautifully prepared and others are comfortable and happy.
The INFJ's power of visualization is incredible thanks to Ni; in the
INFJ's mind's eye she can see how the tables are laid out, the music,
the mood, the invitations, etc. But when the big day comes and the food
arrives late, the weather is unbearably hot, and the people are cranky,
the INFJ (who of course didn't consider a "back-up" plan -- this would
have been far too practical) becomes frustrated, emotional, and stressed
out. There is a tendency to take personal responsibility for such Se
failures. The INFJ figures if she had only planned it better somehow
this might have been avoided. The entire "disaster" is perceived as a
personal attack on the INFJ's inferior function, her ST "blindspots,"
and ultimately her ego. For those unfortunate souls attempting to
console the INFJ dealing with such a letdown, there can be an equal
sense of frustration. Once the INFJ's vision fails to come to fruition
and she falls into the grip of her inferior function, acting logically
goes out the window. Instead of being open to a modification of the
plan, the INFJ holds on ever more tightly to the original vision,
feeling as though this is the only way to correct the problem. The INFJ
is then caught in a paradox. To sacrifice the Ni vision would mean
giving up the dominant function, the very center of her "sense of self."
She is, understandably, loathe to do so. But ultimately what the INFJ
must realize is that this is an illusion. What is touted as a commitment
to the Ni vision is really a veiled commitment to the Se outcome. Of
course, the line between Se and Ni is incredibly thin (where does an

object end and the concept behind it begin?), which accounts for the
ease by which they accidentally fall prey to such illusions." According
to Schallock, INFJs' obsession with Se outcomes, that is, with the
perfect materialization of what they see as good, true, and/or
beautiful, as well as their tendency to impugn themselves for any
shortcoming in this respect, can be their downfall. In her view, this
perfectionistic mindset stems from INFJs trying to shortcut their way to
wholeness by jumping from Ni to Se ("jumping the stack") rather than
moving from Ni to Fe. In other words, INFJs effectively bypass their
judging functions (Fe and Ti) in favor of remaining in what amounts to a
perpetual state of perception (i.e., Ni and Se). Schallock suggests this
state of perfectionistic perceiving is particularly common among INFJ
artists, especially visual artists, as they strive to perfectly
replicate (Se) mental images (Ni). Integration Instead of jumping the
stack, Schallock suggests that INFJs are wise to take up work that
encourages them to move from Ni to Fe. This leads INFJs to function more
like analysts or interpreters, proffering (Fe) their impressions (Ni) of
things (either verbally or in writing), as well as what might unfold if
things continue on their current trajectory. In so doing, INFJs can
relinquish some measure of responsibility for seeing that actual change
occurs (Se). They can do their part as "readers of the situation," and
then trust other types (e.g., S types) to heed and act on their
analysis. By releasing themselves from Se responsibility and trusting
that others will do their part, INFJs can free themselves from the
debilitating stress and pressure of trying to perfect or beautify the
world. The Star Wars character Yoda is a good, even if idealized,
example of a healthy INFJ. Yoda's main task is to function as an
intuitive observer, to keep tabs, by way of the force (i.e., intuition),
on the moral landscape of the galaxy. But he does not restrict himself
to only perceiving. When others seek him out for advice, or when he
senses that a situation is dire, he issues the appropriate insights or
directives. After saying his piece, he then returns to a state of
perceiving until his insights are once again required. While he
occasionally acts (Se), such as engaging in an occasional (and
admittedly gripping) light-saber duel, this is never his first
preference; physical action is always a last resort.

In sum, INFJs must learn that, despite the allure of doing so, engaging
their inferior function directly, such as through S action, is not the
path to their salvation. While directly engaging their Se may appear to
be the quickest and easiest way of integrating it, this is really more
of a trap or illusion. The longer, but ultimately more sustainable and
reliable path to integration, is moving from Ni to Fe. As is true for
other types, it is the oft-overlooked auxiliary function that represents
their first big step toward wholeness. Notes 1. It would be fairly
unusual for INFPs to respond to their body in this sort of way since
Sensing is not their least conscious function. By way of their tertiary
Si, INFPs tend to feel more attuned to their bodies, which they often
augment through mind-body practices such as yoga.

INTJ INTJs' signature strength is deep perception. They are naturally
attuned to "the big picture" and cannot help but see how everything is
interconnected. Their ability to perceive deep patterns and causal
relationships has helped many INTJs achieve eminence in science,
mathematics, and other theory-centered occupations. Although INTJs are
classified as Thinking types, their dominant function is Intuition, or
more specifically, Introverted Intuition (Ni). In seeing the world
through Ni lenses, their typical mode of operation is well described as
impressionistic. Rather than noticing or concerning themselves with the
details of the world around them, their existence is more cerebral or
dreamlike. This can lead them to feel estranged from their physical
environs, not to mention their own bodies. While INTJs may be relatively
unaware of how others perceive them, their "other-worldliness" often
earns them labels such as quirky, awkward, nerdy, or oblivious.
Onlookers sense that INTJs seem to "live in their own world." Immersed
in their own minds and interests, INTJs can be oblivious to social norms
or other practical aspects of life. While incredibly "book smart," they
may fall short when it comes to social or "street smarts." At some point
in their lives, INTJs start to take notice of how characteristically
different they are from their peers. They may even joke about their own
nerdy or esoteric interests. Fortunately, they can usually find a few
friends with overlapping interests, even if those friendships are
maintained through what others might consider non-social activities,
such as playing video games over the internet. Further complicating
INTJs' social life is their use of Extraverted Thinking (Te). The
majority of males, at least in the United States, are TP types, all of
who use Extraverted Feeling (Fe) rather than Te. This gives TPs
(including INTPs) a leg up when it comes to casually connecting with
others in social situations. TPs often enjoy social situations (at least
for a stint), which grant them opportunities to showcase or sharpen
their social chops. By contrast, INTJs, along with other Te types, often
loathe unfamiliar social situations. They find it painfully difficult

to "rub elbows" or engage in any measure of "small talk" with strangers.
This further intensifies their sense of being "different" from their
peers. INTJs also have a reputation for being "walking encyclopedias."
They are sponges for all sorts of information, be it historical,
scientific, technical, or otherwise. I've met many INTJs who seem to
have "photographic memories," able to recall nearly anything they've
been exposed to. One of my INTJ friends, for instance, readily recites
lines from movies he's only seen once. In recognizing their powers of
insight (Ni), not to mention their vast stores of factual knowledge
(Te), INTJs are naturally inclined to share what they know with others.
In addition to activities such as gaming, dispensing ideas or
information is one of the easiest ways for INTJs to engage with others.
They enjoy opportunities to utilize their typological strengths and
enlighten others. Unfortunately, this can sometimes result in INTJs
being misconstrued as arrogant "know-it-alls." Despite their introverted
status, INTJs can be surprisingly talkative. Like INFJs, they can talk
at great length (and depth) on topics that interest them. This is one
reason INTJs often enjoy the role of lecturer or professor. And while
they are rarely the most dynamic or energetic of orators, INTJs are
typically decent storytellers and good for occasional injections of
droll humor or cultural references. This can help humanize them in the
eyes of their audience, even if their overall delivery remains a bit dry
or mechanical. Because INTJs extravert their Thinking judgments (i.e.,
Te), others commonly (and often wrongly) assume them to be
characteristically serious individuals. This misses the fact that they
are dominant Perceivers (i.e., their dominant Ni function is a
Perceiving function), which makes them far more inwardly easygoing, even
playful, than most people realize. I've known some INTJs who begin every
day with comedy, such as catching up on the latest "9gag" website
postings. This is one reason type theory is so important: it keys us
into inner (I) -- outer (E) type differences that might otherwise be
overlooked. Another consequence of INTJs' Perceiving dominance is their
tendency to be passive or phlegmatic. More proactive types, such as
ENTJs, might even consider them a bit lazy or apathetic. But calling
INTJs lazy is to miss the point of what it means to be a Perceiver.
Namely, since INTJs' first and foremost job is to Perceive rather than
Judge or act, functioning in a passive mode of perception

is actually their most authentic mode of operating. Indeed, the reason
that INTJs' theories and insights are often superior is because they do
not force things. They patiently allow their Ni intuition to collect and
synthesize all the pertinent information before they draw conclusions.
Again, others may be blinded to this reality if they focus exclusively
on INTJs' external presentation. INTJs' Functional Stack & Type
Development Each personality type prefers to use four of the eight
functions first described by Jung. These four functions comprise a
type's "functional stack." The relative strength of preference for these
four functions is expressed in the following manner: dominant,
auxiliary, tertiary, and inferior. INTJs' first preference is Ni,
followed by Te, Fi and Se respectively. This is depicted in the
arrangement of their functional stack: Dominant: Introverted Intuition
(Ni) Auxiliary: Extraverted Thinking (Te) Tertiary: Introverted Feeling
(Fi) Inferior: Extraverted Sensing (Se) While we will soon discuss each
of these functions in greater depth, for now, we will turn our attention
to another feature of INTJs' personality--- their type development. As
is true for all the personality types, INTJs' type development consists
of three general phases. These phases roughly correspond to the ordering
of the functional stack, with Ni being the first function to blossom, Te
the second, on so on. But as we will see, the inferior function is sort
of a special case, summoning INTJs' attention at an earlier phase than
might otherwise be expected. Phase I (Childhood) Early in life,
Introverted Intuition (Ni) emerges as INTJs' dominant function. The
degree to which the dominant function needs to be worked on or developed
is not entirely clear. If one can argue, for instance, that great
athletes are born not made, might the same not be true for a type's
dominant function?

Regardless, INTJs' amass a great deal of information for their Ni to
chew on throughout their childhood. The longer they live and the more
they see, the more their worldview crystallizes and the more confident
they feel in their understanding of things. Even young INTJs are keen to
understand what is happening around them. This is what Ni does. It looks
beyond appearances to discern the root causes and structures of things.
But as we've seen, INTJs aren't always all that serious-minded. Many
spend their childhood playing video games, watching movies, learning an
instrument, or surfing the web. They acquire much of their knowledge
through happenstance, without much in the way of conscious effort. Phase
II (Adolescence-30s) In Phase II, their inferior function, Extraverted
Sensing (Se), begins to assert itself and to play a more prominent role
in INTJs' psychic drama. The inferior's undue influence can be seen as
stemming from its bipolar relationship with the dominant function.
Namely, in order to ensure psychological diversity or balance, INTJs
feel compelled to experience something characteristically distinct from
the dominant function. The inferior function is often experienced as
magical, mysterious, and exciting, even blissful. Some have described it
as "a whole new world." It can thereby serve as a powerful source of
energy and motivation. This is why all types, especially those in Phase
II, display a strong appetite for, and curiosity toward, their inferior
function. As will be enumerated in our forthcoming section on Se, the
emergence of Se may take the form of INTJs' showing greater interest in
novel aesthetic or sensory (S) experiences. While INTJ children are
often leery of new experiences, as time goes on, they may gradually open
themselves to S novelties. Although INTJs tend not to be as
"experimental" in their approach to life as NPs, many come to welcome
new S experiences as an invigorating alternative to their typical state
of NT cerebralism. Because of its deep allure and sense of novelty, the
inferior can lead INTJs, to make questionable career or relationship
decisions in Phase II. It may, for instance, cause them to pair with
incompatible types under the spell of the "opposites attract" (i.e.,
inferior function attraction) phenomenon. Therefore, Phase II INTJs can
typically benefit from a reality check, remembering that their "core
self" is ultimately founded on their Ni, not Se.

The siren call of the inferior function can be effectively
counterbalanced by regular use and development of the auxiliary
function. For INTJs, this means bringing a greater measure of Te to the
proverbial table. Te helps INTJs rationally explicate their intuitions,
whether in math, science, consulting, or related fields. Regular
employment of Te also encourages INTJs to move out of Perceiving mode
and into Judging, promoting a more diverse and balanced personality.
Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond) Phase III INTJs wise up to the tricks and
temptations of the inferior function, discovering more sustainable ways
of integrating their functions. Rather than leapfrogging between the
dominant and inferior functions (e.g., the bipolar behavior
characteristic of Phase II), they learn to stay grounded in their Ni as
they explore, develop, and integrate their less conscious functions.
INTJs in Phase III also become skilled in achieving what psychologist
Mihalyi Csikszentmihalyi has dubbed the "flow state." Flow states are
characterized by deep absorption in an activity, an optimal balance of
challenge and stimulation, and a sense of progress toward a meaningful
goal. In a state of flow, INTJs forget about themselves and their
concerns, "becoming one with" the activity. Flow states are most likely
to emerge when INTJs perform activities that engage their dominant and
auxiliary functions. INTJs' Dominant Function: Introverted Intuition
(Ni) As we saw earlier, in order to best understand INTJs, we must
recognize the full implications of their dominant function, Ni, being a
Perceiving function. While INTJs can certainly function as rational
thinkers via their auxiliary Te, their first preference is to process
matters in less rational ways a la Ni. In its popular connotation,
intuition is understood as an unconscious way of knowing, or what writer
Malcolm Gladwell has cleverly described as "thinking without thinking."
It is therefore interesting to consider that, for dominant Intuitives
such as INTJs, intuition is understood to be their most conscious
function. While it is true that intuition is more conscious for INTJs
than it is for other types, we must remember that Ni is a Perceiving
function. So although INTJs may have readier access to its workings and
products, there is still a sense in which they don't really control it.
Intuitive insight often seems to emerge ex

nihilo, as a welcomed but unexpected gift from the muses. With that
said, INTJs do possess some measure of control over the types of
problems they want their Ni to solve, not to mention the raw material
they feed into it. The more they immerse themselves in a certain problem
or subject matter, the more their insight will deepen. So it's not that
INTJs can be totally hands-off and allow Ni to do all the heavy lifting
for them. Healthy INTJs find the right balance between allowing their Ni
to do its thing and consciously participating with the process. Because
of its prescience and depth of insight, Ni may at times seem to border
on magical or supernatural. While not discounting it impressiveness, the
Ni process can, at least to some extent, be rationally explicated.
Namely, INTJs' inferior function, Extraverted Sensing (Se),
unconsciously collects vast quantities of sensory information from the
outside world. This data is then kindly forwarded to Ni, which tries to
make sense of it, like assembling the pieces of a puzzle. Eventually, an
impression is formed that reveals the deeper reality or N pattern behind
the data. It is often said that human beings rely more heavily on vision
than their other senses. This seems particularly true of INJ types, who
often associate a strong visual element with their Ni. Many report
thinking by way of images more than words. Their intuitions may take the
form of symbols, images, dreams, or patterns. This is consistent with
Jung's characterization of the Ni type as the dreamer or seer. There is
a distinct visual character to these notions, which is why
vision-related terms---foresight, insight, seer, visionary, etc.---are
commonly ascribed to INJs. Visual processing may prove advantageous for
solving problems that seem resistant to rational solutions. This is
because visual processing isn't bound by the same rules or limitations
as verbal or logical processing. Indeed, Ni's unique approach to
problem-solving may explain why INTJs often make such formidable
analysts and theorists. INTJs' Auxiliary Function: Extraverted Thinking
(Te) While Ni is a holistic and synthesizing function, INTJs' auxiliary
function, Te, hails squarely from the left side of the brain. The left
hemisphere is characteristically logical, abstract, analytical, and
systematic. It breaks things

down into their constituent parts, names those parts, explicates their
functions, and determines their relationships to other parts. A Te-based
approach also emphasizes quantification, as well as the establishment of
measurable goals and standards. Never vague or ambiguous, it employs
clear definitions, policies, plans, and procedures. It carefully spells
out how to get from here to there, using as many maps, directions, and
labels as necessary. The ultimate goal of Te is to render things
logically intelligible, making them more amenable to human manipulation,
prediction, and control. Ni is neither characteristically rational nor
highly systematic. Only the Judging functions, most notably Te, operate
in such a fashion. And because Ni comes first in INTJs' functional
stack, Te is ultimately more of a servant than a master. It is primarily
used to analyze or flesh out Ni's intuitions. Once an intuition has
formed, Te takes the reins and works to give it rational form, sort of
like decompressing a computer file. Te's ability to translate intuitions
into words, diagrams, or formulae is important because it helps others
better comprehend INTJs' insights. In explicating their intuitions, Te
is highly systematic and methodical, even perfectionistic. INTJs pay
close attention to the way things are ordered, ensuring that their work
follows the appropriate linear or logical sequencing. They may also work
to incorporate relevant Te facts, data, and other objective
considerations. With that said, INTJs always keep at least one eye on
the bigger picture, ensuring that they are staying true to their
foundational intuition. This is one way INTJs differ from SJ types, who
often miss the bigger picture or end up getting lost in the particulars.
Not only are INTJs blessed with the ability to isolate and analyze
specifics, but they simultaneously maintain a clear vision of the whole
system, including its hierarchical structure and the interrelationships
of its component parts. The fact that INTJs lead with Ni rather than Te
also casts doubt on perceptions of INTJs being excessively stubborn or
closed-minded. Such perceptions are typically rooted in observations of
INTJs' extraversion of Thinking. But because Te closure is not their
typical or preferred state of being, we should be careful not to confuse
their outer presentation (Te) with their inner reality (Ni). INTJs are
far more open inwardly than they may seem outwardly.

Another feature of Te, which we touched on earlier, is its social
presentation. Unlike Fe, Te is not concerned with procuring social
harmony or group morale. It is characteristically impersonal---focused
on facts, objects, and systems rather than feelings. The inability of
others to approach things impersonally or objectively is a common point
of frustration for INTJs. They may feel incredulous toward others'
repeated failure to see, and/or appropriately respond to, objective
truth. INTJs often feel that, regardless of how sound their arguments or
the amount of evidence they present, some people simply won't budge.
Even more frustrating is when they see those same people responding to F
influences. When this happens repeatedly, INTJs may become dismayed or
nihilistic, concerned that humanity will forever remain blind to the
truth. One can see this playing out in the political careers of INTJs
Hillary Clinton and Al Gore. Both are among the most intelligent of
politicians, possessing a solid understanding of national and global
dynamics. But both are/were plagued by a lack of charisma and
likeability (i.e., a lack of Fe), making it difficult for them to
inspire or connect with others on an emotional level. INTJs' Tertiary
Function: Introverted Feeling (Fi) Despite their preference for Te over
Fi, it would be a mistake to assume that INTJs are emotionless robots.
The real difficulty for INTJs is that, regardless of how strong their
emotions or convictions may be, this often gets lost in translation. We
know that INTJs' feelings don't readily translate because their
preferred Feeling function (Fi) is introverted in its direction. Instead
of extraverting Feeling, they extravert Thinking (Te). This precludes
others from readily accessing their emotional state. Instead of seeing
variations of expression or intonation (Fe), one encounters a relatively
flat, monochromatic presentation (Te). With respect to other people, Fi
is associated with intensive emotional investments in a limited number
of individuals. Instead of distributing its emotional energies broadly
in the way of Fe, Fi is more focused and discriminating. This is why
INTJs typically show little interest in social networking. Instead, they
typically invest themselves emotionally in their families, along with
one or two close friends. They tend to be loyal and committed partners,
as well as unswervingly devoted to the well-being of their children.
While they may be skeptical toward a great many things, the value of
family and friendship is typically not one of them.

Career-wise, Fi may inspire INTJs to work toward social change and
reform, be it in business, politics, economics, education, or otherwise.
Fi is highly sensitive to injustices, especially those affecting
individuals perceived to be incapable of helping or defending themselves
(e.g., children, the elderly, the poor, etc.). Hence, INTJs' Fi often
teams up with Ni to foresee paths to a more just and equitable world. Te
may also play a role in the process, such as developing strategic or
logistical plans for reforming broken systems. This combination of Ni,
Te, and Fi explains why INTJs often score high on the Enneagram's type
One, often called "The Reformer." With that said, I've observed a fair
amount of variability among INTJs with respect to the prominence of Fi
in their personality. I know one INTJ, for instance, who had a rather
difficult upbringing and has spent most of his adult life trying to
understand and remediate his childhood wounds. This led him to develop
interests in both normal and abnormal psychology. I've also known INTJs
who show little more than a passing interest in psychology. It may be
that differences in childhood experiences affect the degree to which
INTJs focus on Fi matters, including their own emotional landscape. The
interaction of nature and nurture may also affect the degree of INTJs'
emotional stability. Some INTJs are emotionally labile and constantly
turning to others for support. Other INTJs are characteristically more
steady and independent in handling their emotions. The last thing I'll
mention about INTJs' Fi is its contribution to their interest in
self-knowledge, including their desire to understand what makes them
unique and different. For quite some time, I was perplexed as to why so
many INTJs took interest in personality typology. I hypothesized that in
most cases it was probably career-related, such as trying to match their
personality to a particular career field. I later realized that their
reasons often ran deeper than that. Namely, similar to what we see in FP
types, INTJs' Fi compels them to understand who they are as unique
individuals. INTJs' Inferior Function: Extraverted Sensing (Se) The
importance of the inferior function has long been grossly underestimated
in the type community. Sometimes called the lost, missing, or repressed
function, it is the most unconscious of the four functions. It is also
the most difficult to access, understand, and integrate. Despite its
relative elusiveness, we should be careful not to dismiss it as
irrelevant or unimportant, as has too often been done. The truth is that
a proper understanding of the inferior function is indispensable

in the human quest for wholeness and integration. As is the case with
other types, INTJs display a "love-hate" relationship with their
inferior function, Extraverted Sensing (Se). This is especially true for
those in Phase II of type development. Fortunately, the challenges
associated with the inferior can be largely offset by understanding its
essential nature, as well as potential ways of integrating it. Generally
speaking, having Se as their inferior function makes INTJs less attuned
to the details or concrete elements of life. While Se takes in plenty of
sensory data from the outside world, what INTJs typically experience is
an Ni synthesis of that information. So instead of registering
particular environmental details (Se), they see the world through the
lens of Ni impressions. They can therefore seem rather oblivious to the
details of their surroundings. This is not to say, however, that INTJs
are unaffected by, or insensitive to, their physical environment.
Although they may be consciously oblivious to their surroundings, they
are still absorbing and subconsciously registering a breadth of
environmental stimuli. Similar to INFJs, their nervous systems are often
highly permeable and sensitive to the environment. This is why they
commonly know things without realizing how they came to know them. They
passively absorb information apart from conscious effort. This
permeability can also make them susceptible to overstimulation in noisy
or chaotic circumstances. Because of their conscious disconnect from the
world around them, many INTJs report feeling like aliens or strangers in
the world, even estranged from their own bodies. This can make them
leery of unfamiliar S experiences, such as trying new foods, drugs, or
physical activities. Doing so can seem too risky or unpredictable, since
the S world seems largely outside of INTJs' sphere of control. In time,
however, INTJs may gradually become more open to and interested in S
novelties. Those intrigued by their inferior Se may display a surprising
thirst for sensory novelty, material comforts, or physical thrills. They
may drive expensive cars, purchase luxurious homes, or opt for high-end
accommodations when traveling. Some even become connoisseurs of fine
food, wine, or art. This points to the love-hate relationship INTJs
often have with their inferior function. Depending on time and
circumstances, Se matters may be viewed as a

source of great pleasure and intrigue, or one of fear, stress, and
frustration. Mind-Body Disconnect Not only do INTJs feel disconnected to
the physical world around them, but also to their own bodies. In his
book, Jung's Four and Some Philosophers, Thomas King describes the
experience of the INJ type: "His hands are alien to him and his body
unfamiliar." Because of their poor inner bodily perception (a job best
handled by Introverted Sensing), INTJs are often plagued by
health-related fears, even nightmares, regarding unforeseen assaults on
their health. They commonly fear medical procedures of all sorts,
perhaps because of deep-seated uncertainty about how that foreign thing
called their body might respond. For similar reasons, INTJs may
routinely forget to eat and appear undernourished. Others may overeat
because of diminished attention to what, or how much, they are
consuming. One of our INJ blog readers described his experience this
way: "I regularly forget to eat, or put it off because of the effort it
takes to prepare sustenance, or because it may detract from the pleasure
of being in my mind...I don't like to physically "do" much of anything.
It is also very startling for me to be touched without invitation, which
seems to jerk me out of my mind and forces me to pay attention to
sensation. There are also times I try to grasp my present reality and
suddenly feel afraid. I look around and think, "I am in this body... in
this house... with these walls... around these people... and they are my
family... who are these people?" Thinking about these things can upset
my stomach or may even cause me to hyperventilate. It's not that I don't
love my family. It's just when I try to focus on the here and now, it
can be pretty terrifying, as if I'm an ancient being suddenly waking up
in someone else's body." In her piece, "How INJs Approach their Body and
Physical Needs," Elaine Schallock observes: "For INJs there is an
extreme level of distrust, even demonization, of the body and its
processes because S remains so alien and out of their control.
Physiological responses are not well understood and often not accurately
perceived; even supposedly pleasurable physiological feelings are
regularly repressed and/or dismissed as unwanted. So-called "thrill
seeking" which brings

up butterflies of excitement for other types can be a source of anguish
for Ni types who may experience that bodily response as pain, nausea, or
dizziness..." Schallock continues: "Long-term physical suffering is seen
as the epitome of the worst kind of evil and the deepest of their fears.
If this occurs...they may become angry and incredulous, convinced that
the body is lashing out against them somehow. Some INJs react by
becoming positively punitive, subjecting themselves to even more
physical stress by doing things like slamming back a potentially unsafe
dose of NSAIDS or exercising to the point of injury. They tend not to
react gently or respectfully toward the body, blaming and disciplining
when things go awry." In trying to compensate for this mind-body
disconnect, INTJs may develop and adhere to rather strict regimens of
diet, exercise, and/or medical care. Without these types of structures
and safeguards in place, they may worry that their mind-body disconnect
might somehow precipitate, or render them oblivious to, a potentially
serious health crisis. Impracticality & Subsistence The inferior nature
of their Se also makes INTJs the least practical of the T types. This is
partly due to their S obliviousness and partly to their general
preference for N over S. Hence, it would not be uncommon to find an INTJ
capable of explaining complex laws of physics who, at the same time,
seems clueless (or at least highly apathetic) when it comes to filling
out his income taxes. While all types may worry about money and ensuring
that their basic S needs are met, subsistence-related fears are
typically more prominent among INTJs (and INFJs). Realizing their
tenuous relationship to S world, they may frequently worry that
something will go awry in their attempts to secure S provisions. Not
only are they unsure of their own S competence, but also of the degree
to which they can trust the world to be fair and generous with them. To
compensate, they may turn to others to help them navigate life's S
details. This can help, at least to some extent, to allay their S fears
and reassure them that it is safe and okay to stay focused on their N
work. One of the more difficult realities for INTJs is that, in order
for their Ni to work optimally, their S needs must first be satisfied to
a certain level. This is typically

not a problem for INTJs as children, since their S subsistence is
supplied by their parents. But once they hit adulthood and are expected
to fend for themselves, they are suddenly faced with a more ominous
reality. While they would love to earn a living by proffering their N
theories or insights to the world, many INTJ adults discover that
translating N ideas into S provisions is not as easy or surefire as they
anticipated. Those who are fortunate enough to find work that is
rewarding on both the N and S fronts may manage to circumvent this
problem. But those whose career is either unsatisfying on an N level or
fails to pay the bills may feel stuck. They may therefore feel forced to
either take a higherpaying, but ultimately less satisfying job, or to
continue being plagued by S concerns that impair their N focus or
productivity. Perfectionism Both INTJs and INFJs are notorious for their
predilection for perfectionism. Fortunately, this propensity is
well-explained by type theory. Namely, INJs can be understood as
striving to integrate their dominant Ni with their inferior Se, to see
their N ideals perfectly materialized in S reality. Parenthetically,
while it is true that ENPs also have a dominant N (i.e., Ne) and
inferior S (i.e., Si) function, Ne tends not to get attached to a single
vision in the way that Ni does. Where Ne is open to multiple
interpretations or possibilities, Ni sees only one. So although some
ENPs can be perfectionists (Steve Jobs is a good example), perfectionism
is a more consistent and signature tendency of INJs. One of INTJ my
friends, for instance, spent well over a month working to resolve a
problem with the rendering of bullet points in his business's email
newsletters. Despite the fact that the problem would only be noticeable
to about 10% of his email clientele, not to mention that it was
considered intractable by many email experts, he continued to
relentlessly pursue a solution. Ultimately, after many weeks of work and
frustration, he managed to find his own workaround. As suggested by this
example, perfectionism, thoroughness, and perseverance (or what some
might call obsessiveness or compulsiveness) are closely linked for
INTJs. Many feel they cannot rest or move forward until certain
foundational matters have been squared away. While other types might
content themselves with "good enough," INTJs are insistent that their
work meets their own (often

very high) standards of excellence. Moreover, INTJs can rarely be
convinced by others that their behavior is extreme or irrational. And
even if they could be, they may feel incapable of changing it. The
compulsion is simply too strong to readily relinquish. Once again,
Schallock's insight proves instructive: "Instead of being open to a
modification of the plan, INJs hold on ever more tightly to the original
vision, feeling as though this is the only way to correct the problem.
They are then caught in a paradox. To sacrifice the Ni vision would mean
giving up the dominant function, the very center of their "sense of
self." They are, understandably, loathed to do so. But ultimately what
INJs must realize is that this is an illusion. What is touted as a
commitment to the Ni vision is really a veiled commitment to the Se
outcome. Of course, the line between Ni and Se is incredibly thin (where
does a concept end and the object begin?), which accounts for the ease
by which they accidentally fall prey to such illusions." Here, Schallock
provides a critical nugget of wisdom. Namely, she highlights the
distinction between an Ni vision and its Se manifestation, one which is
often conflated in the INTJ mind. Put differently, in their quest to
marry Ni and Se, INTJs are not only inclined to see themselves as
visionaries, but also as responsible for the materialization of their
visions. So instead of seeing their role as limited to deep knowing or
analysis (Ni-Te), they unwittingly take the extra step and try to
control the S effects or outcomes of their vision, a role which is
probably better left to other types (e.g., S types). To deal with this
problem, Schallock advises INTJs to focus primarily on seeing and
articulating truth (Ni-Te), while resisting the temptation to become
overly involved with its application or materialization (Se). In other
words, when INTJs stop trying to control or micromanage Se outcomes,
they are less apt to be gripped by perfectionism. This may be why many
INTJs have found a satisfying home in academics, a setting where they
can develop theories more or less independently of their application.
INTJ "Subtypes" As I touched on earlier, there is a fair amount of
intratype variability among INTJs. While all INTJs use the same four
functions, some focus on certain functions more than others. To explain
these differences, it can be useful to invoke the commonly used
"nature-nurture" distinction. I am inclined to believe

that nature and nurture play roughly equal roles in shaping personality.
So even if we attributed half of INTJs' personality characteristics to
their inborn type, there would still be ample room for circumstantial
factors to introduce variations and differences, as well as
abnormalities. With that said, I am a typologist, which means I am most
interested in exploring "normal" personality patterns (as opposed, for
instance, to studying personality disorders). So while it is true that
life circumstances may lead some INTJs to develop abnormal
characteristics, I see my job as one of describing INTJ variations that
fall within the spectrum of normal personality. Based on my own
observations, as well as extant research on INTJs, I propose four
primary INTJ subtypes. While many INTJs will identify with one of these
subtypes, some may see elements of themselves across two or more of
them. This is perfectly okay and not at all surprising, since all of the
subtypes are ultimately rooted in the same personality structure that we
call INTJ. Moreover, I don't feel it terribly important to identify
one's subtype with absolute certainty. My main concern is to demonstrate
the range of possibilities that exist within the INTJ type, which will
hopefully make it easier for INTJs to correctly identify and understand
their type. Although I discerned the four INTJ subtypes largely through
empirical means, they can also be explained rationally. Namely, each can
be seen as emphasizing one or two of the INTJ's personality functions
over the others. This is not to say that a given subtype will not use,
or feel compelled to explore, the other functions. After all, the
overarching goal for INTJs is to develop and integrate all four
functions. For this reason, it is not uncommon for INTJs to move out of
one subtype and into another. In fact, in many cases this signifies
growth. So while each of the following subtypes falls within the normal
range of INTJ presentations, some can be considered healthier or more
developed than others. It is my conviction that the development and
regular employment of the auxiliary function is a critical first step
toward integration for all types. It is helpful to think of the
auxiliary as a sort of bridge between the dominant and inferior
function. Without this bridge, INTJs may see no alternative to making
huge, bipolar leaps between their Ni and Se. Doing so results in extreme
or unhealthy attitudes and behaviors, including INTJs' Achilles' heel---
perfectionism.

With this in mind, our first two subtypes, the "status / power seeker"
and the "creative / aesthete," can be viewed as generally less developed
or integrated than the "theorist" or "diagnostician" subtypes. In
emphasizing neither Ni nor Te, the status / power seeker might be
considered the least healthy of the subtypes, whereas both the theorist
and diagnostician subtypes routinely use both of these functions, making
them most likely to consistently achieve psychological health and
integration. "The Status / Power Seeker" (Se Emphasis) This subtype
emphasizes external rewards and status (Se). This may include striving
for fame, power, and/or wealth. This subtype roughly corresponds to the
Enneagram types Three and Eight. While not the most common INTJ subtype,
it highlights the allure of Se rewards for INTJs. It is not always easy
to discern the driving motivation of a given INTJ, especially from
without. Moreover, not all INTJs who become rich or famous are motivated
primarily by wealth or egotism. For some, these S rewards are simply
by-products of their achievements in a given field. At the same time,
there is no a priori reason to believe that INTJs are less interested
in, or motivated by, ego or inferior-function rewards than other types.
Therefore, determining whether a given INTJ falls into this subtype
requires discernment and perspicacity. Some INTJs of this subtype may be
drawn to the political sphere. I will leave it up to the reader to
decide, for instance, whether INTJs like Hillary Clinton, Al Gore, Henry
Kissinger, or former Federal Reserve Chairman, Alan Greenspan, fall into
this subtype. Of course, politics is only one of many paths to Se
status. INTJs in STEM careers (science, technology, engineering,
mathematics), not to mention fields like business, law, or finance, may
also enjoy myriad opportunities for achieving power, status, and
influence. This subtype may also be motivated by the prospect of
financial security. One can easily see why INTJs might pursue wealth as
a means of assuaging their fears of S deprivation. Moreover, many INTJs
appreciate high-quality goods such as fine automobiles, art, food/wine,
architecture, etc. So they may not only seek wealth for the sake of
financial security, but also as a means of accessing a smorgasbord of
modern Se pleasures. "The Creative / Aesthete" (Ni-Se Emphasis)

Our second INTJ subtype is the "creative / aesthete." In using the term
aesthete, I am referring to INTJs with an overriding concern for
aesthetic / sensory appreciation or sophistication. We might also use
the term connoisseur. I have known several INTJs of this subtype who are
bona fide "foodies." They relish any opportunity to appreciate and
evaluate new foods and drinks (Se). Some may even take up work as chefs
or sommeliers. Others of this subtype may exhibit affinities for fine
art or architecture. I once knew an INTJ attorney who was such a huge
art connoisseur that he ran out of wall space to display his full
collection. Still other INTJs may display an overriding interest in
comedy and satire. As I mentioned earlier, one of my INTJ friends starts
his day by visiting 9gag.com to enjoy some early laughs. What all of
these INTJs have in common is a strong interest in perception and
aesthetic appreciation. Equally important, they do so with relatively
little incorporation of their auxiliary Te. Similar to INFJs, INTJs of
this subtype may not only appreciate art, but may also try their hand at
creating it (Se). This is attractive to INTJs because it incorporates
both their Ni and Se; Ni supplies the vision or idea, while Se is
charged with its materialization. This provides INTJs with at least some
sense of dominant-inferior integration, as both functions work toward a
common goal. I am inclined to count author Stephen King, comedian George
Carlin, and creator of the Dilbert comic strip, Scott Adams, among INTJs
of this subtype. Elaine Schallock has been fairly critical of INTJs (and
INFJs) of this subtype. She sees this subtype as combining Ni and Se in
a way that mimics Ne, or what she has pejoratively called "bastardized
Ne." According to Schallock, Ni is characteristically a convergent
function and is best used to understand and describe "what is." She sees
Ne, by contrast, as a divergent and creative function, making it better
suited to artistic enterprises. Therefore, Schallock suggests that
INTJs' Ni is better partnered with Te for the sake of analysis, rather
than trying to directly materialize Ni ideals through Se. I should
probably mention that Schallock levels a similar criticism toward NPs
who forsake their divergent role in favor of trying to operate
convergently (i.e., "bastardized Ni"). With that said, Schallock does go
a bit easier on INTJs working creatively with words or ideas (i.e., with
N things) than she does on those functioning as visual artists or
performers (i.e., S activities). In her view, the latter group must
spend an inordinate amount of time and energy developing their weakest
function (Se), which requires putting their type's greatest
strength---convergent N knowing---

on the proverbial backburner. We might also grant an added measure of
grace to INTJs pursuing engineering or architecture. While these fields
in many respects encourage INTJs to function like Ne types, the heavy
demands they place on N and T make them preferable to F-centric creative
enterprises. In closing our discussion of this subtype, one could argue
that it is spurious to suggest that INTJ creatives such as Stephen King,
George Carlin, or Scott Adams were somehow mistaken in their vocational
choices. After all, each left his own indelible, creative mark on the
world. At the same time, one could maintain that these individuals may
have been equally, perhaps even more, successful had they pursued
analytic or scientific types of work. But we cannot discount the deep
importance of motivation. Even if most INTJs are best off performing
analytic or investigative work, there will always be those who are
irrevocably drawn to a certain art form. In such cases, it is probably
futile, perhaps even misguided, to try to persuade them otherwise. If
they are ultimately meant to do something else, time, circumstance, and
intuition will likely be their best teachers. "The Theorist" (Ni-Te or
Ni-Fi Emphasis) The purpose of Ni is to apprehend deep structural truths
or causal patterns. While Ne types may explore and experiment with a
smattering of theories, Ni works more convergently, proffering a
singular theory or framework based on available data. This is why
Schallock sees working with theories as an excellent vocation for INJs,
allowing them to routinely use Ni as it was intended. We can divide INTJ
theorists into two groups: those emphasizing Ni-Te and those emphasizing
Ni-Fi. The former often performs theoretical work in STEM fields,
developing scientific, mathematical, or computational theories. They
enjoy studying the structures and patterns of physical systems. Examples
include INTJs like Stephen Hawking and John Nash. For those familiar
with the Enneagram, such thinkers would be classified as Fives with a
Six wing (5w6). Those in the Ni-Fi camp are more psychologically minded.
Many take interest in abnormal psychology, such as the study of
psychopathy or various personality disorders. As mentioned in our
section on Fi, they may enjoy exploring the effects of past abuse or
trauma on the psyche (e.g., childhood "wounds"). In this

respect, their interests may overlap with those of NFPs. INTJs in this
camp often test as type 5w4 on the Enneagram. INTJs may also enjoy
theoretical work in the field of philosophy. Those with a stronger Te
bent often gravitate toward "analytic philosophy," which resembles
science in its concern for control and precision. Philosophers with
stronger Fi interests, such as French philosopher Jean Paul Sartre, may
function more like the creative / aesthetic subtype. Sartre, for
instance, wrote several novels, which is typically not the preferred
mode of expression for INTJs with stronger Te. I would place the INTJ
writer Daniel Quinn, best known for his thoughtprovoking novel, Ishmael,
in a similar category as Sartre. While it has been difficult for me to
know with confidence whether Nietzsche was an INTJ or INFJ, his
philosophical works also exemplify Ni in combination with Feeling. While
Ni-Te theorizing is undoubtedly one of the healthiest roles for INTJs,
even those in the Ni-Fi camp can be seen as more developed than some of
the other subtypes. At minimum, routine employment of Fi helps INTJs
counterbalance Perceiving with regular doses of Judging. "The
Diagnostician" (Ni-Te or Ni-Fi Emphasis) It is common to associate the
act of diagnosis with medical practice. But in discussing this subtype,
I am connoting something much broader than that. Namely, a diagnosis is
really just an analysis of the nature and causes of a given phenomenon.
This of course has similarities to the work performed by INTJ theorists.
The primary difference is that diagnosticians are more practical in
their focus. They don't engage in analysis for its own sake, but have
practical reasons for doing so. Most typically, this involves finding
solutions to specific problems. As we saw with INTJ theorists, the
diagnostician subtype can be divided into NiTe and Ni-Fi camps. A good
example of the former is Dr. Gregory House, the featured character of
the popular television show, House. If you've ever seen the show, you're
well aware of the fact that Dr. House exhibits an almost absurdly poor
bedside manner, showing little in the way of sensitivity to his
patients' feelings, nor those of his colleagues. But whatever House
lacks in bedside manner is more than made up for in his skill as a
diagnostician. His ability to think differently from his colleagues
(i.e., to wield Ni) allows him to routinely identify the correct
diagnosis with far greater speed and precision.

Former vice president Al Gore is another good example of this subtype.
This is evidenced in Gore's growing number of penetrating books on
subjects like politics, the environment, and economics. Few thinkers
have more knowledge or understanding of the big picture than Gore. This
has allowed him to accurately diagnose and proffer potential solutions
for some of the world's most pressing problems. INTJ diagnosticians with
an Ni-Fi bent may be drawn to working as psychologists, psychiatrists,
life coaches, and the like. They enjoy using their knowledge of
psychology, as well as the specific information they collect from their
clients, to identify problems and therapeutic solutions. Like INFJs,
they believe that a proper understanding of a problem is the most
important step in its amelioration. Hence, such INTJs often see their
primary role as one of enlightening others about the deeper
psychological sources of their attitudes, motivations, and behavior.
Schallock sees the diagnostic role, especially when Ni-Te centered, as
another great use of INTJs' signature strengths. It allows Ni to do what
it does best---to assess a problem and discern its underlying causes and
structure.

INTP INTPs make up about 3-4% of the general population. Their dominant
function is Introverted Thinking (Ti), which can be associated with high
levels of focus, self-discipline, intentionality, independence, and
intensity of thought. Such are the INTP's signature strengths. Although
INTPs may not discover their intellectual side (i.e., their N) as early
as INTJs do, once their auxiliary Ne is fully awakened, they take
intellectual matters very seriously. They work to discern unifying
themes and metaphysical truths that explain the underlying nature of
things. Especially early in their intellectual journey, they feel they
must develop a sufficient understanding of the whole before they can
competently assess any of its constituent parts. Toward this end, INTPs
may devour stacks of books on subjects like philosophy, religion,
psychology, and evolutionary theory. When vacationing from their
personal projects and investigations, INTPs can be quirky, witty, and
engaging. Since they extravert Intuition (Ne) and Feeling (Fe), they can
have a certain charm, approachability, and congeniality about them. When
discussing a topic that interests them, they can be stimulating
conversationalists, as their ever active minds can easily connect one
topic to another, paving the way for a multifaceted and broad-ranging
dialogue. If disinterested however, such as when forced to endure
protracted small talk, they will quickly zone out or find a way of
redirecting the conversation. Despite appearing outwardly genuine and
personable, INTPs are more interested in discussing ideas than the
commonplace details of people's lives. They enjoy discovering what makes
people tick---their motivations, interests, patterns, and propensities.
This allows INTPs to further hone and refine their theories (Ti-Ne) of
human nature (Fe). Like other introverts, INTPs can be anxious and
self-conscious characters. It is not uncommon for them to display a
handful of nervous habits, or at least some sign that they are not at
ease. They generally avoid direct eye contact, as though the gaze of
their interlocutor may somehow harm them or render them incapable of
thinking or communicating. INTPs often have enough insecurity about the
discombobulated nature of their Ne expressions in the first place.
Feeling that

someone else is watching or critiquing them only makes it worse. INTPs
can also be slow to disclose the contents of their inner world. As
strange as it may seem to extraverts, INTPs often conceal some of their
most dominant personality features, namely, their highly cerebral,
rational side. It may only be a select few who are granted full access
to this side of the INTP. Others may only encounter INTPs' inner world
through encounters with their work, such as by reading something they
have written. This may explain why many INTPs often take interest in
writing, which provides an excellent forum for expressing themselves
more fully and precisely. Because of their reluctance to freely display
the rational dimension of their personality, as well as the scattered
nature of their Ne expressions, INTPs often feel their true level of
knowledge and competence goes unnoticed by others. This is especially
common in the workplace, where their lack of enthusiasm for
organizational life, combined with their quirky outward demeanor, may be
mistaken for incompetence. INTPs' Functional Stack & Type Development
INTPs' functional stack is composed of the following functions:
Dominant: Introverted Thinking (Ti) Auxiliary: Extraverted Intuition
(Ne) Tertiary: Introverted Sensing (Si) Inferior: Extraverted Feeling
(Fe) INTPs' personality type development can be broadly conceived as
consisting of three phases: Phase I (Childhood) This phase is
characterized by the emergence and differentiation of INTPs' dominant
function, Introverted Thinking (Ti). Early in life, INTPs often employ
their Ti to focus on one or two pursuits. They may, for instance, use it
to master video games, program computers, get good grades, or perfect
their 5-K time. Since Ti is a Judging function, INTPs tend to take
themselves and their lives

quite seriously. Even from a relatively young age, they are
self-disciplined and goal-oriented, striving for excellence in whatever
captures their interests. Phase II (Adolescence-30s) Once their dominant
Ti reaches a certain level of consciousness and differentiation, INTPs'
inferior function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe), enters the picture and
begins to play a more influential role. INTPs are not immune from the
dominant-inferior wrestlings described in our Introduction, making this
phase as challenging for them as it is for other types. Phase II INTPs
also show increasing use and development of their auxiliary function,
Extraverted Intuition (this can also begin in Phase I for some INTPs).
During this phase, INTPs often develop a stronger interest in
intellectual and philosophical endeavors, poised to see and understand
"the big picture." They also become more skeptical toward certain Ti
conclusions they made in Phase I. Developing their Ne involves an
opening of prior judgments to allow an influx of new information. But
since Ne is extraverted and expansive, INTPs must explore a breadth of
ideas before they feel confident about who they are and what they
believe. Thus, Phase II INTPs may find it much easier to identify what
they don't believe than what they do believe. Many will struggle with
nihilism and relativism, worried that they may never find absolute
truth. It can therefore take INTPs a great deal of time, even well into
their thirties, to discern what they believe about the world and about
themselves, let alone figure out what they should be doing.
Unfortunately, societal pressures and expectations often push Phase II
INTPs (as well as other types) into relationships or careers well before
they are ready. Phase II INTPs may also begin to tap into their tertiary
function, Introverted Sensing (Si). They use their Si to recall past
experiences and acquired wisdom. This prevents them from having to
retread paths they have already explored in the past. Phase III (30s,
40s, & Beyond) If all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter
Phase III, INTPs become increasingly aware of the insidious ways of
their inferior Fe. As they become more aware of their inferior and learn
to function more authentically as INTPs, they experience greater balance
between their Ti and Fe. They learn that

integrating their Fe happens naturally and indirectly as they go about
authentically using their Ti and Ne. As they cultivate conditions that
support their natural strengths, Phase III INTPs come to experience a
heightened sense of peace, wholeness, and satisfaction. INTPs' Dominant
Function: Introverted Thinking (Ti) To understand INTPs, or other IP
types, it is necessary to recognize the full implications of their
dominant function, Ti, being a Judging function. Namely, INTPs are best
understood as predominant Judgers and display many characteristics of
EJs, only that these behaviors are directed inwardly or toward the self.
Ti involves the application of logic and reason for the sake of
understanding a given situation, system, or problem. INTPs use Ti to
bring structure and order to their inner world, granting them a strong
sense of inner control. Inwardly, INTPs are highly self-disciplined,
working to effectively manage their thoughts and their lives. The
disciplined nature of their Ti compels INTPs to frame many things as a
goal or challenge. These challenges may be physical (e.g., trying to
achieve an ideal state of health or fitness), intellectual, practical,
psychoemotional (e.g., becoming self-actualized), or later in their
development, interpersonal (e.g., "perfecting" a relationship or
becoming a skilled lover). In order to succeed in these personal
challenges, INTPs are apt to impose rules on themselves. However,
because of the wayward influence of their auxiliary Ne, they commonly
end up breaking or sabotaging them. INTPs are also less interested in
working with facts than with ideas. Jung writes: "His ideas have their
origin not in objective data, but in his subjective foundation." INTPs
are constantly digging into the background of their own thoughts in
order to better understand their origins and to ensure their thinking is
founded on solid reasoning. They see it pointless to try to build
theories on a dubious conceptual platform, making them slower than Te
types to rush into experiments to discover more "facts." INTPs often
find it easier to identify inconsistencies or logical shortcomings---to
assert what is not true---than to identify and confidently assert what
is true. They can quickly locate inconsistencies or logical shortcomings
in a given theory or argument. They excel when it comes to identifying
exceptions or imagining scenarios in which the proposed explanation
could breakdown. Due to their

sensitivity to theoretical exceptions, they can be quick to throw
theories and start from scratch. INTJs, by contrast, seem less deterred
by ostensible exceptions, perhaps feeling that they will eventually be
explained or otherwise rectified. When functioning constructively,
INTPs, like INFPs, often employ a trial-anderror sort of approach to
building their theories and ideas. INTPs start with a given (Ti) and
then use their auxiliary Ne to explore various connections and
possibilities. They also integrate past experiences and acquired
knowledge through their tertiary Si. It is usually only after years of
toying with ideas that something resembling a systematic and coherent
theory may start to emerge. We can also compare and contrast Ti with Fi.
IFPs generally take up moral, artistic, personal, or humanitarian
concerns (Fi) before logical or intellectual ones (Ti). They judge in
terms of good and bad, love and hate, like and dislike. Conversely, for
INTPs, things must first pass the test of reason. They think less in
terms of like and dislike than they do of likely and unlikely, logical
and illogical. This is why INTPs generally prefer working with ideas and
concepts rather than more subjective, taste-oriented matters like the
arts. INTPs' Auxiliary Function: Extraverted Intuition (Ne) INTPs use
Extraverted Intuition (Ne) as their auxiliary function. Ne can function
either perceptively or expressively. The verbal expression of Ne amounts
to something like brainstorming aloud. When orating, INTPs may not
always seem to "have a point" as they haphazardly drift from one idea to
the next. Even ideas that seem inwardly logical and sensible INTPs may
suddenly sound incoherent when they attempt to convey them through their
Ne. In its receptive role, Ne prompts INTPs to gather information. Ne
does not merely gather sensory information as Se does. Rather, it goes
beyond or looks behind sense data, allowing INTPs to discern otherwise
hidden patterns, possibilities, and potentials. Their Ne is constantly
scanning for relationships or patterns within a pool of facts, ideas or
experiences. INTPs commonly use this receptive side of their Ne in
activities such as reading, researching, and conversation. They enjoy
asking questions that allow them to gain insight or knowledge from
others, making INTPs good facilitators of conversation. INTPs may also
use their Ne to sniff out intriguing possibilities. They commonly enjoy
and assume the role of wanderer or seeker, rarely knowing in advance

exactly what they are seeking. Ne also confers open-mindedness, helping
INTPs see truth on both sides of an issue without forming unwarranted
judgments or premature conclusions. More specifically, their Ne can be
seen as contributing to their openness to alternative or Bohemian
lifestyles. INTPs are those most likely to suddenly become vegetarians,
join a commune, or decide to live out of the back of a van. They are
drawn to the idea and challenges of an unconventional lifestyle. Like
other NPs, INTPs often have a love-hate relationship with their Ne. They
love the fact that it helps them remain open-minded and grasp the bigger
picture. But living with Ne also has its challenges. For one, it can
make it difficult for INTPs to arrive at firm conclusions or make
important decisions. It often seems that at the very moment they are
feeling good about a given conclusion or decision, their Ne steps in and
causes them to start doubting it again. This has obvious implications
for INTPs who are trying to find their niche in the world. This can
leave them feeling discouraged and restless, worried that they may never
find what they are looking for. They may feel frustrated by their
seeming lack of progress toward anything substantial. The fact is that
INTPs desperately want to produce something of lasting worth or value,
but they also want to ensure they get it right. They don't want to leave
any stone unturned before arriving at a conclusion. While INTPs
typically enjoy this quest for truth, there comes a point when they
begin to feel the pressures of life impinging on them. Questions about
careers and relationships loom large as they enter their late twenties
and thirties. This can be frustrated to INTPs as they feel like life is
requiring them to make decisions long before they are ready. As is true
of all IN types, they feel that life would be better if they weren't
forced to reckon with practical concerns. INTPs' Tertiary Function:
Introverted Sensing (Si) Unlike Ne (or Se), INTPs' tertiary function,
Introverted Sensing (Si), is a conservative function. It involves an
attachment to past experiences and past precedent---to the routine,
familiar, and predictable. Types with Si in their functional stack,
including INTPs, tend to eat a fairly routine or consistent diet,
"eating to live" rather than "living to eat." Si types are not only
conservative with regard to their diet, but with respect to the material
world in general. They tend to be savers rather than spenders, seeing
excessive material consumption as unnecessary, or perhaps even immoral.

Like other Si types, INTPs also have a diminished need for novel
physical pleasures, lavish surroundings, or material comforts. They are
minimalists to the core, relatively unconcerned with their physical
surroundings. An often overlooked role of Si is its perception of
internal bodily sensations--- the body as felt and experienced from
within. Perhaps more than any other function, it provides access to the
raw and basic sense of "being" that exists apart from thought or outward
stimuli. Historically, Eastern philosophical and religious traditions
have done a much better job exploring this dimension than those of the
West. This feature of Si is brought to the fore during activities
requiring close attention to one's internal bodily state, such as yoga,
Tai-Chi, meditation, or various relaxation techniques. INTPs interested
in exploring this element of Si may find great delight and benefit from
these sorts of practices. They are especially useful in developing the
body awareness necessary to relax and control anxiety. INTPs'
Fourth/Inferior Function: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) As enumerated in my
recent book, The INTP, INTPs can be easily blinded to the degree to
which their inferior function impacts their decisions and behavior. In
order to avoid being subconsciously controlled and unduly influenced by
their Fe, INTPs can benefit from understanding Fe in general, as well as
the ways it tends to manifest in their own personality type. Harmony
vs. Helping Since Fe is INTPs' inferior function, it is often more
sensitive and less resilient than it is in FJ types. This can make INTPs
extremely uncomfortable in emotional situations, especially those
involving potential conflict or disharmony. Because of their Fe's
concern for maintaining external harmony (or what may be better
understood as its discomfort with disharmony), INTPs may abstain from
expressing their judgments in order to avoid unsettling others. While
not as overtly warm or effusive as FJ types, INTPs can be sensitive to
others' feelings and may go out of their way to avoid hurting or
offending them. For instance, in the midst of a discussion, an INTP may
want to explain how human mating practices are primarily a product of
evolutionary pressures. But if she suspects that others may take offense
to such an explanation, she may withhold it to avoid introducing
disharmony.

Although functioning as superficial peacemakers, INTPs are generally
slower to go out of their way to help others (at least in direct,
hands-on ways). Especially early in their development, most forgo
community service and avoid investing extensive time and energy helping
others. This is particularly evident when under stress. If burdened by
too many external pressures or demands, INTPs' willingness to help
others is one of the first things to go. In short, INTPs' Fe is more
concerned with preserving harmony than it is with extensive helping.
This is especially true early in life, when they have yet to achieve
their Ti goals. Once those goals have been satisfactorily met, however,
they may become more benevolent. We can see this with Einstein, for
instance, who displayed increasing beneficence and generosity toward
people in the second half of his life. Reluctance to Extravert Judgment
Unlike J-types, INTPs are uncomfortable issuing orders and directives.
This is why, whenever possible, they shy away from leadership roles. For
the same reason, parenting and disciplining children can be challenging
for INTPs. We've already discussed one reason why INTPs are slow to
extravert judgment ---their fear of disharmony. But there are other
reasons as well. One is that Ne is the first extraverted function in
their functional stack. So instead of directly expressing a judgment,
they may do so in less direct ways, such as through hints or questions
(e.g., "Are you sure you want to do that?"). They may also refrain from
expressing judgments because they have yet to settle an issue in their
own minds. INTPs never want to be seen as dogmatic, closedminded, or
unnuanced in their thinking. Relatedly, they are naturally slow to
advise others, especially with regard to F-related matters. This is
because INTPs don't want to get it wrong, to deal with the aftermath of
being wrong, or to make decisions that involve or affect other people.
INTPs may also avoid extraverting their judgments because of concerns
about their ability to effectively articulate them, fearing that this
may cause them to be perceived as less intelligent than they really are.
Considering these and other hesitations, it can require a fair amount of
courage for INTPs to assert themselves, particularly when discussing
controversial or otherwise uncomfortable issues. INTJs, in contrast,
whose extraverted Judging

function (Te) is in the auxiliary position, seem to have little problem
in this regard. Because of their difficulty with direct self-expression,
INTPs are prone to making sudden executive decisions without any prior
communication. In such instances, others may be left feeling incredulous
as to why the INTP had not thought to discuss the issue with them first.
INTPs may also exhibit passiveaggressive forms of behavior, such as
intentionally staying late at the office to eschew or resist domestic
expectations. They can resemble other IP types in this regard, who have
a similar propensity for acting passive-aggressively rather than
expressing their concerns more directly. Convergent Truth & Enlightening
Others As I've written elsewhere, the inferior function can be
understood to represent the ultimate goal or attractor point of the
personal growth. It is what motivates and draws us forward. For INTPs,
this attractor point is the promise of convergent truth; Fe, the final
function of their stack, represents this place of convergent truth. They
may dream of finding ultimate answers, an ideal career, or the perfect
relationship. Like FJs, INTPs fancy the idea of enlightening others
regarding how they might live better lives (Fe). But as we've seen,
INTPs can struggle when it comes to directly expressing their judgments.
They are more comfortable dialoguing about ideas by way of their
auxiliary Ne than delivering Fe advice or declarations. INTPs can also
become impatient with those who are slow to understand or embrace their
ideas. They often expect others to learn as quickly and independently as
they do. They therefore tend to have mixed feelings when it comes to
teaching or counseling others. Desire for Affirmation/Validation Fe
involves making connections between one's own emotions and those of
others. When a successful connection occurs, it results in a sense of
validation, of being valued and understood. While INTPs can do a fair
job at reading others' emotions and are cognitively aware of the
appropriate social response, they often do not "feel" what others are
feeling. Despite this difficulty in connecting with others on a feeling
level, their Fe still desires the same sense of affirmation and
validation that FJs readily receive when engaging with people. This need
for

affirmation can be seen as a motivating force behind INTPs' desire for
achievement. It is why many INTPs score high as Enneagram Threes and
display certain narcissistic tendencies. Personally, I never understood
my desire to write for a popular audience (rather than an academic one)
until I recognized that my Fe was pushing for widespread affirmation.
Because INTPs, wittingly or not, rely on others for affirmation, they
may often feel they cannot live without at least one other person in
their lives. At other times, they can feel incredibly independent (Ti).
Especially when their work is going well, they may feel they don't
really need other people. If they manage to completely isolate
themselves from others, they will soon begin to feel that something
important is missing from their lives. This prompts them to reinitiate
contact with others, at least until they feel compelled to assert their
independence again. This cycle of alternating between needing and
devaluing others is common among INTPs and narcissists alike. Slippery,
All-or-None Emotions Despite the inferior position of their Fe, INTPs
are not emotionless robots. Rather, as is typically the case with the
inferior, there is an all-or-nothing character to their Fe. INTPs'
emotions seem to have a mind of their own, coming and going as they
please. Consequently, INTPs often feel awkward or inept in emotional
situations, knowing that they cannot readily summon the
situationallyappropriate emotions. As mentioned previously, INTPs are
usually cognitively aware of which emotions are appropriate for a given
situation, but without experiencing them directly, they can sound clumsy
or mechanical in their expressions. This can be difficult for their
romantic partners, particularly for FJ types, since FJs desire a sense
of authentic emotional communion. While INTPs may experience strong
feelings for their partners while away from them, they may not
experience those emotions or may have trouble communicating them while
together. For most INTPs, their Fe is rather naive and childlike. They
may, for instance, be easily moved by cheesy romantic comedies or sappy
love songs, anything that unconsciously incites their Fe emotions. This
can also make INTPs easy targets for love-at-first-sight sorts of
infatuation. They are particularly susceptible to being wooed by Feeling
types, who can bypass their typical channels of logic and directly
appeal to INTPs' less conscious Fe.

While INTPs struggle to directly summon or contact their emotions, they
can readily override or detach from them, almost functioning as though
they didn't exist. Consequently, INTPs may not consciously struggle with
the same degree of guilt, regret, or shame as other types. Others may be
surprised how quickly INTPs can seemingly resume "business as usual"
after what most would consider tragic or traumatic circumstances.

ISTP ISTP is another of our 16 personality types. While some estimates
suggest ISTPs comprise only 5% of the general population, my research
and experience suggests this type to be more common. Male ISTPs are
thought to outnumber ISTP females at a clip of three to one. Like INTPs,
ISTPs dominant function is Introverted Thinking (Ti), which can be
associated with high levels of focus, self-discipline, intentionality,
independence, and intensity of thought. ISTPs take life rather seriously
and use their inner logic to discern the best ways of navigating it.
They may, for instance, use Ti to work out their own personal methods
for maximizing performance in a particular sport. They love using their
Ti to solve practical problems or to optimize functioning. Because of
their independence, self-directedness, and competitiveness, ISTPs may
excel at nearly anything they set their mind to. Because ISTPs' Thinking
is introverted in its direction (Ti), it often goes unnoticed by
outsiders. What others tend to see is ISTPs' engaging in action (Se) or
mixing with people (Fe). ISTPs' Extraverted Feeling (Fe) can bring a
surprising amount of affability and personableness to their outward
presentation. ISTPs often present as sincere, genuine, and approachable.
Their Fe confers a certain childlike innocence that others may find
refreshing. Since neither Ti nor Se is a highly verbal function, ISTPs
can be persons of few words. Their relationships are often built around
shared interests or activities rather than extensive conversation. But
since status and reputation are important to their Se and Fe, ISTPs may
be far more talkative at work or in public settings than they are at
home. In public, they may be fun and outgoing. In private, they may seem
more aloof or disengaged, sensing that their intimates cannot provide
them the same degree of ego boost they find in the public arena (Fe).
This ostensible disparity between their private and public persona may
lead their intimates to consider them narcissistic or hypocritical.
ISTPs commonly display conventional, sometimes stylish, forms of dress.
While their Ti is concerned with functionality and practicality, their
Se and Fe are attuned to the trendy and popular. Physically, ISTPs may
have either a lanky or muscular build. While athletic engagement often
keeps them fit throughout their

childhood, their love for food (Se) may lead to problems with weight in
adulthood. While not to the same extent as their ESTP counterparts,
ISTPs are undeterred from investing in high quality and/or high-status
goods. Like other Se types, they can appreciate excellent food (some are
even foodies) and stylish clothing. Their Ti "techiness" also lends an
interest to top-notch technology or equipment. Fancy or vintage sports
cars, motorcycles, or power tools commonly line the garages of ISTPs.
Like other SP types, ISTPs often display great kinesthetic intelligence.
They are often athletic, mechanically-inclined, and endowed with
excellent dexterity and hand-eye coordination. In contrast to INTPs, who
sport high levels of mental energy, ISTPs exhibit high levels of
physical energy and stamina. While INTPs use their Ne to explore ideas,
ISTPs use their hands, body, and other senses to explore and manipulate
the concrete world (Se). Because of their preference for hands-on
activities, ISTPs may underperform in academic settings. This is
typically not due to a lack of ability per se, but a lack of interest or
stimulation. As is true for all Sensing types, being forced to deal in
abstractions for too long can be draining for ISTPs. Their need for
physical activity and impatience with abstractions may also explain why
ISTP school children are more likely to be diagnosed with ADD or ADHD
than some of the other personality types. ISTP students who can set
their focus on a particular career goal or endpoint, such as becoming a
surgeon, are apt to fare better. Generally speaking, ISTPs are wise to
pursue careers that allow them to use their practical intelligence to
solve concrete problems (i.e., Holland "Realistic" careers). They can
make excellent artisans, athletes, mechanics, drummers, maintenance
workers, chiropractors, surgeons, pilots, chefs, etc. While ISTP differ
from ISTJs by only one "preference" (i.e., J-P), these types actually
share zero functions in common. This makes them far more different than
is sometimes recognized. As TJ types, ISTJs are more direct and firm
(even blunt) in their assertions than ISTPs are. ISTPs use Fe rather
than Te, which confers a certain social ease, even charm, which ISTJs
often lack. Moreover, ISTPs use Se rather than Si, making them less
concerned with preserving past precedent than ISTJs are. Finally, ISTPs
are more inclined toward "hands-on" and Realistic careers, whereas ISTJs
gravitate toward "white collar" sorts of

work. ISTPs' Functional Stack & Type Development ISTPs' functional stack
is composed of the following functions: Dominant: Introverted Thinking
(Ti) Auxiliary: Extraverted Sensing (Se) Tertiary: Introverted Intuition
(Ni) Inferior: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) ISTPs' personality type
development can be broadly conceived as consisting of three phases:
Phase I (Childhood) This phase is characterized by the emergence and
differentiation of ISTPs' dominant function, Introverted Thinking (Ti).
Early in life, ISTPs often use their Ti to focus on one or two pursuits.
They may for instance, funnel their Ti energies into mastering video
games, tinkering with computers, or learning the best way of shooting a
basketball. Since they often apply their Ti to hands-on
activities---sports, Legos, drumming, video games, and the like---Phase
I ISTPs may also show significant development of their auxiliary
function, Extraverted Sensing (Se). Since their Ti is a rational Judging
function, ISTPs tend to approach life fairly seriously. Even from a
relatively young age, they can be self-disciplined and goal-oriented,
striving for excellence in whatever they do. They can differ markedly
from ESTPs in this regard, whose dominant function (Se) is a Perceiving
function, leading Phase I ESTPs to be more open-ended and easygoing.
While both types utilize Se and Ti, ESTPs are more concerned with
perceiving or experiencing the outside world (Se), while ISTPs are more
intentional, focused, and self-directed (Ti). Phase II (Adolescence-30s)
Once their dominant Ti reaches a certain level of differentiation,
ISTPs' inferior

function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe), enters the picture and begins to
play a more influential role. We will further explore the effects of
ISTPs' Fe later in this profile. Phase II ISTPs also show increasing use
and development of their auxiliary function, Extraverted Sensing (Se).
This may involve exploring new hobbies and interests, such as gourmet
cooking. As a Perceiving function, Se also leads to an opening of their
Ti judgments to see if they pass the test of lived experience. Since Se
is an extraverted and expansive function, Phase II ISTPs may feel it
necessary to explore a wide range of experiences before arriving at
confident conclusions. Phase II ISTPs may also begin to tap into their
tertiary function, Introverted Intuition (Ni), which can subconsciously
assist ISTPs in piecing together their Se experiences, further
clarifying their identity and worldview. Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond)
If all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase III, ISTPs
become increasingly aware of the insidious ways of their inferior Fe. As
they become more aware of their inferior and learn to function more
authentically as ISTPs, they experience greater balance between their Ti
and Fe. They learn that integrating their Fe happens naturally and
indirectly as they go about authentically using their Ti and Se. As they
cultivate conditions that support their natural strengths, Phase III
ISTPs come to experience a heightened sense of peace, wholeness, and
satisfaction. ISTPs' Dominant Function: Introverted Thinking (Ti) To
understand ISTPs, or other IP types, it is necessary to recognize the
full implications of their dominant function, Ti, being a Judging
function. Namely, ISTPs are best understood as predominant Judgers and
display many characteristics of EJs, only that these behaviors are
directed inwardly or toward the self. Ti involves the use of logic and
reason for the sake of understanding a given problem, situation, or
system. ISTPs use Ti to solve problems, to optimize functioning, and to
bring structure and order to their inner world. This inner structuring
grants them a strong sense of inner control. It allows ISTPs to be
inwardly self-disciplined and to independently manage their lives and
personal

projects. The disciplined nature of Ti may inspire ISTPs to frame their
lives in terms of personal challenges or a series of independent
projects. While not shying away from competing with others, ISTPs enjoy
taking on challenges and projects for the mere pleasure of it. Such
challenges may be physical (e.g., trying to achieve an optimal level of
fitness), practical (e.g., fixing a car), creative (e.g.,
craftsmanship), or interpersonal. At times, the inwardly focused and
intentional nature of Ti lead can lead ISTPs to mistype themselves as
ISTJs. In so doing, they rightly recognize their inner Judging nature,
but wrongly conclude that they must be a J-type. They fail to recognize
that the J-P label refers only to outward demeanor and behavior. This
may partly explain what I see as the under-representation of ISTPs in
demographic data. Ti might also be viewed in terms of fluid
intelligence, whereas Extraverted Thinking (Te) seems more related to
crystallized intelligence. Ti is more intuitive, contextual, and
right-brained, whereas Te is more procedure-oriented and left-brained.
The fluid nature of their Ti, combined with the keen observational
powers of their Se, contributes to ISTPs' acumen as practical problem
solvers. ISTPs can analyze a situation, discern how things should work,
and then determine how to fix it. While a Te type might feel compelled
to use schematics or manuals to diagnose the problem, ISTPs rely on
their Ti's ability to reason their way through concrete problems, even
those they've never encountered. This contributes to their skill as
mechanics, maintenance workers, machinists, surgeons, technicians, etc.
ISTPs' Auxiliary Function: Extraverted Sensing (Se) Introverted Sensing
(Si) is conservative with respect to new sensations and the material
world. Extraverted Sensing (Se), by contrast, is more materially liberal
and novelty-oriented. Se types (especially ESPs) often exhibit a
laissez-faire, "eat, drink, and be merry" approach to life. Unlike Si,
Se is not content with routine and familiar experiences. For this
reason, ISTPs enjoy physical thrills and new sensations. Their Ti
penchant for challenges, combined with the thrill-seeking nature of
their Se, makes ISTPs prime candidates for all varieties of extreme/
adventure sports. They may take up

rock climbing, sky diving, motocross racing, etc. ISTPs also enjoy team
sports, long-distance running, and cycling. Any activity that allows
them to see new sights, embrace new challenges, and spring into action
is generally welcomed by ISTPs. Se also attunes to the concrete details
and sensory information of the environment by way of the five senses. SP
types scan the environment for interesting sensory novelties, noticing
details in the environment that other types might readily gloss over.
This is why SPs (especially ESPs) often have strong visual recall, or
what is sometimes dubbed a "photographic" memory. ISTPs may utilize
their Se's attention to detail in any number of ways. One of my ISTP
friends, for instance, enjoys scavenging fields for arrowheads. As he
saunters about, his Se scans the environment in hopes of finding another
lost treasure. After locating an arrowhead, he further enlists his Se to
explore its shape, texture, and other features. ISTPs also employ their
Se in their daily work as mechanics, technicians, chefs, construction
workers, etc. They make excellent craftsmen, using their Se to attend to
the finest physical details. They love working with their hands and
using tools to produce high quality pieces. Unlike the Ne-Si function
pair, which encourages makeshift tool use (Ne) in the name of material
conservation (Si), the Se-Ni function pair impels ISTPs to acquire the
right tools in order to do the job the "right way." In this vein, ISTPs
are not opposed to spending a little extra on high quality tools, parts,
etc. Se also differs from Ne in that it is not a highly verbal or
abstract function. So while INTPs enjoy sitting around discussing ideas,
ISTPs would often prefer to be "doing" something. Even watching sports
can be more stimulating than conversation for ISTPs, since it stimulates
their Se and allows them to vicariously participate in the action.
ISTPs' Tertiary Function: Introverted Intuition (Ni) ISTPs' tertiary
function is Introverted Intuition (Ni). In combination with their
dominant Ti, ISTPs may display some degree of interest in abstract or
theoretical topics. After all, Ni and Ti are the same two introverted
functions employed by INFJs, who are among the most theoretical-minded
of all types. However, because ISTPs' Ni is more unconscious, it is less
accessible to them for

immediate intuitive perception. Therefore, like other SP types, ISTPs
are more likely to gain insight through analyzing a breadth of life
experiences (Ti-Se). Ni can also aid in the process, helping ISTPs
synthesize and extract meaning from a breadth of Se experiences. ISTPs'
Inferior Function: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) Like other types, ISTPs can
be blinded to the degree to which their inferior function impacts their
decisions and behavior. Without sufficiently understanding the inferior
function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe), ISTPs will continue to feel
incomplete and be prone to unhealthy decision-making in their careers,
lifestyle, and relationships. The ISTP's personality type dynamics can
be largely understood as an attempt find a balance between Ti and Fe,
independence (Ti) and interdependence (Fe), self (Ti) and others (Fe).
Since Ti and Fe comprise a functional whole, ISTPs intuitively realize
that they need to better integrate their Fe in order to feel more whole
and complete. Obsessiveness/Workaholism "In the grip" of the inferior
function, all personality types are prone to acting compulsively and
obsessively. Grip experiences can be difficult to escape, since the less
conscious self (i.e., the inferior function) takes over as the driver of
the personality. While the content of grip experiences may differ across
the types, their basic shape is essentially the same. For ISTPs (and
INTPs), being in the grip often involves workaholism. As T dominants,
work (including personal projects and hobbies), comprises a central
component of ISTPs' identity. In doing what they enjoy, ISTPs are
naturally very disciplined and thorough. When they are in the grip,
however, they become obsessive, perfectionistic, and unable to let go of
whatever they are doing. During such times, ISTPs may alienate
themselves from others, insisting they need more and more time to
themselves (this is why ISTPs often test as Enneagram Fives). They
become trapped, functioning only in Judging mode (TiFe), while forgoing
the Perceiving functions (Se-Ni) in the middle of their functional
stack. As for all types, the process of slipping into grip experiences
is often subtle and insidious. For instance, ISTPs may have a goal in
mind for what they want to

accomplish that day, only to discover the task much larger than they
originally imagined. But because a bigger task poses a greater
challenge, they take the bait and see if they can still manage to get it
done. The problem, of course, is that this essentially locks them into
Judging mode, since any deviation into Se Perceiving will preclude them
from accomplishing their goal. This includes closing themselves off to
other people, who come to be viewed as intrusions or impediments to
their productivity. Consequently, ISTPs who are frequently in the grip
may end up ostracizing themselves from other people. What is interesting
is that ISTPs, like other types, can be relatively unaware of falling
into a grip experience, rationalizing their obsessiveness as being
"efficient" or "productive." Moreover, since grip experiences are fueled
by adrenaline, they can feel "good" at some level, allowing for
heightened focus and endurance. At the same time, there is a part of
ISTPs that knows they are in trouble. When all they can do is
compulsively hurl themselves into their work, a part of them realizes
this is unsustainable, unbalanced, and potentially destructive. To
compensate for the isolation involved with grip behavior, ISTPs may
"crutch" their inferior Fe through their relationships, which provides
the reassurance that external Fe support is available should they need
it. This is why so many ISTPs (and INTPs) struggle when it comes to
balancing their work and interpersonal relationships. Slippery & Elusive
Emotions For ISTPs and INTPs alike, their Fe is rather naive and
childlike. They may be easily moved by cheesy romantic comedies or sappy
love songs, anything that incites their subconscious Fe emotions. They
can also be easy targets for "love at first sight" sorts of infatuation.
They may be particularly susceptible to being wooed by Feeling types
(especially FJs), who can bypass their typical channels of logic and
appeal directly to ISTPs' less conscious Fe. Because of the inferior
position of their Fe, ISTPs struggle to intentionally contact or
understand their emotions. It's not they never experience emotions, but
only that their emotions seem to have a mind of their own, coming and
going as they please. So even if ISTPs are aware of what emotions are
appropriate for a given situation, they often do not "feel" them at the
time, engendering a sense of awkwardness or discomfort in emotional
situations. They may even experience

the desired emotion a few hours later, but it's almost as though their
emotions get "stage fright" when "put on the spot." To compensate, ISTPs
may try to use their Fe to offer the socially-appropriate words. But
without experiencing the emotions directly, they often sound clumsy or
contrived in their expressions. At times, this can be difficult for
their romantic partners, particularly for FJ types, who desire a
reciprocation of authentic emotional expression. But because of their Fe
stage fright, ISTPs may not experience their feelings "at the right
times" or can have trouble expressing them when they are present. While
ISTPs can certainly have trouble contacting their emotions, they usually
have little difficulty overriding or detaching from them. Consequently,
ISTPs are less apt to struggle with guilt, regret, or shame in the way
that other types might. Others may even be surprised how quickly ISTPs
can resume "business as usual" after what most would consider tragic or
traumatic circumstances. This should not necessarily be viewed as a flaw
in the ISTP, however, but merely a reflection of the unconscious nature
of their Fe. Conflict Avoidance, Passive-Aggressiveness, & Desire for
Affirmation ISTPs want everyone to feel included and to be treated with
fairness and respect (Fe). While not as warm or effusive as FJ types,
they are concerned with others' feelings and try to avoid hurting or
offending them. They seek to maintain a basic level of harmony in their
immediate circumstances. Fe also contributes to ISTPs' desire for public
affirmation. Fe involves making connections between one's own emotions
and those of others. While ISTPs may not always "feel" what others are
feeling their Fe still desires the sense of social affirmation and
validation. Consequently, there are times when ISTPs are helpful or
compliant largely for the sake of external approval or to maintain a
certain public perception. ISTPs with a strong concern for their image
can take social engagements quite seriously. They want others to see
them as laudable employees, spouses, parents, or citizens. Their desire
for public esteem can also be a motivating force in ISTPs' desire for
achievement. ISTPs' propensity for conflict-avoidance and need for
affirmation, on the one hand, with their need for independence (Ti), on
the other, contributes to no small number of relational difficulties.
Especially when in the grip of workaholism, ISTPs may feel they don't
need or want other people around. Eventually, they come to a point of
feeling miserably imbalanced, which prompts them to

reinitiate contact with others, at least until they fall into the grip
again. This cycle of alternating between needing and devaluing others is
common among ISTPs and narcissists alike. In the name of
conflict-avoidance and preservation of external harmony, ISTPs may do
all they can to circumvent directly expressing their frustrations or
grievances. Wittingly or not, they view conflict as a potential threat
to the relationship they depend on to meet their Fe needs, as well as a
threat to the flawless image they seek to preserve. So rather than
giving voice (Fe) to their concerns, ISTPs prefer to analyze (Ti) or act
on them (Se), sometimes in passiveaggressive ways. They may, for
instance, intentionally start spending more time at the office as a
passive form of rebellion against their partner. Or, they may make
sudden executive decisions without giving others any say or prior
notice. Poor communication can also lead ISTPs to create a convoluted
set of assumptions about what their partners think, want, and expect.
Unhealthy ISTPs may spin an ever-expanding web of faulty beliefs and
assumptions about their partner. In so doing, they may come to resent or
otherwise think negatively of their mates, even if largely a product of
their own assumptions. Personal growth for ISTPs involves integrating
their Fe through consistent and satisfying use of their Ti and Se.
Integrating ISTPs must also must learn to recognize the difference
between healthy modes of work versus functioning in the grip of their
inferior function. Healthy work for ISTPs includes remaining open to Se
experiences and diversions, which can keep them from becoming too
one-track minded. In addition to taking a healthier approach to their
work, integrating ISTPs must enhance their self-awareness and
communication in their relationships. This includes working to unearth
all their implicit assumptions about relationships in general and their
partner in particular. It means being willing to dialogue about
uncomfortable topics that may produce temporary pain or conflict. It is
not until they "clear the air," learning to be more open and honest with
themselves and their partners, that ISTPs will experience true
satisfaction and wholeness in their relationships.

INFP The INFP personality type makes up about 5% of the general
population, outnumbering INFJs at a pace of four to one. INFPs are well
described as seekers. They want to understand who they are and their
purpose in the world. Curious and restless, they enjoy entertaining new
ideas and possibilities. They are rarely content with "what is,"
preferring instead to focus their sights on "what could be." This,
combined with their strong idealism, can engender a sort of "grass is
greener" mentality. INFPs are among the most open-minded (and
open-hearted) of the personality types. While not to the same extent as
ENFPs, they often bring an experimental attitude to life as they explore
a variety of ideas, lifestyles, and experiences. In each new experience,
INFPs see an opportunity to not only learn about the world, but about
themselves and their life's purpose. Their curiosity about the world,
including its potential role in clarifying their identity, can inspire
INFPs to travel or adopt a peripatetic lifestyle. They may, for
instance, choose to explore other cultures, live out of a vehicle, or
take to the woods. As long as these sorts of explorations feel
stimulating and life-giving, INFPs will continue to explore them, even
amid pressures to embrace a more conventional path. Jon Krakauer's
captivating book, later turned movie, Into the Wild, details the life
one such INFP seeker, Chris McCandless. McCandless was academically
gifted and a recent high school graduate. While nearly everyone assumed
he would head off to college and begin his path toward worldly success,
McCandless had others aspirations. Something seemed to be missing from
his life and from the conventional lives of those around him, that he
felt he needed to pursue and understand. So instead of heading off to
college, he sold most of his possessions and embarked on a life of
exploration, culminating in a journey deep into the Alaskan wilderness.
Perhaps even more familiar is the account of another INFP, Henry David
Thoreau, which we find in his classic work, Walden. Like McCandless,
Thoreau was unimpressed by conventional life and dreamed of something
more: "I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to
confront only the essential

facts of life... and not, when it came to die, discover that I had not
lived." Like Thoreau and McCandless, INFPs seek a life of passion and
intensity. They want to know what it means to be fully alive and how
they might cultivate a rich and abundant life. INFPs' seeking impetus is
informed and perpetuated by their critical observations of society and
culture. They often see themselves as characteristically different from,
or at odds with, their surrounding culture, sometimes feeling like
outsiders or misfits. They can be wary of "conventional wisdom" and
societal prescriptions, preferring instead to forge their own unique
path. Amassing wealth or material goods is rarely high on INFPs'
priority list. Money is valued only to the extent that it furnishes the
time and freedom to explore their deepest passions. Considering the
relative unimportance of material niceties to INFPs, the idea of
performing uninspiring work for the sake of a paycheck is invariably
off-putting to them. Consequently, they, not unlike INTPs, often adopt a
minimalist lifestyle, hoping this will translate into less time spent
performing uninteresting work. As INFPs proceed in their search for
self, they eventually stumble onto something that deeply moves or
inspires them. They even feel they've finally found what they have been
looking for. But more often than not, their enthusiasm is short-lived,
once the novelty of their new discovery has worn off. Over time, this
can become frustrating or demoralizing for INFPs, since they so
desperately want to find themselves. They don't want to remain seekers
forever. They want know to know their mission in life. They want their
seeking efforts to culminate in a sense of conviction and direction for
their lives. With that said, it would be wrong to pretend that INFPs
don't also find the seeker's journey deeply meaningful and enjoyable.
Whether they admit it or not, their seeking is at least as much about
the journey as it is the destination. But it is also true that they
wouldn't be seeking, at least not with such vigor and zeal, without an
anticipated payoff. Hence, they may resist notions like "just relax and
enjoy the journey" because the imagined destination, that ever-elusive
Holy Grail, imbues their actions with greater meaning, urgency, and
intensity. INFPs can be drawn to all sorts of creative endeavors---film,
photography,

poetry, music, theater, fiction writing, the fine arts, and so on. Other
INFPs may opt for careers that inspire their inferior function,
Extraverted Thinking (Te), such as science, computers, engineering, law,
economics, etc. Regardless of how they start their career journey, many
will continue to function as seekers for years, even decades. They often
find themselves most inspired when working on their own personal
projects, which allow them to pursue their own interests with full
freedom and authenticity. Many will dabble in freelancing while dreaming
of the time when they can cut ties with their day job and pursue their
passion on a full-time basis. INFPs' Functional Stack & Personality Type
Development INFPs' functional stack includes the following functions:
Dominant: Introverted Feeling (Fi) Auxiliary: Extraverted Intuition (Ne)
Tertiary: Introverted Sensing (Si) Inferior: Extraverted Thinking (Te)
INFPs' personality type development consists of three primary phases:
Phase I (Childhood) Phase I is characterized by the exploration and
development of INFPs' dominant function, Introverted Feeling (Fi). Even
as children, INFPs are often "highly sensitive persons" (HSPs).
Sensitive to their own feelings, as well as those of others, they feel
unsettled and anxious in conflictual situations. This may prompt them to
seek refuge in time alone, finding comfort in solitary activities such
as daydreaming, reading, drawing, listening to music, etc. Hence, young
INFPs come to enjoy exploring their own interests, free from external
disruptions. In time, they develop a unique sense of self through
exploring their feelings (Fi) and imagination (Ne). Phase II
(Adolescence-30s) Phase II involves additional development of their
auxiliary function (Ne), as well as heightened polarity and conflict
between their dominant Fi and their inferior

function, Extraverted Thinking (Te). While INFPs do function as seekers
as children, in the sense of exploring the world through their feelings
and imagination, their seeking tendencies (Ne) grow more intense and
explicit as they approach adulthood. This is prompted, at least to some
extent, by concerns about adulthood, which cause them to think more
seriously about the trajectory of their life. Ne is INFPs' preferred
extraverted function and one of the primary tools they use to explore
the outside world. These explorations may include things like dabbling
in countercultures, experimenting with drugs, starting their own band,
travelling overseas, joining the Peace Corps, etc. Through these
experiences, they hope to get a better sense of who they are and where
they might fit into the world. Through this process of world exploration
(which is equally, if not more, about self-exploration) many INFPs will
either modify or part ways with the religious and political views they
were raised with. The liberal and explorative ways of Ne are checked and
countered by INFPs' tertiary Si and inferior Te, which urge them to "be
responsible" and follow a more traditional path. INFPs who heed this
prompting will function more conventionally (e.g., finish their degree,
get a job, get married, etc.) and may look less like seekers. They may,
however, be more disposed to a mid-life identity crisis if they conclude
that the path they chose was not authentically their own. Perhaps most
commonly, Phase II INFPs feel themselves bouncing between unconventional
(Fi-Ne) and conventional (Si-Te) paths as they try to discern what works
best for them. While other types must also find a way of reconciling
opposing forces within themselves, INFPs (along with INTPs) tend to be
most aware that they are on a journey of self-discovery and
self-development. Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond) Phase III represents
the well-integrated personality. According to Elaine Schallock,
integration occurs when the functional stack is consistently used in a
"top-down" fashion. By this she means that the functions are best
prioritized and utilized in a dominant-auxiliary-tertiary-inferior
sequence. If used consistently over time, she suggests the top-down
approach will naturally result in greater development and integration of
all the functions. In Schallock's view, "jumping

the stack," that is, trying to appease or satisfy the inferior function
directly or through various short-cuts, is rarely a reliable or
sustainable means to integration. The first and probably most important
step for INFPs seeking integration is learning how to effectively
transition into Ne perceiving. To understand why this is so critical, we
must remember that Fi is not only an introverted function, but also a
judging function (all the T and F functions are judging functions).
Therefore, counterbalancing Fi requires both extraversion and
perceiving. And this is precisely what Ne, which is an extraverted
perceiving function, can do for INFPs. There are two reasons why Ne may
be a more reasonable solution to integration for INFPs than Te. The
first is that Te is not a perceiving function and therefore cannot
provide the same degree of counterbalance to Fi as Ne does. The second
reason is Te is deeply buried in INFPs' subconscious, which prevents
them from readily accessing and integrating it. This is why Schallock's
top-down approach (i.e., Fi to Ne to Si to Te) is a more effective route
to integration than jumping the stack (i.e., jumping from Fi to Te).
INFPs who have learned how to truly perceive and/or create through Ne
discover a welcome alternative to the bipolar leaps between Fi and Te
they experience in Phase II. Effectively transitioning into Ne often
induces a state of "flow," which is the inner experience of integration.
In the flow state, INFPs forget about themselves and their concerns,
becoming "one" with the activity at hand. They are neither over nor
under-stimulated, and their worries tend to fade into the background.
Phase III INFPs have a clearer sense of who they are and how they can
live most authentically and effectively. This allows them to feel more
safe, secure, and grounded in themselves as well as, if by some act of
magic, in the world. INFPs' Dominant Function: Introverted Feeling (Fi)
INFPs are deeply aware of and in touch with their inner landscape. Their
dominant Fi is inwardly focused and adept at evaluating and handling
their personal tastes, values, and emotions. Because Fi is introverted
in direction, INFPs process their emotions and experiences on a largely
independent basis. With each new feeling, experience, or idea they
evaluate, their sense of self

becomes a little clearer. This was nicely enumerated by one of our blog
readers: "My inner values and feelings (Fi) are like a building, a
structure of affections that inform my worldview. This involves an inner
love for certain things, and an inner repulsion for other things. My
values and feelings form "blocks" of varying hardness, depending on how
strongly I feel about them; the stronger ones are more resilient...I
constantly discover more about the structure as I go, and what I should
change to make it better. For example, I didn't have to factually
discern a respect for human dignity; I simply found myself in situations
where people did not respect human dignity, and it made me angry --- I
found out that I hate bullying." By reflecting on the experiences of
life, whether gleaned from fiction or real life, INFPs come to better
understand themselves. Despite this journey toward deeper understanding,
INFPs often feel that their self-understanding remains incomplete. They
may still feel they don't know themselves well enough to wholeheartedly
commit to a certain path in life. And they feel it is only through a
more complete or definite self-understanding that they will be capable
of acting with full authenticity and conviction. In addition to its role
in shaping INFPs' self-understanding and identity, Fi can develop deep
attachments and loyalties to certain externalities. INFPs are
particularly prone to empathize with and develop attachments to those
unable to help or care for themselves---animals, children, the less
fortunate, victims of injustice, etc. They can often be found caring for
the elderly, sick, disabled, and disenfranchised. Animal lovers to the
core, they shower their pets with affection while also showing deep
concern for strays. If sufficiently moved or inspired, INFPs may also
take up a niche cause, such as garnering research funding for a rare
disease affecting a loved one. Finally, many INFPs want (or will
eventually want) their own children. Children can serve as a reliable
and rewarding lifelong investment for INFPs' love and attention. Due to
the introverted nature of Fi, INFPs' status as feelers is not always
evident from without. When immersed in Fi, they can seem a bit cool,
aloof, or indifferent. Jung, rarely one to mince words in his type
descriptions, described the introverted feeler (i.e., IFPs) in the
following way: "They are mostly silent, inaccessible, hard to
understand; often they hide behind a childish or banal mask, and their
temperament is inclined to melancholy...

Their outward demeanor is harmonious, inconspicuous...with no desire to
affect others, to impress, influence or change them in any way. If this
is more pronounced, it arouses suspicion of indifference and coldness...
Although there is a constant readiness for peaceful and harmonious
co-existence, strangers are shown no touch of amiability, no gleam of
responsive warmth... It might seem on a superficial view that they have
no feelings at all." -Psychological Types (Para. 640-641) Of course,
this sort of outer presentation belies what we know about INFPs' inner
world, which is abundant with life and feeling. It is also true that
many INFPs compensate for their lack of extraverted feeling by invoking
their auxiliary Ne. When wielding Ne, INFPs are more outwardly open,
receptive, quirky, and engaging. INFPs' Auxiliary Function: Extraverted
Intuition (Ne) Ne demands novelty. It craves new ideas, connections, and
possibilities. It seeks to understand the world (and the self) through
the lens of ideas. It therefore comes as no surprise that Ne plays a
prominent role in INFPs' search for self. Among Ne's manifold talents is
its knack for sniffing out intriguing possibilities. As we've seen,
INFPs commonly assume the role of wanderer or seeker. Rarely do they
know exactly what they are seeking, which is largely why operating in Ne
mode can be exhilarating. Ne can be associated with a sense of blind
anticipation and expectation, of not knowing who or what will manifest
next in one's life journey. INFPs relish the sense of adventure,
expectancy, and wonderment conferred by Ne. This is one reason they
enjoy traveling. The idea of exploring nature or different cultures
feels rife with possibilities. A serendipitous encounter with a kindred
spirit, the discovery of a life-changing book, finding inspiration
through ancient art and architecture, such are the anticipated rewards
of following Ne. Ne can function either expressively or receptively. The
verbal expression of Ne amounts to something like "brainstorming aloud."
When speaking, INFPs may at times struggle to make their point, as Ne
bounces from one idea or association to the next. Even ideas that seem
inwardly cogent to the INFP may scatter when expressed, like a ray of
light passing through a prism. On a more positive note, INFPs often
capitalize on the divergent and

diversifying effects of Ne through inspired works of art or innovation.
Whether they realize or not, INFPs are among the most profoundly
creative of all types. When operating receptively, Ne prompts INFPs to
gather information. It scans for new patterns, associations, and
possibilities. INFPs commonly exercise this side of their Ne through
activities such as reading, research, entertainment, and conversation
with others. In engaging with others, INFPs enjoy asking probing
questions. They find it interesting to explore the unique qualities of
every individual, as well as the life story that explains or gives
context to those characteristics. Hence, INFPs are typically viewed as
good listeners as well as facilitators of conversation. Others sense and
appreciate that the INFP is authentically interested in understanding
them for who they are as individuals, and that they are doing so in a
nonthreatening and non-judgmental way. Like INTPs, INFPs have a
love-hate relationship with their Ne. They relish the sense of wonder,
curiosity, and anticipation it instills, as well as its creativity and
openness. Without their Ne, they would not be the seekers and creatives
that they are. But living with Ne is not without its challenges. For
one, it can make it difficult for INFPs to arrive at firm conclusions or
make important life decisions. It often seems that at the very moment
they feel confident about a given conclusion or decision, Ne finds a way
to inject doubt and uncertainty. This can be frustrating for INFPs who
feel they are working so hard to find their rightful place in the world.
At times, Ne may even cause them to worry that they have made no real
progress toward anything substantial, or worse, that they may never find
what they are looking for. INFPs' Tertiary Function: Introverted Sensing
(Si) Introverted Sensing (Si) is a conservative function. It engenders a
concern and respect for the past---for what is routine, familiar, or
traditional. While INFPs may appreciate some amount of routine in their
lives, such as devoting a certain time of day to creative work, they are
less inclined to wholeheartedly embrace traditions or conventions in the
manner of SJ types. For INFPs, a full embrace of tradition can only
emerge authentically after they explore it (and its alternatives)
through the lens of Fi and Ne. So even when a given tradition manages to
pass muster, it is only after INFPs have personalized

it and made it their own, interpreting it in a way that resonates with
their deepest values. The influence of Si may also be reflected in
INFPs' attitudes toward money and material goods. INFPs are often
minimalists with respect to possessions. Many opt for rather simple
living arrangements so they can devote more time and energy to pursuing
their true passions. This tendency toward material minimalism is often
discernible in their style of dress and artistic preferences. Namely,
their approach often entails the creative reuse or recombination (Ne) of
pre-existing resources (Si) to fashion something new. In this spirit,
many INFPs supply their wardrobes, homes, and art rooms with items from
thrift shops, antique stores, or garage sales. An oft overlooked feature
of Si is its role in the perception of internal bodily sensations---the
body as felt and experienced from within. Si can be associated with the
raw and basic sense of "being" that exists apart from thought or outward
stimuli. Historically, Eastern philosophical and religious traditions
have led the way in exploring this domain of human experience through
practices such as yoga, Tai-Chi, or meditation. Because of INFPs'
openness to new experiences (Ne), as well as their desire to explore the
mind-body connection and enhance their sense of well-being, many are
drawn to these sorts of holistic practices (especially yoga). Finally,
what may be the most important benefit of Si for INFPs is its role in
consolidating and recalling past experiences and life lessons. It can
therefore keep INFPs from repeating past mistakes and help them clarify
their future direction. Exploring evidence from the past can instill
greater confidence in who they are and what they care about, aiding the
consolidation and crystallization of their self-concept. INFPs' Inferior
Function: Extraverted Thinking (Te) Because the inferior function
operates on a largely unconscious level, all types struggle to
understand and develop it. This function represents a strange and
unfamiliar land, one that is difficult to consistently access, which is
why it is sometimes called the "lost" or "missing" function. It is often
symbolized in dreams as something deep underground, undersea, or in a
dark forest. Despite its relative unconsciousness, the psychospiritual
importance of the inferior function should not be underestimated.
Indeed, it plays a surprisingly influential role in

the motivations and developmental trajectory of each personality type.
Its sense of novelty and mystery can make it a powerful source of energy
and motivation. For INFPs, the allure of their inferior function,
Extraverted Thinking (Te), is illustrated in their frequent attraction
to characteristically T careers such as math, science, law, economics,
computers, accounting, engineering, and the like. The most
"left-brained" of all functions, Te can be associated with structure,
organization, quantification, and the ability to manage T things, such
as time and finances. The concerns of Te are myriad, spanning from the
laws of physics, to state and federal laws, to workplace policies and
procedures, to time management, to household organization. As an
extraverted judging function, Te also serves as a tool for verbally
asserting, in a measured and deliberate way, one's opinions and
judgments. Unlike Extraverted Feeling (Fe), it is unemotional in its
presentation, showing little variation in intonation or physical
expression. At times, the measured and rational character of Te may
cause INFPs to be mistaken for thinking types. While INFPs are often
characterized as impractical and disorganized, this is not necessarily
how they want to operate or see themselves. The truth is most INFPs like
the idea of imposing some sort of order on their existence. They
intuitively realize that external structure is to some extent necessary
for them to live happy and healthy lives. INFPs who are parents, for
instance, quickly discover that it is difficult to develop an optimal
parent-child relationship in a chaotic household. However, because Te is
not INFPs' natural strength, they often struggle to maintain their
preferred level of order and organization. Many report difficulty
handling logistical details, staying on top of their finances,
organizing their homes and schedules, or developing effective rules and
modes of discipline for their children. My INFP cousin, for instance,
once recounted her experience of flying her cat on an airline. She
recalled taking great care to ensure that her cat had everything it
needed to be safe and comfortable its carrier. Unfortunately, she failed
to take note of the airline's proof of animal vaccination requirement.
In type parlance, she had used her Fi and Te to ensure the cat's needs
were met, but fell short with respect to the extraneous Si-Te details of
the situation. INFPs may also struggle to accurately assess the quantity
of resources required for a given situation. I've observed several
INFPs, for instance, who have either

overestimated or underestimated the amount of food required for feeding
a group of people or the number of beds needed to comfortably
accommodate them. Assuming that everything will somehow work itself out,
INFPs may fail to take the time to accurately plan or quantify things
ahead of time. This can be frustrating for guests who feel their needs
are not being met, but who are uncomfortable asking the INFP to remedy
his or her oversights. I have also known INFPs to be poor assessors of
time. On a number of occasions, I've seen them underestimate the amount
of time required for a given task, such as registering their car at the
motor vehicle office. And because of these sorts of miscalculations,
they often find themselves frantically scrambling to manage their other
scheduled obligations. In short, just as NT types can appear naïve or
incompetent with respect to SF matters (e.g., parenting or interpersonal
relationships), so it is with INFPs in their ST affairs. Of course, this
truth is rarely easy for INFPs to hear. As is true of all types, the
inferior function can be a touchy or sensitive area for INFPs. This is
especially true for those who feel they have worked hard to remediate
their Te shortcomings, such as by reading books on parenting methods,
organization strategies, money management, etc. INFPs can get really
excited when learning a new Te strategy or method, perhaps even
developing plans for its implementation. However, because of its
dependence on their inferior function, INFPs often fail to consistently
or effectively implement it, thereby lengthening their list of
unactualized good intentions. In most cases, INFPs manage to do a fair
job handling a limited subset of their Te affairs. They may, for
instance, maintain an organized workstation or discover w being more
punctual. These "small wins" allow them to feel that at least part of
their lives is under control. However, when faced with a multitude of Te
demands---maintaining an orderly household, personal finances,
remembering birthdays, workplace responsibilities, etc.---they can
easily feel overwhelmed. Truth (Te) & Values (Fi) One of the more common
misconceptions about INFPs is that they care mostly about values or
morals, but little about truth. The reality is that some INFPs value
truth (i.e., Te) so much that they conceive of their life's purpose as a
search for truth. Consider, for instance, the following quotes from my
INFP friend's blog: "I just want the world to make sense... I use the
intellect to justify my

existence ...I worship at the altar of truth...Truth is my religion...I
want truth to matter to other people." Similarly, in his novel, Emile,
the 18th-century INFP writer, Jean Jacques Rousseau, penned: "I am not a
great philosopher, and I care little to be one. But I sometimes have
good sense, and I always love the truth." Despite their professed love
for truth, INFPs often feel that truth, especially that which is logic
based (Te), can be hard to come by. This is intimated in Rousseau's
Confessions: "I have a passionate temperament and lively, headstrong
emotions. Yet my thoughts arise slowly and confusedly, and are never
ready until too late. It is as if my heart and my brain did not belong
to the same person." To compensate for an unreliable T function,
Rousseau, in Emile, urged that attention be directed to the condition of
the heart (F): "I do not want to argue with you or even attempt to
convince you. It is enough for me to reveal to you what I think in the
simplicity of my heart. Consult yours during my speech. That is all I
ask of you." Rousseau hoped that purity of intention, including the
earnest desire for truth, could somehow substitute for any lack of T
prowess. Art (Fi) & Science (Te) As exemplified in Rousseau's vocation
as a writer, one way INFPs go about reconciling Fi and Te is through
creative pursuits. Of all the arts, writing, especially non-fiction
writing, is one of the more obvious means of incorporating the Te
element. In other arts, such as music or fiction writing, the
opportunity for T-F integration is also present, but is more subtle and
circuitous. One of the most important benefits of creative work for
INFPs is its ability to incorporate their auxiliary Ne. For all types,
the auxiliary function (as well as the tertiary) serves an important
bridge between the dominant and inferior function. Because Ne is more
conscious and accessible than Te is for INFPs, it is easier for them to
develop and integrate. While reaching Te by way of Ne and Si may seem
longer and less immediately gratifying than trying to access Te
directly, it typically proves more satisfying and sustainable over the
long haul. Instead of bouncing between the extremes of Fi and Te, Fi and
Ne can more easily work as a team, allowing INFPs to routinely achieve
integration through creative work. With that said, many INFPs will
nonetheless opt for more direct routes to Te by

pursuing characteristically T-oriented careers such as math, science,
law, economics, computers, engineering, etc. While some of these fields
do incorporate Ne and may prove satisfying for some INFPs, in many
cases, INFPs ultimately discover that their Fi needs are not being met.
This may compel them to begin searching for an entirely different career
or to explore ways of reworking their current career to allow for
greater incorporation of Fi and Ne. Subjective (Fi) vs. Objective (Te)
Values On a broader level, INFPs may experience an ongoing tension
between the subjective values of their Fi and the objective values of
Te. Namely, Fi urges INFPs to follow their heart, including their own
subjective tastes and values. Te, by contrast, may impel INFPs to "be
responsible," follow the rules, or "do things by the book." INFPs are
therefore bound to struggle in situations where their personal values
are in conflict with external demands or expectations. This may prove
true for INFPs still living at home with their parents, as well in
school, the workplace, or other relationships. Fi, especially combined
when Ne, seeks to maximize personal freedom and autonomy (this is often
particularly pronounced in INFP males). This may at times inspire a
rebellious attitude toward authority, potentially even compelling INFPs
to quit their jobs or drop out of school. Other INFPs seem more tolerant
of Te rules and structure, even to the point of assuming predominantly
administrative work roles. According to The MBTI Manual, however, INFPs'
first vocational preference is to perform creative rather than
administrative work. Hence, even INFPs who have learned to tolerate Te
administrative duties may not be fully satisfied in their careers.
Fairness (Fi) in Systems (Te) INFPs also commonly gravitate toward
non-profit work. Working for a nonprofit organization seems to be a
rather obvious way for them to marry their Fi values with their Te's
interest in improving systems. More specifically, INFPs want to ensure
that individual rights and liberties (Fi) are respected and protected
within the system (Te), especially for individuals with special needs or
challenges. So when INFPs encounter a system-related injustice they feel
strongly about, they will often take up the cause and work toward Te
reform. We see this all the time, for instance, when Fi tragedies (e.g.,
school shootings, child

abductions) prompt the passing of new laws (Te) or new non-profit
initiatives intended to prevent future recurrences. Managing Oneself
(Fi) vs. Managing Others (Te) As we've seen, Fi is adept at navigating
and managing INFPs' emotional landscape. Hence, INFPs often have a
strong internal locus of control, feeling they are more than capable of
taking care of themselves. This is one reason why they may struggle to
work under the leadership of others. They crave autonomy and want to be
free to follow the lead of Fi. In an organizational setting, therefore,
taking a position in management may seem, at least at first blush, to be
a reasonable solution to their desire for more autonomy. INFPs may also
enjoy the status associated with management, perhaps feeling it sets
them apart or signifies their intelligence (their inferior Te can crave
recognition for intelligence). Unfortunately, becoming a manager rarely
solves the Fi-Te problem. For one, INFPs still find that they must
answer to someone else and therefore can't enjoy full autonomy. Second,
management places heavy demands on their Te that they may not be
naturally well equipped to handle. Namely, it requires the ability to be
outwardly assertive and directive, and to routinely and directly deal
with conflict. And due to the fact that INFPs' Te is inferior, these
duties can prove difficult and taxing for INFPs. INFPs commonly struggle
to "put their foot down" and say what they really think. More often,
they opt to swallow their judgments and work through the issue on an
independent basis. Instead of expressing their concerns directly, they
often do so more obliquely and passively, such as through a combination
of hints, leading questions, and actions. They then hope that others
will be able to "read between the lines" in order to understand their
concern. Their discomfort with extraverting judgment also contributes to
their tendency to avoid interpersonal conflict whenever possible. Of all
types, INFPs are among the most likely to agree with Aldous Huxley's
confession that "there is only one corner of the universe you can be
certain of improving, and that's your own self." It is therefore ironic
that so many INFPs seem to end up in management roles. The fact that an
INFP would even consider management may thus seem perplexing to those
who know them well. But this

choice becomes more understandable when we understand the Fi-Te struggle
that underlies it. Parent (Fi) vs. Careerist (Te) Fi-Te dynamics also
come to the fore in navigating a satisfying work-life balance. On the
one hand, INFP parents typically want to spend as much time with their
children as possible. This often includes staying at home during their
early years to ensure the formation of secure child-parent bonds. On the
other hand, INFPs may feel compelled to work because of circumstantial
demands (e.g., finances) or because of their own psychological needs. Of
course, there are no easy answers to this issue. Some INFPs may opt to
put off having children until they find themselves and their vocational
path, while others may take the parenting plunge at an early age,
perhaps figuring they can do more self-reflection later in life or while
they are raising their children.

ISFP ISFPs comprise about 8-9% of the general population, making them
one of the more commonly encountered personality types. ISFPs are
lovers, nurturers, and caregivers. They experience great joy from
spending time and making memories with their friends and loved ones.
Like INFPs, they have a particular fondness for children and animals, as
their dominant function, Introverted Feeling (Fi), is drawn to those
incapable of helping themselves. ISFPs form deep emotional attachments
to their loved ones, contributing to a strong sense of loyalty and
devotion. ISFPs are generally less focused on the well-being of the
masses (a concern of Fe and/or Intuitive types) than they are with
applying their Fi in more local and concrete ways. Both INFPs and ISFPs
are sensitive to injustices and dehumanization (Fi). While perceived
injustices may motivate INFPs to write poetry or novels (Fi-Ne), ISFPs
are more apt to respond with action and hands-on aid (Se). An ISFP
friend of mine, for instance, works in inner-city Berkeley providing
food and other goods to the homeless. Like ESFPs, ISFPs often display a
high concern for, as well as good taste in, fashion and aesthetics. They
are often physically attractive, well-manicured, and enjoy keeping up
their appearance. INFPs, by contrast, are often well-described as
"earthy" and are far less concerned with enhancing, embellishing, or
carefully attending to their physical presentation. Therefore, ISFPs and
INFPs can often be distinguished rather quickly by mere observation of
their physical presentation. ISFPs commonly display impressive
kinesthetic intelligence. They are often athletic and endowed with good
dexterity and hand-eye coordination. In contrast to INFPs, who exhibit
high levels of mental energy, ISFPs possess more physical energy and
stamina. While INFPs use their Ne to explore and manufacture new ideas,
ISFPs employ their hands, body, and other senses to explore and
manipulate the physical world (Se).

Like other IP types, ISFPs are quite independent and self-motivated.
Their sense of values (Fi), as well as their desire to excel
performance-wise (Se), can motivate them to diligently and seriously
apply themselves. However, because of their preference for hands-on
activities, some may underperform in academic settings. As is true of
other Sensing types, being forced to deal in abstractions for too long
can be draining for ISFPs. ISFPs often seem more optimistic and easily
satisfied with life than INFPs. INFPs frequently have a depressive or
melancholic bent, struggling to make it in a world that seems
indifferent to the "impractical" (N) gifts they have to offer. ISFPs, by
contrast, seem to more easily assimilate themselves to conventional
careers and lifestyles. ISFPs' Functional Stack & Type Development
ISFPs' functional stack is composed of the following functions:
Dominant: Introverted Feeling (Fi) Auxiliary: Extraverted Sensing (Se)
Tertiary: Introverted Intuition (Ni) Inferior: Extraverted Thinking (Te)
ISFPs' personality type development can be broadly conceived as
consisting of three phases: Phase I (Childhood) This phase of
development is characterized by the emergence of Introverted Feeling
(Fi) as ISFPs' dominant personality function. Phase I ISFPs are quick to
make Fi judgments, even if keeping most of their opinions and sentiments
to themselves. ISFPs are also prone to viewing things in terms of black
and white in this phase of their type development. Phase II
(Adolescence-30s) Once ISFPs' dominant Fi reaches a certain threshold of
strength and dominance, their inferior function, Extraverted Thinking
(Te), begins to assert itself and play

a more significant and mischievous role. This will be elaborated later
in this profile. Phase II ISFPs also show increasing use and development
of their auxiliary function, Extraverted Sensing (Se). Their Se compels
them to seek out new sensations, interests, and experiences. As a
Perceiving function, it also facilitates an opening of their Fi
judgments to see if they pass the test of lived experience. Phase II
ISFPs may also begin to tap into their tertiary function, Introverted
Intuition (Ni). Ni can subconsciously assist ISFPs in piecing together
their Se experiences into a clearer and more coherent worldview. Phase
III (30s, 40s, & Beyond) If all goes well and they are fortunate enough
to enter Phase III, ISFPs become increasingly aware of the insidious
ways of their inferior Te. As they become more aware of their inferior
and learn to function more authentically as ISFPs, they experience
greater balance between their Fi and Te. They learn that integrating
their Te happens naturally and indirectly as they go about authentically
using their Fi and Se. As they cultivate conditions that support their
natural strengths, Phase III ISFPs come to experience a heightened sense
of peace, wholeness, and satisfaction. ISFPs' Dominant Function:
Introverted Feeling (Fi) ISFPs' dominant function is Introverted Feeling
(Fi). Compared with Extraverted Feeling (Fe), Fi is more intensive,
individualized, and idiosyncratic. Since Fi judgments are formed
independent of collective sentiments, ISFPs may be wary of Fe judgments
and expressions, which, from an Fi perspective, may seem generic, fake,
or contrived. Rightly or not, Fi is commonly perceived as more
emotionally "mature" than Fe. For ISFPs, as well as other FP types,
emotions are not readily expressed or dramatized. Instead, they are
typically managed internally or repackaged and expressed via Extraverted
Thinking (Te). Consequently, ISFPs are outwardly measured and rational
in their presentation; outsiders may even mistake them for Thinking
types. The same introverted property which provides emotional restraint
is also responsible for the depth and intensity of Fi. At times, one
might glimpse such intensity of emotion passing through ISFPs' Te in the
form of biting or caustic

remarks. Since Fi is a Judging function, it is characteristically more
serious than it is light and playful. It is therefore unsurprising that
ISFPs often take themselves and their lives quite seriously. In this
respect, they differ from ESFPs, whose dominant function (Se) is more
fun-loving and excitement-seeking. While both types utilize Se and Fi,
ESFPs' are primarily geared to absorb, experience, and respond to the
world (Se), whereas ISFPs are more intentional in their approach.
Finding it difficult to relax and do nothing, ISFPs excel at constantly
busying themselves with tasks and other matters. ISFPs' Auxiliary
Function: Extraverted Sensing (Se) Extraverted Sensing (Se) serves as
ISFPs' auxiliary function. It attunes to concrete sensory details of the
external world by way of the five senses (i.e., sight, smell, touch,
sound, and taste). Se types can often be found scanning the environment
for interesting sensory novelties, noticing details other types might
miss. They often display a strong visual recall, or what is sometimes
dubbed a "photographic" memory. Se differs from Ne in that it is not a
highly verbal function. While INFPs enjoy discussing ideas, ISFPs often
prefer to be "doing" something. While INFPs love playing with words or
abstractions, ISFPs may get swept up in sports, performance, cooking,
etc. Despite these abstract versus concrete differences, both ISFPs and
INFPs are commonly considered "artistic." Unlike IJs, who outwardly
express Judging (Fe or Te), IPs extravert their Perceiving function (Se
or Ne). This can lead IPs to appear more creative or artistic. With
regard to creative expression, INFPs are inclined toward writing or
poetry, while ISFPs are often better suited for painting, sculpting, or
various types of performance. Especially in F types, Se contributes to a
strong concern for taste, aesthetics, and fashion. As mentioned earlier,
ISFPs are more concerned with their appearance and more liberal users of
make-up or other embellishments than INFPs (who use Si) tend to be. Not
only is Se associated with taste, but because it is extraverted, it
gravitates toward popular tastes and fashions. This creates an
interesting dynamic in ISFPs. On the one hand, their Fi is highly
individualized, concerned with making its own value judgments and
developing its own tastes. On the other hand, their Se encourages them
to notice what everyone else is doing and to follow suit. Because Fi is
dominant, however, we would expect it to win out

most of the time. The Fi-Se combination may also inspire ISFPs to
develop refined tastes for food or drink. Many enjoy cooking, wine
tasting, and sampling new cuisines and restaurants. Contrast this with
INFPs, whose Ne-Si combination inspires a more basic diet, often
centered on organic or whole foods. Se can also be associated with broad
interests in sports or other "hands-on" activities. It may compel ISFPs
to take up work as chefs, artisans, dancers, musicians, physical and
occupational therapists, and the like. ISFPs' Tertiary Function:
Introverted Intuition (Ni) Like ISTPs, ISFPs use Introverted Intuition
(Ni) as their tertiary function, which may lead them to develop some
degree of interest in abstract or theoretical topics. After all, Ni and
Fi are the two introverted functions employed by INTJs, who are among
the most theoretically-minded of all types. However, because ISFPs' Ni
is tertiary rather than dominant, it is far less accessible for
conscious intuitive perception. So like other SP types, ISFPs gain most
of their insights through lived experience rather than through bursts of
intuitive knowing. ISFPs' Inferior Function: Extraverted Thinking (Te)
As is true of other types, ISFPs can be easily blinded to the degree to
which their inferior function impacts their decisions and behavior.
Without sufficient awareness and integration of their inferior, ISFPs
will continue to feel incomplete and be prone to unwise decision-making
in their careers and relationships. Therefore, ISFPs must work to
understand the ways in which their inferior function, Extraverted
Thinking (Te), manifests in their personality. For both ISFPs and INFPs,
the Fi-Te function pair involves a tension between individuality and
subjectivity (Fi), on the one hand, and standardized ways of doing
things (Te), on the other. Consciously, ISFPs tend to emphasize the
former, championing the unique values and preferences of the individual
(Fi). Unconsciously, however, they are drawn to "objective" truths and
more standardized ways of doing things (Te). Since all Introverts'
inferior function is extraverted in direction, it is sensitive to
externalities. For ISFPs, their inferior Te is attuned to the structure
of external systems, systems that are inextricably linked with
Fi-related concerns such as

hunger, homelessness, or other injustices. This is one of the chief ways
their Te works with their Fi. Their Te draws conclusions about external
circumstances and their Fi provides the subjective response to those Te
judgments. The world relies on ISFPs (and INFPs) to use this Te-Fi
process to identify potential injustices and to ensure that the
individual (Fi) doesn't get lost in the system (Te). ISFPs' Te can also
contribute a desire to organize the immediate environment. Like INFPs,
ISFPs can derive a great deal of guilty pleasure from ordering and
organizing, giving their Te the sense of external control it desires. Te
may also inspire ISFPs to "follow the rules" and "be responsible." ISFPs
who regularly indulge their Te may be so bent on being pious or
responsible that they fail to spend sufficient time exploring and
experiencing life (Se). And because responsibility is culturally
endorsed as a positive virtue, they may fail to realize that being
obsessed with it is actually quite unhealthy for them, forfeiting their
openness to new experiences and potentially some degree of compassion
(Fi). In the grip of Te, ISFPs can become rigid, particular, and
dogmatic, appearing more like ESTJs than ISFPs. ISFPs feel they have
little control over the outside world. Like other IPs, ISFPs are known
for their lack of assertiveness and conflict avoidance. This is partly
due to their Fi's desire to avoid hurting others' feelings. It also
relates to the fact that being "assertive" involves extraverted Judging,
which for ISFPs, is in the inferior position (Te). So when it comes to
expressing their judgments, they often avoid doing so directly. Instead,
they may simply swallow the judgment and try to deal with its attendant
feelings by way of their Fi. Or, they may address the issue more
obliquely through action (Se). Like other P-types, ISFPs can be disposed
to expressing their grievances through passive-aggressive behavior. For
ISFPs, personal growth requires regular employment of their dominant Fi
and auxiliary Se. It involves avoiding obsessing over Te
responsibilities and, instead, building a life based on care and empathy
(Fi), as well as a breadth of activities (Se). Those who do so
successfully are more open, flexible, and balanced, capable of avoiding
the traps and pitfalls of the inferior function.

ISFJ ISFJs are among the more commonly encountered personality types,
thought to comprise upwards of 8% of the general population. To
understand ISFJs, we must first consider their dominant function,
Introverted Sensing (Si), which compels them to preserve and protect
past ways of doing things. This is why David Keirsey has dubbed them
"guardians." Like other SJ types, they grow attached to the routine,
familiar, and expected. The more often they do something in a particular
way (e.g., eat a certain type of meal for lunch), the harder it is for
them to break out of that pattern. The same can be said of their beliefs
and worldview. As adults, ISFJs often persist in the beliefs and
worldview of their childhood. In sum, they can be seen to rely heavily
on past precedent, both behaviorally and ideationally. While sometimes
viewed as stubborn or nitpicky, ISFJs are actually more easygoing than
they are often given credit for. Since their dominant function (Si) is a
Perceiving function, they are naturally inclined to assume a receptive
rather than a controlling role. Unfortunately, this often goes unnoticed
by the casual onlooker, since Si is introverted in direction. Especially
in their free time, ISFJs know how to be leisurely, something ESFJs can
have a harder time with. In sharing the identical set of psychological
functions, ISFJs resemble ESFJs. One difference is ESFJs tend to be more
warm and engaging upfront, while ISFJs can be a bit more reserved and
take longer to warm-up. These two types also differ with respect to
inferior function issues, with ISFJs wrestling with Ne and ESFJs with
Ti. ISFJs also resemble ISTJs, since they share the same dominant and
inferior function. However, their auxiliary functions do confer
significant differences. ISFJs use Extraverted Feeling (Fe) as their
auxiliary function, which grants them a greater measure of social
intelligence. While ISTJs may lack some degree of social grace, their
auxiliary Te contributes stronger powers of logical and tactical
intelligence. ISFJs' Fe may also contribute an added measure of
openmindedness, at least outwardly. However, this may be more a matter
of ISFJs' concern for interpersonal harmony than a true difference in
openness. Although differing by only one "preference" (i.e., J-P), ISFJs
actually share zero

functions with ISFPs. ISFPs, who use Se instead of Si, are less
concerned with past precedent than ISFJs are. And because of their Fi,
ISFPs are more individualistic and less objective in their judging
process. Their Se also confers a greater interest in sensory and
material novelty. Moreover, ISFPs are inclined toward "hands-on" or what
is described as "Realistic" work on the Holland career inventory. ISFJs,
by contrast, are typically less interested in getting their hands dirty.
They are more apt to pursue "Conventional" than Realistic careers. While
both ISFJs and ISFPs may take up "Social" sorts of work, ISFJs gravitate
toward more abstract occupations, such as teaching, whereas ISFPs,
prefer more hands-on careers, such as nursing. ISFJs also make effective
managers of people, balancing care and concern with organizational
know-how. All in all, ISFJs are among the most loyal, dutiful, and
responsible of all types. They are admired for their devotion and
steadfastness. They make loyal friends and companions, especially for
those with similar values and lifestyles. ISFJs' Functional Stack & Type
Development ISFJs' functional stack is composed of the following
functions: Dominant: Introverted Sensing (Si) Auxiliary: Extraverted
Feeling (Fe) Tertiary: Introverted Thinking (Ti) Inferior: Extraverted
Intuition (Ne) ISFJs' personality type development can be broadly
conceived as consisting of three phases: Phase I (Childhood) Phase I is
characterized by the development and rise to power of ISFJs' dominant
function, Introverted Sensing (Si). ISFJs use their Si to absorb,
integrate, and reflect on acquired information and personal experiences.
Phase I ISFJs may also show some development of their auxiliary
function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe), which can serve as a helpful
extraverted tool for navigating and managing the outside world.

Phase II (Adolescence-30s) While the inferior function is not entirely
dormant or inert in Phase I, the epic tug-of-war between the dominant
and inferior does not come to the fore until Phase II. Once ISFJs'
dominant Si reaches a certain threshold of strength and dominance, their
inferior function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne), begins to assert itself
and play a more prominent and mischievous role. This will be elaborated
later in this profile. Phase II ISFJs also show increasing use and
development of their Fe, allowing them to form and express judgments.
They may even begin to tap into their tertiary function, Introverted
Thinking (Ti), which serves to cross-check and refine their Fe
judgments. Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond) If all goes well and they are
fortunate enough to enter Phase III, ISFJs become increasingly aware of
the insidious ways of their inferior Ne. As they become more aware of
their inferior and learn to function more healthily as ISFJs, they
experience greater balance between their Si and Ne, as well as an
increasing sense of peace and wholeness. ISFJs' Dominant Function:
Introverted Sensing (Si) ISFJs use Introverted Sensing (Si) as their
dominant function. Si is the function that undergirds ISFJs' propensity
to function as guardians and conservators of tradition. The longer they
are immersed in particular set of circumstances, the more difficult it
can be for them to open themselves to alternatives. Because Si is a
Perceiving function, ISFJs are less inclined to function as frontline
activists for their beliefs than ESJs, whose dominant function is a
Judging function. Instead, ISFJs prefer to spend time reflecting on the
past or their cherished traditions. Many enjoy attending religious
services or studying religious texts, activities that strengthen and
bolster their Si beliefs. One of the most commonly overlooked features
of Si is its role in bodily sensation. Namely, Si monitors internal
bodily affairs, ensuring that physical needs are optimally satisfied.
Being an introverted function, Si is more intensive than Se is, which
can make ISFJs more sensitive to a variety of sensory stimuli such as
lighting, room temperature, noise levels, sleeping surfaces, etc. They
can also be sensitive to strong flavors and unfamiliar textures, which
is why they

commonly prefer what Se types might consider a bland, simple, or
routinized diet. The bodily role of Si can also influence ISFJs' health.
It may, for instance, allow them to be more attuned to when they are
full, thereby preventing overeating. On the other hand, it could play a
role in health problems, such as hypochondriasis, in which normal
sensations become amplified and interpreted as signs of illness. We can
also compare Si with its intuitive cousin, Ni. As Perceiving functions,
both can be viewed as functioning rather passively. Both can also be
associated with a strong sense of conviction, which is why SJs and NJs
alike can seem outwardly stubborn, opinionated, or closed-minded. The
primary difference between these two functions is that Ni is a
synthesizing function, producing its own impressions and
interpretations. Si, by contrast, does not perceive a different reality
behind sense data, but compares present experiences to past ones. For
Ni, each experience is approached as new and interpreted on its own
terms, whereas for Si, the past is granted a more prominent role. While
it can be easy for some types to criticize ISFJs for their conservative
ways, we should not overlook their value and purpose. In addition to
helping and teaching others (Fe), ISFJs help remind us of where we've
been (Si) in order to prevent us from repeating our past mistakes. Si
serves as a necessary cultural counterbalance to Se, reminding us that
material resources are not unlimited and should be managed with care and
wisdom. ISFJs' Auxiliary Function: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) ISFJs use
Extraverted Feeling (Fe) as their auxiliary function. As the most
interpersonal of all the functions, Fe is attuned to surveying and
improving interpersonal feelings and morale. Like INFJs, ISFJs work to
cultivate "good feelings" in the interpersonal environment. For the sake
of surveying others' feelings, Fe helps ISFJs read emotional expressions
and body language. Interestingly, ISFJs may have a more difficult time
with perceiving their own emotions than they do those of others. This is
due to the fact that their Feeling function is directed outwardly (i.e.,
extraverted) rather than inwardly. Unlike ISFPs, whose Feeling function
is introverted (Fi), ISFJs are less equipped to independently manage
their emotions. Hence, when ISFJs find themselves in emotionally taxing
circumstances, they often turn to others for support.

Fe also entails an extraversion of judgment. ISFJs utilize their Fe to
express their thoughts, feelings, opinions, and grievances. Assuming
they have not been severely censored in their upbringing, ISFJs are
generally happy to share their feelings and perspectives. ISFJs' Fe can
present differently among strangers than it does with their intimates.
In larger groups, they may seem characteristically "positive" in their
expressions, as part of their attempt to cultivate good feelings. In the
company of close confidants, however, they may be more open and direct
with their concerns and grievances. In fact, self-expression a la their
Fe is critical to their psychological and physical health and
well-being. Even if doing so does not provide immediate solutions to the
problem at hand, they tend to feel better once they have expressed their
feelings, whether through words or tears. This is important for the
mates or friends of ISFJs to recognize. While not necessarily looking
for others to solve their problems, ISFJs value emotional support,
empathy, and reassurance. ISFJs' Tertiary Function: Introverted Feeling
(Ti) ISFJs use Introverted Thinking (Ti) as their tertiary function. Its
role is to further refine their Fe judgments. It adds an element of
logic that is less apparent in the early phases of their type
development. Less developed ISFJs may draw very little from their Ti.
Since their Si-Fe pairing provides them with strong convictions about
truth, taking an additional step to Ti may seem unnecessary. With time
and maturity, however, ISFJs can grow more comfortable with their Ti and
appreciate its inherent value. Ti can help ISFJs think more critically
and analytically, serving as an aid and check to their Si-Fe process.
ISFJs' Inferior Function: Extraverted Intuition (Ne) As is true of other
types, ISFJs can be blinded to the degree to which their inferior
function impacts their decisions and behavior. Without sufficient
awareness and integration of their inferior, ISFJs will be prone to
unwise decision-making in their lifestyle, careers, and relationships.
Therefore, it behooves ISFJs to understand the ways their inferior
function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne), manifests in their personality. Ne
is concerned with connecting ideas, brainstorming new theories, and
conceiving options and possibilities. Prone to seeing connections and

associations everywhere, it is an unpredictable and highly divergent
function. This is why ENPs are often viewed as quirky, absent-minded
creatives. While it is true that ISFJs can be routine and conservative,
there are numerous ways in which Ne may manifest in their personality.
One way ISFJs may employ their Ne is finding creative ways to teach or
engage with children. Since Ne might be construed as a rather "playful"
function, there is part of the ISFJ that is childlike, that wants to
play and let loose. ISFJs may also employ their Ne through hobbies such
as reading or word games. Many ISFJs enjoy working crosswords or other
sorts of word puzzles. Such activities allow them to exercise their Si
recall, while also making connections and associations (Ne). Many ISFJs
also enjoy a variety of arts and crafts that allow for creative
engagement of their Ne. A less healthy means of engaging their Ne is
gossip. By proffering speculations about people or events, ISFJs can
obtain a quick ego boost for their Ne. ISFJs may also enjoy speculating
about various religious or political topics. Stock trading is yet
another way ISFJs may engage their Ne. Since reading and analyzing
market trends might be construed as an Ne-Ti endeavor, ISFJs who can
successfully navigate the complexities of the market not only anticipate
a financial reward, but a psychological kickback for their inferior
function. Like other types seeking to integrate their inferior function,
ISFJs must learn that integration does not occur through direct use or
development of their Ne. Instead, they are wise to allow their Ne to
remain rather unconscious, functioning passively in the background. This
allows them to focus their time and energy on what they do best (Si and
Fe), trusting that integration will occur naturally as they consistently
and authentically function as ISFJs.

ISTJ Thought to comprise over 10% of the general population, ISTJ is
among the most commonly encountered personality types, outnumbering
INTJs at a clip of ten to one. ISTJs are among the most loyal, dutiful,
and responsible of the types. They make loyal friends and companions and
are admired for their devotion, steadfastness, and perseverance. If ESPs
are the hares of the sixteen types, ISTJs are the tortoises. They work
slowly and steadily until the job is done, fastidiously attending to all
the details along the way. In order to understand ISTJs, one must first
understand their dominant function, Introverted Sensing (Si), which
compels them to preserve and protect past ways of doing things. Their Si
characteristics led David Keirsey to rightly describe them as
"guardians." ISTJs guard and defend traditions and conventions,
particularly those they have significant personal experience and
familiarity with (e.g., their childhood religion). Like ISFJs, ISTJs can
grow attached to the routine and familiar. The more often they do
something in a particular way, the harder it is for them to break out of
that pattern. This not only applies to their behavioral habits, but also
to their beliefs and worldview, as many ISTJs continue in the same
belief system in which they were raised. While ISTJs are at times viewed
as stubborn or finicky, they are actually more easygoing than is
typically accredited them. Since Si is a Perceiving function, their
first preference is to assume a receptive rather than controlling
attitude. Unfortunately, this often goes unnoticed, since Si is
introverted in direction. This is especially true in work settings,
where ISTJs are more apt to call on their auxiliary Te. Once away from
the workplace, however, most ISTJs know how to be leisurely, something
ESTJs can have a harder time with. In short, ISTJs are far less rigid
and controlling (especially inwardly) than they are sometimes painted to
be. In sharing the same dominant and inferior functions, ISTJs have much
in common with ISFJs. However, their auxiliary functions do confer
significant differences. ISFJs use Extraverted Feeling (Fe) as their
auxiliary function, which grants them a greater measure of social and
emotional intelligence. And while

ISTJs may lack some measure of social grace, their auxiliary Thinking
function (Te) contributes stronger powers of logic and tactical
intelligence. Although differing in only one preference (i.e., J-P),
ISTJs actually share zero functions with ISTPs. ISTPs, who use Se
instead of Si, are less concerned with past precedent than ISTJs are.
Their Se also confers a stronger desire for sensory and material
novelty. Lastly, ISTPs are more inclined toward "hands-on" work, whereas
ISTJ career-seekers are more disposed to administrative or other "white
collar" sorts of work. ISTJs' Functional Stack & Type Development ISTJs'
functional stack is composed of the following functions: Dominant:
Introverted Sensing (Si) Auxiliary: Extraverted Thinking (Te) Tertiary:
Introverted Feeling (Fi) Inferior: Extraverted Intuition (Ne) ISTJs'
personality type development can be broadly conceived as consisting of
three phases: Phase I (Childhood) Phase I is characterized by the
development and rise to power of their dominant function, Introverted
Sensing (Si). ISTJs use their Si to absorb, integrate, and reflect on
acquired information and personal experiences. Phase I ISTJs may also
show some development of their auxiliary function, Extraverted Thinking
(Te), which can serve as a helpful extraverted tool for navigating and
managing the outside world. Phase II (Adolescence-30s) Once ISTJs'
dominant Si reaches a certain threshold of consciousness and
differentiation, their inferior function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne),
begins to assert itself and play a more prominent and mischievous role.
The tug-of-war between their Si and Ne will be discussed later in this
profile. Phase II ISTJs also show

increasing use and development of their Te and may even begin to tap
into their tertiary function, Introverted Feeling (Fi). Phase III (30s,
40s, & Beyond) If all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter
Phase III, ISTJs become increasingly aware of the insidious ways of
their inferior Si. As they become more aware of their inferior and learn
to function more authentically as ISTJs, they experience greater balance
between their Si and Ne. They learn that integrating their Ne happens
naturally and indirectly as they go about authentically using their Si
and Te. As they cultivate conditions that support their natural
strengths, Phase III ISTJs come to experience a heightened sense of
peace, wholeness, and satisfaction. ISTJs' Dominant Function:
Introverted Sensing (Si) As we've seen, ISTJs use Introverted Sensing
(Si) as their dominant function. Si types (i.e., SJs) are quite
different from Se types (i.e., SPs). Unlike SPs, ISTJs are not
sensation-seekers. They do not venture out seeking novel sensations,
experiences, or material goods. They typically prefer a more routine,
careful (versus carefree), and predictable lifestyle. Si undergirds
ISTJs' propensity to function as conservators of tradition. However,
because Si is a Perceiving function, ISTJs are less inclined to function
as frontline activists for their beliefs or values than ESJs are.
Rather, ISTJs prefer spending time reflecting on the past and their
cherished traditions. Many enjoy attending religious services or
studying religious texts, activities that support and strengthen their
Si convictions. Another feature of Si is its role in bodily sensation.
Namely, it serves to monitor internal bodily affairs, ensuring that
bodily needs are satisfied. As an introverted function, Si is more
intensive than Se is, which can make ISTJs more sensitive to certain
sensory stimuli. They may be hypersensitive to things like lighting,
room temperature, noise levels, etc. This can make them more irritable
than other types when sleep-deprived, hungry, or otherwise physically
uncomfortable. Sensitivity to strong or unusual flavors and textures may
lead them to adopt a relatively bland or routine diet. Si can also play
a role in problems like hypochondriasis, contributing to excessive
attention to and concern for bodily sensations, so that normal
sensations become amplified and interpreted as signs

of illness. We can also compare Si with its intuitive cousin, Ni. As
Perceiving functions, both can be viewed as functioning rather
passively. Both can also be associated with strength of conviction, as
SJs and NJs alike can seem outwardly stubborn, opinionated, or
closed-minded. The chief difference between these two functions is that
Ni is a synthesizing function, weaving together disparate information to
construct its own impressions or interpretations. Si, by contrast, does
not see a different reality behind immediate sense data. Instead, it
compares present experiences to past ones. For Ni, every experience is
new and interpreted on its own terms. For Si, the past plays a more
prominent role in interpreting the present. While it can be easy for
other types to criticize ISTJs for their conservative ways, we should
not overlook their value and purpose. ISTJs remind us of where we've
been and can thereby keep us from repeating our past mistakes. Their Si
also serves as a necessary cultural counterbalance to Se, reminding us
that material resources are limited and should be handled with care and
concern. ISTJs' Auxiliary Function: Extraverted Thinking (Te)
Extraverted Thinking (Te) serves as ISTJs' auxiliary function. It
undergirds their tendency to outwardly express their judgments and
opinions. ISTJs' tendency to "think out loud," by way of their Te, can
be both a strength and a weakness. On the one hand, their Te can make
ISTJs strong and effective teachers or managers. On the other hand, it
can result in them coming across as brusque, dogmatic, or controlling.
Like other Judging types, ISTJs can be prone to overstating things or
saying things that, in retrospect, they wish they could rescind or at
least soften. Unlike Extraverted Feeling, Te is not oriented to the
preservation of social harmony. It is less personal and less attuned to
others' feelings. ISTJs' preference for Te may therefore lead others to
perceive them as lacking some degree of tact or empathy. Te also strives
to bring order, control, and rationality to external systems and
operations. The modern world, characterized by a snowballing of
bureaucracy and "red tape," might be viewed as an offspring of an
unchecked Te. ISTJs' Te, in combination with their Si, makes them
well-suited for administrative, clerical,

and other careers that require careful attention to detail, protocols,
and procedures. While other types may find highly structured work
settings offputting, ISTJs find them comforting, since they know what to
expect and what their role is according to the delineated structure.
ISTJs' Tertiary Function: Introverted Feeling (Fi) Introverted Feeling
(Fi) is ISTJs' tertiary function. As an introverted function, Fi
involves an inner focus on and analysis of personal feelings and values.
Of all types, IFPs, who use Fi as their dominant function, are literally
the most "selffocused" (in a neutral sense) with respect to their
concern for independently exploring and managing their values and
emotions. ISTJs, by contrast, whose Fi is far less conscious, do not
always enjoy ready access to their own emotions. As an inner Judging
function, Fi grants IFPs a strong sense of inner self-control. But since
ISTJs' Fi is in the tertiary position, they do not enjoy the same degree
of inner control. To compensate, they, like other TJ types, focus more
on shaping or controlling the outside world via their Te. One of the
more important features of Fi is its direction. Namely, because it is
introverted, onlookers are often barred from accessing ISTJs' emotions.
This is exacerbated by the fact that Fi is subordinated to Te in their
functional stack. Consequently, ISTJs can appear cold, aloof, or
unemotional. As ISTJs tap into their Fi, they begin to attend more
closely to their personal feelings and values, as well as those of
others. They begin to recognize and appreciate the merit of subjective
concerns, acknowledging that truth or value is not limited to past
precedent (Si) or external standards (Te), but can also include
individual preferences (Fi). In opening to their Fi, ISTJs can become
more compassionate and understanding, even toward those at the other end
of the political or religious spectrum. ISTJs' Inferior Function:
Extraverted Intuition (Ne) As is true of other types, ISTJs can be
blinded to the degree to which their inferior function impacts their
decisions and behavior. Without sufficient awareness and integration of
their inferior, ISTJs will be prone to unwise decision-making.
Consequently, ISTJs seeking personal growth must work to understand the
ways their inferior function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne), manifests in
their personality.

Ne is concerned with generating and connecting ideas, as well as seeing
all the various options and possibilities. Prone to seeing connections
and associations everywhere, it is an unpredictable and highly divergent
function. This is why Ne types are often viewed as quirky and
unconventional creatives. While it is true that ISTJs are rather routine
and conservative in their ways, there are numerous ways in which Ne can
manifest in their personality. One way ISTJs may indulge their Ne is
through various sorts of speculation or prognostication. One of the most
common ways ISTJs do this is through gossip. By proffering theories
about various people or happenings, they secure an ego boost for their
Ne. They also enjoy propagating various religious or political theories.
ISTJs also engage their Ne in their hobbies, such as word or math games.
I know a number of ISTJs who enjoy working crosswords, Sudokus, or other
sorts of puzzles. Such activities allow them to exercise their Si
recall, utilize Te strategies, and make associations and experiment with
possibilities (Ne). Many ISTJs also enjoy a variety of arts and crafts
that allow for creative use of their Ne. ISTJs also employ their Ne is
by looking for creative ways to teach others. In addition to their
desire to impart Si-Te information, creative use of their Ne may be
another reason ISTJs gravitate toward teaching. As for other types,
integration for ISTJs does not occur through direct use or development
of their inferior function. Rather, ISTJs are better off allowing their
Ne to remain unconscious, functioning passively in the background.
Instead of trying to develop or display more foresight, cleverness, or
creativity, integrating ISTJs do what ISTJs do best, focusing their time
and energy on Si and Te, while trusting that, in due time, everything
else will fall into place.

ENFP ENFPs are enthusiastic, idealistic, restless, and open-minded. They
are among the most versatile of all types, working well with both people
and ideas. As Extraverts, they are not opposed to action, while as
Intuitives, they are not opposed to reflection. In this sense, ENFPs
represent a sort of hybrid between Introverts and Extraverts. ENFPs are
novelty-seekers. They are constantly scanning for new and interesting
people, ideas, and possibilities. Like INFPs, they enjoy abstract as
well as more experiential forms of learning. While seeking success in
their careers and personal development, ENFPs generally take life less
seriously than IP or EJ types (i.e., types with a dominant Judging
function). At the end of the day, ENFPs want to have fun and may not be
highly discriminating with regard to how that happens. Perhaps more than
anything, ENFPs fear boredom and stagnation. Even sleep can seem a bit
too boring or mundane for ENFPs. The minds of ENFPs can move at a
frenetic pace. They can be restless, anxious, and plagued by erratic
sleeping patterns. As with ENTPs, one can even observe this restlessness
in ENFPs' eyes, which are often darting broadly from one side to
another, as though searching for something in their surroundings. What
they are actually searching for, however, is more mental in nature, such
as words, ideas, or possibilities (i.e., Ne). ENFPs are constantly
generating new ideas, associations, and quips. They can often seem
random, scattered, distracted, and flighty and, rightly or not, are
commonly diagnosed with ADD or ADHD. ENFPs are predominantly
"right-brained" personality types. While the left side of the brain is
concerned with order, control, and systematizing, the right brain is
oriented to novelty, people, and emotions. The right brain is also the
more random or "creative" side (i.e., divergence), while the left
hemisphere is concerned with analysis and predictability (i.e.,
convergence). ENFPs place high value on their personal experiences when
it comes to discerning truth. Though not to the same extent as ESFPs,
for ENFPs, "experiencing is believing." Because of the high value they
place on their

personal experiences, ENFPs may feel they cannot fully know themselves
until they have tried just about everything (contrast this with INJs,
who feel they know whether they will like something without needing to
experience it). For this reason, ENFPs are quintessential seekers and
dilettantes, wanting to experience as much of life and the world as is
humanly possible. In many regards, the interests and aspirations of
ENFPs are infinite. This can be nothing less than exhausting for those
trying to stay apace with them. ENFPs are among the least judgmental and
most inclusive of all types, both inwardly and outwardly. Much like
INFPs, they are champions of diversity and multiculturalism. Their
Extraverted Intuition (Ne) allows them to readily see different points
of view, while their Introverted Feeling (Fi) supplies a sense of
empathy and respect for individuality. ENFPs are also connoisseurs of
and participants in the arts and culture. They are commonly drawn to all
sorts of creative endeavors. In particular, they often enjoy music,
drama, and photography. Those with sufficient mental focus can also make
great writers, be it fiction or non-fiction. ENFPs are highly
represented among journalists, excelling with both the written and
spoken word. Career-wise, ENFPs are often drawn to ministry, counseling,
or teaching. They love seeing and cultivating potential in others. While
some ENFPs are content with working largely with ideas, others seek to
combine this with action and adventure. Such individuals may take up
work as missionaries, tour guides, or diplomats. Others may try their
hand at politics. ENFPs' inferior function, Introverted Sensing (Si),
may contribute an interest in history that may add to the allure of
religious, political, or journalistic work. ENFPs' Functional Stack &
Type Development ENFPs' functional stack is composed of the following
functions: Dominant: Extraverted Intuition (Ne) Auxiliary: Introverted
Feeling (Fi) Tertiary: Extraverted Thinking (Te) Inferior: Introverted
Sensing (Si)

ENFPs' type development can be roughly conceived according to three
phases: Phase I (Childhood) Extending from early childhood into late
adolescence, Phase I involves the emergence and differentiation of
ENFPs' dominant function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne). While ENFPs are
typically open-minded and curious throughout their lives, this becomes
more apparent with the development of their Ne, which is among the most
open-ended of the functions. Beyond the requirements of school, Phase I
ENFPs are generally free to sit back and absorb the world without undue
worry or concern. This grants their Ne ample time to form extensive
connections and associations. Phase I ENFPs may further expand their
horizons through things like reading, travel, the arts, engaging with
people, etc. Phase II (Adolescence-30s) Once their Ne reaches a certain
level of conscious and differentiation, ENFPs' inferior function,
Introverted Sensing (Si), enters the picture and begins to play a more
influential and often mischievous role. We will discuss this in greater
depth later in this profile. ENFPs also develop their auxiliary
function, Introverted Feeling (Fi), in Phase II. Fi serves to refine and
clarify their values, worldview, and identity. The process of "finding
themselves" entails both inner (Fi) and outer (Ne) exploration. As ENFPs
develop and utilize their Fi, they may also become more serious,
focused, and intentional. Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond) If all goes
well and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase III, ENFPs become
increasingly aware of the insidious ways of their inferior Si. As they
become more aware of their inferior and learn to function more
authentically as ENFPs, they experience greater balance between their Ne
and Si. They learn that integrating their Si happens naturally and
indirectly as they go about authentically using their Ne and Fi. As they
cultivate conditions that support their natural strengths, Phase III
ENFPs come to experience a heightened sense of peace, wholeness, and
satisfaction. ENFPs' Dominant Function: Extraverted Intuition (Ne)

Extraverted Intuition (Ne) seeks outer novelty. At first glance, Se and
Ne types can appear quite similar, as both ESPs and ENPs can be
outwardly active, playful, or restless. Ne differs from Se, however, in
that it is more concerned with seeking new ideas, connections, and
possibilities than it is with seeking novel sensations. Ne is an
extraverted Perceiving function. It can function either perceptively or
expressively. The verbal expression of Ne amounts to something like
brainstorming aloud. When orating, ENFPs may not always seem to "have a
point" as they randomly move from one idea to the next. Often times, the
"point" is for ENFPs to find their way to a judgment (Fi), but this
first requires them to explore multiple options by way of their Ne.
While others may not trust the seemingly arbitrary and haphazard ways of
Ne, ENFPs realize its value. They know that, in time, that truth or
wisdom will reveal itself. Their only job is to express their Ne,
trusting that it will lead them in the right direction. Granted, some
ENFPs are much more coherent and polished in their expressions than
others; much depends on the context of the conversation. In some
instances, ENFPs call on their tertiary function, Extraverted Thinking
(Te), which is not at all random, but more direct and to the point. In
its receptive role, Ne works to gather information. It does not merely
gather overt information as Se does. Se is more straightforward,
involving a direct apprehension of information through one or more of
the primary senses. Ne is different in that it goes beyond or looks
behind sense data. This allows ENFPs to discern otherwise hidden
patterns, possibilities, and potentials. Their Ne is constantly scanning
for relationships and patterns among facts and experiences. ENFPs
commonly employ the receptive side of their Ne in activities such as
reading, exploring the arts and culture, and conversing with others.
They enjoy asking questions that allow them to gain insight or knowledge
from others, making them good facilitators of conversation. ENFPs often
hone and apply this talent in careers such as journalism. As an
extraverted function, Ne is more divergent and open-ended than its
introverted cousin, Ni. Once Ni has done its work, INJs are more apt to
feel there is a single correct solution. ENFPs, by contrast, are
disposed to multiplying rather than reducing the number of options or
possibilities. ENFPs also use their Ne to sniff out intriguing
possibilities. They enjoy the role of wanderer or seeker. They rarely
know in advance precisely what they are

seeking, which is partly why they find it so exhilarating. Ne entails a
sense of blind anticipation and expectation, of not knowing who or what
will manifest next in their life journey. Extraverted Intuition can also
be associated with open-mindedness. It helps ENFPs see truth on both
sides of an issue without forming premature judgments or conclusions. Ne
can also involve openness to alternative or Bohemian lifestyles,
allowing ENFPs to consider things like going vegan or joining a commune.
Like ENTPs, ENFPs can have a sort of love-hate relationship with Ne.
They like that it helps them stay open-minded and allows them to see the
value of different options or perspectives. They also enjoy its sense of
adventure, expectancy, and wonderment toward life's mysteries. But Ne
also has its challenges, such as making it difficult for ENFPs to draw
firm conclusions or feel confident about their decisions. ENFPs'
Auxiliary Function: Introverted Feeling (Fi) Introverted Feeling (Fi) is
the auxiliary function of both ENFPs and ESFPs. One of Fi's primary
concerns is the development of a personalized worldview, independent of
societal conventions, which can serve as a platform for
selfunderstanding and decision-making. Fi is quite similar to
Introverted Thinking (Ti) in that it involves an ongoing process of
building an inner worldview and approach to life. The primary difference
is that Fi focuses more on personal tastes (i.e., "likes and dislikes")
and moral judgments (i.e., "good and bad"), whereas Ti thinks more in
terms of "reasonable and unreasonable," "logical or illogical."
Consequently, ENFPs first inclination is to use Fi to make moral,
artistic, or taste-related evaluations, whereas ENTPs use Ti to evaluate
the validity and veracity of concepts. The difference between Fi in
ENFPs versus INFPs is its place in the functional stack. For INFPs, it
comes first, which makes them quicker to judge. Afterward, they use
their Ne to probe the judgment to see if it is valid or whether it
should be kept open or "grey." For ENFPs, the order is reversed. They do
not start with an initial judgment or presumption like INFPs. This is
particularly true in Phase I of their development. ENPs are wired to
approach each situation with the openness of their Ne. After exploring
things by way of their Ne, they use their Fi

to form a judgment. Then, if they feel confident in that judgment, they
may express it through their tertiary Te. One of the more important
features of Fi is its direction. Namely, because it is introverted,
outsiders may not have easy access to ENFPs' emotions, with the
exception of their general spiritedness and enthusiasm. Like ESFPs,
ENFPs express their Feeling judgments somewhat indirectly through their
Te. This may at times lead others to view ENFPs as Thinking types, while
seeing ENTPs, who extravert their judgments by way of Extraverted
Feeling, as Feeling types. ENFPs' Tertiary Function: Extraverted
Thinking (Te) Extraverted Thinking (Te) involves the outward expression
of rational judgments and opinions. Since Te is ENFPs' preferred
extraverted Judging function and falls lower in their functional stack,
ENFPs are generally less comfortable extroverting judgments than keeping
their judgments to themselves (Fi). This may lead them, along with other
Perceiving types, to habitually defer to others' wishes rather than
asserting their own. And since ENFPs have independent minds, they can
grow resentful of those who try to control them. With that said, ENFPs
tend to be somewhat more self-assertive than IPs, but their relative
discomfort with utilizing their Te can still land them in relational
trouble. As with other Perceiving types, ENFPs can also disposed to
passive-aggressive behavior, involving the expression of negative
feelings in indirect and underhanded ways. For instance, an ENFP might
suddenly discontinue correspondence with a friend after furtively
feeling offended by something he said. To improve their communication in
relationships, ENFPs can develop the ability to confidently assert
themselves through their Te. In hoping to live up to their ideal of
authenticity, they can learn to express themselves more honestly and
directly. Self-actualizing ENFPs find a source of strength and
confidence in their Te. They find the courage to stand-up for
themselves, to overcome their fear that conflict or disharmony will
necessitate a bad outcome. They come to see how forthright expression
can enhance intimacy. Te can also contribute to ENFPs' leadership
capacities. ENFPs' Inferior Function: Introverted Sensing (Si)

As with other types, ENFPs can be blinded to the degree to which their
inferior function impacts their decisions and behavior. Consequently,
ENFPs seeking self-knowledge and personal growth must work to understand
the ways their inferior function, Introverted Sensing (Si), manifests in
their personality. Si uses information from the past to inform the
present. It is attuned to past ways of doing things, engendering a
concern for preserving certain traditions and conventions. Si types
(i.e., SJs) are creatures of routine and habit. In contrast to Se types,
they have a diminished need for novel physical pleasures, lavish
surroundings, or material comforts. Si is best understood in
juxtaposition with its functional opposite, Ne. Despite being opposites,
when considered together, Ne and Si constitute a meaningful whole. As
we've seen, Ne is concerned with exploring new ideas and possibilities.
Si, in contrast, is focused on preserving the past. Ne knows no limits,
seeing options and opportunities as endless, while Si sees clearly
defined limits as determined by past precedent. Ne seeks the new and
novel, Si the tried and true. Interestingly, all of these opposing
forces can exist within the same personality type. ENFPs tend to
consciously identify with the needs and values of their Ne, while their
subconscious rallies for the values and desires associated with Si. Mind
(N) & Body (S) A most overlooked feature of Si is its perception of
internal bodily sensations--- the body as felt and experienced from
within. This element of Si becomes more evident during activities that
direct attention to one's internal bodily state, such as meditation,
yoga, or Tai-Chi. Since Si is their inferior function, ENFPs can lack
some degree of inner bodily awareness. In their attempts to compensate,
they may grant too much attention to certain physical sensations. This
can make them more susceptible to hypochondriasis or psychosomatic
illnesses, in which a heightened focus on bodily sensations cultivates
or amplifies physical symptoms. Because of the powerful role of the mind
in both health and illness, negative imaginings may even promote the
development of real physical problems and illnesses. Big Picture (N)
vs. Details (S); Perfectionism When operating in Ne mode, ENFPs tend to
be oblivious to details. They focus

on abstract ideas and the big picture rather than details or minutia.
They may struggle to effectively attend to the concrete details of daily
life, such as forgetting to pay the bills, eating a poor diet, or
failing to take enough exercise. When engrossed in a creative project,
however, ENFPs can look like INFJs. They can become perfectionistic and
obsessive over details. It can be hard for them to accept anything less
than the perfect material embodiment (S) of their imagined design (N).
Walt Disney and Steve Jobs, both of whom were ENPs, exemplified this N-S
perfectionism. Future (Ne) vs. Past (Si); Novel (Ne) vs. Traditional
(Si) Si concerns itself with the past, while Ne focuses on future
options or possibilities. ENFPs' Si, combined with their tertiary Te,
can take an interest in the facts and details of history. They may also
enjoy using their Ne to explore historical meanings, as well as the
implications of history's lessons for a better future. This is why many
ENFPs and ENTPs turn to politics or journalism, careers that allow them
to use their knowledge of history to analyze current events and
speculate about the future. ENFPs often experience a sense of tension
between the familiar and traditional (Si) versus the novel and
unconventional (Ne). This is especially common for ENFPs in their teens
and twenties. At some level, ENFPs are attached and drawn to the
traditions of their childhood (Si). On the other, their Ne and Fi may
encourage them to reconsider those same traditions. This can contribute
to identity confusion among ENFPs, finding themselves unsure of the
degree to which they should break from their childhood traditions versus
reinventing themselves. ENFPs raised in strong religious families may
even experience a sense of guilt in allowing their Ne to roam free. But
they are also motivated by their inferior Si to fashion a life that is
more predictable and routine than would be possible if their Ne went
unchecked. Such struggles can leave ENFPs with questions like: Do I want
to start a family or do I want to live a freer and less fettered
lifestyle? Should I take a good-paying job in a conventional career (Si)
or try my hand at something more creative and risky (Ne)? In weighing
such questions, ENFPs, like other types, are wise to ensure they are
leading with their dominant function rather than their inferior. As
Ne-dominants, ENFPs' signature strength is creative exploration. To best
utilize their creativity,

they need to ensure they are not allowing their Si to impose excessive
limitations or boundaries on their explorations. ENFPs are typically
better to use their Ne, as well as the reasoning capacities of their Fi,
to hash out truth, rather than deferring to Si tradition. Their Si may
however supply some of the raw material for their Ne and Fi to explore
and analyze. For example, an ENFP who leads with her Si might start with
the conclusion that the religion of her youth is true. She might then
use her Ne and Fi to further explore that religion, without really
questioning whether she had the right starting point. In contrast, an
ENFP leading with Ne would not start with the assumption that the
religion is true. While she would include her Si experiences in
exploring its merits, she would not allow religious dogmas to restrict
or bias her initial analyses. Only after exploring all the options, a
process that typically takes years, would her beliefs grow clearer and
allow her to draw firmer conclusions regarding the teachings of her
youth.

ENTP ENTPs are versatile, open-minded, and restless. Easily bored, they
are constantly toying with new ideas and scanning for possibilities.
Because of their insatiable thirst for novelty, their interests can seem
limitless. As is true of ENFPs, ENTPs' minds move at a frenetic pace,
contributing to restlessness, anxiousness, and erratic sleeping
patterns. Not only are they constantly scanning for new possibilities,
but also generating new ideas and associations. Moreover, ENTPs enjoy
sharing and exchanging their ideas with others. Considering how their
minds are drawn in so many different directions, it is no wonder that
ENTPs can seem restless, scattered, distractible, and, rightly or not,
are commonly diagnosed with ADD or ADHD. Unlike ENTJs or other types
with a dominant Judging function, ENTPs do not carefully screen and
filter incoming information. They are truly among the most open-minded
of all types when it comes to absorbing outside information. However,
just because they are permeable to new information does not mean they
are quick to accept it as true. As ENTPs ingest ideas over time, they
gradually develop, even if somewhat passively, their own theories about
the world and human nature. When these theories don't square with
conventional thinking, which is often the case, they grow increasingly
skeptical and critical of majority viewpoints. So despite their status
as Extraverts, ENTPs can resemble INT types with regard to their
skepticism and unconventional thinking. When engrossed in their dominant
function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne), ENTPs are not highly intentional
or agenda-driven (their only agenda might be one of avoiding boredom).
Hence, they may not be as consciously driven or obsessed with hammering
down truth as some INTPs are. Nonetheless, many ENTPs, especially those
who have developed their auxiliary function, Introverted Thinking (Ti),
come to recognize their penchant for philosophizing. Like INTPs, they
enjoy exploring unifying patterns and broad metaphysical speculations.
Despite these propensities, they seem less apt to develop an exclusive
focus on intellectual pursuits. As Extraverts, they can be reluctant to
focus on any singular pursuit, preferring to distribute their energies
across different hobbies and interests.

ENTPs' tertiary function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe), is a strong
interpersonal function. This, along with their verbose Ne, contributes
to ENTPs' love for engaging with others possessing similar interests.
Despite their tendency toward restlessness and distractibility, ENTPs
can focus when partaking in stimulating discussions or activities. Like
INTPs, they are more interested in discussing ideas than engaging in
small talk. Their Ne, Ti, and Fe confer an interest in analyzing what
makes people tick---their motivations, interests, patterns, and
propensities. Engaging with others allows ENTPs to sharpen their
theories of human nature and enjoy themselves along the way. When it
comes to schooling, the degree to which ENTPs feel engaged depends
largely on the circumstances. Like other NTs, they generally excel in
math and science. But as dominant Intuitives, they tend to have broad
scholastic interests that extend into the arts and humanities. Their
inferior function, Introverted Sensing (Si), may also contribute to an
interest in history. As abstract learners, ENTPs are more apt to enjoy
traditional schooling than ESTPs are. Teachers often appreciate their
intelligence, creativity, and genuine intellectual curiosity. However,
if the instructor or coursework fails to be stimulating, they can
quickly become bored, restless, and tuned out. ENTPs are also notorious
for procrastinating too long, sometimes producing work that fails to
reflect their true capabilities. ENTPs are often better at finding their
place among people (Fe) than they are at identifying an ideal job in the
system (Te). Their Ne (as well as their lack of Te) can make ENTPs
reluctant to work within highly structured systems or organizations.
Unfortunately, the modern working world seems primarily suited for those
with Te in their functional stack (especially TJ types). Rife with
rules, policies, and regulations, nearly all professions, as well as
academic and research institutions, have become Te-laden in their
methods and operations. Consequently, ENTPs often struggle to find jobs
and careers that allow them to function authentically as ENTPs.
Career-wise, ENTPs are best suited for working with people and ideas.
Since many ENTPs are effective writers and orators, they often do well
as journalists, writers, or editors. While apt to grow weary of the
increasing standardization and bureaucracy of the modern education
system, ENTPs may also enjoy teaching. ENTPs with religious affiliations
may function as missionaries, pastors, or ministers, although their
knack for deviating from conventional dogmas and traditions may
precipitate problems. ENTPs may also enjoy work as actors,

mediators, diplomats, or entrepreneurs. ENTPs' Functional Stack & Type
Development ENTPs' functional stack is composed of the following
functions: Dominant: Extraverted Intuition (Ne) Auxiliary: Introverted
Thinking (Ti) Tertiary: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) Inferior: Introverted
Sensing (Si) ENTPs' type development can be roughly divided according to
three phases: Phase I (Childhood) Extending from childhood to early
adulthood, Phase I involves the emergence and differentiation of the
ENTPs' dominant function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne). While ENTPs are
generally curious and open-minded throughout their lives, this is
especially pronounced during this phase of their development. Beyond the
requirements of schooling, Phase I ENTPs are free to sit back and absorb
the world without undue worry or concern. This allows their Ne to make
all sorts of connections and associations, which can eventually coalesce
into a coherent worldview. Phase II (Adolescence-30s) Once their Ne
reaches a certain level of consciousness and differentiation, ENTPs'
inferior function, Introverted Sensing (Si), enters the picture and
begins to play a more influential and often mischievous role. We will
discuss ENTPs' inferior-function related issues later in this profile.
In addition to the increasing presence and influence of Si, Phase II
ENTPs are also developing their auxiliary function, Introverted Thinking
(Ti). Ti brings greater order and clarity to ENTPs' ideas, worldview,
and identity. As ENTPs develop and utilize their Ti, they may also
become more serious, focused, and driven.

Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond) If all goes well and they are fortunate
enough to enter Phase III, ENTPs become increasingly aware of the
insidious ways of their inferior Si. As they become more aware of their
inferior and learn to function more authentically as ENTPs, they
experience greater balance between their Ne and Si. They learn that
integrating their Si happens naturally and indirectly as they go about
authentically using their Ne and Ti. As they cultivate conditions that
support their natural strengths, Phase III ENTPs come to experience a
heightened sense of peace, wholeness, and satisfaction. ENTPs' Dominant
Function: Extraverted Intuition (Ne) As explained in My True Type, EPs
are really "purer" Perceivers than IPs are. Not only do EPs display the
outer characteristics commonly associated with Perceiving (e.g.,
spontaneous, adaptable, receptive), but their dominant function (Ne or
Se) is also a Perceiving function. Extraverted Intuition (Ne) is a
novelty-seeking function. At first glance, Se and Ne types may seem
fairly similar (such conflation can be seen, for instance, in the
Enneagram Seven), since both ESPs and ENPs can be outwardly active,
energetic, and playful. Ne differs from Se, however, in that it is more
concerned with ideas, connections, and possibilities than it is with
novel sensations or material goods. Extraverted Intuition can function
either perceptively or expressively. The verbal expression of Ne amounts
to something like brainstorming aloud. Although typically not to the
same extent as ENFPs, when orating aloud, ENTPs may not always seem to
"have a point," quickly bouncing from one idea to the next. In many
cases, "the point" is for ENTPs to find their way to a judgment, but
they must first explore the options by way of their Ne. While others may
distrust the seemingly arbitrary or haphazard ways of Ne, ENTPs realize
its value, recognizing that in time, truth or wisdom will reveal itself.
ENTPs' primary job then, is to employ and express their Ne, trusting
that it will lead them in the right direction. With that said, some
ENTPs are much more cogent and streamlined in their expressions than
others. Many ENTPs learn to develop and express themselves via their
tertiary function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe), which is not at all random,
but more direct and coherent.

Ne also works receptively, gathering information from without. Unlike
Se, it does not gather overt information, but goes beyond or looks
behind sensory data. It is what allows ENTPs to discern otherwise hidden
patterns, possibilities, and potentials. Ne is constantly scanning for
new connections and patterns. They often employ this receptive side of
their Ne in activities like reading, watching movies, and conversing
with others. Because it is an extraverted function, Ne is more
divergent, extensive, and openended than Introverted Intuition (Ni). Ni
is more intensive and convergent, conferring a greater sense of
conviction and closure. Once Ni has done its work, INJs are apt to feel
there is a single correct solution. Ne, by contrast, is disposed to
multiplying rather than reducing the number of possible options or
solutions. Only through use of their auxiliary Ti can ENTPs move toward
convergence. Ne also confers open-mindedness. It helps ENTPs see truth
on both sides of an issue without forming unwarranted judgments or
premature conclusions. It also contributes openness to alternative or
Bohemian lifestyles, allowing ENTPs to entertain options such as
vegetarianism or joining a commune. Ne also resists excessive external
structuring, which can feel like an imposition to ENTPs' sense of
personal freedom and autonomy. ENTPs scoff at what they see as
unnecessary or overly rigid rules, regulations, or procedures. They also
dislike unchanging or sterile surroundings. When the environment is too
bland or sterile, they can quickly become bored and restless. Like other
NPs, ENTPs can have a love-hate relationship with their Ne. They love
the fact that it helps them remain open-minded, to see the bigger
picture, and to appreciate different options and perspectives. They also
enjoy its attendant sense of adventure, expectancy, and wonderment
toward life's mysteries. But Ne also has its challenges. It can make it
difficult for ENTPs to feel calm and satisfied, to arrive at firm
conclusions, or to feel confident in their decision-making. ENTPs'
Auxiliary Function: Introverted Thinking (Ti) As dominant Perceivers,
ENTPs are disposed to taking a more passive approach to life,
particularly with regard to the outside world. Like other EPs, they are
content to remain in a mode of open Perceiving until they are prompted,
whether inwardly or outwardly, to employ their auxiliary Judging
function, Introverted

Thinking (Ti). When ENTPs feel compelled to engage their Ti, they become
more inwardly focused and intense, similar to the typical mode of
operation for INTPs. But because Ti is introverted in its direction,
onlookers may fail to notice this more rational side of the ENTP. Ti
involves the application of logic and reason for the sake of
understanding a given situation, system, or problem. It also works to
bring structure and order to the inner world. This inner structuring
grants ENTPs a good sense of inner control. When engaging their Ti,
ENTPs dig into the background of their thoughts to better understand
their origins and to ensure their ideas are logical. Like INTPs, they
can quickly find inconsistencies or logical shortcomings in a given
theory or argument. They excel at identifying exceptions or imagining
scenarios in which the proposed explanation might breakdown. They find
it easier to identify logical shortcomings or inconsistencies ---to
assert what is not true---than to confidently assert what is true. The
difference between Ti in ENTPs versus INTPs is its place in the
functional stack. For INTPs, it comes first, which makes them quicker to
inwardly judge. INTPs then use their auxiliary Ne to open up and further
explore their initial judgments. In ENTPs, the order is reversed. Rather
than starting with an initial judgment or presumption like INTPs, they
approach things through the fresh eyes of Intuition. They then employ
their Ti to analyze and enhance the logic and structuring of their Ne
perceptions. In addition to the different ordering of their functional
stacks, ENTPs, as dominant Perceivers, can more easily leave things
open-ended or ambiguous than INTPs can. Their Ne dominance also makes
them more open to "playing" than INTPs are. I once administered a values
inventory and was surprised when a couple ENTPs marked "having fun" as
one of their top priorities in life. To most INTPs, whose dominant Ti
compels them to take life seriously, such a response smacks of hedonism
and would likely be among their lowest ranked values. ENTPs' dominant Ne
may also confer a greater interest in the arts and culture than
typically seen among INTPs. The difference between Ti and Fi seems
largely a matter of interests and emphases. Fi types (FPs) are more
concerned and skilled with moral judgments (Fi) than logical ones (Ti).
They judge in terms of good and bad, love and hate,

like and dislike. TPs, in contrast, start out with a need for sound
logic (Ti) and are generally less concerned with matters of taste or
morality upfront. They think less in terms of love and hate than
reasonable and unreasonable, logical and illogical. With that said,
since T and F are adjacent in ENTPs' functional stack, it can sometimes
be a bit tricky, especially early in their development, to tease out
their T-F preference. ENTPs' Tertiary Function: Extraverted Feeling (Fe)
ENTPs' tertiary function is Extraverted Feeling (Fe). Fe is the most
interpersonal of all the functions, striving for interpersonal peace,
harmony, and understanding. This not only involves attending to what is
said, but also how something is said. While ENTPs may be less disturbed
by or sensitive to external disharmony than some other types, they still
work, even if largely unwittingly, to cultivate good feelings in the
environment. We can also approach ENTPs' Fe more theoretically. Namely,
since Fe is their preferred extraverted Judging function and falls lower
in their functional stack, ENTPs are less comfortable extroverting
judgments (Fe) than keeping them to themselves (Ti). This can lead
ENTPs, along with other Perceiving types, to habitually defer to others'
wishes rather than asserting their own. And because ENTPs have strong
minds, they may grow inwardly resentful of those they see as trying to
control them. Granted, they are generally more self-assertive than IPs
are, but their discomfort in deploying Fe can still get kindle problems
in ENTPs' relationships. ENTPs' Inferior Function: Introverted Sensing
(Si) As is true of other types, ENTPs can be easily blinded to the
degree to which their inferior function impacts their decisions and
behavior. ENTPs seeking selfknowledge and personal growth must work to
understand the ways their inferior function, Introverted Sensing (Si),
manifests in their personality. Introverted Sensing is best understood
when juxtaposed with its functional opposite, Ne. Despite their
oppositional nature, when considered together, Ne and Si constitute a
meaningful whole. As we have seen, Ne explores new ideas and
possibilities. Si, by contrast, is concerned with preserving the past.
Ne knows no limits, seeing infinite options and possibilities, while Si
sees clearly defined limits as determined by past precedent. Ne is
liberal and unfettered, Si

conservative and careful. What is fascinating is that all of these
opposing forces can exist within the same personality type. ENTPs tend
to consciously identify with the needs and values of their Ne, while
their subconscious pushes for the interests of Si. When using Ne, ENTPs
can be rather oblivious to details. They may fail to effectively attend
to the concrete details of daily life, such as forgetting to pay the
bills, being careless with their diet, or not taking enough exercise.
When engrossed in a creative project, however, ENTPs can look like
INTJs, becoming perfectionistic and obsessive over details. As
N-dominants, it can be difficult for them to accept anything less than
perfection when it comes to the physical embodiment (S) of their vision
or ideas (N). A most overlooked feature of Si is its perception and
awareness of internal bodily sensations---the body as felt and
experienced from within. But since Si is ENTPs' inferior function, they
may feel out of touch with their inner body. To compensate, they may
grant too much attention to certain physical sensations, making them
more susceptible to hypochondriasis or psychosomatic illnesses, in which
an increased focus on bodily sensations cultivates or heightens
symptoms. N and S also have a temporal element. Si concerns itself with
the past, while Ne is focused on future possibilities and potentials.
ENTPs' Si can confer an interest in the details of history. They also
enjoy using their Ne to explore historical meanings, interpretations,
and implications. This is why many ENTPs take up politics or journalism,
careers that allow them to use their knowledge of history to analyze
current events and speculate about the future. ENTPs also experience
tension between the traditional (Si) and the novel or unconventional
(Ne). This is especially common for ENTPs in Phases I and II of their
type development. To some degree, they remain attached and drawn to
their childhood traditions (Si). At the same time, however, their Ne and
Ti may encourage them to deconstruct and even rebel against those
traditions. This can engender identity confusion in ENTPs, unsure of the
degree to which they should break from their childhood traditions versus
reconceiving themselves. Such struggles can leave ENTPs with questions
like: Should I opt for family life or an unconventional lifestyle?
Should I pursue the security of a conventional career (Si) or something
more creative and potentially risky (Ne)? In considering such questions,
ENTPs, need to ensure they are leading with their

dominant function rather than their inferior. As N-dominants, ENTPs'
best strengths involve creatively exploring ideas, theories, and
connections. To best utilize these strengths, they need to ensure they
are not allowing their inferior Si to impose undue limits or boundaries
on their explorations. They are generally better off using their Ne, as
well as the reasoning capacities of their Ti, to hash out truth, rather
than deferring to Si traditions.

ENFJ ENFJs are among the rarest of the sixteen types, comprising only
about 2-3% of the population. They are warm, engaging, charismatic,
persuasive, and talkative. They are the kings and queens of the social
realm, capable of quickly reading and establishing rapport with others.
Because of their love for people and formidable social intelligence,
ENFJs develop extensive networks of friends, acquaintances, and social
connections; they are networkers par excellence. Just as ESPs seek a
breadth of sensory experiences (Se), ENFJs enjoy extensive interactions
with people (Fe). Like INFJs, ENFJs excel when it comes to reading
people, quickly assessing and mirroring their emotions, expressions, and
body language. This grants ENFJs great insight into people, contributing
to their effectiveness as teachers, counselors, managers, salespersons,
etc. ENFJs discover their people skills rather early in life. Indeed,
their self-esteem and self-image develops in large part around their
social prowess. With each new person they encounter and connect with,
their self-concept and self-worth are reinforced. Over time, ENFJs
gradually become aware of their power to influence and persuade others.
At some point, they realize they can use their powers of persuasion to
get nearly anything they want. From that point forward, they must
wrestle with the degree to which they are willing to use their charm and
charisma to achieve their goals. They can take an "end justifies the
means" approach, manipulating and politicking their way to the top. Or,
they can forgo the temptation of quick success and preserve their
integrity. While "working a crowd" or charming an audience is
undoubtedly invigorating for ENFJs, their desire to engage with people
goes beyond mere superficials. Their auxiliary function, Introverted
Intuition (Ni), adds a degree of depth that is less apparent in their
ESFJ counterparts. Like INFJs, ENFJs see it as their job to help others
live more authentically, ethically, and healthily. Utilizing their
insight into people, they can be quite effective at diagnosing problems
and formulating solutions that spawn personal growth. And because ENFJs
are the most convincing (even if a bit forceful) of all the personality
types, others often respond well to their counsel.

Although ENFJs certainly want to help and support others, their reasons
for doing so are not always entirely altruistic. After all, as Fe types,
their own sense of self is inextricably interwoven with that of others.
So while ENFJs genuinely want those they help to succeed, if those
individuals end up failing, the ENFJ may come down hard on them. After
all, failure on the part of their students can seem threatening to
ENFJs' ability to self-actualize, since their students are extensions of
themselves. Deep down, the ENFJ may feel that a "poor student" is a
reflection of a "poor teacher." Another element of ENFJs that cannot be
overlooked is their desire for selfmastery. As we will discuss later,
this pertains to their inferior function, Introverted Thinking (Ti),
which compels them to be self-controlled, selfdirected, and
self-regulated. Unfortunately, like other types, ENFJs often
overestimate the skill and development of their inferior. So while they
may aspire to or even believe they have achieved self-mastery, they are
typically far better at evaluating and managing others (Fe) than they
are themselves (Ti). In sum, ENFJs are driven by several things. They
are invigorated by social novelty and networking with people. They are
also motivated by personal excellence and self-mastery, including the
sense of validation that comes from being esteemed and admired by
others. Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, they strive to quicken the
personal growth of others, which, in turn, fortifies their sense of
purpose and self-worth. ENFJs' Functional Stack & Type Development
ENFJs' functional stack is composed of the following functions:
Dominant: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) Auxiliary: Introverted Intuition (Ni)
Tertiary: Extraverted Sensing (Se) Inferior: Introverted Thinking (Ti)
ENFJs' personality type development can be broadly conceived as
consisting of three phases: Phase I (Childhood)

This phase is characterized by the emergence and differentiation of
ENFJs' dominant function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe). In developing and
strengthening their Fe, Phase I ENFJs can seem inflexible and
opinionated, quick to make judgments and draw conclusions about the
world. Since their judgments are not yet being weighed and balanced by
their auxiliary Ni, they are prone to jump to conclusions. Since Fe is a
rational Judging function, ENFJs tend to take themselves and their lives
quite seriously. Even from a relatively young age, ENFJs are
selfdisciplined and goal-oriented, striving for excellence in whatever
they do. They can differ markedly from INFJs in this phase, whose
dominant function (Ni) is a Perceiving function. Ni prompts INFJs to be
more open and take life less seriously than Phase I ENFJs are wont to
do. While both types utilize Fe, INFJs are more concerned with ingesting
and digesting the world (Ni), while ENFJs are already working to change
or control it (Fe). Phase II (Adolescence-30s) Once their Fe reaches a
certain level of consciousness and differentiation, ENFJs' inferior
function, Introverted Thinking (Ti), enters the picture and begins to
play a more influential and often mischievous role. We will discuss
ENFJs' Fe-Ti tug-of-war later in this profile. In addition to the
increasing presence and influence of their Ti, Phase II ENFJs are also
developing their auxiliary function, Introverted Intuition (Ni). As they
encounter complex problems and situations that call for greater patience
and reflection, they turn to their Ni for assistance. In doing so, they
become increasingly capable of grasping and incorporating the bigger
picture (Ni) into their Fe Judging process. Ni insight may also compel
them to rescind or revise some of their previous premature judgments.
Phase II ENFJs may also begin to differentiate and incorporate their
tertiary function, Extraverted Sensing (Se). For ENFJs, Se represents a
further relaxing and opening of their judgments. It helps them loosen
their grip on life, tempering their need for constant outer control
(Fe). As their Ni and Se develop, ENFJs take on more Perceiving
qualities, displaying more openness, flexibility, and acceptance. Phase
III (30s, 40s, & Beyond)

If all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase III, ENFJs
become increasingly aware of the insidious manifestations of their
inferior Ti. By increasing their inferior awareness and learning to
function more authentically as ENFJs, they experience greater balance
between their Fe and Ti. They learn that integrating their Ti happens
naturally and indirectly as they go about authentically using their Fe
and softening its judgments and its need for control through their Ni
and Se. As they cultivate conditions that support their natural
strengths, Phase III ENFJs come to experience a heightened and enduring
sense of peace, wholeness, and satisfaction. ENFJs' Dominant Function:
Extraverted Feeling (Fe) Extraverted Feeling (Fe) is ENFJs' dominant and
most preferred function. As a Judging function that is extraverted in
its direction, ENFJs are considered Extraverted Judging types. In
laypersons' terms, this means they are quick to outwardly express their
feelings, opinions, and grievances. They Judge before they Perceive,
speak before they listen. This can be both a strength and a weakness. On
the one hand, it contributes to ENFJs' quick responsiveness and capacity
for leadership. On the other, it can dispose ENFJs to judging too
quickly or too severely. Fe also imbues ENFJs with a propensity to
control or otherwise influence other people. This desire for control
should not immediately be considered "bad" or unhealthy. As we've seen,
Judging is a viable and commonly used approach to navigating life. While
ETJs are more quickly recognized as controlling commanders, ENFJs'
Feeling preference makes their means of control more subtle and in some
ways more effective. Because of their ability to read and understand
people, ENFJs can quickly and intuitively discern the quickest and most
effective route to influencing them. This often involves schmoozing
through eloquent language packaged in Fe warmth and friendliness. While
ENFJs are subtle and smooth in the public sphere, those who work with or
have a closer relationship them will eventually see their more
controlling or judgmental side. While Fe involves a penchant for
maintaining interpersonal harmony and good feeling, this can be trumped
by its commensurate desire for outer control and assertiveness. ENFJs
are in many ways wired to express their feeling judgments as soon as
they come about. This is obviously of great importance for their
intimates to understand, recognizing that what comes out of the ENFJ's
mouth is often their first reaction, one they may later come to reverse

upon further reflection (Ni). Unfortunately, parents and teachers often
fail to understand this about their ENFJ children and end up stifling
their Fe expressiveness. This most certainly produces great frustration
and possibly even psychological harm in young ENFJs. Fe also plays a
prominent role in reading and empathizing with others' emotions. It
helps ENFJs recreate another's emotion state within themselves, allowing
them to feel what the other person is feeling. Interestingly, ENFJs have
a more difficult time when it comes to perceiving and making sense of
their own emotions. This is due to the fact that Fe is directed
outwardly rather than inwardly. Unlike IFPs, ENFJs don't spend much time
trying to independently sort out their emotions. Inwardly, they deal
largely in the currency of Intuition (Ni). Hence, when ENFJs find
themselves in emotionally troubling circumstances, they often (and
should) turn to others for support or guidance. Expressing themselves
through their Fe is critical to their psychological and physical health
and well-being. Even if doing so does not provide them with an immediate
solution to the problem at hand, they tend to feel better once they have
expressed their feelings, be it through words or through tears. Fe is
more influenced by cultural norms and expectations than Fi is. Just as
Extraverted Thinking (Te) involves collective methods for evaluating and
ordering information (e.g., the scientific method), Fe entails socially
accepted ways of engaging with people. For instance, ENFJs typically
display ample warmth, friendliness, and congeniality in their
interactions. While Fi types may disparage ENFJs as emotionally
superficial or disingenuous, most ENFJs have good intentions of
improving morale or finding consensus. Even their attempts to control or
schmooze others may be rooted in a larger desire for peace, diplomacy,
and mutual understanding. Finally, the dominant position of their Fe,
combined with their auxiliary Ni, makes ENFJs among the most
consistently goal-oriented of all types. ENFJs tend to take themselves,
their lives, and their endeavors quite seriously. To the casual
onlooker, this may not always seem evident, since ENFJs spend so much of
their time engaging with people. But for ENFJs, their interactions with
people are a key part of their life's work. ENFJs are highly intentional
and often have an agenda---to teach, motivate, unite, persuade, etc. If
they see little opportunity to effectively execute their agenda, they
can quickly become restless and move on to something different.

ENFJs' Auxiliary Function: Introverted Intuition (Ni) As stated earlier,
ENFJs Judge before they Perceive. In many cases, it is only after making
an upfront judgment by way of their Fe that they open themselves to
alternative perspectives presented by their auxiliary function,
Introverted Intuition (Ni). They differ in this respect from INFJs, who
use Ni first and are therefore slower to express an initial judgment.
ENFJ-INFJ differences emerge in social contexts as well. As Fe
dominants, ENFJs are first and foremost concerned with shaping what is
happening in the immediate social environment (Fe). They want to ensure
that good feelings are maintained or to accomplish whatever social
objective they have in mind (e.g., teaching, advising, motivating,
etc.). For ENFJs, Ni concerns take a backseat to Fe. INFJs, by contrast,
are more concerned with obtaining an accurate perception of what is
happening (Ni) than they are with accomplishing any specific social
objective. If they are faced with the dilemma of stating truth versus
saving face, INFJs are more inclined toward the former. ENFJs, by
contrast, are more likely to take an "ends justifies the means" approach
than INFJs are. In order to accomplish their J agenda, ENFJs may be
willing to say or withhold things that would not sit right with INFJs.
They may also be more willing to feign happiness. ENFJs might reason,
even if unwittingly, that if good feelings can be cultivated out there
(Fe), then a sense of inner happiness will likely emerge in due time.
All of this is not to say that INFJs are somehow more moral or
upstanding than ENFJs. Rather, this discussion illustrates the
importance of the relative ordering of the functions in the functional
stack, which invariably influences a given type's priorities,
motivations, and actions. ENFJs' Tertiary Function: Extraverted Sensing
(Se) Extraverted Sensing (Se) serves as ENFJs' tertiary function. While
Si involves an intensive connection to the remembered past, Se is more
extensive and presentoriented. It amasses concrete details and sensory
information from the environment by way of the five senses (i.e., sight,
smell, touch, sound, and taste). Unlike Si, Se is not content with the
routine and familiar. Rather, it seeks sensory

and material novelty. Se types love novel sensations and appearances,
physical thrills, and material comforts. They are more liberal than Si
types in their approach to and use of the material world. Se can also be
linked with a concern for beauty and aesthetics (especially in Feeling
types). ENFJs often have refined tastes regarding their material
surroundings, their physical appearance, as well as their palate. They
commonly display a taste for the finer things in life---fine arts, food,
music, culture, etc. Consequently, some ENFJs may be perceived as
snobbish or uppity, taking themselves or their sophisticated tastes a
bit too seriously. ENFJs' Inferior Function: Introverted Thinking (Ti)
Like other types, ENFJs can be blind to the degree to which their
inferior function impacts their decisions and behavior. Without
sufficiently understanding their inferior function, Introverted Thinking
(Ti), ENFJs will continue to feel incomplete and be prone to unhealthy
decision-making in their careers, lifestyle, and relationships. Like
ITPs, EFJs can be seen as trying to find the right balance between their
Ti and Fe, independence (Ti) and interdependence (Fe), self (Ti) and
others (Fe). For ITPs, Ti is far more conscious than it is for EFJs.
While ITPs may feel they have little control over or influence with
regard to the outside world (Fe), the inner structuring granted by their
Ti confers a strong sense of inner control. This allows them to
independently manage and order their thoughts and experiences so as to
better cope with a world they see as outside their control. ITPs also
use their Ti powers of logic to discern their own truth. Because their
Ti is inferior, ENFJs don't enjoy the same sense of inner control that
ITPs do. Nor do they experience the same aptitude or confidence in their
ability to consciously wield logic. Just as feelings are slippery and
elusive for ITPs, so it is with logic for ENFJs. However elusive their
Ti, ENFJs are still captivated by it (as all types are with their
inferior). In many ways, Ti represents a source of wholeness and
selfactualization for ENFJs. Since Ti and Fe comprise a functional
whole, they intuitively realize the importance of integrating these two
functions for them to feel whole and complete. Consequently, ENFJs can
be seen as striving for a greater sense of inner control and logical
competence (Ti), which is why they

may exhibit some of the same interests or self-conceptions as INTPs. For
instance, ENFJs may conceive of themselves as highly logical,
independent, and self-sufficient. They may extol the virtues of
independent thought (Ti), lauding the value of "cognitive-behavioral"
strategies. They may also fancy themselves as self-aware or self-taught.
When indulging their Ti, they may lose themselves in stacks of
non-fiction books or journals. Their Ti may even impel them to take up
formal study in subjects like mathematics, science, or philosophy. Some
ENFJs may even consider themselves Introverts because of their Ti
attraction to heady or intellectual topics. But just as other types
misinterpret or overestimate the skill and competence of their inferior
function, so it goes with ENFJs. In truth, ENFJs are not as logical or
independent in their thinking as they imagine themselves to be; the
majority of their Thinking-related ideas are typically culled from
without. Moreover, as Extraverts, ENFJs are far better at reading,
understanding, and controlling others (Fe) than they are themselves;
they are more "other-aware" (Fe) than "selfaware" (Ti). Since ENFJs are
ultimately unsure of the soundness of their own logic (Ti), they may
unwittingly try to convince themselves through the act of convincing
others. The more people they can convince that an idea is sound (Fe),
the more confident they hope to feel about its veracity (Ti). But the
truth is that most people are not nearly as convinced by the content of
ENFJs' Thinking judgments as they are by their persuasive Fe packaging.
As we've seen, personal growth is more about utilizing our natural
strengths and enhancing the conditions for functioning authentically
according to our type than it is about directly developing or
"improving" the inferior function. In this light, integrating ENFJs
learn to regularly employ their Fe and Ni, while allowing the Ti
endpoint to take care of itself. Rather than over-emphasizing their
skills as independent logicians (Ti), for instance, ENFJs are better off
focusing on their relationships and social networks (Fe). While it may
sound paradoxical, the best way for ENFJs to self-actualize and discover
themselves is through consistent engagement with other people. By
helping others discover and actualize their potential, ENFJs move ever
closer toward self-understanding and personal wholeness.

ESFJ ESFJs are one of sixteen personality types. I have found ESFJs to
be less common than demographic data sometimes suggests, especially
among Caucasian females. In my experience, they are easily outnumbered
by ESFPs, at least in the U.S. ESFJs are warm, engaging, caring, loyal,
dutiful, and hardworking. They are admired for their work ethic,
perseverance, devotion, and steadfastness. They strive to practice what
they preach, holding fast to their commitments and convictions. As
predominant Judgers, they take their work, family, and social roles
rather seriously. ESFJs have strong interpersonal skills, capable of
quickly establishing rapport with others. They are natural readers of
people and their emotions, a trait which allows them to quickly relate
to people. Because of their social intelligence and love for people,
they often have a substantial network of friends, acquaintances, and
social connections. Their people skills also contribute to their
persuasiveness and prowess as salespersons. While appearing outwardly
confident and assertive, on the whole, ESFJs are no more inwardly sure
of themselves than other types. Indeed, because their inner Judging
function, Introverted Thinking (Ti), is inferior, ESFJs may feel they
have relatively little inner control. Finding inner control elusive,
they naturally turn their focus outwardly, hoping that achieving outer
control will somehow bring them inner calm and security. Their primary
means of achieving outer control is through Extraverted Feeling (Fe),
which serves as their dominant function. By way of their Fe, ESFJs can
befriend, persuade, and direct others. In so doing, ESFJs can reap the
benefit of social support, as well as a sense of control and influence
in the world of people. ESFJs' auxiliary function, Introverted Sensing
(Si), prompts them to keep one eye on the past and to preserve existing
methods, traditions, and conventions. This is why David Keirsey
classifies them as "guardians." This may partly explain why many ESFJs
love teaching, a role that allows them to relay existing knowledge and
wisdom to others.

In sharing the same set of functions, ESFJs often resemble ISFJs. One
difference is ESFJs tend to more warm and engaging upfront, while ISFJs
can be somewhat more socially anxious and take longer to warm-up. These
two types also differ with regard to their inferior function issues,
with ISFJs wrestling with Ne and ESFJs with Ti-related concerns. ESFJs
can also resemble ENFJs, since they share the same dominant and inferior
function. Both types have strong social acumen and enjoy helping and
supporting others. But because ENFJs use Ni as their auxiliary function,
they are often more interested in theoretical or philosophical
discussions than ESFJs are. On account of their Si, ESFJs tend to be
more practical and traditional, whereas ENFJs are often less
conventional in their approach. While ESFJs differ from ESFPs by only
one "preference" (i.e., J-P), they actually share no functions in
common. This makes these two types far more different than is commonly
recognized. ESFJs, whose Extraverted Judging function is dominant (Fe),
tend to be more direct and firm in their assertions than is true of
ESFPs, whose Extraverted Judging function is tertiary (Te). Moreover,
because of their Se, ESFPs are more concerned with keeping up with
current trends and fashions, as well as modifying their appearance
accordingly. ESFJs, by contrast, whose Sensing is introverted (Si), tend
to have a diminished concern for doing so. Of course, ESFJs raised with
Se types may assimilate certain Se tendencies because their Si has
learned to see them as normal. ESFJs' Functional Stack & Type
Development ESFJs' functional stack is composed of the following
functions: Dominant: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) Auxiliary: Introverted
Sensing (Si) Tertiary: Extraverted Intuition (Ne) Inferior: Introverted
Thinking (Ti) ESFJs' personality type development can be broadly
conceived according to three phases: Phase I (Childhood)

Phase I is characterized by the development and differentiation of
ESFJs' dominant function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe). In strengthening
their Fe, Phase I ESFJs can seem inflexible and opinionated, quick to
make judgments and draw conclusions about the world. Since their
judgments are not yet being weighed and balanced by their auxiliary and
tertiary functions, they are especially prone to jumping to conclusions.
Since Fe is a Judging function, ESFJs tend to take themselves and their
lives quite seriously. Even from a relatively young age, they tend to
strive for excellence in whatever they do. They can differ markedly from
ISFJs in this phase, whose dominant function (Si) is a Perceiving
function. This leads ISFJs to be more open and take life less seriously
than Phase I ESFJs are wont to do. While both types utilize Fe, ISFJs
are more concerned with perceiving the world (Si), while ESFJs are
already working to change or control it (Fe). Phase II (Adolescence-30s)
While the inferior function is not entirely dormant or inert in Phase I,
the epic tug-of-war between the dominant and inferior does not come to
the fore until Phase II. Once ESFJs' dominant Fe reaches a certain
threshold of consciousness and differentiation, their inferior function,
Introverted Thinking (Ti), begins to assert itself and play a more
prominent and mischievous role. This will be elaborated later in this
profile. Phase II ESFJs also show increasing use and development of
their auxiliary function, Introverted Sensing (Si), and may even begin
to tap into their tertiary function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne). These
Perceiving functions allow ESFJs to open and modify their Fe judgments,
as well as to loosen their grip on life. Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond)
If all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase III, ESFJs
become increasingly aware of the insidious effects of their inferior Ti.
By increasing their self-awareness and learning to function more
authentically as ESFJs, they can negotiate a better balance between
their Fe and Ti. As they cultivate conditions that support their natural
strengths, Phase III ESFJs can experience a heightened and enduring
sense of peace, wholeness, and satisfaction. ESFJs' Dominant Function:
Extraverted Feeling (Fe)

As we've seen, Extraverted Feeling (Fe) is ESFJs' dominant function.
Since Fe is a Judging function that is extraverted in its direction,
ESFJs are Extraverted Judging types, quick to express their feelings,
opinions, and grievances. This can be both a strength and a weakness. On
the one hand, it contributes to ESFJs' quick responsiveness and capacity
for leadership. On the other, it can dispose them to judging prematurely
or too severely. Fe imbues ESFJs with a desire to control or otherwise
influence others. Whereas Fi dominants (i.e., IFPs) seek control
inwardly, Fe types do so outwardly. This desire for outer control should
in no way be considered "bad" or unhealthy for ESFJs. As we've seen,
Judging is a viable and commonly used means of navigating life. While
ETJ types are often viewed as controlling commanders, ESFJs' Feeling
preference makes their means of control more subtle and in some ways
more effective. Because of their ability to read and relate to people,
ESFJs can skillfully discern the most effective route to influencing
them. Another feature of Fe involves meeting the needs of others. ESFJs
work to ensure that everyone is getting along and is well cared for.
ESFJs are often conceived as self-sacrificing, deferring their own needs
for the sake of the collective good. In their attempt to cultivate good
feelings in the social environment, ESFJs typically put on a happy face,
displaying ample warmth, friendliness, and congeniality in their
interactions. While Fi types may at times consider overt Fe friendliness
as somewhat disingenuous, most ESFJs do so with good intentions of
improving morale or finding consensus. ESFJs' Fe can present differently
among strangers than it does with their intimates. In larger groups,
ESFJs may seem consistently "positive" in their expressions as part of
their attempt to cultivate good social feelings. In the company of close
confidants, however, they are more apt to share their negative emotions
and grievances. And because their words are often bathed in emotion,
ESFJs can seem intense or dramatic in their expressions. While such
expressions are commonly interpreted as "irrational" by Thinkers or Fi
types, they are rational to the degree to which they accurately reflect
the nature of the experienced emotion. In many instances, given
sufficient time, ESFJs will further refine or soften their initial Fe
judgments as they move through the Perceiving functions of their
functional stack. In contrast to IFPs, ESFJs can have a more difficult
time independently perceiving their own emotions. This is due to the
fact that their Feeling function

is extraverted rather than introverted. Consequently, ESFJs don't spend
as much time trying to independently sort out their emotions. Inwardly,
they deal largely in the currency of Si. So when ESFJs find themselves
in emotionally troubling circumstances, they often (and should) turn to
others for support or guidance. Expressing themselves through their Fe
is critical to their psychological (and physical) health and well-being.
Even if doing so does not provide them with an immediate solution to the
problem at hand, they tend to feel better once they have expressed their
feelings, be it through words or through tears. Unfortunately, parents
and teachers often fail to understand this about their FJ children and
may end up stifling their Fe expressions. At least in the U.S., Fi seems
to be the most common and socially accepted way to handle emotions. ESFJ
females, in particular, can feel misunderstood in a culture predominated
by FP and TJ females. The dominant position of their Fe also makes ESFJs
a proactive and highly intentional type. ESFJs tend to take themselves,
their lives, and their endeavors quite seriously. They are efficient and
task-oriented, quickly moving from one thing to the next. To the casual
onlooker, this may not always seem evident, since ESFJs spend much of
their time engaging with people. But for ESFJs, their interactions with
people are a substantive part of their life's work. Even with communing
with others, ESFJs often have an agenda---to help, teach, unite, etc.
ESFJs' Auxiliary Function: Introverted Sensing (Si) ESFJs use
Introverted Sensing (Si) as their auxiliary function. Si contributes to
ESFJs' propensity to function as conservators of the past. The more
often Si types do something in a particular way the harder it is for
them to break out of that pattern. The same can be said for their
beliefs and worldview. As adults, ESFJs often continue in the beliefs
and worldview of their youth, including matters of politics and
religion. The longer they are immersed in particular set of
circumstances, the more difficult it can be for them to open themselves
to alternatives. ESFJs' Tertiary Function: Extraverted Intuition (Ne)
Like Extraverted Sensing (Se), Extraverted Intuition (Ne) is a
novelty-seeking function. Ne differs from Se, however, in that it is
geared toward ideational rather than physical or sensory novelty. Ne
types are more concerned with being creative, making connections, or
exploring options than they are with

experiencing sensory or material novelty. Since Ne is in the lower half
of ESFJs' functional stack, they often have a lovehate relationship with
it. On the one hand, they may fancy themselves clever, witty, creative,
or savvy. This can be seen, for instance, in their desire to generate
creative solutions or conjure clever comments. ESFJs may also employ
their Ne in a variety arts and crafts or work to find creative ways of
helping or teaching others. The "hate" part of ESFJs' relationship with
their Ne can involve the way it injects uncertainty into their beliefs
and worldview. ESFJs seek a firm and unambiguous worldview to base their
lives on. And because abstract analysis is not their strong suit,
wrestling with ideas that contradict their Si worldview can be
unsettling. ESFJs' Inferior Function: Introverted Thinking (Ti) Like
other types, ESFJs can be readily blinded to the degree to which their
inferior function impacts their decisions and behavior. Without
sufficiently understanding their inferior function, Introverted Thinking
(Ti), ESFJs will continue to feel incomplete and be prone to unhealthy
decision-making in their careers, lifestyle, and relationships. As with
INTPs and ISTPs, the overarching project of EFJ types can be seen as an
attempt to forge a balance between their Ti and Fe, between independence
(Ti) and interdependence (Fe), between self (Ti) and others (Fe). The
difference is, for ITPs, Ti is far more conscious. They use their Ti to
consciously create and maintain inner structure and order. While ITPs'
feel they have little control over others (Fe), their Ti confers a
strong sense of inner control and self-regulation. It allows them to
independently manage their thoughts and experiences so as to better cope
with a world they see as outside their control. ITPs also use their own
Ti powers of logic to discern what is true and reasonable. Because Ti is
inferior in their functional stack, ESFJs don't enjoy the same degree of
inner control that ITPs do (just as ITPs don't experience the same sense
of outer control as ESFJs). Nor do ESFJs experience the same confidence
in wielding Ti logic. Just as feelings are slippery, elusive, and
ephemeral for ITPs, so it is with logic for ESFJs. Despite its
elusiveness, ESFJs remain forever captivated by and in pursuit of their
Ti. They intuitively understand that Ti is

somehow important in their quest for personal wholeness. Therefore,
ESFJs can be seen as striving for a greater sense of inner control and
logical competence (Ti), which may lead them to exhibit some of the same
interests and selfconceptions as ITPs. They may, for instance, view
themselves as highly logical, independent, and self-sufficient. They may
extol the virtues of independent thought or laud the value of
cognitively managing ones owns thoughts and feelings. They may also
fancy themselves as highly self-aware or "self-taught." ESFJs may
indulge their Ti by pouring over non-fiction books, trying to prop up
their desire for logical understanding. Their Ti may even impel them to
take up formal study in subjects like math, science, or computer
programming. Some ESFJs may go so far as to consider themselves
Introverts because of their desire for inner control or obsession with
being logical. But just as other personality types misinterpret or
overestimate the skills and know-how of their inferior function, so it
is with ESFJs. In truth, as Extraverts, ESFJs are far better at
understanding and helping others (Fe) than they are themselves; they are
more "other-aware" (Fe) than "selfaware" (Ti). Moreover, ESFJs are not
nearly as logical or independent in their thinking as they might imagine
themselves to be. Often uncertain of their Ti, ESFJs may try to convince
themselves, even if unwittingly, of the veracity of their judgments
through the act of convincing others. The more people they can convince
that their idea is sound (Fe), the more confident they can feel in its
logical veracity. But most people are not as convinced by the content of
ESFJs' Thinking judgments as they are by their persuasive Fe packaging.
After all, it is primarily ESFJs' Fe know-how that makes them effective
teachers or salespersons. As I've described elsewhere, personal growth
is more about utilizing our natural strengths and enhancing the
conditions for functioning authentically according to our personality
type than it is about directly developing or "improving" our inferior
function. As we learn to function authentically, many of our inferior
function related issues begin to take care of themselves. In this vein,
self-actualizing ESFJs can capitalize on their strengths of Fe and Si,
while allowing their Ti concerns to resolve themselves. So rather than
overemphasizing their powers of logic and independence (Ti), ESFJs are
better off allowing their self-identity to overlap with their
relationships and social networks (Fe). Moreover, when it comes to
self-help, ESFJs are wise to include

others in the process (Fe) rather than attempting to manage their
thoughts and emotions independently (Ti). While the prospect of directly
employing or identifying with their inferior Ti can at times be
tempting, this does not represent a genuine path to wholeness for ESFJs.
Foregoing this temptation requires trusting that their personal growth
will occur primarily through regular use of their Fe and Si rather than
trying to control Ti matters directly. By staying true to their most
conscious and authentic selves (Fe and Si), ESFJs can move closer to an
enduring sense of peace and wholeness.

ENTJ ENTJs are born leaders. They are direct, assertive, and
uninhibited. They can become frustrated and impatient when things don't
unfold according to their expected plan or time frame, evoking notions
of the "Type-A" personality. In the presence of ENTJs, others may feel
they are somehow being hurried or rushed, that the ENTJ wants them to
"cut to the chase." Like ESTJs, ENTJs are firm, direct, and outwardly
opinionated. At times, they may be seen as harsh, blunt, or insensitive.
Despite outer confidence and imposing presence, they are, on the whole,
no more inwardly secure nor sure of themselves than other types. In
fact, because their inner Judging function (Fi) is inferior, they may
feel they have relatively little inner control. Finding inner control
elusive, they naturally turn their focus outwardly, hoping that
achieving outer order and control will bring them inner calm and
security. Of course, controlling the outside world is rarely an easy
task, contributing to ENTJs' propensity for restlessness and
hypervigilance. Unlike ENFJs, ENTJs don't enjoy ready access to the
interpersonal benefits conferred by Extraverted Feeling. Instead, they
rely on their sense of humor, fueled by their auxiliary function,
Introverted Intuition (Ni), to ingratiate themselves to others. ENTJs
can be great showmen and storytellers. Undeterred by conflict or
controversy (they actually like being seen as edgy or provocative), they
like to push the envelope, which not infrequently results in someone
feeling hurt or offended. While ENTJs can be quite funny when the time
is right, they are, on the whole, quite serious in the approach to life.
Their dominant function, Extraverted Thinking (Te), confers a strong
work orientation. As we will shortly explore in greater depth, Te seeks
to impose order, rationality, and efficiency on the world and its
operations. Therefore, like INTJs, ENTJs are often drawn to science, or
can at least appreciate the value of its standardized methods. One of
the hallmarks of Te is its need for everything to be clearly defined,
measurable, and quantifiable. This, in combination with their love for
strategy and competition, can make ENTJs formidable strategists and
executives. ENTJs are commonly found among CEOs heading for-profit
companies.

Wealth and social status can also be motivating factors for ENTJs. This
can be seen as deriving, at least in part, from their tertiary function,
Extraverted Sensing (Se). Despite their status as Intuitives, ENTJs love
worldly things. They are not opposed to owning high-end homes or taking
extravagant vacations, just as long as these things are written into the
Te budget. So while ENTJs certainly like to work hard, they can also
play hard. ENTJs' Functional Stack & Type Development ENTJs' functional
stack is composed of the following functions: Dominant: Extraverted
Thinking (Te) Auxiliary: Introverted Intuition (Ni) Tertiary:
Extraverted Sensing (Se) Inferior: Introverted Feeling (Fi) ENTJs' type
development can be broadly conceived according to three phases: Phase I
(Childhood) This phase is characterized by the emergence and
differentiation of ENTJs' dominant function, Extraverted Thinking (Te).
Even early in life, ENTJs are goal-oriented. They are ambitious and seek
success in whatever they put their mind to. Taking their goals and
responsibilities seriously, they typically do well in school and aren't
afraid to assume leadership roles. During this phase, ENTJs can seem
particularly inflexible and opinionated. They are quick to make
judgments and draw conclusions about the world. Since their Extraverted
Thinking (Te) judgments are not yet being tempered by their auxiliary
and tertiary Perceiving functions, they are especially prone to jump to
conclusions. Phase I ENTJs differ markedly from Phase I INTJs. Since
INTJs dominant function (Ni) is a Perceiving function, they tend to be
more passive and take life less seriously than ENTJs. In Phase I, INTJs
are more concerned with ingesting and digesting the world (Ni), while
ENTJs are already focused on shaping and manipulating it (Te).

Phase II (Adolescence-30s) Once their Te reaches a certain level of
consciousness and differentiation, ENTJs' inferior function, Introverted
Feeling (Fi), enters the picture and begins to play a more influential
and often mischievous role. This will be explored later in this profile.
In addition to the increasing presence and influence of Fi, Phase II
ENTJs are also developing their auxiliary function, Introverted
Intuition (Ni). As they encounter complex problems and situations that
call for greater patience and reflection, they turn to their Ni for
assistance. They work to better see and incorporate the bigger picture
(Ni) into their Te Judging process. As they develop their ability to
assume different perspectives and to grasp the bigger picture, they
become somewhat slower to judge, displaying greater foresight and
discernment in their decision-making. Phase II ENTJs may also begin to
differentiate and incorporate their tertiary function, Extraverted
Sensing (Se). For ENTJs, Se represents a further relaxing and opening of
their judgments. It helps them loosen their grip on life, tempering
their need for constant outer control. Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond) If
all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase III, ENTJs
become increasingly aware of the insidious ways of their inferior Si. As
they become more aware of their inferior and learn to function more
authentically as ENTJs, they experience greater balance between their Te
and Fi. They learn that integrating their Fi happens naturally and
indirectly as they go about authentically using their Te and Ni. As they
cultivate conditions that support their natural strengths, Phase III
ENTJs come to experience a heightened sense of peace, wholeness, and
satisfaction. ENTJs' Dominant Function: Extraverted Thinking (Te)
Extraverted Thinking (Te) serves as ENTJs' dominant and most preferred
function. It undergirds their tendency to quickly express their
judgments and opinions, to literally think (i.e., make judgments,
conclusions, decisions, etc.) aloud. ENTJs speak before they listen,
Judge before they Perceive. This can be both a strength and a weakness.
On the one hand, it can make them strong and courageous leaders, while
on the other, it can contribute to their being abrasive

or controlling. It can also dispose ENTJs to advancing premature
judgments and assertions. They may say things that, in retrospect, they
would prefer to rescind, soften, or further qualify. As mentioned
earlier, Te strives to impose order and rationality on external world.
It is quantitative in nature, pushing for objective standards and
measurable goals. Rarely vague or ambiguous, it insists on clearly
defined policies, plans, and procedure. Although their auxiliary Ni may
contribute some degree of openness, ENTJs still expect things to be done
according to their Te plans and guidelines. After all, if too much
leeway is granted, they feel the system will not function at their
desired level of rationality and efficiency. Te also contributes to
ENTJs' work-orientation. As T-dominants, ENTJs are generally more
serious and focused than they are relaxed or receptive. Even on days
when they have no external obligations, they are quick to get to work on
something. Like other types with a dominant Judging function, ENTJs are
not good at relaxing and doing nothing. ENTJs' Auxiliary Function:
Introverted Intuition (Ni) Like other Intuitives, ENTJs are
future-oriented, always striving for something more. They are forward
thinking and change-oriented, getting bored or restless when things seem
too repetitive, straightforward, or mundane. Instead of thinking of
their Ni in terms of "intuition," which can sometimes have a feminine
connotation, ENTJs may use terms like "instincts" or "going with their
gut." Unlike Ne, which tends to generate more options than it does firm
solutions, Ni confers a higher level of convergence and singularity.
Hence, ENTJs, as well as other NJs, often feel confident that their Ni
answers or insights are trustworthy and reliable. Like INTJs, ENTJs are
not only are they blessed with the ability to isolate and analyze
specifics (Te), but can also maintain a clear vision of the whole system
(Ni), including its hierarchical structure and the interrelations of its
constituent parts. Their proficiency with seeing both the big picture
(Ni) and its specifics (Te) makes ENTJs masters of strategy, analysis,
and planning. Not only does a well-developed Ni make ENTJs better
visionaries, but it can also temper their propensity to jump to
premature conclusions. ENTJs can use their Ni to explore alternative
perspectives and avoid the tunnel vision that may

result from exclusive use of Te. Using and developing their Ni
represents an important part of their personal growth, helping to ensure
that their Te judgments are rooted in a broader, more comprehensive
understanding. ENTJs' Tertiary Function: Extraverted Sensing (Se)
Extraverted Sensing (Se) is a sensual, instinctual, and appetitive
function. Se types seek out novel sensations, physical thrills, and
material comforts. ENTJs can have a certain worldliness about them,
enjoying novel sensations, experiences, and material acquisitions. They
can be particular about the quality, appearance, and status of their
homes and possessions. Like other NJs, they can be captivated by the
finer things in life, including the allure and status of affluent
lifestyles. With that said, the fact remains that ENTJs are dominant
Judgers, meaning that their Te work generally takes precedence over any
Se concerns. So while ENTJs can enjoy Se goods and experiences, they may
be slow to make time for them in their T-oriented schedule. ENTJs'
Inferior Function: Introverted Feeling (Fi) As is true of other types,
ENTJs can be blinded to the degree to which their inferior function
impacts their decisions and behavior. Without adequate awareness of
their inferior, they will continue to feel incomplete and be prone to
unwise decision-making in their lifestyle, careers, and relationships.
Consequently, ENTJs seeking self-knowledge and personal growth must work
to understand the ways their inferior function, Introverted Feeling
(Fi), manifests in their personality. Fi involves an inner focus on
personal feelings, tastes, and values. Of all types, IFPs are the most
"self-focused" (in a neutral sense) with respect to their concern for
exploring and managing their personal values and emotions. ENTJs, for
whom Fi is inferior and largely unconscious, do not enjoy ready access
to their personal feelings and values. As for other dominant Thinking
types, emotions can be slippery and elusive for ENTJs. Therefore, in
situations where a "socially appropriate" emotional response is
warranted, ENTJs can feel quite uncomfortable, since their emotional
experience is often relatively weak. They may then resort to using their
Te to offer condolences, etc., which can sound a bit mechanical, terse,
or otherwise inadequate in emotional situations. ENTJs

may also develop strategies for repairing a bad situation, allowing them
to escape the awkward task of emotionally supporting or connecting with
others. Fi is also concerned with the development of a system of
personalized values and judgments, independent of societal conventions.
This inner value system and personalized worldview grants IFPs a strong
sense of inner confidence and control. ENTJs, by contrast, do not enjoy
the same degree of inner confidence because of the inferior nature of
their Fi. To compensate, they focus on managing and controlling the
outside world. They instinctively sense that the best way of controlling
themselves is through controlling their surroundings. This is precisely
the opposite of the IFP approach. IFPs feel relatively powerless in
their ability to control the outside world (Te) and respond by focusing
on the one thing they can control---themselves (Fi). With that being
said, it would be wrong to assume that ENTJs' Fi is powerless or lacking
in influence. While they may feel they experience relatively little
conscious control over their Fi, it can still exert its influence
through less conscious means. As I have written elsewhere, the inferior
function can play a prominent role in informing and orienting the
dominant function, influencing its values and objectives. More
specifically, ENTJs' Fi might compel them to work toward a cause that
has personally affected them. For instance, an ENTJ whose parent died of
a rare disease may decide to become a physician or medical researcher.
Their Fi might also lead them to place greater importance on the role of
children and family in their lives than one might expect from a dominant
Thinking type. This is not to say, however, that it is a good thing for
ENTJs to be ruled or overtaken by their Fi. To the contrary, ENTJs, not
to mention society as a whole, are better served when they engage in
work that capitalizes on their Te-Ni strengths. It is also critical that
ENTJs consider how they are using their Te. Like other dominant Judgers,
ENTJs can be prone to a sense of urgency when it comes to making
decisions or finishing tasks. This sense of urgency can lead to
premature and erroneous judgments, lower quality work, and obsessive
sorts of behavior. For instance, ENTJs may have in mind for what they
want to accomplish on a given day, only to discover the project to be
much larger than they originally conjectured. But since larger task
poses a larger challenge, they may "take the bait" and see if they can
still manage to finish it. One of the problems with doing so is it locks
them into Judging mode, as any deviation into Perceiving would

likely prevent them from achieving their goal in the specified time
frame. It might also lead them to shut out other people, who are then
viewed as intrusions or impediments to their objectives. To function
more healthily, ENTJs need to ensure they are spending adequate time
Perceiving rather than racing to finish things. While acknowledging
their desire to reach a point of closure, ENTJs can benefit from
remaining open to alternatives, realizing that Perceiving infuses their
life with texture and richness. It allows them to live more organically,
rather than always clinging to a preset agenda. This is not to say that
ENTJs should stop being ENTJs and transform into ENTPs, but involves
finding the right balance between Judging and Perceiving.

ESTJ ESTJ is another of our 16 personality types. While some estimates
suggest ESTJs comprise upwards of 8% of the general population, my
research and experience suggests them as less common than both ESTPs and
ISTJs. ESTJs are dutiful, hardworking, and task-oriented. Often
possessing "Type-A" tendencies, they can become impatient and frustrated
when things fail to unfold according to their expected plan or time
frame. In the presence of ESTJs, one can sometimes feel like he is being
hurried or rushed, that the ESTJ wants him to "cut to the chase." ESTJs
are also firm, direct, and opinionated. Their verbiage tends to be
succinct and to the point. At times, others may view them as harsh,
blunt, or insensitive. Despite appearing outwardly confident and
assertive, they are, on the whole, no more inwardly secure nor sure of
themselves than other types. In fact, because their inner Judging
function (Fi) is inferior, they may feel they have relatively little
inner control. Finding inner control elusive, they naturally turn their
focus outwardly, hoping that achieving outer control will bring them
inner calm and security. Of course, controlling the outside world is no
small or easy task, contributing to ESTJs' propensity for restlessness
and hypervigilance. Among the most "left-brained" of all the types,
ESTJs typically present as relatively serious folks. Unlike ENTJs, whose
auxiliary Ni can go a long way in providing fun and entertainment for
all, ESTJs' Si may offer little in terms of lightness or humor. Those
with a more salient sense of humor generally rely on their tertiary
function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne), for witty or clever remarks. Like
their ISTJ counterparts, ESTJs tend to keep one eye on the past (Si).
They aim to protect and preserve past methods, traditions, and
conventions. This is why David Keirsey classifies them as "guardians."
They grow attached to the familiar and expected, often developing a
reliable set of habits and routines. As such, ESTJs like to know what to
expect, to "know the plan." Unlike EPs, who are stimulated by novelty
and uncertainty, ESTJs can find uncertainty or ambiguity unsettling.
Like ENTJs, ESTJs often rise to positions of leadership. The primary
difference,

in this respect, is that ENTJs tend to be visionary leaders, which often
carries them to the very top of the leadership ladder. ENTJs also prefer
to make and modify their own rules. ESTJs by contrast, are not only
willing to give orders, but are generally okay with working under
pre-established rules, guidelines, and procedures. Consequently, they
often serve as middle-level managers and supervisors. While ESTJs differ
from ESTPs by only one "preference" (i.e., J-P), they actually share
zero functions in common. This makes these two types far more different
than is commonly recognized. ESTJs, whose Extraverted Judging function
is dominant Thinking (Te), tend to be blunter and unapologetic in their
assertions than ESTPs, whose Extraverted Judging function is tertiary
Feeling (Fe). ESTPs display a certain social ease and smoothness that is
distinguishable from the blunt approach of ESTJs. All in all, ESTJs are
among the most loyal, dutiful, and responsible of all types. Like ESFJs,
they are admired for their work ethic, perseverance, devotion, and
steadfastness. They strive to practice what they preach, holding fast to
their commitments and convictions. They make loyal friends and
companions, especially for those who embrace a similar worldview and
lifestyle. ESTJs' Functional Stack & Type Development ESTJs' functional
stack is composed of the following functions: Dominant: Extraverted
Thinking (Te) Auxiliary: Introverted Sensing (Si) Tertiary: Extraverted
Intuition (Ne) Inferior: Introverted Feeling (Fi) ESTJs' personality
type development can be broadly conceived as consisting of three phases:
Phase I (Childhood) This phase is characterized by the development and
employment of ESTJs' dominant function, Extraverted Thinking (Te). In
developing and strengthening

their Te, Phase I ESTJs can seem particularly inflexible and
opinionated, quick to make judgments and draw conclusions about the
world. Since Te is a Judging function, they also tend to take themselves
and their lives rather seriously. While often perceived as outspoken or
opinionated, Phase I ESTJs are developing the Te skills necessary to
function as leaders and managers. Phase II (Adolescence-30s) While the
inferior function is not entirely dormant or inert in Phase I, the epic
tug-of-war between the dominant and inferior does not come to the fore
until Phase II. Once ESTJs' dominant Te reaches a certain threshold of
strength and dominance, their inferior function, Introverted Feeling
(Fi), begins to assert itself and play a more prominent and mischievous
role. Phase II ESTJs also show increasing use and development of their
auxiliary function, Introverted Sensing (Si), and may even begin to tap
into their tertiary function, Extraverted Intuition (Ne). These
Perceiving functions allow ESTJs to open and modify their Te judgments,
helping them loosen their grip on life and temper their Te drive for
outer order and control. Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond) If all goes well
and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase III, ESTJs become
increasingly aware of the insidious ways of their inferior Fi. As they
become more aware of their inferior and learn to function more healthily
as ESTJs, they experience greater balance between their Te and Fi, as
well as an increasing sense of peace and wholeness. ESTJs' Dominant
Function: Extraverted Thinking (Te) There are two varieties of Thinking:
Introverted Thinking (Ti) and Extraverted Thinking (Te). The latter
serves as ESTJs' dominant and most preferred function. Te strives to
bring order, control, and rationality to the systems and operations of
the outside world. It is oriented toward quantification, insisting on
objective standards and measurable goals. It carefully spells out how to
get from here to there, using as many maps, directions, and labels as
appropriate. Te undergirds ESTJs' tendency to quickly express their
judgments and opinion, to literally think (i.e., make judgments,
conclusions, and decisions) aloud. ESTJs

Judge before they Perceive, speak before they listen. This can be both a
strength and a weakness. On the one hand, it can make them strong and
courageous leaders. On the other, it can cause them to seem abrasive,
dogmatic, or controlling. Having a dominant Te can also make ESTJs prone
to overstating things. They may say things that, in retrospect, they
wish they could rescind, or at least soften. This is especially true for
ESTJs with a hypersensitive inferior function (Fi), which can lead them
to respond defensively or reactively. As a Judging function, Te also
contributes to ESTJs' work-orientation. Like other types with a dominant
Judging function, they are generally more serious and focused than
relaxed or receptive. Even on days when they have no obligations, they
are quick to get to work on something. Even in their leisure time, they
can experience a sense of urgency or hurriedness in getting things done.
ESTJs' Auxiliary Function: Introverted Sensing (Si) ESTJs use
Introverted Sensing (Si) as their auxiliary function. Unlike Extraverted
Sensing types (SPs), ESTJs are less concerned with seeking novel sensory
stimulation or acquiring new material goods. Instead, their Si prefers a
more routine and predictable lifestyle. When combined with Te, Si also
contributes to a sense of conviction about their beliefs and lifestyle,
which is why ESTJs are sometimes perceived as stubborn or closed-minded.
Like other SJ types, ESTJs function as conservators of the past. The
more often they do something in a particular way, the harder it is for
them to break out of that pattern. The same can be said of their beliefs
and worldview. As adults, they often continue in the beliefs and
worldview of their youth, including matters of politics and religion.
The longer they are immersed in particular set of circumstances, the
harder it is for them to be open to alternatives. ESTJs' Tertiary
Function: Extraverted Intuition (Ne) Ne is a novelty-seeking function.
Ne differs from Se, however, in that it is geared toward ideas rather
than the material or sensory world. Ne types are more concerned with
being creative, making connections, developing new theories, or seeing
new possibilities than they are with sensory or material novelty.

Since Ne is in the lower half of ESTJs' functional stack, they often
have a lovehate relationship with it. On the one hand, it may inspire
them to view themselves as witty, clever, creative, or savvy. This can
be seen, for instance, in their desire to conjure clever comments or
generate creative options or possibilities. They may also draw on their
Ne for the sake of creative business or entrepreneurial enterprises.
What ESTJs may dislike about their Ne is its tendency to inject
uncertainty into their beliefs and worldview. After all, ESTJs seek a
clear and unambiguous worldview to base their lives on. And since
abstract analysis is not necessarily their strong suit, ideas that
contradict their Si worldview can be unsettling. In response, they may
try to close off their Ne to various sources or ideas that they perceive
as potential threats to their belief system. ESTJs' Inferior Function:
Introverted Feeling (Fi) As is true of other types, ESTJs can be blinded
to the degree to which their inferior function impacts their decisions
and behavior. Without sufficient awareness and integration of their
inferior, they will continue to feel incomplete and be prone to unwise
decision-making in their lifestyle, careers, and relationships.
Consequently, ESTJs seeking self-knowledge and personal growth must work
to understand the ways their inferior function, Introverted Feeling
(Fi), manifests in their personality. As an introverted function, Fi
involves an inner focus on personal feelings and values. Of all types,
IFPs are literally the most "self-focused" (in a neutral sense) with
respect to their concern for independently exploring and managing their
values and emotions. ESTJs, by contrast, whose Fi is inferior and
largely unconscious, do not enjoy ready access to their own emotions. As
for ITPs, emotions, for ESTJs, are slippery and elusive, often taking an
all-or-nothing character. For IFPs, Fi also confers a strong sense of
inner control. However, because Fi is inferior in ESTJs, they do not
enjoy the same luxury of inner control. To compensate, they spend much
of their time vigorously working to control the outside world. They
instinctively sense that the only way they can feel in control of
themselves is by taking control of their surroundings. This is precisely
the opposite of the IFP approach. IFPs feel relatively powerless in
their ability to control the outside world (Te) and respond by focusing
on the one thing they feel

they can control---themselves (Fi). With that said, it would be wrong to
assume that ESTJs' Fi is powerless or lacking in influence. While they
may feel they have little conscious control of their Fi, it can still
exert its influence through less conscious means. As I have written
elsewhere, the inferior function can play a prominent role in informing,
motivating, and orienting the dominant function, influencing its goals,
interests, and values. For ESTJs, their choice of work is often informed
and motivated by the less conscious feelings and values of their Fi.
This may lead them to take up work that deviates from what one might
imagine for an ESTJ. They may, for instance, be driven by their Fi to
take up work in ministry. While ESTJs are not innately gifted in matters
of N or F (ministry might be roughly construed as an NF career), their
move toward psychological wholeness does entail a reconciliation of
their Fi and Ne functions. So while I am not suggesting that ESTJs are
wellsuited to function as ministers, we can at least understand why they
might feel compelled to do so. Fi might also inspire ESTJs to take up
causes that have personally affected them. For instance, an ESTJ whose
parent died of a rare disease may decide to become a physician or
medical researcher. Another example of Fi influence would be an ESTJ who
opts to function as a stay-at-home parent. IFPs seem to have a
particular empathy and concern for children, often finding great
fulfillment in having and caring for children. Since ESTJs have Fi in
their stack, they may have similar proclivities, even if far less
conscious. Therefore, ESTJs may experience a sort of "high" from having
or caring for children, even if doing so ultimately proves taxing or
unsatisfying. Personal Growth for ESTJs As I have written elsewhere, we
prepare the grounds for personal growth and personality type development
by functioning authentically according to our personality type. This
includes considering whether our circumstances (i.e., work,
relationships, and lifestyle) allow for regular use of our dominant and
auxiliary functions. In this case of ESTJs, this would involve regularly
employing their Te and Si. It is also important for ESTJs to consider
how they are using their Te. Like other

types with a dominant Judging function, ESTJs are prone to a sense of
urgency when it comes to finishing tasks or making decisions. This often
leads them to jump between their two Judging functions (Te & Fi) while
spending too little time Perceiving (Si). Their concern for "being
productive" can prevent them from absorbing or appreciating life (i.e.,
Perceiving); they may take their lives, as well as themselves, too
seriously. While ESTJs are naturally disciplined and thorough, this can
mutate into obsessiveness or compulsiveness if they aren't careful. In
short, personal growth for ESTJs occurs primarily through consistent and
balanced use of their Te and Si. By staying true to their most conscious
selves, they can move ever closer to an enduring sense of peace and
wholeness.

ESFP ESFP is another of our 16 personality types. It is among the most
commonly encountered personality types, especially among women,
comprising upwards of 10% of the general population. Like ISFPs, ESFPs
are often considered physically attractive. Of course, this might be
partly attributable to their extraverted personality, as well as their
concern for keeping up their appearance. They are attuned to what is
trendy and popular, willing to modify their appearance accordingly.
Glitz, glamor, perfume, jewelry---all are a part of the ESFPs'
repertoire. It's not that ESFPs are necessarily snobbish or narcissistic
about their appearance. Rather, because of their dominant function,
Extraverted Sensing (Se), they seem to have a natural eye for beauty,
style, and aesthetics. Their homes are often immaculate and tastefully
adorned, as ESFPs love to ensconce themselves in beautiful and
well-accoutered surroundings. As much as anything else, ESFPs are
disposed to seeking sensory, material, and experiential novelty (Se).
This is part of the reason they enjoy keeping up with current trends and
fashions. Their Se is hungry for new stimulation---new sights, sounds,
tastes, and experiences. Like ESTPs, ESFPs also display high levels of
kinesthetic intelligence. They are often athletic and endowed with good
dexterity and hand-eye coordination. In contrast to ENFPs, who exhibit a
preponderance of mental energy, ESFPs can display great physical energy.
ENFPs use their Ne to explore new ideas. ESFPs employ their senses to
explore and manipulate the physical world (Se). ESFPs can also make
great performers. Their sense of style and presentation, combined with
their kinesthetic capacities, allow them to excel as actors, vocalists,
and the like. For similar reasons, ESFPs can make skilled marketers and
salespersons. ESFPs' penchant for sensory and material novelties, as
well as their knack for social "performance," has at times earned them
the label of "hedonist" or "life of the party." While this may be true
in some cases, especially early in their

development, it only captures one aspect of the ESFP, namely, that of
their dominant function (Se). What is often missed is the fact that many
ESFPs present as intelligent, articulate, and composed. They use their
tertiary function, Extraverted Thinking (Te), to express themselves in a
measured and rational way. ESFPs are generally adaptable and open to new
experiences. Despite their status as Extraverts, they, like other SP
types, are often more interested in "doing" or being otherwise
entertained than they are in sitting around talking. While they can
certainly be chatty at times, Se, by nature, is not a highly verbal
function. ESFPs often express themselves through action rather than
words, showing their love and thoughtfulness through gifts or acts of
kindness. ESFPs are often most verbally engaged when granted an
opportunity to proffer advice. Rightly or not, they often see themselves
as wise counselors. Because of their Ni function, they feel they can
independently generate insights and answers for others' problems. This
is why ESFPs often score as Enneagram Twos (i.e., "The Helper") and
choose careers like counseling. Because Ni and Te make-up their
subconscious ego, there may be nothing more ego-gratifying for ESFPs
than giving advice. Wittingly or not, a common reason they maintain a
wide social circle is because it provides them ample opportunity to
advise others. ESFPs like having others turn to them for help and
guidance, since it helps them feel valuable and important (it also gives
their inferior Ni quite an ego boost). If they aren't careful, however,
ESFPs propensity to proffer unsolicited advice can be off-putting to
others. Because of composed and measured presentation of Te, as well as
their penchant for maintaining neat and tidy surroundings (even if
largely for aesthetic reasons), ESFPs are commonly mistyped as ESFJs. In
my experience, however, ESFPs are far more common than ESFJs are, at
least in the U.S. As Si types, ESFJs are generally less stylish and
image conscious than ESFPs are. And because ESFJs use Extraverted
Feeling, they have a more natural sense of warmth and approachability.
While not to quite the same extent as ISFPs, ESFPs are lovers,
nurturers, and caregivers. They love children and animals, whose
relative helplessness makes them perfect recipients of ESFPs' affection.
Although ESFPs can present as warm and inviting, this is best understood
as Se

social performance rather than a natural expression of feeling. The
natural direction of their Feeling is inward (i.e., Introverted Feeling
(Fi)). Fi prompts ESFPs to manage their emotions on a largely
independent basis. The sense of emotional independence conferred by Fi
may also contribute to their confidence in advising others about how to
manage their emotional concerns. All in all, ESFPs are fun, active,
attractive, and impressive. While generally funloving and easy-going
(Se), they can also be assertive, controlling, and subtly manipulative.
Like other personality types, their degree of psychological health
depends on their degree of personal growth, including the way they go
about reconciling their conscious and less conscious personality
functions. ESFPs' Functional Stack & Type Development ESFPs' functional
stack is composed of the following functions: Dominant: Extraverted
Sensing (Se) Auxiliary: Introverted Feeling (Fi) Tertiary: Extraverted
Thinking (Te) Inferior: Introverted Intuition (Ni) ESFPs' personality
type development can be broadly conceived according to three phases:
Phase I (Childhood) This phase of development is characterized by the
emergence of Extraverted Sensing (Se) as ESFPs' dominant personality
function. Phase I ESFPs are funloving and free-spirited. They enjoy
being active and drinking in all the experiences life has to offer.
Since their foremost concern is absorbing and experiencing the world,
Phase I ESFPs tend not to take themselves or life itself too seriously.
Phase II (Adolescence-30s) While the inferior function is not entirely
dormant or inert in Phase I, the epic tug-of-war between the dominant
and inferior does not come to the fore until

Phase II. Once ESFPs' dominant Se reaches a certain threshold of
strength and dominance, their inferior function, Introverted Intuition
(Ni), begins to assert itself and play a more significant and
mischievous role. This will be discussed later in this profile. Phase II
ESFPs also show increasing use and development of their auxiliary
function, Introverted Feeling (Fi), and may even begin to tap into their
tertiary function, Extraverted Thinking (Te). Phase III (30s, 40s, &
Beyond) If all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase
III, ESFPs become increasingly aware of the insidious ways of their
inferior Ni. As they become more aware of their inferior and learn to
function more authentically as ESFPs, they experience greater balance
between their Ne and Si. They learn that integrating their Ni happens
naturally and indirectly as they go about authentically using their Se
and Fi. As they cultivate conditions that support their natural
strengths, Phase III ESFPs come to experience a heightened sense of
peace, wholeness, and satisfaction. ESFPs' Dominant Function:
Extraverted Sensing (Se) There are two varieties of Sensing: Introverted
Sensing (Si) and Extraverted Sensing (Se). Si involves a strong
attachment to past precedent---to the routine, familiar, and
predictable. Not only does it seek to conserve past precedent, but it is
also conservative with respect to the material world. Si types (SJs and
NPs) are less apt to lather on make-up or concern themselves with
current styles and fashions, opting for a more "natural," simple, and
less embellished appearance. Se involves the perception of information
through the five senses (i.e., sight, smell, touch, sound, and taste).
It is sensual, instinctual, and appetitive. Compared to Si, it is more
liberal and novelty-oriented with respect to sensations and the material
world. Se types love novel sensations, physical thrills, and material
comforts. They are "sensation-seekers," relishing novel experiences and
the thrill of action. Many enjoy cooking and experimenting with new
recipes. Because Se is concerned with "here and now" experiences, it can
also be associated with a present temporal orientation. Se attunes to
the concrete details and sense data. ESFPs naturally scan the
environment for interesting sensory novelties, noticing details that
other types might miss. This is why they often have a strong visual
recall, or what is

sometimes dubbed a "photographic" memory. Like other SPs types, ESFPs
enjoy an array of sports and other "hands-on" activities. They commonly
take up work as chefs, cosmetologists, nurses, waitresses, physical/
occupational therapists, and the like. ESFPs' Auxiliary Function:
Introverted Feeling (Fi) Because ESFPs' auxiliary function, Introverted
Feeling (Fi), is one of inner Judging, they are more serious inwardly
than they might appear outwardly. Their Fi grants them a good sense of
inner control, independently managing and regulating their emotions.
Compared to Extraverted Feeling (Fe), Fi is more individualistic and
idiosyncratic. Because Fi judgments are formed largely independently, Fi
types can be a bit wary of Fe expressions. To FP types, Fe can seem
generic, fake, or contrived. With that said, since ESFPs often use their
Se to mimic Fe, they are apt to be less bothered by Fe expressions than
IFPs might be. Rightly or wrongly, Fi can also seem more emotionally
"mature" than Fe. This Since ESFPs' emotions are often repackaged and
expressed via their tertiary Te, they can often come across as measured
and rational; they may even be mistaken for Thinking types. Unlike Fe
emotion, Fi emotion is not given an opportunity to "run rampant" in its
outward expression--it is restrained. The same introverted property
which provides such restraint is also responsible for its intensiveness.
At times, that Fi intensity of emotion comes out through Te in the form
of biting or sarcastic remarks, something ESFPs need to be wary of.
ESFPs' Tertiary Function: Extraverted Thinking (Te) Extraverted Thinking
(Te) involves the outward expression of rational judgments. As we've
seen, Te contributes to ESFPs' ability to communicate in a measured and
articulate fashion. Their Te is particularly active when proffering
advice, at times leading them to seem preachy or condescending. But
because Te is in the bottom half of their functional stack, ESFPs are
not always comfortable expressing their judgments, especially early in
their development. This can lead them, along with other Perceiving
types, to merely adapt rather than assert themselves. And since
Perceivers are generally uncomfortable with direct conflict, they often
mistake relational harmony for

relational health, forgoing open communication in favor of preserving
outer peace. So while ESFPs are generally more self-assertive than IPs
are, those who fail to self-express via their Te can still find
themselves in relational trouble because of inadequate communication. Te
can also inspire ESFPs to "be responsible," follow the rules, or "do
things by the book." And because responsibility is culturally endorsed
as a positive virtue, they may fail to realize that being obsessed with
it is actually quite unhealthy for them. An overactive Te can contribute
to an air of smugness and selfrighteousness in ESFPs, detracting from
their better virtues of openness (Se) and compassion (Fi). ESFPs'
Inferior Function: Introverted Intuition (Ni) As is true of other types,
ESFPs can be easily blinded to the degree to which their inferior
function impacts their decisions and behavior. Without sufficient
awareness and integration of their inferior, ESFPs will continue to feel
incomplete and be prone to unwise decision-making in their lifestyle,
careers, and relationships. ESFPs seeking self-knowledge and personal
growth must work to understand the ways their inferior function,
Introverted Intuition (Ni), manifests in their personality. For NJ
types, Ni confers a depth of perception and insight. But because Ni is
essentially unconscious and undeveloped in ESFPs, they do not enjoy the
same degree of access or benefit from its workings. Nonetheless, for
reasons I have described elsewhere, their inferior Ni remains highly
attractive and alluring. For this reason, ESFPs often delude themselves
into believing they are deeply insightful and entitled to function as
sages or counselors. While ESFPs' auxiliary Fi does confer a healthy and
genuine concern for friends and loved ones, this differs from the ego
boost they receive from using their Ni and Te to proffer advice. In many
ways, ESFPs can be understood as trying to validate their self-worth or
achieve wholeness through counseling others. And while some ESFPs can
seem impressive and convincing in doing so (especially at first blush),
like other types, they are prone to overestimating their inferior's
capacities. The fact is that, as Se types, they are not wired to
function as idea generators or advice givers. When ESFPs fancy
themselves as Ni sages, they are being deceived, even if unknowingly, by
their ego.

Similar to the Enneagram Two, as described by Riso and Hudson, ESFPs in
the grip of their inferior Ni are prideful and self-righteous. They can
be slow to see or admit their own personal failures or shortcomings,
since this would threaten their self-image of being wise (Ni) and
righteous (Te). Their inferior Ni can also cause ESFPs to latch onto a
particular theory, worldview, or plan for their lives. So instead of
going with the flow and allowing life to come to them (Se), they try to
control life (Te) to ensure it conforms to their Ni vision or ideals.
This of course goes against their natural (and healthy) mode of
functioning as ESPs. By going against the "natural order" for their
type, they are susceptible to unwise decision-making in their careers
and relationships. Healthy functioning for ESFPs, as well as other
personality types, involves the development and regular employment of
their dominant and auxiliary functions. In truth, ESFPs best insights
and decisions come from a breadth of lived experience (Se) and a
compassionate outlook (Fi) rather than from indulging their Ni.
Understanding this alone is a critical first step for ESFPs seeking
enduring peace, wholeness, and life satisfaction.

ESTP ESTP is the last (but not the least) of our 16 personality types.
While some estimates suggest ESTPs comprise only 4% of the general
population, my research and experience suggests that estimates of 7% (or
higher) are likely to be closer to the mark. ESTP males are thought to
outnumber females at a clip of two to one. ESTPs are fun, active, and
charming. Because ESTPs' Thinking function is introverted in its
direction (Ti), it often goes unnoticed by outsiders. What others tend
to see is ESTPs engaging in action (Se) or with people (Fe). Their
tertiary function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe), contributes ample
affability and personableness to their outward presentation. ESTPs
typically display conventional, even stylish, forms of dress. While
their Ti is concerned with functionality and practicality, their
Extraverted Sensing (Se) and Fe functions are attuned to the trendy and
popular; social status is often a high priority for ESTPs. Since their
dominant function (Se) is a Perceiving function, ESTPs are naturally
more concerned with experiencing the world than they are with
structuring or controlling it. And as Extraverts, the outside world
serves as their primary source of stimulation. This makes ESTPs the most
action-oriented and task-oriented of all types. Without a task or
something novel to experience, they can quickly become bored and
restless. With adequate stimulation, ESTPs act and respond quickly,
making things happen and getting things accomplished. They are "doers,"
men and women of action. Like ISTPs, ESTPs display great kinesthetic
intelligence. They are athletic and mechanically-inclined, endowed with
ample dexterity and hand-eye coordination. In contrast to ENTPs, who
exhibit a preponderance of mental energy, ESTPs exhibit great physical
energy. ENTPs use Ne to explore new ideas or hypotheticals. ESTPs employ
their bodies and senses to explore and manipulate the physical world
(Se). Therefore, ESTPs commonly pursue careers that allow them to
explore sensory novelties and use their practical intelligence to solve
concrete problems (i.e., Holland "Realistic careers). They make
excellent chefs, athletes, chiropractors, physical therapists, surgeons,
etc. They

can also make great performers. Their sense of style and presentation,
combined with their kinesthetic capacities, allow them to excel as
actors, musicians, and the like. Because of their preference for
hands-on activities, ESTPs may underperform in academic settings. This
may not be due to a lack of ability per se, but to a lack of Se
stimulation. As is true for all SPs, the most concrete of all the
personality types, being forced to deal in abstractions for too long can
be draining for ESTPs. Their impatience with abstractions may also
explain why they are more apt to be diagnosed with ADD or ADHD than some
of the other personality types. ESTPs are generally open and adaptable
to new experiences. Despite their status as Extraverts, they often
prefer "doing" more than talking. While they may be chatty at times,
neither Se nor Ti is a highly verbal function. Thus, ESTPs first
instinct is to express themselves via action rather than words. Their
relationships are generally built around a breadth of shared activities
(Se) rather than extensive, in-depth conversations. But since status and
reputation are important to both their Se and Fe, ESTPs may be far more
talkative at work or in public settings. In the public arena, they may
quickly shift into "schmoozing mode." This can differ dramatically from
their private persona, where they can seem more independent and aloof.
The ostensible disparity between their public and private personas may
at times lead their intimates to consider them narcissistic or
hypocritical. As we've seen, ESTPs' public actions are driven by a need
to be admired and respected. This stems, in large part, from their
tertiary Fe, which combined with their Se concern for appearances,
prompts them to take their social obligations quite seriously. Since
their public actions affect their reputation, ESTPs are careful not to
act in ways that could jeopardize their social standing. In attempting
to maintain a strong public image, they may be particular about
punctuality, dressing appropriately, and behaving according to social
expectations. This image-consciousness contributes to their tendency to
score high as Enneagram Threes. ESTPs' public conscientiousness may lead
them to mistype themselves as ESTJs. But ESTJs, whose dominant function
is Extraverted Thinking (Te), tend to be far more blunt and unapologetic
in their assertions than ESTPs. ESTPs exude an affability and
personableness that is clearly distinguishable from the take-charge,

"to-the-point" persona of ESTJs. In social settings, ESTPs can blend and
engage with people far more effortlessly than is typical of ESTJs. While
ESTPs put people at ease, ESTJs are often uncomfortably direct or
opinionated. Like other Perceivers, ESTPs can have a propensity for
acting passively or passive-aggressively in their relationships. Because
their Ti precedes their extraverted Fe in their functional stack, ESTPs
are more apt to internalize (Ti) or act on (Se) their frustrations than
openly talk about them (Fe). This can be frustrating for partners who
would prefer to dialogue about their concerns rather than ESTPs taking
matters into their own hands. This can be complicated by the fact that,
because of their tertiary Fe, ESTPs may prefer to avoid conflict and
function, to some degree, as people-pleasers. Hence, ESTPs can find
themselves caught between wanting to please their partner, on the one
hand, and wanting to convey their frustrations, on the other. This can
lead to a situation in which ESTPs are being outwardly compliant while
furtively engaging in duplicitous or passive-aggressive behaviors.
ESTPs' Functional Stack & Personality Type Development ESTPs' functional
stack is composed of the following functions: Dominant: Extraverted
Sensing (Se) Auxiliary: Introverted Thinking (Ti) Tertiary: Extraverted
Feeling (Fe) Inferior: Introverted Intuition (Ni) ESTPs' personality
type development can be broadly conceived as consisting of three phases:
Phase I (Childhood) This phase of development is characterized by the
emergence of Extraverted Sensing (Se) as ESTPs' dominant personality
function. Phase I ESTPs are funloving and free-spirited. They enjoy
being active and drinking in all the experiences life has to offer.
Since their foremost concern is absorbing and experiencing the world,
they tend not to take themselves or life itself too seriously. Phase I
ESTPs may also show some degree of development in their

auxiliary function, Introverted Thinking (Ti). Phase II
(Adolescence-30s) While the inferior function is not entirely dormant or
inert in Phase I, the tug-ofwar between the dominant and inferior does
not come to the fore until Phase II. Once ESTPs' dominant Se reaches a
certain threshold of strength and dominance, their inferior function,
Introverted Intuition (Ni), begins to assert itself and play a more
significant and mischievous role. This will be elaborated later in this
profile. Phase II ESTPs also show increasing use and development of
their auxiliary Ti, and may even begin to tap into their tertiary
function, Extraverted Feeling (Fe). Phase III (30s, 40s, & Beyond) If
all goes well and they are fortunate enough to enter Phase III, ESTPs
become increasingly aware of the insidious ways of their inferior Ni. As
they become more aware of their inferior and learn to function more
authentically as ESTPs, they experience greater balance between their Se
and Ni. They learn that integrating their Ni happens naturally and
indirectly as they go about authentically using their Se and Ti. As they
cultivate conditions that support their natural strengths, Phase III
ESTPs come to experience a heightened sense of peace, wholeness, and
satisfaction. ESTPs' Dominant Function: Extraverted Sensing (Se) There
are two varieties of Sensing: Introverted Sensing (Si) and Extraverted
Sensing (Se). While Si is conservative with respect to the material
world, Se is more liberal and novelty-oriented. Se involves the
perception of information through the five senses (i.e., sight, smell,
touch, sound, and taste). It is sensual, instinctual, and appetitive. Se
types love novel sensations, physical thrills, and material comforts.
They are "sensation-seekers," relishing novel experiences and the thrill
of action. Se attunes to the concrete details and sensory data of the
present by way of the five senses. ESTPs naturally scan the environment
for interesting sensory novelties, noticing details that other types
might miss. As a child, I would occasionally go on long car rides with
my ESTP father. He loved driving because it provided him with the
constant change in scenery

needed to stimulate his Se. It was a rare occasion that he failed to
"spot" something to bring to my attention: a deer prancing through a
distant field, a rare sports car, or a hawk scoping out its prey from
above. Only occasionally could he be found directly attending to the
road ahead, since he was always on scanning for something novel and
interesting. ESTPs commonly enjoy hobbies that capitalize on their keen
powers of observation. My father has always enjoyed keeping his cars in
immaculate condition, washing them by hand twice a week. The notion of
"detailing" a vehicle aptly describes a primary purpose of Se, involving
close attention to the details of the immediate environment. Se also
contributes to ESTPs' love of sports, food, sex, and physical action. As
we've seen, ESTPs love working with their hands and quickly responding
to environmental demands. ESTP's Auxiliary Function: Introverted
Thinking (Ti) As dominant Perceivers, ESTPs are naturally disposed to
taking a less intentional approach to life. Like other EPs, they are
content to remain in an open mode of Perceiving until life demands a
response or judgment. When ESTPs are compelled to make judgments a la
their auxiliary Ti, they become more inwardly focused and intense,
similar to the typical mode of operation for ISTPs. But because Ti is
introverted in its direction, onlookers may fail to notice this more
serious side of the ESTP. Ti involves the application of logic and
reason for the sake of understanding a given situation, system, or
problem. Ti also works to bring structure and order to the inner world.
This inner structuring grants ESTPs a good sense of inner control.
Inwardly, ESTPs are self-disciplined, working to independently manage
their thoughts and objectives. Ti might also be viewed in terms of fluid
intelligence, whereas Extraverted Thinking (Te) seems more related to
crystallized intelligence . Ti is more intuitive, contextual, and
right-brained, whereas Te is more abstract, procedureoriented, and
left-brained. The fluid nature of their Ti, combined with the keen
observational powers of their Se, contributes to ESTPs' acumen as
practical problem solvers. ESTPs can analyze a situation, diagnose the
problem, and then determine how to fix it.

The difference between Ti in ESTPs versus ISTPs is its place in the
functional stack. For ISTPs, Ti comes first, which makes them
characteristically more serious, focused, and quicker to judge. ISTPs
then use their auxiliary Se to open up and further explore their initial
judgments. For ESTPs, the order is reversed. They do not start with an
initial judgment or presumption like ISTPs, but approach things through
the open eyes of their Se. They then employ their Ti to evaluate,
structure, and order their Se observations. Their Se dominance also
makes ESTPs more open to "playing" or perceiving for its own sake.
ESTPs' Tertiary Function: Extraverted Feeling (Fe) ESTPs' tertiary
function is Extraverted Feeling (Fe). Fe is the most interpersonal of
all the functions. It strives to promote interpersonal peace, harmony,
and understanding. This involves attending not only to what is said, but
also how it is said. It allows ESTPs to quickly establish rapport and
connections with others. Fe also involves a desire to be socially
understood and validated. Although ESTPs may not connect with others on
a deep level of feeling, their Fe still desires the sense of affirmation
and validation that comes from engaging with people. So even though they
are Thinking types, ESTPs need a certain degree of social engagement. As
we've seen, they particularly enjoy engaging with others in the public
arena. We can also approach ESTPs' Fe more theoretically. Namely, since
Fe serves as their extraverted Judging function and falls lower in their
functional stack, they are generally less comfortable extroverting
judgments (Fe) than they are keeping their judgments to themselves (Ti).
This can lead ESTPs to habitually defer to others' wishes rather than
asserting their own, functioning to some extent as "people-pleasers."
But because ESTPs have fairly independent minds (Ti), they may
eventually grow resentful of others who they may see as trying to
control them. This can result in ESTPs functioning unhealthily in what
is sometimes described as a "co-dependent" fashion. On the one hand,
they feel reliant on their partners for Fe support, while on the other,
they feel the need to be unfettered (Se) and independent (Ti). ESTPs'
Inferior Function: Introverted Intuition (Ni) As is true of other types,
ESTPs can be easily blinded to the degree to which their inferior
function impacts their decisions and behavior. Without sufficient

awareness and integration of their inferior, ESTPs will continue to feel
incomplete and be prone to unwise decision-making in their lifestyle,
careers, and relationships. Consequently, ESTPs seeking self-knowledge
and personal growth must work to understand the ways their inferior
function, Introverted Intuition (Ni), manifests in their personality.
ESTPs' inferior Ni may manifest as a desire to be seen as profound or
insightful with respect to abstract topics, such as politics or
religion. So by asserting and defending certain dogmas or ideologies,
ESTPs can experience a strong, even if unhealthy, sense of ego
validation. Since Ni is a fairly convergent function, it may inspire
ESTPs to latch onto a single theory, worldview, or plan for their lives.
So instead of going with the flow and allowing life to come to them
(Se), they may try to force-fit life into a preformed Ni plan. This of
course goes against their most natural (and healthy) mode of Se
functioning, making them susceptible to unwise decision-making in their
careers, relationships, and otherwise. Healthy functioning for ESTPs, as
well as other personality types, involves the development and regular
employment of their dominant and auxiliary functions. ESTPs must realize
that their best insights and decisions will not come from their immature
Ni, but will emerge primarily from gaining a breadth of experiences
(Se), combined with rational analyses of those experiences (Ti). When
ESTPs extend much beyond their own experiences, they are prone to much
greater error and are more likely to fall into the grip of their Ni ego.

Additional Resources To learn more about the 16 personality types,
including their careers, relationships, and type development, I
encourage you to visit us at: PersonalityJunkie.com You may also wish to
explore my other books: My True Type: Clarifying Your Personality Type,
Preferences & Functions The INTP: Personality, Careers, Relationships, &
the Quest for Truth and Meaning. The INTP Quest: INTPs' Search for their
Core Self, Purpose, & Philosophy Best to you! A.J. Drenth \*If you
appreciated this book and would like to promote our work, we always
appreciate positive Amazon or iTunes reviews!

Table of Contents Introduction The Preferences & Functions The
Functional Stack J-P Criteria The Inferior Function Type Development &
Integration Type Profiles INFJ INTJ INTP ISTP INFP ISFP ISFJ ISTJ ENFP
ENTP ENFJ ESFJ ENTJ ESTJ ESFP ESTP Additional Resources


