CONTENTS Notes on Relaxing Meditations for Resting and Relaxing

You don't need to set aside special time for resting and relaxing. You
don't need a special pillow or any fancy equipment. You don't need a
whole hour. In fact, now is a very good time to relax.

You are probably breathing in and out right this moment. If you can
close your eyes for a moment, do so. This will help you pay attention to
your breath. Your body is doing so many things right now. Your heart is
beating. Your lungs are inhaling and exhaling air. Blood is traveling
through your veins. Without effort, your body is both working and
relaxed.

NOTES ON RELAXING

RESTING Whenever animals in the forest are wounded, they rest. They look
for a very quiet place and just stay there without moving for many days.
They know it's the best way for their body to heal. During this time
they may not even eat or drink. The wisdom of stopping and healing is
still alive in animals, but we human beings have lost the capacity to
rest.

HEALING We human beings have lost confidence in the body just knowing
what to do. If we have time alone with ourselves, we panic and try to do
many different things. Mindful breathing helps us to relearn the art of
resting. Mindful breathing is like a loving parent cradling a baby,
saying, "Don't worry, I'll take good care of you; just rest."

AWARENESS OF BREATHING Your breathing is a stable, solid ground where
you can take refuge. No matter what thoughts, emotions, and perceptions
are going on inside you, your breath is always there, like a faithful
friend. Whenever you're carried away by thinking, overwhelmed by strong
emotions, or feeling restless and dispersed, return to your breathing.
Bring body and mind together and anchor your mind. Become aware of the
air coming in and going out of your body. With awareness of the breath,
our breathing naturally becomes light, calm, and peaceful. At any time
of the day or night, whether you're walking, driving, working in the
garden, or sitting at the computer, you can return to the peaceful
refuge of your own breath.

RESTING POEM At any moment, we can say this small poem to ourselves and
take a minirest. This poem is like a tiny vacation, except that it
brings you back to your true home instead of taking you away from it.
Breathing in, I know I am breathing in. Breathing out, I know I am
breathing out.

You can even shorten this poem; it works just as well: In. Out.

FOLLOWING THE BREATH To increase your mindfulness and concentration,
gently and easily follow your in-breath and out-breath all the way
through. Just sitting and following your breathing can bring a lot of
joy and healing. Breathing in, I follow my in-breath all the way
through. Breathing out, I follow my out-breath all the way through.

CALM WATER Each of us is like the waves and also like the water.
Sometimes we're excited, noisy, and agitated like the waves. Sometimes
we're tranquil like still water. When water is calm, it reflects the
blue sky, the clouds, and the trees. Sometimes, whether we're at home,
work, or school, we become tired, agitated, or unhappy and we need to
transform into calm water. We already have calmness in us; we just need
to know how to make it manifest.

MEDITATION To meditate means to pay full attention to something. It
doesn't mean to run away from life. Instead it's an opportunity to look
deeply into ourselves and into the situation we're in.

STOPPING: THE FIRST ASPECT OF MEDITATION Meditation has two aspects. The
first is stopping (shamatha in Sanskrit). We run throughout our whole
life, chasing after some idea of happiness. Stopping means to stop our
running, our forgetfulness, and our being caught in the past or the
future. We come home to the present moment where life is available. The
present moment contains every moment. Here we can touch our ancestors,
our children, and their children, even if they haven't been born yet. We
calm our body and emotions through the practice of mindful breathing,
mindful walking, and mindful sitting. Shamatha is also the practice of
concentrating, so we can live deeply each moment of our life and touch
the deepest level of our being.

STOP FIRST If we can't rest, it's because we haven't stopped running. We
began running a long time ago. We continue to run, even in our sleep. We
think that happiness and well-being aren't possible in the present. If
you can stop and establish yourself in the here and the now, you will
see that there are many elements of happiness available in this moment,
more than enough for you to be happy. Even if there are a few things in
the present that you dislike, there are still plenty of positive
conditions for your happiness. When you walk in the garden, you may see
that a tree is dying and so you feel sad and aren't able to enjoy the
rest of the garden that is still beautiful. If you look again, you can
see that the garden is still beautiful, and you can enjoy it.

LOOKING DEEPLY: THE SECOND ASPECT OF MEDITATION The second aspect of
meditation is looking deeply (vipashyana in Sanskrit) in order to see
the true nature of things. Understanding is a great gift. Your daily
life conducted in mindfulness is also a great gift; this too is the
practice of meditation. Mindfulness carries within it concentration and
understanding.

MINDFULNESS IN DAILY LIFE Mindfulness is the continuous practice of
touching deeply every moment of daily life. To be mindful is to be truly
present with your body and your mind, to harmonize your intentions and
actions, and to be in harmony with those around you. We don't need to
make a separate time for this outside of our daily activities. We can
practice mindfulness in every moment of the day---in the kitchen, the
bathroom, or the garden, and as we go from one place to another. We can
do the same things we always do---walking, sitting, working, eating, and
so on---with mindful awareness of what we're doing. Our mind is with our
actions.

A RELAXED POSITION What is your most relaxed position? Sometimes we
think we can only relax if we are lying down. But we can also sit in a
relaxed position. Your posture can be upright and not rigid. Relax your
shoulders. See if it's possible to sit with no tension in your body.

HEALING ENERGY If you can sit in meditation on your own, quietly and
peacefully, that is already relaxing and healing. Even if nobody else
knows you are meditating, the energy you produce is very beneficial for
you and for the world. But if you sit with others, if you walk and work
with others, the energy is amplified, and you will create a powerful
collective energy of mindfulness for your own healing and the healing of
the world. It's something one person cannot do alone. Don't deprive the
world of this essential spiritual food.

COLLECTIVE ENERGY OF HEALING Usually we think of relaxing and healing as
things that happen when we are alone. But many thousands of people have
participated in collective walking meditation and mass sitting
meditation in some of the world's busiest cities. People have walked
mindfully and peacefully around the Hoan Kiem Lake in Hanoi. They have
left footprints of peace and freedom on the ancient streets and piazzas
of Rome. Thousands of us have sat in silence and stillness in London's
busy Trafalgar Square and in Zucotti Park in New York City. Everyone who
participates and everyone who witnesses this collective practice has a
chance to get in touch with the energy of peace, freedom, healing, and
joy. The collective energy generated on such occasions is a gift that we
can offer ourselves, one another, the city, and the world.

CULTIVATING JOY We may think of joy as something that happens
spontaneously. But joy needs to be cultivated and practiced in order to
grow. When we sit in mindfulness with others, it's easier to sit. When
we relax with others, it's easier to relax. The collective energy can
help us when we're tired or when our mind wanders. The collective energy
can bring us back to ourselves. This is why it's so important to
practice with others. At first we may worry that we aren't doing sitting
or walking meditation properly, and we may hesitate to practice with
others for fear of being judged. But we all know how to sit and how to
breathe. That's all we have to do. After only a few moments of
concentrating on our breathing, we can bring peace and calm to our body
and mind. We only need to pay attention to our in-breath and out-breath.
Just focus on that. That's all it takes to begin to calm the agitation
in your mind and body and restore stability and peace within yourself.
The concentration of those around you will also support you as you begin
to practice. Do this a little bit each day, alone or with others. When
you train like this, it becomes easier and easier to return to your
mindful breathing. The more you train yourself, the more easily you
touch the depths of your consciousness, and the more easily you can
generate the energy of compassion. Each one of us can do this.

PRACTICING JOY TOGETHER We can't try hard to relax, just as we can't use
a lot of strict effort to be mindful. When we practice together as a
community, our practice of mindfulness becomes more joyful, more
relaxed, and steady. We are bells of mindfulness for each other,
supporting and reminding each other along the path of practice. With the
support of the community, we can cultivate peace and joy in ourselves,
which we can then offer to those around us. We cultivate our solidity
and freedom, our understanding and compassion. We practice looking
deeply to gain the sort of insight that can free us from suffering,
fear, discrimination, and misunderstanding.

MINDFULNESS OF THE BODY In our body there may be tension and pain. If we
suppress or ignore this, then every day the tension and pain will grow
and prevent us from experiencing the happiness that we should be able to
experience. When we have tension in our body, we can't sleep well or eat
well. Mindfulness of breathing can help us relax and bring peace to our
body. We take care of our body first. We can take care of our mind
later.

COMMUNICATING WITH OURSELVES Sometimes we want to relax because we want
to not think. That's wonderful; we all need non-thinking time. But that
doesn't mean we should stop listening. When we stop thinking, we can
start communicating with ourselves by listening to our bodies and our
emotions. With all the technology we have, we need only a few seconds to
get in contact with people who live very far away. But true
communication with others can't happen unless we stop, relax, and listen
to ourselves.

RESTORING WELLNESS Releasing any tension and bringing calm to your body
is the first step in restoring wellness. You can't heal your body if you
don't pay attention to it. Bringing your mind home to your body, you
become established in the here and the now. You have a chance to be
aware, without judgment, of any pain, tension, or suffering in your
body. This is the beginning of healing.

PEACEFUL BREATHING When we begin practicing awareness of our breath, the
breathing may not be very peaceful. It may be rushed, uneven, or
shallow. This is because of the tensions in our body and the sadness and
other preoccupations in our mind. Therefore, our breathing isn't
peaceful. Breathing in and out, we concentrate just on our breathing. If
we continue to practice awareness of breathing, our breathing becomes
gentle, deeper, more peaceful, and the state of dispersion in our mind
ceases. Here are three exercises to bring peace to the breath. The first
is to recognize the in-breath as an in-breath, and the out-breath as an
out-breath. The second is to recognize the length of the in-breath and
out-breath. The third is to focus on the breath all the way through.
This is concentration. We just observe the breath; we never force it. We
allow it to be natural. With awareness of breathing, our breath
naturally becomes deeper, slower, and more peaceful. Breathing in, I
know I'm breathing in. Breathing out, I know I'm breathing out.
Breathing in, I see my breath is long or short. Breathing out, I see my
breath is long or short. Breathing in, I follow my in-breath all the way
through. Breathing out, I follow my out-breath all the way through.

THE SOUND OF THE BELL I started inviting the bell when I was sixteen
years old, the age when I became a novice monk. We say, "invite the
bell" rather than "strike the bell" because we think of the bell as a
friend. We want to invite its sound into our bodies. Inviting a bell to
sound is one very simple way to relax. When we hear the bell, we breathe
in and we breathe out, and we take in that beautiful sound. That's it.
If we don't have a bell, we can use another sound---a phone ringing, an
airplane passing overhead, the chime of a clock, a timer on the
computer, or the natural sounds around us. We can even use the sound of
a jackhammer or a leaf blower.

BREATHING ROOM Do you have a space dedicated to relaxing in your home?
This doesn't have to be a big space. It could be a small corner (not
your bed!) or anywhere in a room that is dedicated just to breathing and
relaxing. This is not a space for eating or doing homework, or folding
laundry or building anything. This is as essential as a place to eat,
sleep, and go to the bathroom. We need a small space where we can take
care of our nervous system and restore our tranquility and peace.

BRINGING PEACE TO OUR TERRITORY Each of us has a physical body, as well
as feelings, perceptions, thoughts, emotions, and a deep consciousness.
These comprise our territory; and each of us is a monarch ruling over
our territory. But we're not responsible monarchs. There's disharmony
and conflict in our territory. We don't have the capacity to restore
peace and harmony. Instead of surveying our territory, we escape and
take refuge in some form of consumption. Mindfulness is a practice to
give you the courage and energy to go back and embrace your body and
your feelings and emotions, even if they're unpleasant. Even if it seems
they may destroy you, go back and embrace them and help them to
transform. If you're still afraid, ask friends in the practice for
support. Practicing walking meditation, conscious breathing, and eating
meals in mindfulness, you cultivate the energy of mindfulness and you're
able to reign peacefully over your territory.

LAZY DAY Most of us have very scheduled lives and very full calendars.
But do we have enough lazy days in our calendar? A lazy day is a day for
us to be without any scheduled activities. We just let the day unfold
naturally, timelessly. On this day we have a chance to reestablish the
balance in ourselves. We may do walking meditation on our own or with a
friend, or do sitting meditation in the forest. We might like to read a
little or write home to our family or to a friend. It can be a day for
us to look more deeply at our practice and at our relations with others.
Or we may recognize that we simply need to rest. When we have
unscheduled time, we tend to get bored, seek entertainment, or cast
about for something to do. A lazy day is a chance to train ourselves not
to be afraid of doing nothing. You might think that not doing anything
is a waste of time. But that's not true. Your time is first of all for
you to be---to be alive, to be peace.

BEING PEACE The world needs joyous and loving people who are capable of
just being. If you know the art of being peace, then you have the basis
for your every action. The ground for action is to be, and the quality
of being determines the quality of doing. Action must be based on
non-action. People sometimes say, "Don't just sit there, do something."
But we have to reverse that statement to say, "Don't just do something,
sit there," in order to be in such a way that peace, understanding, and
compassion are possible.

RELAXATION NEEDS INSIGHT We know that there are those who try very hard
to be mindful, and yet they cannot relax. They try to breathe and they
try to walk; they try very hard, and yet they're unable to
relax---because trying is not mindfulness. It's not because you have the
intention to relax that you can relax. It's not because you have the
intention to stop that you can stop. Mindfulness, true mindfulness, must
carry within it true view, insight. You need insight in order to relax.

MINDFULNESS OF SOMETHING Mindfulness is always mindfulness of something.
We can be mindful of our breath, our footsteps, our thoughts, and our
actions. Mindfulness requires that we bring all our attention to
whatever we're doing, whether we're walking, breathing, brushing our
teeth, or eating a snack. To be mindful is already to be awakened. If we
can say with awareness, "Breathing in, I know I have a body," that is
already insight. Because if we know we have a body, we can know how to
take care of our body. If we want to reduce stress and tension, we need
to be aware that we've been running a lot. True happiness isn't found in
success, money, fame, or power. True happiness should be found in the
here and the now. With that kind of insight you can truly relax.

RELAXING IN NATURE When you walk in the hills, in a park, or along a
riverbank, you can follow your breathing. When you feel tired or
irritated, you can lie down with your arms at your sides, allowing all
your muscles to relax, maintaining awareness of just your breath and
your smile. Relaxing in this way is wonderful, and quite refreshing.
You'll benefit a lot if you practice this several times a day. Your
mindful breath and your smile will bring happiness to you and to those
around you. There's nothing you could buy your loved ones that could
give them as much true happiness as your gift of awareness, breathing,
and smiling---and these precious gifts cost nothing.

HEALING OURSELVES, HEALING THE EARTH Mindfulness and a deep awareness of
the Earth can help us to handle pain and difficult feelings. It can help
us heal our own suffering and increase our capacity to be aware of the
suffering of others. With awareness of the Earth's generosity, we can
generate a pleasant feeling. Knowing how to create moments of joy and
happiness is crucial for our healing. It's important to be able to see
the wonders of life around us and to recognize all the conditions for
happiness that already exist. Then, with the energy of mindfulness, we
can recognize and embrace our feelings of anger, fear, and despair and
transform them. We don't need to become overwhelmed by these unpleasant
emotions.

WAKING UP TO THE MOMENT Walking meditation is a way of waking up to the
wonderful moment we are living in. If our mind is caught, preoccupied
with our worries and our suffering, or if we distract ourselves with
other things while walking, we can't practice mindfulness; we can't
enjoy the present moment. We're missing out on life. But if we're awake,
then we'll see this is a wonderful moment that life has given us, the
only moment in which life is available. We can value each step we take,
and each step can bring us happiness because we're in touch with life,
with the source of happiness, and with our beloved planet.

TRANSFORMING AN UNPLEASANT SOUND One day during a retreat in the
mountains of northern California there was a wildfire nearby. All day
long, during sitting meditation, walking meditation, and silent meals we
heard the sound of helicopters. In Vietnam during the war, the sound of
helicopters meant guns, bombs, and death. At the retreat there were many
practitioners of Vietnamese origin who had gone through the war, so the
sound was not pleasant for them, nor was it pleasant for the other
practitioners. But there was no choice. So we chose to practice
listening to the sound of the helicopters with mindfulness. With
mindfulness, we could tell ourselves that this is not a helicopter
operating in a situation of war, but a helicopter that is helping to
extinguish the flames. With mindfulness, we transform our unpleasant
feeling into a pleasant feeling of gratefulness. So we practiced
breathing in and out with the sound of helicopters. And we survived very
well. We made the sound of helicopters into something helpful. And we
practiced: I listen, I listen. This sound of helicopters brings me back
to the present moment.

SLEEPING When you're in bed and unable to sleep, the best thing to do is
to go back to your breathing. Resting is almost as beneficial as
sleeping, and you'll know you're doing the best that you can. Bring
peace to your breathing and your body so you can rest.

LEARNING TO REST We have to relearn the art of resting. Even when we
have a vacation, we don't know how to make use of it. Very often we are
more tired after a vacation than before it. We should learn the art of
relaxation and resting, and make some time each day to practice deep
relaxation on our own or with others.

LEANING ON SNORING Sometimes you have to share a room with someone who
snores. You may get irritated. But with mindfulness you can bring about
compassion. You can lean on the sound of snoring in order to go to
sleep. Listen and say that this brings you home to the here and now.
Then you can accept the snoring much more easily, and you can go to
sleep thanks to the sound of snoring.

OUR IDEA OF HAPPINESS Say you have a notion of happiness, an idea about
what will make you happy. That idea has its roots in you and in your
environment. Your idea tells you what conditions you need in order to be
happy. You've entertained this idea for ten or twenty years, and now you
realize that your idea of happiness is making you suffer. Your idea may
contain an element of delusion, anger, or craving. These elements are
the substance of suffering. On the other hand, you know that you have
other kinds of experiences: moments of joy, release, or true love. You
can recognize these as moments of real happiness. When you've had a
moment of real happiness, it becomes easier to release the objects of
your craving, because you're developing the insight that these objects
will not make you happy. Many people have the desire to let go, but
they're not able to do so because they don't yet have enough insight;
they haven't seen other alternatives, other doorways to peace and
happiness. Fear is an element that prevents us from letting go. We're
fearful that if we let go we'll have nothing else to cling to. Letting
go is a practice; it's an art. One day, when you're strong enough and
determined enough, you'll let go of the afflictions that make you
suffer.

LETTING GO To "let go" means to let go of something. That something may
be an object of our mind, something we've created, like an idea,
feeling, desire, or belief. Getting stuck on that idea could bring a lot
of unhappiness and anxiety. We'd like to let it go, but how? It's not
enough just to want to let it go; we have to recognize it first as being
something real. We have to look deeply into its nature and where it has
come from, because ideas are born from feelings, emotions, and past
experiences, from things we've seen and heard. With the energy of
mindfulness and concentration we can look deeply and discover the roots
of the idea, feeling, emotion, or desire. Mindfulness and concentration
bring about insight, and insight can help us release the object in our
mind.

SOLITUDE Being in solitude can help us relax. Solitude doesn't mean
being by ourselves or away from civilization. Real solitude means we're
not carried away by the crowd, by sorrows about the past, by worries
about the future, or by strong emotions in the present. We don't lose
our stability and our peace. We take refuge in our mindful breathing and
come back to the present moment, and to the island of peace within
ourselves. We enjoy our time with others, but we don't get lost in our
interactions. Even in a busy marketplace, we can smile and breathe in
peace, dwelling in the island of ourselves.

LETTING GO OF WORRYING Our practice is to learn to take care of the
present moment. Don't allow yourself to be lost in the past or the
future. Taking good care of the present moment, we may be able to change
the negative things from the past and prepare for a good future. We tend
to worry about what will happen in the future. The practice helps us to
come home to the present moment, to our body, our feelings, to the
environment around us. When we breathe in and breathe out mindfully, our
mind is brought back to our body, and we are truly there in order to
take care of the present moment. If there's some stress, some tension in
our body, we practice mindful breathing in order to release the tension,
and that brings us relief. If there's a painful feeling in us, we use
mindfulness to embrace our feeling so that we can get relief. The key
point is that you are fully there in the present moment, in the here and
now, to take care of yourself and what's happening around you. You don't
think too much about the future or project too much about how it might
be; and you're not trapped too much in the past. You have to train
yourself, to learn how to go home to the present moment, to the here and
now, and to take care of that moment, to take care of your body and your
feelings in this moment. As you learn how to be in the present moment,
you'll gain faith and trust in your ability to handle the situation. You
learn how to take care of your feelings and what's happening around you.
That makes you confident; and as your confidence grows, you're no longer
the victim of your worries.

HAPPINESS IS A COLLECTIVE MATTER We can learn to handle our own fear and
pain. After that, we can help other people, because we have direct
experience with how to handle the fear and the pain. Suffering and fear
are not things that we just experience by ourselves. Our fear and
suffering is also the suffering of our parents, our friends, and our
society. You are me and I am you. If something wonderful happens to one
of us, it happens to all of us. If something awful happens to one of us,
it happens to all of us. This answer comes from the insight of noself.
With the insight of no-self you see that your suffering, your fear, is a
collective suffering. With the insight of no-self, you see that
happiness is a collective happiness. We are not separated.

WALKING YOUR TALK If you practice mindfulness to release the tension,
stress, and pain in your body, you begin to feel better. Then, when you
see a person who is tense, who has pain in his or her body, you can show
him or her how to practice. That person will believe you because you
have direct experience. You've walked your talk. That's why it's very
important that we're able to do it for ourselves first. Just the way you
live your life, the way you react to situations, can already be very
helpful. Other people see you react in a peaceful and kind way, and they
already begin to learn from you.

EFFORTLESSNESS Do we need to make a special effort to see the beauty of
the blue sky? Do we have to practice to be able to enjoy it? No, we just
enjoy it. Each second, each minute of our lives can be like this.
Wherever we are, at any time, we have the capacity to enjoy the
sunshine, the presence of each other, even the sensation of our
breathing. We don't need to go to China to enjoy the blue sky. We don't
have to travel into the future to enjoy our breathing. We can be in
touch with these things right now. It would be a pity if we were only
aware of suffering.

LETTING GO OF STRESS Stress accumulates in our body. The way we eat,
drink, and live takes its toll on our well-being. Lying down and
bringing gentle awareness to our breath, we can realize rest and
recovery for our physical body. Find space in your day when you can
practice mindful breathing and letting go of tensions. In just five,
ten, or twenty minutes, you can reestablish mindfulness and dissipate
stress. When you have trouble sleeping, follow your breathing in and
breathing out. Bring your awareness to the different parts of your body
in turn, and allow them to relax. Sometimes this can help you get to
sleep. The practice is still very good even if you don't sleep, because
it nourishes you and allows you to rest.

LIFE IS DREADFUL AND WONDERFUL Meditation means being aware of what is
going on---in our bodies, in our feelings, in our minds, and in the
world. Each day thousands of children die of hunger. Plant and animal
species are going extinct every day. Yet the sunrise is beautiful, and
the rose that bloomed this morning along the wall is a miracle. Life is
both dreadful and wonderful. To practice meditation is to be in touch
with both aspects of life.

DON'T WASTE YOUR LIFE On the wooden board outside of the meditation hall
in many Zen monasteries, there is a four-line inscription. The last line
is, "Do not squander your life." Our lives are made of days and hours,
and each hour is precious. Have we wasted our hours and our days? Are we
wasting our lives? When we practice sitting or walking meditation, it's
easier to be mindful and concentrated. During the rest of the day, we
also practice. It's more difficult, but it's possible. The sitting and
the walking can be extended to the non-walking, non-sitting moments of
our day. That is the basic principle of meditation.

HAPPINESS AND AWARENESS Please do not think we must be solemn in order
to meditate. Whether or not we are happy depends on our awareness. When
you have a toothache, you think that not having a toothache will make
you very happy. But when you don't have a toothache, often you are still
not happy. All of us have the capacity of transforming neutral feelings
into pleasant feelings. If you're rested and relaxed, all living beings
will profit from your relaxation and energy. This is the most basic kind
of peace work.

SMILING A smile can relax hundreds of muscles in your face, and relax
your nervous system. A smile makes you master of yourself. All day long,
we can practice smiling. At first you may find it difficult to smile,
and we have to think about why. Smiling means that we are ourselves,
that we have sovereignty over ourselves, that we are not drowned in
forgetfulness. I'd like to offer a short poem you can recite from time
to time, while breathing and smiling: Breathing in, I calm my body.
Breathing out, I smile. Dwelling in the present moment, I know this is a
wonderful moment.

CALMING "Breathing in, I calm my body." Reciting this line is like
drinking a glass of cool water---you feel the freshness permeate your
body. When I breathe in and recite this line, I actually feel the
breathing calming my body, calming my mind.

PRESENT MOMENT, WONDERFUL MOMENT While I sit here, I don't long to be
somewhere else; I'm not pulled away by the future or by the past. I sit
here, and I know where I am. This is very important. We tend to be alive
in the future, not now. We say, "Wait until I finish school and get my
PhD; then I'll really be living." Once we have it--- and it wasn't easy
to get---we say to ourselves, "I have to wait until I have a job for my
life to really begin." Then after the job a car, and after the car a
house. We aren't capable of being alive in the present moment. We tend
to postpone being alive to the future, the distant future, we don't know
when. It's as if now is not the moment to be alive. We may never be
alive at all in our entire life. The only moment to be alive is in the
present moment.

SELF-HEALING We have to believe in our body's capacity to heal itself.
The power of selfhealing is a reality, but many of us don't believe in
it. Instead, we take a lot of vitamins and medicines that may sometimes
be harmful to our body. Taking good care of our bodies, eating well but
not too much, sleeping, and drinking water, we have to trust the power
of understanding, healing, and loving within us. It is our refuge. If we
lose our faith and confidence in it, we lose everything. Instead of
panicking or giving ourselves up to despair, we practice mindful
breathing and put our trust in the healing power within us. We call this
the island within ourselves in which we can take refuge. It is an island
of peace, confidence, solidity, love, and freedom. Be that island for
yourself. You don't have to look elsewhere. Mindful breathing helps you
go back to that precious island within, so that you can experience the
foundation of your being.

THE WAR INSIDE We know that many of us don't want to go home to
ourselves. We're afraid. There's a lot of internal suffering and
conflict that we want to avoid. We complain that we don't have time to
live, yet we try to kill our free time by not going back to ourselves.
We escape by turning on the television or picking up a novel or a
magazine; or we go out for a drive. We run away from ourselves and don't
attend to our body, feelings, or states of mind. We have to go home. If
we're at war with our parents, friends, society, or our church, it may
be because there's a war raging within us. An internal war facilitates
other wars. We're afraid of going home because we lack the tools or the
means for self-protection. Equipped with mindfulness, we can go home
safely and not be overwhelmed by our pain, sorrow, and depression. With
some training, with the practice of mindful walking and mindful
breathing, we'll be able to go home and embrace our pain and sorrow.

WATER OVER THE ROCKS The activities of our mind, often unstable and
agitated, are like a torrent of water washing over the rocks. In
traditional Buddhist literature, the mind is often compared to a monkey
always swinging from branch to branch or to a horse galloping out of
control. Once our mind is able to identify what is happening, we will be
able to see clearly our mental state and make it calm. Just that will
bring us peace, joy, and stillness.

BOAT IN A STORM Suppose you're on a boat crossing the ocean. If you get
caught in a storm, it's important to stay calm and not panic. To
accomplish that, go back to your breathing and be yourself. When you're
calm, truly your own island, you will know what to do and what not to
do. Otherwise, the boat may capsize. We destroy ourselves by doing
things we ought not to do. Take refuge in mindfulness, and you will see
things more clearly and know how to improve the situation. Mindfulness
brings about concentration, and concentration brings about insight and
wisdom. This is the safest refuge. The safety and stability your island
can provide depend on your practice. Everything---comforting a child,
building a house, or playing volleyball--- depends on your practice.

ALL IS NOT SUFFERING There are those who say that everything is
suffering. This is not true. It's an exaggeration and a misunderstanding
of what the Buddha said. The Buddha said that there is suffering, but he
didn't say that's all there is. There are causes that bring about
suffering, and it's possible to arrive at a state of the absence of
these causes. Of course we shouldn't dream that one day we'll have one
hundred percent happiness and not a single drop of suffering. There is
always something. But we can handle suffering and happiness in an artful
way.

RELEASING TENSION The way to release all the tension is with our mindful
breath. So we always start with mindfulness. Mindfulness brings the mind
to the present moment, and we see and experience things more deeply.
Going back to the present moment, you can see if your body is tense. We
look deeply and see that, "Ah, I am tense because I'm carried away by my
worry, anxiety, and plans." Then we can make the determination not to be
carried away like that.

DESIRE AND HAPPINESS The Buddha often said that many people confuse
desire with happiness. Before he became a monk, the Buddha had grown up
as a prince and had tasted a life of trying to satisfy desires, so his
words came from experience. He said that true happiness is a life with
few desires, few possessions, and the time to enjoy the many wonders in
us and around us. Desire means to be caught in unwholesome longing. When
the mind is desiring, we are aware of the presence of that state of
mind. "This is the mind longing for wealth." "This is the mind desiring
reputation." When the mind isn't desiring, it's important to observe
that the desiring mind is not present. "This is the sense of ease that
accompanies the absence of a mind desiring wealth." "This is the sense
of ease that accompanies the absence of a mind desiring reputation,"
etc. We can experience happiness, ease, and peace when we observe these
moments of no desire. Desirelessness is the basic condition that makes
possible the feelings of joy, peace, and ease that come with living a
simple life. Simplicity means to have few desires, to be content with a
simple life and just a few possessions. Desirelessness is the basis of
true happiness, because in true happiness there must be the elements of
peace, joy, and ease.

RELAXING WHERE WE ARE Living in the city, we may be very busy, and the
city is very noisy and polluted. We can never see the moon or the stars,
and we get caught in the city. We want to have a two-day vacation to
leave the city and go to the countryside, but we can't go because we're
not able to let go. One day a friend comes and says, "This Friday let's
go to the countryside." That person is really good at convincing us to
leave, so we accept. We get in the car, and after only forty-five
minutes we have left the city behind and we can see the countryside. We
feel the breeze, we see the spaciousness, and it gives us joy. That joy
comes from being able to let go and leave the city behind. Letting go
gives rise to joy and happiness. We need to sit down with a piece of
paper and write down the things we can let go of. We're still caught in
many things. We're not happy and joyful, because we haven't been able to
let go.

IDEAS OF HAPPINESS In order to be happy, we need first of all to let go
of our ideas of happiness. It's difficult. Each one of us has an idea of
happiness; we think that we must have this or that to be happy, or that
we have to eliminate this or that to be happy. We think that we have to
have certain conditions: We have to have this house or this car or that
person to live with us so that we can be happy. We have these ideas of
happiness. If we haven't been able to be happy and joyful, it's because
we're caught in our ideas. So we have to be able to let them go. Our
idea of happiness is the main obstacle to happiness.

NO COWS TO LOSE One day the Buddha was sitting having a silent lunch
together with his monks in the woods. A farmer came hurrying by and
asked, "Dear monks, have you seen my cows? They have all left me this
morning. If I don't have my cows, how can I live? Insects have eaten my
fields of sesame; I couldn't harvest anything. I cannot live. I think I
will kill myself." The Buddha said, "Dear friend, we've been sitting
here for a while, and we haven't seen any cows pass by. Maybe you can
look in another direction." So the farmer left. The Buddha turned to his
monks and said, "Dear monks, you are very lucky. You don't have any cows
to lose." A cow stands for something we need to let go of. Our idea of
happiness is a cow. And it's because of this idea of happiness that we
cannot be happy.

NAMING OUR COWS Each one of us needs to sit down with a piece of paper
and write down the names of all our cows. Among them are our ideas of
happiness. We get caught and we suffer. We struggle with all these
things, but we don't have the capacity to let them go. How many cows do
we have? Sometimes we see that one page is not enough for us to write
the names of all our cows. The truth is, if you let go of these cows,
you will be lighter, and your happiness will be much greater. Let go so
that happiness, joy, and peace can be possible.

OUR PEACE IS WHAT IS MOST PRECIOUS Awakening is something that happens
today, not in ten or twenty years. Insights can come continuously to
give us the understanding we need to untangle ourselves from
attachments. When our mind is entangled with anger, jealousy, or
sadness, we can be in that state hour after hour, day after day. It's a
pity, because meanwhile, life is wondrous. If we only concentrate on
breathing in and seeing that our body is a wonder, we can see that
nothing else is really important. It's only the peace in our body and in
our mind that matters. Anyone can attain this insight. While we sit, we
can be with our breathing, we can let go of tensions, and we can have
peace. This peace is the most precious thing there is, more precious
than any pursuit.

FREEDOM IS A PRACTICE If you want to be free, just concentrate on your
in-breath and out-breath. Breathe in and out for three minutes, and in
those three minutes you are free. This freedom is something we have to
train ourselves to have. It's not something that comes automatically.
When we have freedom, when we're not overwhelmed by anger or anxiety,
then we can make the determination to practice cultivating this freedom.
When we're anxious, worried, or angry, we can't make good decisions.
When we're free, we make better decisions. This freedom is something we
can attain whenever we like with the practice of breathing in
mindfulness, walking in mindfulness.

DON'T BE TOO BUSY As you go about your daily activities, do you feel
you're lacking something? As you wash the dishes, cook a meal, clean the
kitchen, while you walk, stand, sit, or lie down, what are you looking
for? There's no business for you to take care of. You're free; there's
nothing to do or to run after. Perhaps you're seeking something,
calculating, or feeling agitated. Your feet and hands may always think
they have to be doing something. When you do sitting or walking
meditation, don't put too much effort into it. You're not trying to
attain something. Meditation shouldn't be hard labor. The principle is
to be ordinary, not to be too busy. We just live in a normal way. When
we eat, we just eat; we don't speak. If we need to urinate, we urinate.
If we're tired, then we can rest.

COMPASSION FOR YOURSELF Don't consider anger, hatred, and greed as
enemies you have to fight, destroy, or annihilate. If you annihilate
anger, you annihilate yourself. Dealing with anger in that way would be
like transforming yourself into a battlefield, and tearing yourself to
bits. If you struggle in that way, you do violence to yourself. If you
can't be compassionate to yourself, you won't be able to be
compassionate to others. When we get angry, we have to produce
awareness: "I am angry. Anger is in me. I am anger." That is the first
thing to do. Breathing in, I feel my anger. Breathing out, I smile. I
stay with my breathing so I won't lose myself.

NO BLAMING When you plant a tree, if it doesn't grow well, you don't
blame the tree. You look into the reasons it isn't doing well. It may
need fertilizer or more water or less sun. We never blame the tree. Yet
we're quick to blame our child. If we know how to take care of her, she
will grow well, like a tree. Blaming has no good effect at all. Never
blame, never try to persuade using reason and arguments; they never lead
to any positive effect. That is my experience. No argument, no
reasoning, no blaming, just understanding. If you understand, and you
show that you understand, you can love, and the situation will change.

THE BREATH IS A BRIDGE Our breath is like a bridge connecting body and
mind. In our daily lives, our bodies may be in one place and our minds
somewhere else, in the past, or in the future. This is called a state of
distraction. The breath is a connection between the body and the mind.
When you begin to breathe in and out mindfully, your mind will come back
to your body. You will be able to realize the oneness of body and mind
and become fully present and fully alive in the here and the now. You
will be in a position to touch life deeply in this moment. This isn't
something difficult. Everyone can do it.

RELAXED PRACTICE In traditional Chinese medicine, doctors sometimes
offer their patients something healing that is delicious to eat. Just by
eating, you begin to heal in a pleasant and relaxed way. The same is
true with the practice. While you practice sitting, you enjoy sitting.
While you practice breathing, you enjoy breathing. If you are able to
enjoy yourself, then healing and transformation will take place.

LIBERATION We often live as if we're in a dream. We're dragged into the
past or pulled into the future. We're bound by our sorrow, agitation,
and fear. We hold on to our anger, which blocks communication.
"Liberation" means transforming and transcending these conditions in
order to be fully awake, at ease, peaceful, joyful, and fresh. We
practice stopping and observing deeply in order to arrive at liberation.
When we live in this way, our life is worth living, and we become a
source of joy to our family and to everyone around us.

RELAXED SITTING When you sit and watch television, you don't make any
effort. That's why you can sit there for a long time. When you sit in
meditation, if you struggle, you won't be able to sit for very long.
Please imitate the way you sit in your living room. Effortlessness is
the key to success. Don't fight. Don't try hard. Just allow yourself to
sit. This relaxing way of sitting is also restful. Allow your body to
rest and be at ease.

SETTLING DOWN When you pour fresh juice into a glass and let it stand
for fifteen minutes, all the pulp sinks down to the bottom of the glass.
If you allow yourself to sit in a relaxed, peaceful way, it calms and
settles your body and your mind. Sitting like this allows you to enjoy
your in-breath and out-breath, to enjoy being alive, to enjoy just
sitting there.

THE HABIT OF TENSION A number of years ago, I went to India to visit the
Buddhist community of untouchables. A friend had organized the teaching
tour for me. He belonged to that caste, which has been discriminated
against for so many thousands of years. He was sitting next to me in the
bus, on my right. I was enjoying looking out the window and seeing the
countryside of India. But when I looked at him, I saw that he was very
tense. He had done everything to make my visit pleasant, yet he
continued to worry. This habit energy had been transmitted to him from
many generations of ancestors who had struggled all their lives against
discrimination. It's hard to transform that kind of habit. I said, "Dear
friend, why are you so tense? You have arranged everything beautifully.
There's nothing to do now that we're here on the bus; and when we
arrive, our friends will come to the station to meet us. Sit back and
relax and enjoy the countryside." He said, "Okay," but just two minutes
later, he looked exactly as before, very tense, worrying about the
future, and not being able to be at ease in the here and now. So many of
us are like that. Our practice is to stop running, and to be aware that
all the wonders of life are available in the here and now.

MEDITATIONS FOR RESTING AND RELAXING

INVITING THE BELL There is tranquility, peace, and joy within us, but we
have to call them forth so they can manifest. Inviting a bell to sound
is one way to call forth the joy and tranquility within. I have been
inviting the bell since I was sixteen. When I want to invite the small
bell, I hold it in the palm of my hand and I breathe in and out.
"Breathing in, I calm myself. Breathing out, I smile." If you want to
invite the bell, here is a short poem to learn by heart. Recite the
first line of the poem as you breathe in, the second line as you breathe
out, and so on: Body, speech, and mind in perfect oneness, I send my
heart along with the sound of this bell. May all the hearers awaken from
forgetfulness, and transcend the path of anxiety and sorrow.

LISTENING TO THE BELL The bell is a friend, someone who helps us come
back to ourselves and become calm. We invite tranquility to manifest.
With the help of the bell, our mind is collected and brought back to the
present moment. We stop our thinking and talking and come back to
ourselves, breathing and relaxing. As you listen, you may notice that
your in-breath and out-breath naturally become longer and more relaxed.
Here is a poem for listening to the bell. "Your true home" means your
own island, your solidity, peace, and joy. Listen, listen. This
wonderful sound brings me back to my true home.

EASING WORRY Sometimes we think and worry nonstop. It's like having a
cassette tape continually turning in our minds. When we leave the
television set on for a long time, it becomes hot. Our head also gets
hot from all our thinking. When we can't stop, we may be unable to sleep
well. Even if we take a sleeping pill, we continue to run, think, and
worry in our dreams. The alternative medicine is mindful breathing. If
we practice mindful breathing for five minutes, allowing our body to
rest, then we stop thinking for that time. We can use words like "in"
and "out" to help us be aware of our breathing. This is not thinking;
these words aren't concepts. They're guides for mindfulness of
breathing. When we think too much, the quality of our being is reduced.
Stopping the thinking, we increase the quality of our being. There's
more peace, relaxation, and rest.

IN, OUT. DEEP, SLOW. Here is a poem to practice any time, but especially
when you're angry, worried, or sad. If you know how to practice this
poem, you'll feel much better after just one or two minutes. In, Out.
Deep, Slow. Calm, Ease. Smile, Release. Present Moment, Wonderful
Moment.

"In, Out," means that when I breathe in, I know I'm breathing in, and
when I breathe out, I know I'm breathing out. You are one-hundred
percent with your in-breath and your outbreath. Don't think of anything
else. That's the secret of success. After you've practiced "In, Out"
three, four, or five times, you'll notice that your inbreath naturally
becomes deeper, and your out-breath becomes slower. Your breath is calm,
and you're more peaceful. That is "Deep, Slow." "Calm, Ease" means,
"Breathing in, I feel calm. Breathing out, I feel at ease." This
exercise is wonderful to practice, especially when you're nervous, or
angry, or you don't feel peaceful in yourself. Then you come to "Smile,
Release." "Breathing in, I smile." You may feel it's too difficult to
smile. But after practicing three or four times, you may feel that
you're able to smile. If you can smile, you'll feel a lot better. You
may protest, "Why do you want me to smile? It's not natural." Many
people ask me that and they protest, "I have no joy in me. I can't force
myself to smile; it wouldn't be true." I always say that a smile can be
a kind of yoga practice, yoga of the mouth. You just smile, even if you
don't feel joy. And after you smile, you'll see you feel differently.
Sometimes the mind takes the initiative, and sometimes you have to allow
the body to take the initiative.

BODY SCAN If you only have a few minutes to sit or lie down and relax,
you can do a body scan. Beginning at the top of your head and moving
down to your toes, you bring mindful awareness to parts of your body.
You can bring attention to many or just a few parts of your body. This
can be done anytime, anywhere to rest and relieve stress in body and
mind. Breathing in, I am aware of my eyes. Breathing out, I smile to my
eyes.

Having eyes in good condition is a wonderful thing. We need to take care
of our eyes and rest them from time to time, especially when we're
working. Breathing in, I am aware of my heart. Breathing out, I smile to
my heart.

You have neglected your heart for a long time. You may cause trouble for
your heart by the way you rest, work, eat, and drink. Your heart works
day and night for your well-being, but because of your lack of
mindfulness, you have not been very helpful to your heart. Once or twice
each day, you can pick at least one part of your body to focus on and
practice relaxing.

TELEPHONE MEDITATION When you want to pick up the phone to call someone,
first practice breathing in and out to calm yourself. Words can travel
thousands of miles. Words can help restore communication and build
mutual understanding. I vow that the conversation I'm going to have will
bring us closer together, and make our friendship bloom like a flower.

When you receive a call, you can also practice mindful breathing before
answering the phone. I listen, I listen. The mindfulness bell of the
telephone brings me back to my true home.

COMPUTER MEDITATION A bell is a friend, an invention to help us. If you
work on a computer, you might get so carried away by your work that you
forget you have a body; you forget that you're alive. You even forget to
breathe sometimes. So you may like to program your computer so that
every quarter of an hour it offers the sound of the bell, enabling you
to go back to yourself, to smile, and to breathe in and out before you
continue working. Many of us have done that. The sound of a bell
reminding you to come back to yourself and enjoy breathing is a
wonderful way to take a break.

DEEP RELAXATION Deep relaxation is an opportunity for your body to rest,
heal, and be restored. You bring attention to each part of your body:
hair, scalp, brain, ears, neck, shoulders, arms, hands, fingers, lungs,
each of the internal organs, the digestive system, pelvis, legs, feet,
toes. You send your love and care to every part of your body and every
cell. Lie down on your back with your arms at your sides. Make yourself
comfortable. Allow your body to relax. Be aware of the floor beneath you
and the contact of your body with the floor. Allow your body to sink
into the floor. Become aware of your breathing, in and out. Be aware of
your abdomen rising and falling as you breathe in and out. Breathing in,
bring your awareness to your eyes. Breathing out, allow your eyes to
relax. Allow your eyes to sink back into your head. Let go of the
tension in all the tiny muscles around your eyes. Your eyes allow you to
see a paradise of forms and colors. Allow your eyes to rest. Send love
and gratitude to your eyes. Breathing in, bring your awareness to your
mouth. Breathing out, allow your mouth to relax. Release the tension
around your mouth. Your lips are the petals of a flower. Let a gentle
smile bloom on your lips. Smiling releases the tension in the hundreds
of muscles in your face. Feel the tension release in your cheeks, your
jaw, and your throat. Breathing in, bring your awareness to your
shoulders. Breathing out, allow your shoulders to relax. Let them sink
into the floor. Let all the accumulated tension flow into the floor. You
carry so much with your shoulders. Now let your shoulders relax as you
care for them. Breathing in, become aware of your arms. Breathing out,
relax your arms. Let your arms sink into the floor. Relax your upper
arms, your elbows, your lower arms, your wrists, your hands, and all the
tiny muscles in your fingers. Move your fingers a little if you need to,
helping the muscles relax. Breathing in, bring your awareness to your
heart. Breathing out, allow your heart to relax. You have neglected your
heart for a long time, and you cause your heart stress by the way you
work, eat, and manage anxiety and stress. Your heart beats for you night
and day. Embrace your heart with mindfulness and tenderness, reconciling
and taking care of your heart.

Breathing in, bring your awareness to your legs. Breathing out, allow
your legs to relax. Release all the tension in your legs, your thighs,
your knees, your calves, your ankles, your feet, your toes, and all the
tiny muscles in your toes. You may want to move your toes a little to
help them relax. Send your love and care to your toes. Breathing in,
breathing out, your whole body feels as light as a lily floating on the
water. You have nowhere to go, nothing to do. You are free as a cloud
floating in the sky. Bring your awareness back to your breathing, to
your abdomen rising and falling. Following your breathing, become aware
of your arms and legs. You may want to move them a little and stretch.
When you feel ready, slowly sit up. When you are ready, slowly stand up.

Parallax Press P.O. Box 7355 Berkeley, California 94707 parallax.org
Parallax Press is the publishing division of Unified Buddhist Church,
Inc. © 2015 by Unified Buddhist Church All rights reserved Cover and
text design by Debbie Berne Edited by Rachel Neumann Illustrations by
Jason DeAntonis This eBook was created using the first print edition
from 2015 eBook ISBN: 978-1-941529-09-6 Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon request. 1 2 3 4 5 / 19
18 17 16 15

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon
request

RELATED TITLES Awakening Joy • James Baraz and Shoshana Alexander Be
Free Where You Are • Thich Nhat Hanh Breathe, You Are Alive! • Thich
Nhat Hanh Deep Relaxation • Sister Chan Khong Happiness • Thich Nhat
Hanh How to Eat • Thich Nhat Hanh How to Love • Thich Nhat Hanh How to
Sit • Thich Nhat Hanh The Long Road Turns to Joy • Thich Nhat Hanh
Making Space • Thich Nhat Hanh Not Quite Nirvana • Rachel Neumann
Planting Seeds • Thich Nhat Hanh and the Plum Village Community Ten
Breaths to Happiness • Glen Schneider World As Lover, World As Self •
Joanna Macy

Parallax Press is a nonprofit publisher, founded and inspired by Zen
Master Thich Nhat Hanh. We publish books on mindfulness in daily life
and are committed to making these teachings accessible to everyone and
preserving them for future generations. We do this work to alleviate
suffering and contribute to a more just and joyful world.

To learn more about our books, click here Want to connect with
like-minded readers? Check out our book club and our blog for reader's
guides and the latest news from Parallax Press. Subscribe to our
newsletter to receive special deals, news from our authors, and
inspiration. Visit us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter Add us on
Goodreads

To reach mindful living communities following the tradition of Thich
Nhat Hanh please contact: Plum Village 13 Martineau 33580 Dieulivol,
France www.plumvillage.org Blue Cliff Monastery 3 Mindfulness Road Pine
Bush, NY 12566 www.bluecliffmonastery.org Deer Park Monastery 2499 Melru
Lane Escondido, CA 92026 www.deerparkmonastery.org Magnolia Grove
Monastery 123 Towles Rd. Batesville, MS 38606
www.magnoliagrovemonastery.org The Mindfulness Bell, a journal of the
art of mindful living in the tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh, is published
three times a year by Plum Village. To subscribe or to see the worldwide
directory of Sanghas, visit www.mindfulnessbell.org.


