NO DEATH, NO FEAR

OTHER BOOKS BY THICH NHAT HANH Anger Going Home Living Buddha, Living
Christ Fragrant Palm Leaves Being Peace The Blooming of a Lotus Breathe!
You Are Alive Call Me By My True Name Cultivating the Mind of Love For a
Future to Be Possible The Heart of the Buddha's Teaching The Heart of
Understanding The Long Road Turns to Joy Love in Action The Miracle of
Mindfulness Old Path, White Clouds The Path of Emancipation Peace Is
Every Step Present Moment, Wonderful Moment The Sun My Heart Touching
Peace Transformation and Healing

NO DEATH, NO FEAR Comforting Wisdom for Life

THICH NHAT HANH RIVERHEAD BOOKS a member of Penguin Putnam Inc. NEW YORK
2002

While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone
numbers and Internet addresses at the time of publication, neither the
publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for
changes that occur after publication.

RIVERHEAD BOOKS a member of Penguin Putnam Inc. 375 Hudson Street New
York, NY 10014 Copyright © 2002 by Unified Buddhist Church All rights
reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form
without permission.

Published simultaneously in Canada Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data Nhât Hanh, Thích.

No death, no fear: comforting wisdom for life / Thich Nhat Hanh. p. cm.
ISBN: 978-1-1012-1855-6 1. Spiritual life---Buddhism. 2.
Buddhism---Doctrines. I. Title BQ4302.N43 2002 2002021358
294.3'444---dc21

Contents FOREWORD

ONE

Where Do We Come From? Where Do We Go?

TWO

The Real Fear

THREE

The Practice of Looking Deeply

FOUR

Transforming Grief and Fear

FIVE

New Beginnings

SIX

The Address of Happiness

SEVEN

Continuing Manifestations

EIGHT

Fear, Acceptance and Forgiveness: The Practice of Touching the Earth

NINE

Accompanying the Dying

Foreword One day, over lunch, my father said to me, "The last time I saw
my father, he was in a basket in the living room." We were sitting
together at the outdoor dining area of a Mexican restaurant in Key West,
Florida. He looked up from his plate of beans and rice, and continued.
"My father was a working man. He was a baker; he worked at the co-op in
downtown Fitchburg on Leominster Street." "Tell me about your father's
death," I said. "I don't know anything," he replied. "What did people
say?" "No one ever said anything. And I never asked." He returned to the
silence that I knew all too well. Sacred Heart Church is two blocks from
the house on Sanborn Street in West Fitchburg, Massachusetts, where my
father said good-bye to the grandfather I never knew. This was my
family's spiritual center when I was growing up. It was a refuge from
the daily grind of factory work, arguing spouses, unpaid bills and
excess alcohol. This is where I was baptized and where I was sent for my
spiritual education. Every Monday afternoon, after a full day at public
school, I reluctantly trudged up Water Street to this building for two
hours of catechism. I still remember the first day, sitting next to my
cousin Patty, our fresh new catechism books in hand. As two nuns stood
in front of the class, we were told to open our books to page one and to
memorize three questions and their three answers. "Who made me?" "God
made you." "Why did God make me?" "To love and serve him." "What happens
when I die?" "You will live forever with God in Heaven." For the fathers
of the church there was no doubt: my soul is eternal and I will live
forever. Reading The Boston Globe one Sunday, I was struck by an article
about a woman facing the possibility of terminal cancer. The story
began, "A Young Life Interrupted...Adriana Jenkins doubts God exists. Or
fate." "When we die," she says, "we are gone 'ashes to ashes, dust to
dust.'" But she imagines death often---the pain, floating upward,
looking down on mourners around her hospital bed, a shimmer of light and
finally nothing: "off like a light switch." This has become the main
alternative for those to whom doubt itself

has become a faith; when we die we are gone, we are nothing. The first
funeral I ever attended was in 1968. It was for my mother's father, my
grandfather, Sam Rameau. Since then, more than two dozen times, I have
stood at the edge of a freshly dug grave, confused, lost and wondering
what to think and what to feel about death, asking myself, Are there
really only two options to consider, the belief in an eternal soul, or
annihilation? Doubting the belief in an eternal life and dreading the
idea of oblivion, I have lived with a dull fear, a kind of cosmic
background noise, throughout my life. Which one is true, forever
remaining as me or nothingness? Is there an eternal soul and, if there
is, will I be in heaven or in hell? Bored forever or in bliss? Alone or
with God? During the Buddha's life, he was questioned many times by
scholars and theologians about the opposite philosophies of eternalism
and nihilism. When asked if there was an eternal soul, the Buddha
replied that there is no permanent self. When asked if we were
extinguished into oblivion upon our death, the Buddha said that we are
not annihilated. He rejected both of these ideas. I have a dear friend
who is a famous marine biologist. Like many people he believes that when
we die we are extinguished forever. He believes this not from a loss of
faith or from despair but because of his trust in science. His faith is
in the natural world, in the beauty of the unfolding universe around him
and in the ability of humans to understand and gain knowledge of that
universe. Thich Nhat Hanh also has an abiding faith in the ability of
humans to gain understanding. But his goal is more than the accumulation
of scientific knowledge; it is the attainment of liberation and deep
personal wisdom based on pure inquiry. Writing in these pages from his
own experience, Thich Nhat Hanh proposes a stunning alternative to the
opposing philosophies of an eternal soul and nihilism. He tells us:
"Since before time you have been free. Birth and death are only doors
through which we pass, sacred thresholds on our journey. Birth and death
are a game of hide-and-seek. You have never been born and you can never
die" and "Our greatest pain is caused by our notions of coming and
going." Over and over again, he invites us to practice looking deeply so
we can know for ourselves the freedom and joy of the middle way between
a permanent self and oblivion. As a poet, he explores the paradoxes of
life and gently lifts the veil of illusion, allowing us, maybe for the
first time in our lives, to see that our dread of dying is caused by our
own misperceptions and misunderstandings. His insights into life and
death are subtle and elegant, and, like all things subtle, best
appreciated slowly, in quiet contemplation. Out of the deep

wellspring of Thich Nhat Hanh's humanity and compassion comes the balm
to heal our hearts. PRITAM SINGH

One

WHERE DO WE COME FROM? WHERE DO WE GO?

In my hermitage in France there is a bush of japonica, Japanese quince.
The bush usually blossoms in the spring, but one winter it had been
quite warm and the flower buds had come early. During the night a cold
snap arrived and brought with it frost. The next day while doing walking
meditation, I noticed that all the buds on the bush had died. I
recognized this and thought, This New Year we will not have enough
flowers to decorate the altar of the Buddha. A few weeks later the
weather became warm again. As I walked in my garden I saw new buds on
the japonica manifesting another generation of flowers. I asked the
japonica flowers: "Are you the same as the flowers that died in the
frost or are you different flowers?" The flowers replied to me: "Thay,
we are not the same and we are not different. When conditions are
sufficient we manifest and when conditions are not sufficient we go into
hiding. It's as simple as that." This is what the Buddha taught. When
conditions are sufficient things manifest. When conditions are no longer
sufficient things withdraw. They wait until the moment is right for them
to manifest again. Before giving birth to me, my mother was pregnant
with another baby. She had a miscarriage, and that person wasn't born.
When I was young I used to ask the question: was that my brother or was
that me? Who was trying to manifest at that time? If a baby has been
lost it means that conditions were not enough for him to manifest and
the child has decided to withdraw in order to wait for better
conditions. "I had better withdraw; I'll come back again soon, my
dearest." We have to respect his or her will. If you see the world with
eyes like this, you will suffer much less. Was it my brother that my
mother lost? Or maybe I was about to come out but instead I said, "It
isn't time yet," so I withdrew.

Becoming Nothing Our greatest fear is that when we die we will become
nothing. Many of us believe that our entire existence is only a life
span beginning the moment we

are born or conceived and ending the moment we die. We believe that we
are born from nothing and that when we die we become nothing. And so we
are filled with fear of annihilation. The Buddha has a very different
understanding of our existence. It is the understanding that birth and
death are notions. They are not real. The fact that we think they are
true makes a powerful illusion that causes our suffering. The Buddha
taught that there is no birth, there is no death; there is no coming,
there is no going; there is no same, there is no different; there is no
permanent self, there is no annihilation. We only think there is. When
we understand that we cannot be destroyed, we are liberated from fear.
It is a great relief. We can enjoy life and appreciate it in a new way.

Finding a Lost Loved One The same thing happens when we lose any of our
beloved ones. When conditions are not right to support life, they
withdraw. When I lost my mother I suffered a lot. When we are only seven
or eight years old it is difficult to think that one day we will lose
our mother. Eventually we grow up and we all lose our mothers, but if
you know how to practice, when the time comes for the separation you
will not suffer too much. You will very quickly realize that your mother
is always alive within you. The day my mother died, I wrote in my
journal, "A serious misfortune of my life has arrived." I suffered for
more than one year after the passing away of my mother. But one night,
in the highlands of Vietnam, I was sleeping in the hut in my hermitage.
I dreamed of my mother. I saw myself sitting with her, and we were
having a wonderful talk. She looked young and beautiful, her hair
flowing down. It was so pleasant to sit there and talk to her as if she
had never died. When I woke up it was about two in the morning, and I
felt very strongly that I had never lost my mother. The impression that
my mother was still with me was very clear. I understood then that the
idea of having lost my mother was just an idea. It was obvious in that
moment that my mother is always alive in me. I opened the door and went
outside. The entire hillside was bathed in moonlight. It was a hill
covered with tea plants, and my hut was set behind the temple halfway
up. Walking slowly in the moonlight through the rows of tea plants, I
noticed my mother was still with me. She was the moonlight caressing me
as she had done so often, very tender, very sweet...wonderful! Each time
my feet touched the earth I knew my mother was there with me. I knew
this body was not mine alone but a living continuation of my mother and
my father and my grandparents and great-grandparents. Of all my

ancestors. These feet that I saw as "my" feet were actually "our" feet.
Together my mother and I were leaving footprints in the damp soil. From
that moment on, the idea that I had lost my mother no longer existed.
All I had to do was look at the palm of my hand, feel the breeze on my
face or the earth under my feet to remember that my mother is always
with me, available at any time. When you lose a loved one, you suffer.
But if you know how to look deeply, you have a chance to realize that
his or her nature is truly the nature of no birth, no death. There is
manifestation and there is the cessation of manifestation in order to
have another manifestation. You have to be very keen and very alert in
order to recognize the new manifestations of just one person. But with
the practice and with effort you can do it. So, taking the hand of
someone who knows the practice, together do walking meditation. Pay
attention to all the leaves, the flowers, the birds and the dewdrops. If
you can stop and look deeply, you will be able to recognize your beloved
one manifesting again and again in many forms. You will again embrace
the joy of life.

Nothing Is Born, Nothing Dies A French scientist, whose name is
Lavoisier, declared, "Rien ne se crée, rien ne se perd." "Nothing is
born, nothing dies." Although he did not practice as a Buddhist but as a
scientist, he found the same truth the Buddha discovered. Our true
nature is the nature of no birth and no death. Only when we touch our
true nature can we transcend the fear of non-being, the fear of
annihilation. The Buddha said that when conditions are sufficient
something manifests and we say it exists. When one or two conditions
fail and the thing does not manifest in the same way, we then say it
does not exist. According to the Buddha, to qualify something as
existing or not existing is wrong. In reality, there is no such thing as
totally existing or totally not existing. We can see this very easily
with television and radio. We may be in a room that has no television or
radio. And while we are in that room, we may think that television
programs and radio programs do not exist in that room. But all of us
know that the space in the room is full of signals. The signals of these
programs are filling the air everywhere. We need only one more
condition, a radio or a television set, and many forms, colors and
sounds will appear. It would have been wrong to say that the signals do
not exist because we did not have a radio or television to receive and
manifest them. They only seemed not to exist because the causes and
conditions were not enough to

make the television program manifest. So at that moment, in that room,
we say they do not exist. Just because we do not perceive something, it
is not correct to say it does not exist. It is only our notion of being
and non-being that makes us confused. It is our notion of being and
non-being that makes us think something exists or something doesn't
exist. Notions of being and nonbeing cannot be applied to reality.

No Above, No Below It is like the notion of above and below. To say they
exist is also wrong. What is below for us is above for someone else
somewhere else. We are sitting here and we say that above is the
direction over our head and we think that the opposite direction is
below. People practicing sitting meditation on the other side of the
world would not agree that what we call above is above because for them
it is below. They are not sitting on their heads. The ideas of above and
below always mean to be above something or to be below something, and
the ideas of below and above cannot be applied to the reality of the
cosmos. These are only concepts to help us relate to our environment.
They are concepts that give us a point of reference, but they are not
real. Reality is free from all concepts and ideas.

Trapped by a Notion The Buddha offered an interesting parable concerning
ideas and notions. A young tradesman came home and saw that his house
had been robbed and burned by bandits. Right outside what was left of
the house, there was a small, charred body. He thought the body belonged
to his little boy. He did not know that his child was still alive. He
did not know that after having burned the house, the bandits had taken
the little boy away with them. In his state of confusion, the tradesman
believed the body he saw was his son. So he cried, he beat his chest and
pulled out his hair in grief. Then he began the cremation ceremony. This
man loved his little boy so much. His son was the raison d'être of his
life. He longed for his little boy so much that he could not abandon the
little boy's ashes even for one moment. He made a velvet bag and put the
ashes inside. He carried the bag with him day and night, and whether he
was working or resting, he was never separated from the bag of ashes.
One night his son escaped from the robbers. He came to the new house
built by his

father. He knocked excitedly on the door at two o'clock in the morning.
His father called out as he wept, still holding the bag of ashes. "Who
is there?" "It's me, your son!" the boy answered through the door. "You
naughty person, you are not my boy. My child died three months ago. I
have his ashes with me right here." The little boy continued to beat on
the door and cried and cried. He begged over and over again to come in,
but his father continued to refuse him entry. The man held firm to the
notion that his little boy was already dead and that this other child
was some heartless person who had come to torment him. Finally, the boy
left and the father lost his son forever. The Buddha said that if you
get caught in one idea and consider it to be "the truth," then you miss
the chance to know the truth. Even if the truth comes in person and
knocks at your door, you will refuse to open your mind. So if you are
committed to an idea about truth or to an idea about the conditions
necessary for your happiness, be careful. The first Mindfulness Training
is about freedom from views: Aware of the suffering created by
fanaticism and intolerance, we are determined not to be idolatrous about
or bound to any doctrine, theory or ideology, even Buddhist ones.
Buddhist teachings are guiding means to help us learn to look deeply and
to develop our understanding and compassion. They are not doctrines to
fight, kill or die for. This is a practice to help free us from the
tendency to be dogmatic. Our world suffers so much from dogmatic
attitudes. The first mindfulness training is important to help us remain
free people. Freedom is above all else freedom from our own notions and
concepts. If we get caught in our notions and concepts, we can make
ourselves suffer and we can also make those we love suffer.

No Coming, No Going For many of us, our greatest pain is caused by our
notions of coming and going. We think that the person we loved came to
us from somewhere and has now gone away somewhere. But our true nature
is the nature of no coming, no going. We have not come from anywhere, we
shall not go anywhere. When conditions are sufficient, we manifest. When
conditions are no longer

sufficient, we no longer manifest. It does not mean that we do not
exist. Like radio waves without a radio, we do not manifest. Not only do
the notions of coming and going not express reality, neither do the
notions of being and non-being. We hear these words in the
Prajnaparamita Sutra: "Listen Shariputra, all dharmas \[phenomena\] are
marked by emptiness, they are neither produced nor destroyed, neither
increasing nor decreasing." The meaning of emptiness here is very
important; it means first of all to be empty of a separate self. Nothing
has a separate self, and nothing exists by itself. If we examine things
carefully we will see that all phenomena, including ourselves, are
composites. We are made up of other parts. We are made of our mother and
father, our grandmothers and grandfathers, our body, our feelings, our
perceptions, our mental formations, the earth, the sun and innumerable
non-self elements. All these parts depend on causes and conditions. We
see that all that has existed, exists or will exist is interconnected
and interdependent. All that we see has only manifested because it is a
part of something else, of other conditions that make it possible to
manifest. All phenomena are neither produced nor destroyed, because they
are in a constant process of manifesting. We may be intelligent enough
to understand this, but to understand it intellectually is not enough.
To really understand this is to be free from fear. It is to become
enlightened. It is to live in inter-being. We have to practice looking
deeply like this to nourish our awakened understanding of no birth and
no death in our daily lives. In this way we can realize the wonderful
gift of non-fear. If we just talk about inter-being as a theory, it will
not help us. We should ask: "Piece of paper, where do you come from? Who
are you? What did you come here to do? Where are you going to go?" We
can ask the flame: "Flame, where do you come from and where will you
go?" Listen to the reply closely. The flame, the piece of paper, is
replying by its presence. We only have to look deeply and we can hear it
reply. The flame is saying: "I do not come from anywhere." That would be
the answer of the japonica flowers also. They were not the same and not
different. They did not come from anywhere and they did not go anywhere.
If there is a baby who is lost, we should not be sad. It is because
there were not sufficient causes and conditions for it to arrive at that
time. It will come again.

Sadness Lies in Ignorance

The Great Being Avalokiteshvara was a disciple of the Buddha. One day,
when he was concentrating in the course of deep understanding, he
suddenly saw that everything is without a separate self. Seeing this, he
overcame all ignorance, which means he overcame all his suffering.
Looking deeply, we should also see that there is no birth, there is no
death; there is no coming, there is no going; there is no being, there
is no nonbeing; there is no same, there is no different. If we don't
learn this practice, it is a terrible waste. We can learn many practices
to lessen our sadness and our suffering, but the cream of enlightened
wisdom is the insight of no birth, no death. When we have this insight
we will have no more fear. We can then enjoy the immense inheritance our
ancestors have handed down to us. We should make time to practice these
deep and wonderful teachings in our daily lives.

Respecting Our Manifestations If you look at a friend with the eyes of a
meditator, you will see in him or her all generations of their
ancestors. You will be very respectful to them and to your own body
because you will see their body and your body as the sacred home of all
our ancestors. You will also see that our bodies are the source of all
future generations. We will not damage our bodies, because that wouldn't
be kind to our descendants. We do not use drugs and we do not eat or
drink things that have toxins or that will harm our bodies. This is
because our insight of manifestation helps us to live in a healthy way,
with clarity and responsibility. The ideas of inside and outside are
also like this. If we say that the Buddha is in us, our parents are in
us, our parents are outside of us, or the Buddha is outside of us, these
ideas of inside and outside are not applicable. We are caught in ideas,
especially ideas of coming and going and being and not being. Only when
we rid ourselves of all these ideas can reality appear, the reality of
nirvana. When all ideas of is and is not have been extinguished, then
reality will manifest itself.

There Is Nothing Like Experience We can use an example that is easy to
understand, of a tangerine or a durian fruit. If there is a person who
has never eaten a tangerine or a durian fruit, however many images or
metaphors you give him, you cannot describe to him

the reality of those fruits. You can only do one thing: give him a
direct experience. You cannot say: "Well, the durian is a little bit
like the jackfruit or like a papaya." You cannot say anything that will
describe the experience of a durian fruit. The durian fruit goes beyond
all ideas and notions. The same is true of a tangerine. If you have
never eaten a tangerine, however much the other person loves you and
wants to help you understand what a tangerine tastes like, they will
never succeed by describing it. The reality of the tangerine goes beyond
ideas. Nirvana is the same; it is the reality that goes beyond ideas. It
is because we have ideas about nirvana that we suffer. Direct experience
is the only way.

Two

THE REAL FEAR

We are afraid of death, we are afraid of separation, and we are afraid
of nothingness. In the West, people are very afraid of nothingness. When
they hear about emptiness, people are also very afraid, but emptiness
just means the extinction of ideas. Emptiness is not the opposite of
existence. It is not nothingness or annihilation. The idea of existence
has to be removed and so does the idea of nonexistence. Emptiness is a
tool to help us. Reality has nothing to do with existence and
nonexistence. When Shakespeare says: "To be, or not to be---that is the
question," the Buddha answers: "To be or not to be is not the question."
To be and not to be are just two ideas opposing each other. But they are
not reality, and they do not describe reality. Not only does awakened
insight remove the notion of permanence, but it also removes the notion
of impermanence. The notion of emptiness is the same. Emptiness is an
instrument, and if you are caught in the notion of emptiness you are
lost. The Buddha said in the Ratnakuta Sutra: "If you are caught by the
notion of being and non-being, then the notion of emptiness can help you
to get free. But if you are caught by the notion of emptiness, there's
no hope." The teaching on emptiness is a tool helping you to get the
real insight of emptiness, but if you consider the tool as the insight,
you just get caught in an idea. If you have a notion about nirvana, that
notion should be removed. Nirvana is empty of all notions, including the
notion of nirvana. If you are caught in the notion of nirvana, you have
not touched nirvana yet. This deep insight and discovery of the Buddha
took him beyond fear, beyond anxiety and suffering and beyond birth and
death.

Burning Our Notions When you have a match, you have the condition to
make a fire. If the flame you make with the match lasts long enough, it
will also burn up the match. The match gives rise to the fire, but the
fire itself burns up the match; the

teaching of impermanence is the same. It helps us to have the awakened
understanding of impermanence, and the insight of impermanence is what
will burn up our idea of impermanence. We have to go beyond the idea of
permanence, but we also have to go beyond the idea of impermanence. Then
we can be in touch with nirvana. The same is true of no self. No self is
the match; it helps to give rise to the fire of the insight of no self.
It is the awakened understanding of no self that will burn up the match
of no self. To practice is not to store up a lot of ideas about no self,
impermanence, nirvana or anything else; that is just the work of a
cassette recorder. To speak about and distribute ideas is not the study
or practice of Buddhism. We can go to a university to study Buddhism,
but we will learn only theories and ideas. We want to go beyond ideas to
have real insight, which will burn up all our ideas and help us to be
free.

Where Is Nirvana? Look at a quarter. One side of it is called heads, the
other side is called tails; they cannot exist without each other. The
metal from which they are made contains them both. Without the metal the
two sides would not exist. The three elements, heads, tails and metal,
inter-are. The metal we could describe as something like nirvana, and
the heads and tails as something like the manifestation of impermanence
and no self. Through the appearance of either the tails or the heads,
you can touch and recognize the presence of the metal. Similarly by
looking deeply into the nature of impermanence and no self, you can also
touch the nature of nirvana. The ultimate dimension of nirvana cannot be
separated from the historical dimension. When you touch deeply the
historical dimension, you also touch the ultimate dimension. The
ultimate dimension is always in you. For a practitioner it's very
important to touch his or her own nature of impermanence and non-self.
If he is successful he will touch the nature of nirvana and attain
non-fear. Now he can ride on the waves of birth and death, smiling
serenely.

The Historical and Ultimate Dimensions We look upon reality in our daily
lives through the historical dimension, but we can also look upon the
same reality in the ultimate dimension. Reality can

be manifested in the historical dimension, or it can be manifested in
the ultimate dimension. We are similar. We have our daily and historical
concerns, but each of us also has our ultimate concerns. When we look
for God or nirvana or the deepest kind of peace, we are concerned about
the ultimate. We are not only concerned with the facts of daily
life---fame, profit, or our position in society and our projects---but
we are also concerned about our true nature. To meditate deeply is to
begin to fulfill our ultimate concern.

Waves Are Water When you look at the surface of the ocean, you can see
waves coming up and going down. You can describe these waves in terms of
high or low, big or small, more vigorous or less vigorous, more
beautiful or less beautiful. You can describe a wave in terms of
beginning and end, birth and death. That can be compared to the
historical dimension. In the historical dimension, we are concerned with
birth and death, more powerful, less powerful, more beautiful, less
beautiful, beginning and end and so on. Looking deeply, we can also see
that the waves are at the same time water. A wave may like to seek its
own true nature. The wave might suffer from fear, from complexes. A wave
may say, "I am not as big as the other waves," "I am oppressed," "I am
not as beautiful as the other waves," "I have been born and I have to
die." The wave may suffer from these things, these ideas. But if the
wave bends down and touches her true nature she will realize that she is
water. Then her fear and complexes will disappear. Water is free from
the birth and death of a wave. Water is free from high and low, more
beautiful and less beautiful. You can talk in terms of more beautiful or
less beautiful, high or low, only in terms of waves. As far as water is
concerned, all these concepts are invalid. Our true nature is the nature
of no birth and no death. We do not have to go anywhere in order to
touch our true nature. The wave does not have to look for water because
she is water. We do not have to look for God, we do not have to look for
our ultimate dimension or nirvana, because we are nirvana, we are God.
You are what you are looking for. You are already what you want to
become. You can say to the wave, "My dearest wave, you are water. You
don't have to go and seek water. Your nature is the nature of
nondiscrimination, of no birth, of no death, of no being and of no
non-being." Practice like a wave. Take the time to look deeply into
yourself and recognize that your nature is the nature of no-birth and
no-death. You can

break through to freedom and fearlessness this way. This method of
practice will help us to live without fear, and it will help us to die
peacefully without regret. If you carry within yourself deep grief, if
you have lost a loved one, if you are inhabited by fear of death,
oblivion and annihilation, please take up this teaching and begin to
practice it. If you practice well, you will be capable of looking at the
cloud, the rose, the pebble or your child with the kind of eyes the
Buddha has transmitted to us. You will touch the no-birth, no-death,
nocoming, no-going nature of reality. This can liberate you from your
fear, from your anxiety and your sorrow. Then you can truly have the
kind of peace that will make you strong and stable, smiling as events
happen. Living this way will allow you to help many people around you.

Where Were You Before You Were Born? Sometimes people ask you: "When is
your birthday?" But you might ask yourself a more interesting question:
"Before that day which is called my birthday, where was I?" Ask a cloud:
"What is your date of birth? Before you were born, where were you?" If
you ask the cloud, "How old are you? Can you give me your date of
birth?" you can listen deeply and you may hear a reply. You can imagine
the cloud being born. Before being born it was the water on the ocean's
surface. Or it was in the river and then it became vapor. It was also
the sun because the sun makes the vapor. The wind is there too, helping
the water to become a cloud. The cloud does not come from nothing; there
has been only a change in form. It is not a birth of something out of
nothing. Sooner or later the cloud will change into rain or snow or ice.
If you look deeply into the rain, you can see the cloud. The cloud is
not lost; it is transformed into rain, and the rain is transformed into
grass and the grass into cows and then to milk and then into the ice
cream you eat. Today if you eat an ice cream, give yourself time to look
at the ice cream and say: "Hello, cloud! I recognize you." By doing
that, you have insight and understanding into the real nature of the ice
cream and the cloud. You can also see the ocean, the river, the heat,
the sun, the grass and the cow in the ice cream. Looking deeply, you do
not see a real date of birth and you do not see a real date of death for
the cloud. All that happens is that the cloud transforms into rain or
snow. There is no real death because there is always a continuation. A
cloud continues the ocean, the river and the heat of the sun, and the
rain continues the cloud.

Before it was born, the cloud was already there, so today, when you
drink a glass of milk or a cup of tea or eat an ice cream, please follow
your breathing. Look into the tea or the ice cream and say hello to the
cloud. The Buddha took the time to look deeply and so can we. The Buddha
was not a God; he was a human being like us. He suffered, but he
practiced, and that is why he overcame his suffering. He had deep
understanding, wisdom and compassion. That is why we say he is our
teacher and our brother. If we are afraid of death it is because we have
not understood that things do not really die. People say that the Buddha
is dead, but it is not true. The Buddha is still alive. If we look
around us we can see the Buddha in many forms. The Buddha is in you
because you have been able to look deeply and see that things are not
really born and that they do not die. We can say that you are a new form
of the Buddha, a continuation of the Buddha. Do not underestimate
yourself. Look around you a little bit and you will see continuations of
the Buddha everywhere.

Am I Yesterday's Me? I have a photograph of myself when I was a boy of
sixteen. Is it a photograph of me? I am not really sure. Who is this boy
in the photograph? Is it the same person as me or is it another person?
Look deeply before you reply. There are many people who say that the boy
in the photograph and I are the same. If that boy is the same as I am,
why does he look so different? Is that boy still alive or has he died?
He is not the same as I am and he is also not different. Some people
look at that photograph and think the young boy there is no longer
around. A person is made of body, feelings, perceptions, mental
formations and consciousness, and all of these have changed in me since
that photograph was taken. The body of the boy in the photograph is not
the same as my body, now that I am in my seventies. The feelings are
different, and the perceptions are very different. It is just as if I am
a completely different person from that boy, but if the boy in the
photograph did not exist, then I would not exist either. I am a
continuation like the rain is the continuation of the cloud. When you
look deeply into the photograph, you can see me already as an old man.
You do not have to wait fifty-five years. When the lemon tree is in
flower, you may not see any fruit, but if you look deeply you can see
that the fruit is already there. You just need one more condition to
bring forth the lemons: time. Lemons are already there in the lemon
tree. Look at the tree and you only see branches, leaves and flowers.
But if the lemon tree has time it will express itself in lemons.

Sunflowers in April If you come to France in April, you will not see any
sunflowers. But in July the area around Plum Village has so many
sunflowers. Where are the sunflowers in April? If you come to Plum
Village in April and look deeply, you will see sunflowers. The farmers
have ploughed the land and sown the seed, and the flowers are just
waiting for one more condition to show themselves. They are waiting for
the warmth of May and June. The sunflowers are there, but they have not
fully manifested. Look deeply at a box of matches. Do you see a flame in
it? If you do, you are already enlightened. When we look deeply at a box
of matches, we see that the flame is there. It needs only the movement
of someone's fingers to manifest. We say: "Dear flame, I know you are
there. Now I shall help you express yourself." The flame has always been
in the box of matches and also in the air. If there were no oxygen, the
flame could not express itself. If you lit a candle and then covered the
flame with something, the flame would go out for lack of oxygen. The
survival of the flame depends on oxygen. We cannot say that the flame is
inside the box of matches or that the flame is outside the box of
matches. The flame is everywhere in space, time and consciousness. The
flame is everywhere, waiting to manifest itself, and we are one of the
conditions that will help the flame to manifest. However, if we blow on
the flame we shall help the flame stop showing itself. Our breath, when
we blow on the flame, is a condition that stops the manifestation of the
flame in its flame form. We can light two candles from the match and
then blow out the flame on the match. Do you think the flame from the
match has died? The flame is not of the nature to be born or to die. The
question is, is the flame on the two candles the same flame or two
different flames? It is not the same and it is not different. Now
another question: is the flame of the match dead? It is both dead and
not dead. Its nature is not to die and not to be born. If we leave the
candle burning for an hour, will the flame remain the same or become
another flame? The wick, the wax and the oxygen are always changing. The
part of the wick and the wax that is burning is always transforming. If
these things transform, the flame must change too. So the flame is not
the same, but it also is not different.

Being Is Not the Opposite of Annihilation

We have an idea of being that it is the opposite of not being. These
ideas are no more solid than ideas of right and left. Look at a pen. Can
we remove totally its right-hand side? If we use a knife and cut away
half of the pen, the part that remains still has a right-hand side.
Political parties of the right and the left are immortal---they cannot
be removed. As long as there is a right wing, there will be a left wing.
Therefore those on the left of the political spectrum should desire the
eternal presence of those on the right. If we remove the right, we have
to remove the left at the same time. The Buddha said: "This is because
that is. This manifests because that has manifested." This is the
Buddha's teaching concerning the creation of the world. It is called the
teaching on co-arising. The flame is there because the matches are
there. If the matches were not there, the flame would not be there.

The Answer Lies Within Where does the flame come from? What is its
origin? We should look deeply into this question. Do you need to sit in
the lotus position to find the answer? I am sure that the answer is
already in you. It is just waiting for one more condition to manifest
itself. The Buddha said that everyone has Buddha nature in them. Buddha
nature is the ability to understand and touch our real nature. The
answer is already in you. A teacher cannot give you the answer. A
teacher can help you be in touch with the awakened nature, the great
understanding and compassion in you. The Buddha invites you to be in
touch with the wisdom that is already in you. Many of us ask: "Where do
you go when you die? What happens when you die?" We have friends who
have lost someone they love and they ask: "Where is my beloved one now?
Where has she gone now?" Philosophers ask: "Where does man come from?
Where does the cosmos or the world come from?" When we look deeply, we
see that when all the conditions are sufficient something will manifest.
What manifests does not come from anywhere. And when a manifestation
ceases, it does not go anywhere.

Creation "To create" seems to mean that from nothing you suddenly have
something. I prefer the use of the expression "manifestation" to the
word "creation." Look

deeply, and you can understand creation in terms of manifestation. Just
as we can understand a cloud as a manifestation of something that has
always been there, and rain as the end of the cloud manifestation, we
can understand human beings, and even everything around us, as a
manifestation that has come from somewhere and will go nowhere.
Manifestation is not the opposite of destruction. It simply changes
form. Understanding our lives and the cosmos as a manifestation can
bring us tremendous peace. If you are grieving over the loss of a loved
one, this is an invitation to look deeply and to heal your pain. There
are theologians who have said that God is the ground of being, but what
being? It is not the being that is opposed to non-being. If it is the
notion of being as opposed to non-being, then that is not God. God
transcends all notions, including the notions of creation and
destruction. If you look deeply at the notion of creation with the
insight of manifestation in mind, you will discover the depth of the
teaching on creation. You will discover that nothing is born and nothing
dies. There is only manifestation.

Finding Relief We come to spiritual practice, to a church, a synagogue,
a mosque or a meditation center, to find relief from pain and sorrow.
But the greatest relief can only be obtained when we are capable of
touching the ultimate dimension. In Judaism and in Christianity you may
call that dimension God. God is our true nature, the true nature of no
birth, no death. That is why if you know how to trust God, to trust your
true nature, you will lose your fear and sorrow. In the beginning you
might think of God as a person, but a person is the opposite of a
non-person. If you think of God in terms of notions and concepts, you
have not yet discovered the reality of God. God transcends all our
notions. God is neither a person nor a non-person. A wave in her
ignorance is subject to the fear of birth, death, high, low, more or
less beautiful, and the jealousy of others. But if a wave is able to
touch her true nature, the nature of water, and know that she is water,
then all her fear and jealousy will vanish. Water doesn't undergo birth
and death, high and low.

Causes When we look at things like a flower, a table or a house, we
think that a house

has to be made by someone and a table has to be made by someone in order
to be there. Our tendency is to look for a cause that has given birth to
the house, a cause that has given birth to the table. We come to the
conclusion that the cause of the house must be the house builder: the
mason or the carpenter. What is the cause of the table? Who created the
table? A carpenter. Who is the creator of the flower? Is it the earth or
the farmer or the gardener? In our minds we think very simply in terms
of cause. We think that one cause is enough to bring about what is
there. With the practice of looking deeply we find out that one cause
can never be enough in order to bring about an effect. The carpenter is
not the only cause of the table. If the carpenter does not have things
like nails, saw, wood, time and space, food to eat, a father and mother
who brought him to life and a multitude of conditions, he would not be
able to bring the table into being. The causes are actually infinite.
When we look at the flower we see the same thing. The gardener is only
one of the causes. There must be the soil, the sunshine, the cloud, the
compost, the seed and many, many other things. If you look deeply, you
will see that the whole cosmos has come together in order to help the
flower to manifest. If you look deeply into a piece of carrot that you
eat at lunch, you will see that the whole cosmos has come together in
order to help manifest that piece of carrot. If we continue to look
deeply, we see that a cause is at the same time an effect. The gardener
is one of the causes that has helped to manifest the flower, but the
gardener is also an effect. The gardener has manifested because of other
causes: ancestors, father, mother, teacher, job, society, food, medicine
and shelter. Like the carpenter, he is not only a cause, he is also an
effect. Looking deeply, we find that every cause is at the same time an
effect. There cannot be something that we can call "pure cause." There
are many things we can discover with the practice of looking deeply, and
if we are not bound to any dogma or concept we will be free to make our
discoveries.

No Pure Cause When the Buddha was asked, "What is the cause of
everything?" he answered with very simple words. He said, "This is,
because that is." It means that everything relies on everything else in
order to manifest. A flower has to rely on non-flower elements in order
to manifest. If you look deeply into the flower, you can recognize
non-flower elements. Looking into the flower, you recognize the element
sunshine; that is a non-flower element. Without sunshine, a flower
cannot manifest. Looking at the flower, you recognize the

element cloud; that is a non-flower element. Without clouds, the flower
cannot manifest. Other elements are essential, such as minerals, soil,
the farmer and so on; a multitude of non-flower elements has come
together in order to help the flower manifest. This is why I prefer the
expression "manifestation" to the word "creation." This does not mean
that we should not use the word "creation." Of course we can do so, but
we should understand that creation does not mean making something out of
nothing. Creation is not something that is destroyed and can become
nothing. I very much like the term "Wonderful Becoming." It is close to
the true meaning of creation.

Three

THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY

All authentic practices of the Buddha carry within themselves three
essential teachings called the Dharma Seals. These three teachings of
the Buddha are impermanence, no self and nirvana. Just as all-important
legal documents have the mark or signature of a witness, all genuine
practices of the Buddha bear the mark of these three teachings. If we
look into the first Dharma Seal, impermanence, we see that it doesn't
just mean that everything changes. By looking into the nature of things,
we can see that nothing remains the same for even two consecutive
moments. Because nothing remains unchanged from moment to moment, it
therefore has no fixed identity or permanent self. So in the teaching of
impermanence we always see the lack of an unchanging self. We call this
"no self." It is because things are always transforming and have no self
that freedom is possible. The third Dharma Seal is nirvana. This means
solidity and freedom, freedom from all ideas and notions. The word
"nirvana" literally means "the extinction of all concepts." Looking
deeply into impermanence leads to the discovery of no self. The
discovery of no self leads to nirvana. Nirvana is the Kingdom of God.

Impermanence The practice and understanding of impermanence is not just
another description of reality. It is a tool that helps us in our
transformation, healing and emancipation. Impermanence means that
everything changes and that nothing remains the same in any consecutive
moments. And although things change every moment, they still cannot be
accurately described as the same or as different from what they were a
moment ago. When we bathe in the river today that we bathed in
yesterday, is it the same river? Heraclitus said that we couldn't step
into the same river twice. He was right. The water in the river today is
completely different from the water

we bathed in yesterday. Yet it is the same river. When Confucius was
standing on the bank of a river watching it flow by, he said: "Oh, it
flows like that day and night, never ending." The insight of
impermanence helps us to go beyond all concepts. It helps us to go
beyond same and different and coming and going. It helps us to see that
the river is not the same river but is also not different either. It
shows us that the flame we lit on our bedside candle before we went to
bed is not the same flame that is burning the next morning. The flame on
the table is not two flames, but it is not one flame either.

Impermanence Makes Everything Possible We are often sad and suffer a lot
when things change, but change and impermanence have a positive side.
Thanks to impermanence, everything is possible. Life itself is possible.
If a grain of corn is not impermanent, it can never be transformed into
a stalk of corn. If the stalk were not impermanent, it could never
provide us with the ear of corn we eat. If your daughter is not
impermanent, she cannot grow up to become a woman. Then your
grandchildren would never manifest. So instead of complaining about
impermanence, we should say, "Warm welcome and long live impermanence."
We should be happy. When we can see the miracle of impermanence, our
sadness and suffering will pass. Impermanence should also be understood
in the light of inter-being. Because all things inter-are, they are
constantly influencing one another. It is said that a butterfly's wings
flapping on one side of the planet can affect the weather on the other
side. Things cannot stay the same because they are influenced by
everything else, everything that is not itself.

Practicing Impermanence All of us can understand impermanence with our
intellect, but this is not yet true understanding. Our intellect alone
will not lead us to freedom. It will not lead us to enlightenment. When
we are solid and we concentrate, we can practice looking deeply. And
when we look deeply and see the nature of impermanence, we can then be
concentrated on this deep insight. This is how the insight of
impermanence becomes part of our being. It becomes our daily experience.
We have to maintain the insight of impermanence in order to be able to
see and live impermanence all the time. If we can use impermanence

as an object of our meditation, we will nourish the understanding of
impermanence in such a way that it will live in us every day. With this
practice, impermanence becomes a key that opens the door of reality. We
also cannot uncover the insight into impermanence for only a moment and
then cover it up and see everything as permanent again. Most of the time
we behave with our children as though they will always be at home with
us. We never think that in three or four years' time they will leave us
to marry and have their own families. Therefore we do not value the
moments our children are with us. I know many parents whose children,
when they are eighteen or nineteen years old, leave home and live on
their own. The parents lose their children and feel very sorry for
themselves. Yet the parents did not value the moments they had with
their children. The same is true of husbands and wives. You think that
your spouse will be there for the whole of your life, but how can you be
so sure? We really have no idea where our partners will be in twenty or
thirty years' time or even tomorrow. It is very important to remember
every day the practice of impermanence.

Seeing Emotions Through the Eyes of Impermanence When somebody says
something that makes you angry and you wish they would go away, please
look deeply with the eyes of impermanence. If he or she were gone, what
would you really feel? Would you be happy or would you weep? Practicing
this insight can be very helpful. There is a gatha, or poem, that we can
use to help us: Angry in the ultimate dimension I close my eyes and look
deeply. Three hundred years from now Where will you be and where shall I
be? When we are angry, what do we usually do? We shout, scream, and try
to blame someone else for our problems. But looking at anger with the
eyes of impermanence, we can stop and breathe. Angry at each other in
the ultimate dimension, we close our eyes and look deeply. We try to see
three hundred

years into the future. What will you be like? What will I be like? Where
will you be? Where will I be? We need only to breathe in and out, look
at our future and at the other person's future. We do not need to look
as far as three hundred years. It could be fifty or sixty years from now
when we have both passed away. Looking at the future, we see that the
other person is very precious to us. When we know we can lose them at
any moment, we are no longer angry. We want to embrace her or him and
say: "How wonderful, you are still alive. I am so happy. How could I be
angry with you? Both of us have to die someday, and while we are still
alive and together it is foolish to be angry at each other." The reason
we are foolish enough to make ourselves suffer and make the other person
suffer is that we forget that we and the other person are impermanent.
Someday when we die we will lose all our possessions, our power, our
family, everything. Our freedom, peace and joy in the present moment is
the most important thing we have. But without an awakened understanding
of impermanence, it is not possible to be happy. Some people do not even
want to look at a person when the person is alive, but when the person
dies they write eloquent obituaries and make offerings of flowers. At
that point the person has died and cannot really enjoy the fragrance of
the flowers anymore. If we really understood and remembered that life
was impermanent, we would do everything we could to make the other
person happy right here and right now. If we spend twentyfour hours
being angry at our beloved, it is because we are ignorant of
impermanence. "Angry in the ultimate dimension/I close my eyes." I close
my eyes in order to practice visualization of my beloved one hundred or
three hundred years from now. When you visualize yourself and your
beloved in three hundred years' time, you just feel so happy that you
are alive today and that your dearest is alive today. You open your eyes
and all your anger has gone. You open your arms to embrace the other
person and you practice: "Breathing in you are alive, breathing out I am
so happy." When you close your eyes to visualize yourself and the other
person in three hundred years' time, you are practicing the meditation
on impermanence. In the ultimate dimension, anger does not exist. Hatred
is also impermanent. Although we may be consumed with hatred at this
moment, if we know that hatred is impermanent, we can do something to
change it. A practitioner can take resentment and hatred and help it to
disappear. Just like with anger, we close our eyes and think, Where will
we be in three hundred years? With the understanding of hatred in the
ultimate dimension, it can evaporate in an instant.

Let Impermanence Nurture Love Because we are ignorant and forget about
impermanence, we don't nurture our love properly. When we first married,
our love was great. We thought that if we did not have each other we
would not be able to live one more day. Because we did not know how to
practice impermanence, after one or two years our love changed to
frustration and anger. Now we wonder how we can survive one more day if
we have to remain with the person we once loved so much. We decide there
is no alternative: we want a divorce. If we live with the understanding
of impermanence, we will cultivate and nurture our love. Only then will
it last. You have to nourish and look after your love for it to grow.

No Self Impermanence is looking at reality from the point of view of
time. No self is looking at reality from the point of view of space.
They are two sides of reality. No self is a manifestation of
impermanence, and impermanence is a manifestation of no self. If things
are impermanent, they are without a separate self. If things are without
a separate self, they are impermanent. Impermanence means being
transformed at every moment. This is reality. And since there is nothing
unchanging, how can there be a permanent self, a separate self? When we
say "self," we mean something that is always itself, unchanging day
after day. But nothing is like that. Our body is impermanent, our
emotions are impermanent and our perceptions are impermanent. Our anger,
our sadness, our love, our hatred and our consciousness are also
impermanent. So what permanent thing is there that we can call a self?
The piece of paper on which these words are written does not have a
separate self. It can only be present when the clouds, the forest, the
sun, the earth, the people who make the paper, and the machines are
present. If those things are not present, the paper cannot be present.
And if we burn the paper, where is the self of paper? Nothing can exist
by itself alone. It has to depend on every other thing. That is called
inter-being. To be means to inter-be. The paper inter-is with the
sunshine and with the forest. The flower cannot exist by itself alone;
it has to inter-be with soil, rain, weeds and insects. There is no
being; there is only inter-being. Looking deeply into a flower, we see
that the flower is made of non-

flower elements. We can describe the flower as being full of everything.
There is nothing that is not present in the flower. We see sunshine, we
see the rain, we see clouds, we see the earth, and we also see time and
space in the flower. A flower, like everything else, is made entirely of
non-flower elements. The whole cosmos has come together in order to help
the flower manifest herself. The flower is full of everything except one
thing: a separate self, a separate identity. The flower cannot be by
herself alone. The flower has to inter-be with the sunshine, the cloud
and everything in the cosmos. If we understand being in terms of
inter-being, then we are much closer to the truth. Inter-being is not
being and it is not non-being. Inter-being means being empty of a
separate identity, empty of a separate self. No self also means
emptiness, a technical term in Buddhism that means the absence of a
separate self. We are of the nature of no self, but that does not mean
that we are not here. It does not mean that nothing exists. A glass can
be empty or full of tea, but in order to be either empty or full, the
glass has to be there. So emptiness does not mean non-being, and it does
not mean being either. It transcends all concepts. If you touch deeply
the nature of impermanence, no self and inter-being, you touch the
ultimate dimension, the nature of nirvana.

Who Are We? We think of our body as our self or belonging to our self.
We think of our body as me or mine. But if you look deeply, you see that
your body is also the body of your ancestors, of your parents, of your
children and of their children. So it is not a "me," it is not a "mine."
Your body is full of everything else--- limitless non-body
elements---except one thing: a separate existence. Impermanence has to
be seen in the light of emptiness, of inter-being and of non-self. These
things are not negative. Emptiness is wonderful. Nagarjuna, the famous
Buddhist teacher of the second century, said, "Thanks to emptiness,
everything is possible." You can see non-self in impermanence, and
impermanence in non-self. You can say that impermanence is non-self seen
from the angle of time, and non-self is impermanence seen from the angle
of space. They are the same thing. That is why impermanence and non-self
inter-are. If you do not see impermanence in non-self, that is not
non-self. If you do not see non-self in impermanence, that's not really
impermanence. But that is not all. You have to see nirvana in
impermanence and you have to see nirvana in non-self. If I draw a line,
on one side there will be impermanence and non-self, on the

other side there will be nirvana. That line may be helpful, although it
could also be misleading. Nirvana means going beyond all concepts, even
the concepts of no self and impermanence. If we have nirvana in no self
and in impermanence it means that we are not caught in no self and
impermanence as ideas.

Clones: No Permanent Self If you take three cells from my body to make
clones and make three children from these cells, all of them will have
the genetic inheritance of my blood family and myself. But we all have
one more inheritance. The body we inherit from our family is nature. We
also have an inheritance from our environment. That is nurture. So
imagine that we put these three clones into three different
environments. If one of the children is put into an environment of drugs
and gambling, he will probably become a person who enjoys drugs and
gambling. He will not be a Buddhist monk like I am now. If you put
another cloned child into an environment of business and send him to a
business school, he will probably become a businessman. This would occur
even though the clones will all have the same genetic inheritance as I
do. But I have been penetrated by the Buddha dharma. The teachings of
the Buddha and the practice will not be watered by business school. The
seeds of selling, buying and business will be watered. That clone may
become a businessman. Although the eyes, nose and ears will look just
like me, this clone will be nothing like me. Let us say that we allow
the third clone to become a monk. We put him in the Deer Park Monastery
to be brought up by monks and nuns. Every day he hears the sutras and
does walking meditation. That child will be more like the monk I am
today. Nurture is extremely important. If you make three clones or three
thousand clones, the particular manifestation of the clone depends on
the conditions that nurture that clone; the thinking, the love, the
hate, the studying and the work that surround him or her. Imagine if
there are people who are afraid to let me go and they say: "Please give
us a cell for us to clone." If I were to agree, I would also have to
say: "Well, please let that clone be in a monastery like the Deer Park
Monastery in California, or Maple Forest Monastery in Vermont;
otherwise, he will suffer."

Nirvana

Impermanence and no self are not rules to follow given to us by the
Buddha. They are keys to open the door of reality. The idea of
permanence is wrong, so the teaching on impermanence helps us correct
our view of permanence. If we get caught in the idea of impermanence, we
have not realized nirvana. The idea of self is wrong, so we use the idea
of non-self to cure it. If we are caught in the idea of non-self, then
that is not good for us either. Impermanence and no self are keys to the
practice. They are not absolute truths. We do not die for them or kill
for them. In Buddhism there are no ideas or prejudices that we kill for.
We do not kill people simply because they do not accept our religion.
The teachings of the Buddha are skillful means; they are not absolute
truth. So we have to say that impermanence and no self are skillful
means to help us come toward the truth; they are not absolute truth. The
Buddha said: "My teachings are a finger pointing to the moon. Do not get
caught in thinking that the finger is the moon. It is because of the
finger that you can see the moon." No self and impermanence are means to
understand the truth; they are not the truth itself. They are
instruments; they are not the ultimate truth. Impermanence is not a
doctrine that you should feel you have to die for. You would never put
someone in prison because they contradict you. You are not using one
concept against another concept. These means are to lead us to the
ultimate truth. Buddhism is a skillful path to help us; it is not a path
of fanatics. Buddhists can never go to war, shedding blood and killing
thousands of people on behalf of religion. Because impermanence contains
within herself the nature of nirvana, you are safe from being caught in
an idea. When you study and practice this teaching, you free yourself
from notions and concepts, including the concept of permanence and
impermanence. This way, we arrive at freedom from suffering and fear.
This is nirvana, the kingdom of God.

Extinction of Concept We are scared because of our notions of birth and
death, increasing and decreasing, being and non-being. Nirvana means
extinction of all notions and ideas. If we can become free from these
notions, we can touch the peace of our true nature. There are eight
basic concepts that serve to fuel our fear. They are the notions of
birth and death, coming and going, the same and different, being and
non-being. These notions keep us from being happy. The teaching given to
counteract these notions is called "the eight no's," which are no birth,
no death, no coming, no going, not the same, not different, no being, no
non-

being.

Ending Notions of Happiness Each of us has a notion of how we can be
happy. It would be very helpful if we took the time to reconsider our
notions of happiness. We could make a list of what we think we need to
be happy: "I can only be happy if..." Write down the things you want and
the things you do not want. Where did these ideas come from? Are they
reality? Or are they only your notions? If you are committed to a
particular notion of happiness, you do not have much chance to be happy.
Happiness arrives from many directions. If you have a notion that it
comes only from one direction, you will miss all of these other
opportunities because you want happiness to come only from the direction
you want. You say, "I would rather die than marry anyone but her. I
would rather die than lose my job, my reputation. I cannot be happy if I
don't get that degree or that promotion or that house." You have put
many conditions on your happiness. And then, even if you do have all
your conditions met, you still won't be happy. You will just keep
creating new conditions for your happiness. You will still want the
higher degree, the better job and the more beautiful house. A government
can also believe that they know the only way to make a nation prosper
and be happy. That government and nation may commit itself to that
ideology for one hundred years or more. During that time its citizens
can suffer so much. Anyone who disagrees or dares to speak against the
government's ideas will be locked up. They might even be considered
insane. You can transform your nation into a prison because you are
committed to an ideology. Please remember that your notions of happiness
may be very dangerous. The Buddha said happiness can only be possible in
the here and now. So go back and examine deeply your notions and ideas
of happiness. You may recognize that the conditions of happiness that
are already there in your life are enough. Then happiness can be
instantly yours.

Four

TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR

THE CLOUD

As a free person I can always come and go, Not caught in ideas of is and
is not. Not caught in ideas of being and non-being Let your steps be
leisurely. Waxing or waning the moon is always the moon The wind is
still flying. Can you feel it my dear? Bringing the rain from afar to
nourish the nearby cloud Drops of sunshine fall from on high to earth
below And the lap of earth touches the clear vault of the sky. ---THICH
NHAT HANH

On a beautiful sunny day, you look up into the sky and see a nice, puffy
cloud floating through. You admire its shape, the way the light falls
upon its many folds and the shadow it casts on the green field. You fall
in love with this cloud. You want it to stay with you and keep you
happy. But then the shape and color change. More clouds join with it,
the sky becomes dark, and it begins to rain. The cloud is no longer
apparent to you. It has become rain. You begin to cry for the return of
your beloved cloud. You would not cry if you knew that by looking deeply
into the rain you would still see the cloud. In Buddhism there is the
teaching of signlessness (animitta). "Sign" means the outer form or
appearance of things. The practice of signlessness is the practice of
not being fooled by the outer form or the appearance of things. When we
understand animitta, we understand that appearance is not all of
reality.

When a cloud transforms itself into rain you can look deeply into the
rain and see that the cloud is still there, laughing and smiling at you.
This makes you happy, and you are able to stop crying because you are no
longer attached to the appearance of the cloud. If you are struck down
by your grief and you continue to cry for a long time, it is because you
have been left behind, caught in the form or sign of the cloud. You are
caught in an appearance from the past and you are not able to see the
new form. You have not been able to follow the cloud as it transforms
into rain or snow. If you have lost someone and if you have cried so
very much, please accept the invitation of the Buddha. Look deeply and
recognize that the nature of your beloved is the nature of no birth, no
death, no coming, no going. This is the teaching of the Buddha
concerning our true nature.

Transformation Let us look into the birth of a cloud. You can visualize
the heat, you can see the vapor, you can see the formation of the cloud
in the sky. You know where the cloud has come from. We can understand
the conditions that have helped the cloud to manifest in the sky. Our
observation and our practice of looking deeply can help. Science can
also tell us about the formation of a cloud, the journey of a cloud and
the adventure of a cloud. If you were to love a cloud, with this insight
you would know that the cloud is impermanent. If you love a human being
you can also know that he or she is impermanent. If you were to become
attached to a cloud you would have to be very careful. You know that,
according to the law of impermanence, very soon the cloud will become
something else. It might become rain. You might say to the cloud,
"Darling cloud, I know you are there and I also know that one day you
will die. I also must die. You will become something else, someone else.
I know you will continue your journey, but I shall have to look deeply
in order to recognize your continuation so that I will not suffer so
much." If you forget about impermanence and are attached to the cloud,
when the time comes for the cloud to be transformed into rain, you will
cry, "Oh dear, my cloud is no longer there. How can I survive without
her?" But if you practice looking deeply, you can see the cloud in new
forms like the mist or the rain. The rain is smiling, singing, falling
down, full of life, full of beauty. Yet because of your forgetfulness
you are not capable of recognizing the presence of the cloud in this new
manifestation. You are caught in grief. You keep crying and crying and
meanwhile the rain is calling

you, "Darling, darling, I am here, recognize me!" But you ignore the
rain while all the time the rain is the continuation of the cloud. In
fact the rain is the cloud herself. When you look at the cloud, you
might like to be like a cloud floating freely in the sky. How wonderful
it would be to be a cloud floating in the sky! You would have such a
feeling of freedom. When you look at the rain falling, singing and
making music, you might also long to be the rain. The rain is nourishing
all the vegetation and the lives of innumerable beings. How wonderful it
is to be the rain. Do you think the rain and the cloud are the same or
different? The snow on the top of a mountain is so white, so immaculate,
so beautiful. It is so enchanting that you might like to see yourself as
being like the snow. Sometimes when you look at the water flowing in the
creek, you see the stream so crystal pure and beautiful that you may
like to be like the water, always flowing. Cloud, rain, snow and water.
Are they four different things? Or are they really the same reality,
sharing the same ground of being?

No Fear In chemistry we would call the ground of being of water H2O: two
hydrogen atoms and an oxygen atom. From this ground of being, a
molecule, many things can manifest: clouds, rain, snow, water. It is
wonderful to be a cloud, but it is also wonderful to be the rain. It is
also wonderful to be the snow or water. If the cloud remembers this,
then when the cloud is about to transform and continue in the form of
rain, it will not be so frightened. It will remember that to be a cloud
is wonderful, but to be the rain falling down is also wonderful. When
the cloud is not caught in the idea of birth and death, or being and
non-being, there is no fear. By learning from the cloud, we can nurture
our non-fear. Non-fear is the ground of true well-being. As long as fear
is in us, happiness cannot be perfect. When you practice looking deeply,
you see your true nature of no birth, no death; no being, no non-being;
no coming, no going; no same, no different. When you see this, you are
free from fear. You are free from craving and free from jealousy. No
fear is the ultimate joy. When you have the insight of no fear, you are
free. And like the great beings, you ride serenely on the waves of birth
and death.

Manifesting and Hiding The true nature of all things is not to be born,
not to die, not to arrive and not to depart. My true nature is the
nature of no coming and no going. When there are sufficient conditions,
I manifest, and when the conditions are no longer sufficient, I hide. I
do not go anywhere. Where would I go? I simply hide. If your dear one
has just died, you may have a difficult time overcoming your loss. You
may be crying all the time. But look deeply. There is a divine medicine
to help you overcome your pain, to see that your dear one is not born
and does not die, does not come and does not go. It is only because of
our misunderstanding that we think the person we love no longer exists
after they "pass away." This is because we are attached to one of the
forms, one of the many manifestations of that person. When that form is
gone, we suffer and feel sad. The person we love is still there. He is
around us, within us and smiling at us. In our delusion we cannot
recognize him, and we say: "He no longer is." We ask over and over,
"Where are you? Why did you leave me all alone?" Our pain is great
because of our misunderstanding. But the cloud is not lost. Our beloved
is not lost. The cloud is manifesting in a different form. Our beloved
is manifesting in a different form. If we can understand this, then we
will suffer much less.

Taking New Forms When we lose someone we love, we should remember that
the person has not become nothing. "Something" cannot become "nothing,"
and "nothing" cannot become "something." Science can help us understand
this, because matter cannot be destroyed---it can become energy. And
energy can become matter, but it cannot be destroyed. In the same way,
our beloved was not destroyed; she has just taken on another form. That
form may be a cloud, a child or the breeze. We can see our loved one in
everything. And smiling, we can say, "Dear one, I know you are there
very close to me. I know that your nature is the nature of no birth and
no death. I know that I have not lost you; you are always with me." If
you look deeply at every moment of your daily life, you will see that
person. Practicing like this, you will be able to overcome your grief.
The same is true with your mother or your father. Their true nature is
the nature of not born, not dying, not arriving and not departing. In
reality, you have not lost anyone who has died.

The Story of the River and the Clouds There is a story I like to tell
about a river that followed the clouds. There is a little stream that
comes from a mountain spring. It is very small and young and wants to
reach the sea as quickly as possible. It does not know how to dwell
peacefully in the present moment. It is in a hurry because it is so
young. It has not realized the practice of "I am home, I have arrived,"
so it flows down the mountain, reaches the plains and becomes a river.
As a river it has to go more slowly. This is irritating because it is
afraid that it will never get to the sea. But since it is forced to go
more slowly, its waters become more still. Its surface begins to reflect
the clouds in the sky--- pink clouds, silver clouds, white clouds. There
are so many wonderful shapes. All day it follows the clouds. It becomes
attached to the beautiful clouds. So the river suffers because the
clouds are impermanent. They are always moving with the wind, leaving
the river to go off somewhere else. How the river suffers! The river
tries over and over to hold on to the clouds. It is sad that the clouds
will not stay with it and stand still. One day a stormy wind blew all
the clouds away. The vault of the sky was very clear blue and empty. How
the river despaired. It no longer had a cloud to follow. There was not a
cloud in the sky. The vast expanse of blue brought despair into the
river's heart. "What is there to live for without the clouds? What is
there to live for without my beloved one?" The river wanted to die, but
how could a river kill itself? All night long it wept. That night the
river had a chance to listen to itself crying. The sound of its weeping
was the sound of its own waves lapping on the shore. When it was able to
come back to itself and hear its own crying, it had a very wonderful
insight. It realized that its own nature was also the nature of the
cloud. It was the cloud. The cloud lay in the depths of its own being.
Just like the river, the cloud was grounded in water. The cloud was made
of water. So why, the river thought, do I need to run after the cloud? I
only need to run after the cloud if I am not the cloud. That night of
utter loneliness and depression helped the river to wake up and see that
it was also the cloud. That morning the blue emptiness of the sky, which
had made the river feel so lonely, was now something new and very
wonderful, clear and bright. The blueness of the sky was reflecting the
newfound freedom and innocence of the river. It knew that the vault of
the sky was the home of all the clouds and no cloud could exist outside
the vault of the sky. The river understood that the nature of the cloud
was not to arrive and not to depart, so why should the river cry? Why
should it weep as if it had been torn from the cloud? The river had
another insight that morning. It saw the no-birth, no-death

nature of the sky. This made the river very peaceful and quiet. It began
to welcome and reflect the sky. Before that, it had not reflected the
sky, it had only reflected the clouds. Now the sky was always there for
the river, day and night. Before, the river had not wanted to be in
touch with the true nature of things. It had only wanted to be in touch
with change, with birth and death. Now that it had been in touch with
the vault of the sky, it became very peaceful and quiet. It had never
felt so much peace. That afternoon when the clouds came back, the river
was no longer attached to any particular one of them. There was no cloud
it felt to be its own special cloud. It smiled at every cloud as it
passed. It welcomed and loved every cloud. Now the river felt the
special joy of equanimity. It was not partial to any particular cloud or
in the grip of any particular cloud. It loved them all. It could enjoy
being with and reflecting every cloud that came through the sky. When a
cloud left it, the river said, "Good-bye. See you again soon," and it
felt very light at heart. It knew that the cloud would return to it
after it became rain or snow. The river was free. It did not feel it
even needed to run to the sea anymore. That night a full moon rose and
shone into the depths of the river. The moon, the river and the water
practiced meditation together. The river enjoyed the present moment in
freedom. It was liberated from all sorrow. When we chase an object,
trying to grab it, we suffer. And when there is no object to run after,
we also suffer. If you have been a river, if you have run after the
clouds, suffered, cried and been lonely, please hold the hand of a
friend. Looking deeply together, you can see that what you were looking
for has always been there. In fact it is you, yourself. You are what you
want to become. Why search anymore? You are a wonderful manifestation.
The whole universe has come together to make your existence possible.
There is nothing that is not you. The kingdom of God, the Pure Land,
nirvana, happiness and liberation are all you.

The Same Body? Suppose we practice cloning, and every cell in our body
is made into a new body. Does that mean that one soul can become many
souls? One person can become many people? Are all those new people the
same or different? Science has already advanced to the point where it
can perform cloning of animals. It is possible that this can be done
with human beings also. If, for example, we take three cells from my
body and we make three clones, will those three clones plus myself make
four people or one person? When the

clones are made, I might already be quite old and the three clones would
be very young. So am I and those three people the same or different? If
we practice meditation, we can look deeply with the power of
mindfulness, the energy of concentration and the energy of insight. Then
we are able to see things much more deeply and clearly. The Buddha is
someone who practiced like that, and he shared the insight he had with
us. We also practice like the Buddha, and with a little effort we will
have insight like the Buddha had. First we should look deeply into the
idea of the same and different. When we ask the Buddha: "Are this body
and the other three clones the same or different?" the Buddha will say,
"They are not the same and they are not different." Impermanence means
something is always changing. We think that our body is permanent. In
fact, birth and death are taking place in our body all the time. At
every moment many cells are dying and many cells are being born. We have
the illusion that our bodies are always our bodies. You were born a
baby. Your mother took a picture of you when you were small, and now you
have grown into a man or woman. Do you think you are the same person as
that tiny baby, or are you different? We think that at five years old it
is our bodies and at fifty years old it is our bodies. But it is wrong
to think that it is the same body. If you have a family photo album,
please look at it and you will see what you looked like when you were
six years old and what you look like now at sixty. You will see that
those two people look very different. They are different. But in another
sense they are not different. If there were not the six-year-old, there
would not be the sixty-year-old. They are not the same and they are not
different. Impermanence is the explanation for this puzzle. After one
in-and out-breath we have already become a different person. From the
moment we began reading this book until this moment, there have been
many changes within our bodies and within our consciousnesses. Many
cells have died; many new cells have been born. The same is true of our
consciousness. Thoughts come and go, feelings are born and die.
Manifestation and the cessation of manifestation are constantly taking
place. We do not remain the same in two consecutive moments. The same is
true of the river, the flame, the cloud or the sunflower.

Conditions Looking deeply into a box of matches, you can see the flame.
The flame has not manifested, but as a meditator you can see the flame.
All the conditions

are sufficient for the flame to manifest. There is wood, sulfur, a rough
surface and my hands. So when I strike the match and the flame appears I
would not call that the birth of a flame. I would call it a
manifestation of a flame. The Buddha said that when conditions are
sufficient you manifest yourself. When conditions are no longer
sufficient, you stop the manifestation in order to manifest in other
forms, with other conditions.

Manifesting from Something What do you think birth is? Most of us think
birth means that something begins to exist where something didn't exist
before. In our mind we have the concept that birth means that from
nothing you suddenly become something; from no one you suddenly become
someone. Most of us would define birth like that. Looking deeply, we see
that this definition is not sound. From nothing, you cannot become
something. From no one, you can never become someone. Before your
so-called birthday, you were already there, in your mother. So that
moment of childbirth is only a moment of continuation. Look and see if
you can find the moment that you became something from nothing. Was it
at the moment of conception in the womb of your mother? That is not
correct either, because before that there had been something else, maybe
half in your father, half in your mother; maybe one third in your
father, one third in your mother, one third in the cosmos. There were
many "somethings" that were already there. If something existed already,
it does not need to be born. The time when a mother is in labor and then
gives birth is not really the moment of birth; it is just a moment of
the coming into the world from the womb. In Zen we like to ask the
question, "What did your face look like before your grandmother was
born?" Ask yourself this question and you will begin to see your own
continuation. You will see that you have always been there. The moment
of your conception is a moment of continuation, of manifesting in
another form. If you keep looking you will see that instead of birth and
death, there is only continuing transformation.

Where Does the Flame Come From? I can say to the flame, "Dear flame,
please manifest yourself." As I strike the match, the flame complies.
But I would also like to ask her, "Where have you come from?"

The flame would say this: "Dear Thay, I come from nowhere and I go
nowhere. When conditions are sufficient, I manifest." That is the truth
of the nature of no coming, no going. Let us practice looking deeply
into the nature of the flame of a candle. Is it the same flame as the
flame of the match that lit it? Or is it a different flame? If we
maintain this flame for one hour, the flame will burn lower on the
candle. It may appear to be the same flame, but that is only our
perception. In fact there are multitudes of flames succeeding one
another in every instant. They give the impression that it is always the
same flame, but it is not. The fuel is different, the oxygen is
different. The room has changed, and so the conditions are different.
Therefore the flame is not exactly the same. It does not take much time
for the flame to change because in one second the flame is nourished by
the wax and oxygen in the first part of the candle. The next moment, the
oxygen and the wax are being burned away and new fuel, new wax and
oxygen, are now burning. It is not the same fuel, so it is not the same
flame. When the candle becomes shorter, you see that it has consumed
this much wax and that much oxygen, so you know that the flame is
changing all the time. Just like us, the flame does not remain the same
in two consecutive moments. Looking at just one flame you see already
the nature of being neither the same nor different. Underneath our
impression of being the same, there is the nature of impermanence.
Nothing can remain the same in two consecutive moments. This applies to
a human being, a cloud, to everything. If you say that the flame burning
on the candle ten minutes ago is the same as the flame you see now, this
is not correct. If you say there are one thousand different flames
succeeding each other, this is not correct either. The true nature of
the flame is the nature of neither the same nor different. If we can
move through the illusion of same and different, we can change a lot of
suffering into joy.

Impressions In the sutras there is an excellent example. In the darkness
one person holds a torch and draws a circle of fire. Another person,
standing a little bit away, has the impression that there is a fire
circle. But there is no circle, there are only dots of fire that succeed
each other and give the impression of a fire circle. This is like the
illusion of fixed identity and the illusion of permanence. The fire
circle is an idea. It cannot be applied to reality, and it cannot
describe the true reality. If you analyze the fire circle you will see
that there are millions of instances moving in quick succession that
give the impression that there is a

fire circle. When we film someone dancing, we are taking many pictures
of that person dancing. We take so many pictures and then when we
project these frames one after another, we have the impression that
there is fluid movement. But in fact these are only innumerable still
pictures, one succeeding another. When we look at someone, we have the
impression that there is a permanent self or entity. We think that this
morning I recognized this identity and this evening, when I look, I will
recognize that same entity. If I travel somewhere else and come back ten
years later I will also recognize the same entity. That is an illusion.
There's a very funny story in the sutras. A woman left a saucepan of
milk with her neighbor, saying: "Please keep it for me; I shall come
back in two or three days." There was no refrigeration, so the milk
curdled and became a kind of cheese. When the woman came back she said:
"Where's my milk? I left milk behind, not cheese, so this is not my milk
here." The Buddha said that this person had not understood impermanence.
Milk will become yogurt or cheese if you leave it for a few days. The
person wanted only the milk of five days ago and refused to take the
cheese. Do you think that milk and cheese are the same or different?
They are neither the same nor different, but it takes several days for
the milk to become cheese. With the insight of impermanence we can see
the truth about the universe and all phenomena, the true nature of being
neither the same nor different. We presume that things remain the same
forever, but in reality nothing remains the same in two consecutive
moments. That is why the notion of a fixed identity is also an illusion,
an idea that cannot be applied to reality. There is a stream of
manifestation, yes, and you can assign to it a name, like the
Mississippi River. Although the name does not change, the reality does.
You have the impression that the river is always there for you, but the
water in it is not the same even after just one moment. Philosophers
have said that you can never bathe twice in the same river. This is the
nature of impermanence confirmed, not only by the Buddha, but by
Confucius and Heraclitus and many other wise people who knew how to look
deeply into the nature of reality.

St. Francis and the Almond Tree One day, while doing walking meditation
during winter in his garden, St. Francis of Assisi saw a bare almond
tree. He approached the almond tree and, as he practiced breathing in
and out, asked the almond tree to tell him about

God. Suddenly the almond tree was covered with blossoms. I believe the
story to be true because such a contemplative could see into the depth
of reality. He did not need to have the warmth of spring in order to
realize that the almond blossoms were already there. I invite you to
look at a box of matches with the eyes of St. Francis, the eyes of the
Buddha. You do have those eyes. Can you see the flame already in the box
of matches? It has not manifested but it is there somewhere. Looking
deeply, you can already see the flame. All conditions are there for the
flame to manifest, except one---a movement of your fingers. You can
furnish that last condition and see the flame manifesting. When you
strike a match, please do it very mindfully. Observe all the conditions.
Ask the flame, "Dear little flame, where have you come from?" When you
extinguish it, ask, "Where have you gone to?" We think the flame, which
was born a moment ago, is now going to die. Is there any place separate
from us in space that the flame has gone to? I don't think so. The
Buddha said that there is no coming; there is no going. These are
questions philosophers have asked many times and have used so much
paper, ink and saliva to try to answer. Looking deeply with your Buddha
eyes, you can find the answer.

Suchness Reality, as it is, is called suchness. Suchness means, "it is
like that." You cannot describe it in terms of notions, especially
notions of birth and death, being and non-being, coming and going. No
word, no idea, no notion can describe reality: the reality of a table,
the reality of a flower, the reality of a house, the reality of a living
being. Sometimes you are angry with your father and you say, "I don't
want anything to do with him!" What a declaration! You don't know that
you and your father belong to the same reality; you are his
continuation, you are he. Look into whether you are the same as your
father or different from him. Our true nature is the nature of not the
same, not different. You and your father are not the same; and you are
not different. When you help the flame to manifest by striking the
match, look deeply and you can see that it comes from nowhere, and it
goes nowhere. Use the flame on the match to light a candle. Is the flame
of the candle the same as the flame of the match or different? If you
have a second candle and light it too, you can ask if the three flames
are the same or different. Looking into a flame of one candle, we can
see in this very flame that the idea of "neither the same nor different"
applies not only to the flames of the

two different candles but also to the one flame that lit them both. This
flame is not the same and is not different because each moment of that
flame is unique. The moment that comes next is a moment when the flame
manifests itself in a different way. The manifestation of something or
someone does not rely on one condition alone; it relies on many
conditions. So, the idea that one cause can bring about the effect is
not correct. One cause is never enough to help something manifest. While
we were contemplating the flame we did not look deeply enough to see all
the conditions. We know that the flame is nourished by the matchstick,
by the wood and by fuel. It is true that nothing can survive without
fuel, but the fuel is only one element, one condition. The flame can
manifest itself only when all the elements are there. If there is no
oxygen in the air, the flame cannot appear for very long. The flame
relies on the wood, on the wick, on oxygen. The flame is already there
in the matchbox. It does not need to be born, it only needs to manifest
when the conditions are right. We may only be a boy or a girl of twelve
years old and do not now have children of our own. But in our person,
all the causes and conditions for the manifestation of children and
grandchildren are there. It's just a matter of time and conditions. A
SHEET OF PAPER

No coming, no going, No after, no before. I hold you close, I release
you to be free; I am in you And you are in me. No coming, no going is
the true nature of reality. You have come from nowhere; you will go
nowhere. The rose, the cloud, the mountains, the stars, the planet
Earth---everything is like that. Their nature is the nature of no
coming, no going. To die does not mean that from something you become
nothing. To be born does not mean that from no one you suddenly become
someone. There is only manifestation based on sufficient conditions, and
the

cessation of manifestation, based on the lack of proper conditions. The
sheet of paper on which these words are written has a history. This page
in the book that you are holding in your hands took its form in a single
moment. That does not mean that it was the moment of its birth. It was
already there as the light of the sun, as the trunk of a tree, as the
cloud and the earth. The moment when it came from the factory was just
its moment of manifestation. So we should ask, "Dear little sheet of
paper, were you there before you were born?" The sheet of paper will
answer, "Yes, in the form of a tree, in the form of the sunshine, in the
form of a cloud and the rain, in the form of minerals and the earth. The
moment of becoming a sheet of paper was a moment of continuation. I have
not come from nothing. I have come from the cosmos. I have been a tree,
I have been a cloud, I have been sunshine, soil and so on." Looking
deeply into the sheet of paper, you can still see the trees, the cloud,
and the sunshine. You do not have to go to the past. That is the
advantage of being a meditator; you do not have to travel. You just sit
there and look deeply, and you can see and recognize everything. The
sheet of paper contains all the information about the cosmos, including
information concerning the cloud, the sunshine, the trees, the earth. If
you return one of these elements to its origin, the sheet of paper will
no longer be there. If you returned the sunshine to the sun, there would
be no forest, and no paper. That is why the sunshine is in the paper.
When you touch the sheet of paper, you touch the sunshine, you touch the
cloud, you touch the rain, you touch the earth, you touch the whole
cosmos. One manifestation contains all. If you run your fingers over the
paper, you can feel the cloud in it. Without the rain, which comes from
the cloud, there would be no paper. When you are running your fingers
over the piece of paper, you are running your fingers over the trees in
the forest. With our fingers we can touch the sun and all the minerals
of the earth in the paper. All these conditions lie in the paper. When
we can be in touch with the paper with our awakened understanding, we
are in touch with the whole of existence. When we practice looking
deeply into this sheet of paper, we can see the forest. Without the
forest there would be no tree, without the trees we cannot make paper.
So this sheet of paper has not come from nothing; it has come from
something like the trees. But the trees are not enough to make the sheet
of paper. The sunshine nourishes the trees; the clouds water the trees;
the soil, the minerals and a multitude of other phenomena help the sheet
of paper to manifest. And then there has to be a logger who cuts the
tree, and the deli worker that made the sandwich for the logger's lunch,
and the people who formed the company that pays the loggers. These
things do not exist outside the sheet of paper. They are one with the
paper.

You may think, How can I identify this sheet of paper with the forest?
The forest is outside the paper. If you remove the forest or the cloud
from the sheet of paper, the sheet of paper will fly apart. If there
were no clouds, and no rain from the clouds, how could trees grow? How
could we make paper paste in order to produce a sheet of paper? The
sheet of paper has no birthday, and you have no birthday. You were there
before you were born. The next time you celebrate your birthday, you
might like to change the song to "Happy Continuation Day." If it is true
that the birthday is a continuation day, then what you call the day of
death is also a continuation day. If your practice is strong, at the
moment of dying you will sing a song of happy continuation.

Try to Make Nothing You can try to make a sheet of paper into nothing.
Is it possible? Strike a match and burn it to see whether it becomes
nothing, or whether it becomes something else. This is not just a
theory---it is something we can prove. Breathe in and out as you strike
the match. Witness the transformation of a sheet of paper. As you light
the match, be aware that the flame does not need to be born. With the
right conditions, it only has to manifest for us to see it. As you burn
the paper, see the smoke. The heat is enough to burn your fingers. Where
is the paper now? When you burn a sheet of paper, it is no longer in the
form of paper. If you follow it with your mindfulness, you will see that
the sheet of paper continues in other forms. One of its forms will be
smoke. The smoke from the piece of paper rises and will join one or two
of the clouds already existing in the sky. It is now participating in a
cloud, and we can wave good-bye to it. Good-bye piece of paper, see you
again very soon. Tomorrow, next month, there will be rain and a drop of
water can fall on your forehead. That drop of water is your sheet of
paper. Another form the paper takes on is ash. You can give the ash back
to the soil. When it is returned to the soil, the earth becomes a
continuation of the sheet of paper. Maybe next year you will see the
continuation of the paper in a tiny flower or a blade of grass. That is
the afterlife of a sheet of paper. During the process of being burned,
the piece of paper also became heat. That heat penetrates into our
bodies, even if you are not very close to the flame. Now you carry the
sheet of paper in you. The heat penetrates deeply into the cosmos. If
you are a scientist and have very sophisticated instruments, you can
measure the effects of that heat even in distant planets and stars. They
then become a manifestation, a continuation of the little sheet

of paper. We cannot know how far the sheet of paper will go. Scientists
say that if you clap your hands it may have an impact on a distant star.
What is happening with us can affect a galaxy far away. And the galaxy
far away can affect us. Everything is under the influence of everything
else.

Nothing Is Lost To meditate means to be invited on a journey of looking
deeply in order to touch our true nature and to recognize that nothing
is lost. Because of this we can overcome fear. Non-fear is the greatest
gift of meditation. With it we can overcome grief and our sorrow. Only
nothing can come from nothing. Something cannot come from nothing and
nothing cannot come from something. If something is already there, it
does not need to be born. The moment of birth is only a moment of
continuation. You can be perceived as a baby the day of your so-called
birth and everyone thinks of you as now existing. But you already
existed before that day. To die in our notion of death means that from
something you suddenly become nothing. From someone you suddenly become
no one---that is a horrible idea and makes no sense. If something has
not been born, will that something have to die sometime? Can you reduce
the sheet of paper into nonbeing, nothing? I can testify that a sheet of
paper has never been born, because to be born means from nothing you
suddenly become something, from no one you suddenly become someone. That
idea is not compatible with reality. Your true nature is the nature of
no birth; the nature of the sheet of paper is also the nature of no
birth. You have never been born; you have been there for a long, long
time.

You Have Always Been There When you were a child you may have liked to
play with a kaleidoscope. Every movement of your fingers created a
wonderful pattern of colors. If you moved it a little bit, then what you
see would change. It was also beautiful, but it would be different. You
might say that the different patterns within the kaleidoscope were being
born or dying, but as a child you did not mourn that kind of birth and
death. Instead, you continued to delight in seeing different

forms and colors. If we are able to touch our ground of no birth and no
death, we will have no fear. That is the base of our true happiness. As
long as fear is still in you, your happiness cannot be perfect. The
bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara has offered us the Heart Sutra. In that
sutra we learn that reality is as it is, not conditioned by birth,
death, coming, going, being, non-being, increasing, decreasing, being
defiled or immaculate. We are full of all these notions, and we suffer
because we are caught in these notions. Our true liberation is the
liberation from notions. When you come to a practice center, you hope to
alleviate some of your suffering. You hope for some relief, but the
greatest relief of all can be obtained only by touching your true
nature, the nature of no birth and no death. That is the deepest
teaching the Buddha offered to us.

No Creation Look at the sunflower growing in the garden. The sunflower
relies on so many elements in order to manifest itself. There is a cloud
inside of the flower because if there were no cloud there would be no
rain, and no sunflower could grow. There is the sunshine in the
sunflower. We know that without sunshine nothing can grow; there would
be no sunflower. We see the earth, we see the minerals, we see the
farmer, we see the gardener, and we see time, space, ideas, the
willingness to grow and many other elements. So, sunflowers depend on
many conditions in order to manifest, not just one. I like to use the
word "manifestation" instead of "birth," and I also like to use it
instead of "creation." In our minds, "to create" also means from nothing
something is brought forth. The farmer who grows sunflowers does not
create the sunflowers. If you look deeply, you see that the farmer is
only one of the conditions that can bring sunflowers into being. There
are seeds of sunflowers stored in the barn, there are fields outside
where you can plant sunflowers, there are clouds in the sky to make
rain, there are fertilizers, there is the sunshine to help the sunflower
to grow. You, the farmer, are not really the creator of the sunflower.
You are just one of the conditions. Without you the sunflowers cannot
manifest. But the same is true of the other conditions. All are equally
important to the manifestation of the sunflower. When you come to Plum
Village in the month of July, you will see many sunflowers on the
surrounding hills. Hundreds of thousands of sunflowers all turn toward
the east, smiling and bright. If you come in the month of May or April,
the hills are bare. But when the farmers walk through their fields, they
can already see the sunflowers. They know that the sunflowers have been

planted, that every condition is sufficient. The farmers have sown the
seeds; the soil has been prepared. Only one condition is missing---the
warmth that will come in June and July. It is not because something
manifests that you can describe it as being. It is not because it has
not manifested or has ceased its manifestation that you can call it
non-being. "Being" and "non-being" cannot apply to reality. By looking
deeply, you realize that reality is not subject to birth and death, to
being and non-being. When Paul Tillich said, "God is the ground of
being," that being should not be confounded with the being that is
opposed to non-being. You are invited to look deeply into the notion of
being in order to be free from it.

Five

NEW BEGINNINGS

Where was Jesus before he was born? Over the years I have asked many of
my Christian friends this question. If we want to look into this
question deeply, we must explore the life and the death of Jesus in
terms of manifestation. Jesus Christ was not no one before his birth. It
was not in Bethlehem that Jesus came into being. The event of the
nativity was only an occasion of manifestation; Jesus did exist before
the moment of so-called birth or nativity. So we should not really call
it a birth. It's not really the nativity. It's really only a
manifestation. By looking with the insight of manifestation, we have an
opportunity to see deeply into the person of Jesus. We can discover the
truth of his immortality. We can discover the truth of our own nature of
no birth and no death. It is said by Christians that God sent his only
son, Jesus, to earth. Since God was there, and Jesus is a part of God,
and Jesus is the Son of God, Jesus was already there. The day of
Christ's birth, Christmas, is a manifestation day, not a nativity day.
This day was only the time when the manifestation took place. Jesus
Christ is still manifesting himself in many thousands of ways. He is
manifesting himself all around you. We need to be alert in order to
recognize his manifestations. If you are not mindful or attentive, you
will miss him because you will miss his manifestations. In the morning
when you practice walking meditation, you may recognize his
manifestation as a flower, as a drop of water, as a bird song or as a
child playing in the grass. We have to be very careful not to miss these
things. In the teaching and understanding of the Buddha, we all share
the nature of no birth and no death. Not only humans, but also animals,
plants and minerals share the nature of no birth and no death. A leaf
and a flower share the same ground of no birth and no death. There is a
manifestation of a flower or a leaf or a cloud. During the winter we do
not see any sunflowers or dragonflies, and we do not hear the cuckoo
bird sing. It seems that they do not exist in winter, but we know that
this idea is wrong. In the beginning of spring, all of these beings will
manifest themselves again. They have just been somewhere else during the
winter, in another manifestation, waiting until conditions are favorable
in order to manifest themselves again. To qualify them as non-existing
in winter is a wrong perception.

"Passed Away" Does Not Mean "Gone" We must also ask the question, If
Jesus was not born then how could he die? Though he was crucified, did
he cease to exist? And did Jesus need to be resurrected? Is it possible
that his crucifixion was not a death? Is it possible it was a hiding?
His true nature is the nature of no birth and no death. This is true not
just of Jesus. In this sense a cloud is the same, a sunflower is the
same, and you and I are the same. We are not born and we do not die. And
since Jesus Christ is not affected by birth and death, we call him the
Living Christ. It is real and deep wisdom to learn to look at things in
terms of manifestation. If someone who is very close to you has passed
away and you define him or her as non-existing, you are mistaken. From
nothing cannot be born something. From no one cannot be born someone.
From something you cannot become nothing. From someone you cannot become
no one. That is the truth. If the person who is close to you does not
manifest in the form that you are used to seeing or perceiving, that
does not mean that he is nonexisting. It does not mean that he is no
longer there. If you look deeply, you can touch his or her presence in
other forms of manifestation. One day I took the hand of a young father
who had just buried his little son. I invited him to walk with me to
discover his son in other forms. His son had come to Plum Village when
he was very young and learned to enjoy vegetarian food. He gave me his
allowance and extra pocket money and asked me to buy a plum tree and
plant it for him. He wanted to participate in the work of supporting
hungry children in the world by planting a fruit tree in Plum Village.
He knew that a plum tree gives a lot of fruit. He knew that we could
sell the fruit and send the money to hungry children in the third world.
He learned to do walking and sitting meditation, and he practiced the
dharma very well. When he was sick I went to Bordeaux and visited him in
the hospital. He said to me, "Grandpa monk, I will do walking meditation
for you." He got down from his bed, although he was quite weak, and
walked beautifully for me. Shortly after my visit, he died. The day of
his cremation, I sprinkled the consecrated water and chanted the Heart
Sutra for him. A week later I took the hand of his father during a
walking meditation and showed him many other manifestations of his
little boy. Together we visited the plum tree I planted for his son, and
as we sat in the afternoon light, we saw his little boy waving to us
from every bud and branch. Looking deeply into reality, you can discover
many things. You can surmount so much suffering and counter many wrong
perceptions. If we can abide peacefully in the ultimate dimension, we
will not drown in the ocean of suffering, grief, fear and despair.

Re-Manifesting Ourselves In the ultimate dimension, we have never been
born and we will never die. In the historical dimension, we live in
forgetfulness and we are rarely truly alive. We live like dead people.
In Albert Camus' novel The Stranger, the main character, out of despair
and rage, shoots and kills someone. He receives the death sentence for
his crime. One day, while lying on the bed in his prison cell, he looks
up at the square-shaped skylight over him. Suddenly he becomes aware of
and deeply in touch with the blue sky above. He has never seen the sky
in that way before. Camus called this a moment of consciousness, which
is a moment of awareness or of mindfulness. For the condemned man, it
was the first time in his life that he really came into touch with the
sky and realized what a miracle it was. From that moment on, he wants to
maintain that kind of shining awareness. He believes this was the only
kind of energy that can keep him alive. He has only three days left
before his execution. He practices all alone in the prison to maintain
that awareness, to keep his mindfulness alive. He vows to live every
minute of the three days left to him fully and in mindfulness. On his
final day a priest comes to visit him to perform the last rites. The
condemned man does not want to waste his time of awareness in receiving
the sacrament. At first he resists, but finally he opens the door for
the priest to come in. When the priest departs, the prisoner remarks to
himself that the priest lives like a dead person. He has seen no
qualities of awareness or mindfulness in the priest. If you live without
awareness it is the same as being dead. You cannot call that kind of
existence being alive. Many of us live like dead people because we live
without awareness. We carry our dead bodies with us and circulate
throughout the world. We are pulled into the past or we are pulled
forward into the future or we are caught by our projects or our despair
and anger. We are not truly alive; we are not inhabited by awareness of
the miracle of being alive. Albert Camus never studied Buddhism, but in
his novel he speaks about a core practice of Buddhism, the "moment de
conscience," the moment of deep awareness or awakening. The practice of
resurrection, or re-manifestation, is possible for all of us. Our
practice is always to resurrect our selves, going back to the mind and
the body with the help of mindful breathing and walking. This will
produce our true presence in the here and the now. Then we can become
alive again. We will be like dead people reborn. We are free from the
past, we are free from the future, we are capable of establishing
ourselves in the here and now. We are fully present in the here and now,
and we are truly alive. That is the basic

practice of Buddhism. Whether you eat or drink or breathe or walk or
sit, you can practice resurrection. Always allow yourself to be
established in the here and now---fully present, fully alive. That is
the real practice of resurrection.

The Only Moment We Can Be Alive I have arrived, I am home In the here,
In the now I am solid, I am free In the ultimate, I dwell We cannot
enjoy life if we spend a lot of time worrying about what happened
yesterday and what will happen tomorrow. We worry about tomorrow because
we are afraid. If we are afraid all the time, we cannot appreciate that
we are alive and can be happy now. In our daily life, we tend to believe
that happiness is only possible in the future. We are always looking for
better things, the right conditions to make us happy. We run away from
what is happening right in front of us. We try to find things that make
us feel more solid, more safe and secure. But we are afraid all the time
of what the future will bring. We are afraid we'll lose our jobs, our
possessions, the people around us whom we love. So we wait for the
magical moment---sometime in the future---when everything will be as we
like, as we want it to be. But life is available only in the present
moment. The Buddha said, "It is possible to live happily in the present
moment. It is the only moment we have." When you come back to the here
and the now, you will recognize the many conditions of happiness that
already exist. The practice of mindfulness is the practice of coming
back to the here and the now to be in touch deeply with ourselves, with
life. We have to train ourselves in order to do this. Even if we are
very intelligent and we understand it right away, we still have to train
ourselves to live this way. We have to train ourselves to recognize that
the conditions for happiness are already here.

True Home Our true home is in the here and the now. The past is already
gone and the future is not yet here. "I have arrived, I am home, in the
here, in the now." This is our practice. You can recite this gatha, or
poem, during walking meditation or sitting meditation. You can practice
this poem when you drive to your office. You may not have arrived at
your office, but even while driving you have already arrived at your
true home, the present moment. And when you arrive at your office, this
is also your true home. When you are in your office, you are also in the
here and the now. Just practicing the first line of the poem "I have
arrived, I am home" can make you very happy. Whether you are sitting,
whether you are walking, whether you are watering the vegetables in the
garden, or whether you are feeding your child, it is always possible to
practice "I have arrived, I am home." I am not running anymore; I have
run all my life; now I am determined to stop and to really live my life.

What Are You Waiting For? The French have a song called: "Qu'est-ce
qu'on Attend Pour Etre Heureux?" (What are you waiting for to be
happy?). When I practice breathing in and I say, "I have arrived," that
is an achievement. Now I am fully present, one hundred percent alive.
The present moment has become my true home. When I breathe out I say, "I
am home." If you do not feel you are home, you will continue to run. And
you will continue to be afraid. But if you feel you are already home,
then you do not need to run anymore. This is the secret of the practice.
When we live in the present moment, it is possible to live in true
happiness.

Appreciating Earth For many years I have told this story. Suppose two
astronauts go to the moon. When they arrive, they have an accident and
find out that they have only enough oxygen for two days. There is no
hope of someone coming from Earth in time to rescue them. They have only
two days to live. If you asked them at

that moment, "What is your deepest wish?" they would answer, "To be back
home walking on the beautiful planet Earth." That would be enough for
them; they would not want anything else. They would not want to be the
head of a large corporation, a big celebrity or president of the United
States. They would not want anything except to be back on Earth---to be
walking on Earth, enjoying every step, listening to the sounds of nature
and holding the hand of their beloved while contemplating the moon. We
should live every day like people who have just been rescued from the
moon. We are on Earth now, and we need to enjoy walking on this
precious, beautiful planet. The Zen master Lin Chi said, "The miracle is
not to walk on water but to walk on the Earth." I cherish that teaching.
I enjoy just walking, even in busy places like airports and railway
stations. In walking like that, with each step caressing our Mother
Earth, we can inspire other people to do the same. We can enjoy every
minute of our lives.

Six

THE ADDRESS OF HAPPINESS

If you want to know where God, the Buddhas and all the great beings
live, I can tell you. Here is their address: in the here and now. It has
everything you need, including the zip code. If you can breathe in and
out and walk in the spirit of "I have arrived, I am home, in the here,
in the now," then you will notice that you are becoming more solid and
more free immediately. You have established yourself in the present
moment, at your true address. Nothing can push you to run anymore, or
make you so afraid. You are free from worrying about the past. You are
not stuck, thinking about what has not happened yet and what you cannot
control. You are free from guilt concerning the past and you are free
from your worries about the future. Only a free person can be a happy
person. The amount of happiness that you have depends on the amount of
freedom that you have in your heart. Freedom here is not political
freedom. Freedom here is freedom from regret, freedom from fear, from
anxiety and sorrow. "I have arrived, I am home, in the here, in the
now." "I am solid, I am free." This is what you feel, what you become,
when you arrive in the here and now. You're not just telling yourself
this---you will see it; you will feel it. And when you do, you will be
at peace. You will experience nirvana, or the kingdom of God, or
whatever you may like to call it. Even if you are not caught by a lot of
worries, if you are not solid and free, how can you be happy? To
cultivate solidity and freedom in the present moment is the greatest
gift we can give ourselves.

Dwelling in the Ultimate "In the ultimate I dwell." The ultimate is the
foundation of our being, the ground of being. The ultimate, or God, or
the divine, is not separate from us. We are in it all the time. It is
not somewhere up there beyond the sky. But we have to live in our true
home in order to dwell in the ultimate, in order to live in the
ultimate.

It is like the wave and water. If we look into a wave, we see that a
wave can have a beginning and an end. A wave can be high or low. A wave
can be like other waves, or it can be different. But the wave is always
made of water. Water is the foundation of the wave. A wave is a wave,
but it is also water. The wave may have a beginning and an end, it may
be big or small, but with water there is no beginning, no end, no up, no
down, no this, no that. When the wave realizes and understands this, it
is free from the fear of beginning and end, up and down, big and small,
this and that. In the historical dimension, we have time and space, and
pairs of opposites: right and wrong, young and old, coming and going,
pure and impure. We look forward to beginning and we are afraid of
ending. But the ultimate dimension does not have any of these things.
There is no beginning or end, no before or after. The ultimate is the
ground that makes the historical dimension possible. It is the original,
continuing source of being. It is nirvana. It is the kingdom of God. Our
foundation is nirvana, the ultimate reality. You can call it God or the
kingdom of God. This is the water in which we live. You are a wave, but
at the same time you are also water. You have a historical dimension and
you also have an ultimate dimension. If we understand that our true
nature is of no birth, no death, no coming, no going, then our fear will
depart and our pain and suffering will vanish. A wave does not have to
die in order to become water. She is water right here and now. We also
do not have to die in order to enter the kingdom of God. The kingdom of
God is our very foundation here and now. Our deepest practice is to see
and touch the ultimate dimension in ourselves every day, the reality of
no birth and no death. Only this practice can remove our fear and
suffering entirely. Rather than saying, "In the ultimate I dwell," you
may like to say, "In the kingdom of God I dwell" or "In the Buddha land
I dwell."

Releasing Sorrow Suppose someone was able to transport you by jet to the
kingdom of God or the Pure Land of the Buddha. When you arrived, how
would you walk? In such a beautiful place, would you walk under
pressure, running and anxious like we do so much of the time? Or would
you enjoy every moment of being in paradise? In the kingdom of God, or
the Pure Land, people are free and they enjoy every moment. So they do
not walk like we do. The Pure Land is not somewhere else; it is right
here, in the present. It is in every cell of our bodies. When we run
away from the present, we destroy the kingdom of God. But if we know how
to free ourselves from our habit

energy of running, then we will have peace and freedom and we will all
walk like a Buddha in paradise. What we carry with us determines in
which dimension we dwell. If you carry a lot of sorrow, fear and craving
with you, then wherever you go you will always touch the world of
suffering and hell. If you carry with you compassion, understanding and
freedom, then wherever you go you will touch the ultimate dimension, the
kingdom of God. Wherever the practitioner goes, she knows she is
touching the kingdom of God under her feet. There is not one day when I
do not walk in the kingdom of God. Because I practice freedom and
compassion wherever I go, my feet touch the kingdom of God, the ultimate
dimension everywhere. If we cultivate this kind of touching, then the
important elements of solidity and freedom will be available to us
twenty-four hours every day. "I have arrived, I am home." The home of
the wave is water. It's right there. She does not have to travel
thousands of miles in order to arrive at her true home. It's so simple
and so powerful. I would like to invite you to memorize this little poem
and to practice and remember it many times a day. In this way you will
touch the ultimate dimension and always remember your true home.

Habit Energy of Running We run during the daytime and we run during our
sleep. We do not know how to stop. Our practice is first of all to stop,
then to relax, to calm down and to concentrate. When we can do this,
then we are in the here and now. Then we become solid. And when we are
solid, we can look around. We can look deeply into the present moment,
we can look deeply into our true nature, and we can discover the
ultimate dimension. By looking deeply, we can see that though we are
waves, we are also water. But if we have not stopped, if we have not
learned to concentrate, then we cannot look deeply. We will not free
ourselves from fear because we will not be strong enough or stable
enough to see the reality of no coming and no going. It is very hard to
fight against the habits we have developed. Dr. Ambedkar was a member of
Indian parliament who came from the ranks of the Untouchables. He fought
for the rights of the Untouchables. He felt very strongly that their
hope for dignity and safety was in Buddhism. The Buddha did not believe
in the caste system. So, one day in the city of Bombay, five hundred
thousand Untouchables came together and Dr. Ambedkar delivered the Three
Refuges and the Five Mindfulness Trainings of the Buddha. I went to
India to offer my support and assistance to this community of

Untouchables. We gave dharma talks and held days of mindfulness. Imagine
that you grew up as an Untouchable. Imagine that everyone around you
treated you badly and made you afraid for your life. Imagine that you
had to please all those of higher rank in order to stay safe. How would
you live? Would you be relaxed and in the present moment? Or in constant
worry about the future? The habit energy of anxiety would be very
strong. The friend who organized my trip came from the Untouchable
community. He lived in New Delhi with his wife and three children. He
very much wanted to make my trip pleasant and successful. One morning,
we were sitting on a bus together, traveling to another community. I was
enjoying the landscape of India from my window seat. When I turned to
look at my friend, I noticed that he was very tense. I said, "My dear
friend, I know that you very much want to make my trip pleasant and
happy, but you know, I am very happy right now! Please, don't worry. Sit
back and relax!" He said, "Yes!" He relaxed a bit, so I turned to the
window again and I practiced breathing in and out. I enjoyed the palm
trees in the morning sun. I thought about the palm leaves on which the
scriptures of the Buddha have been written since ancient times. The
leaves are long and slender. A sharp point was used to inscribe the
teaching of the Buddha on the leaves. They can be preserved for a
thousand years or more. I remembered that some fifteen-hundred-year-old
Buddhist texts had been discovered in Nepal written on these leaves.
Then my mind returned to my friend. This took perhaps two minutes. I
turned to him and saw that he was becoming stiff and tense again. It was
difficult for him to relax for even a few minutes. As an Untouchable, he
had struggled all of his life. Now, even though he had a nice apartment
in New Delhi and a good job, the habit energy in him to struggle all the
time was still very strong. Throughout many generations, the
Untouchables have been struggling hard day and night to survive. That
kind of habit energy had been transmitted to him from many generations.
It would be difficult for anyone to transform it quickly. He needed some
time and some training. With the support of friends in the practice, in
a few months or a few years he could transform his energy of struggling
and being tense. It is possible for anyone to do. You can allow yourself
to relax and be free. If you want to transform your habit energy of
running and struggling, you have to recognize it every time it shows its
head. Breathing in and out and smiling, you say, "Oh, my dear little
habit energy, I know you are there!" At that moment you are free. You
can remind yourself. You can teach yourself. You cannot have a spiritual
friend twenty-four hours a day with you to remind you. I reminded my
friend one time, and it worked only for two minutes. He has to do it
himself. Everyone has to do it for themselves. You must become your own
spiritual friend and live in an environment that helps you. The habit
energy of running is strong in us. It may have been transmitted

to us by many generations. But you don't need to pass that habit energy
along. You should be able to tell your children that you have walked in
the kingdom of God. You may like to tell them, as I have told my
friends, that there is not one day when I do not walk in the kingdom of
God. If you can do this, your life will become an inspiration to many
people. Perhaps you and your children will walk in the Pure Land all the
time.

Releasing Our Baggage If we want to walk in the Pure Land all the time,
it helps us to let go of the things that keep us from being in the
present. It helps us to learn to let go of what makes us worry, to get
to zero. When we think of zero, we think of it as nothingness. We see it
as something negative. But zero can be very positive. If you have a debt
to pay, that is negative. When you pay it back, your balance returns to
zero. That is wonderful because then you are free. At the time of the
Buddha, there was a monk whose name was Baddhiya. Before becoming a monk
he had been governor of a province in the kingdom of Sakka where the
Buddha was born. After his enlightenment the Buddha had come back to the
kingdom of his birth and visited his family. When many young people saw
the great happiness and liberty of the Buddha, they wanted to follow
him. They wanted to be free. Among them was Baddhiya. During the first
three months of his monastic life he practiced so diligently that he
could see many things deeply. One night while practicing meditation in
the forest, he opened his mouth and said, "Oh my happiness! Oh my
happiness!" As governor, Baddhiya had slept in beautiful rooms. He was
guarded by many soldiers. He had expensive things to eat and many
servants. Now he sat at the foot of a tree, with nothing but his begging
bowl and monk's robe. A monk who was sitting close to Baddhiya heard his
exclamation. He thought Baddhiya regretted losing his former positions
of power. He thought Baddhiya must be regretting losing his former life
as a governor. In the early morning of the next day the monk went to the
Buddha and told him what he had heard. The Buddha summoned Baddhiya and
in the presence of the entire community of monks the Buddha said,
"Brother Baddhiya, is it true that last night during sitting meditation
you opened your mouth and pronounced the words, "Oh my happiness! Oh my
happiness?" Baddhiya replied, "Yes, that is true, Lord Buddha." The
Buddha asked, "Why? Did you regret something?" Baddhiya answered,
"During sitting meditation, I remembered the time when I was governor,
attended by so many servants and protected by

bodyguards. I always lay awake with fear. I was afraid that people would
steal my wealth from me. I was afraid of being assassinated. Now,
sitting at the foot of a tree and meditating, I felt so free. Now I have
nothing to lose. I enjoy deeply every moment, and I have never been as
happy as I am now. That is why I said, 'Oh my happiness! Oh my
happiness!' Noble Teacher, if I disturbed my brothers, I apologize."
Only then did everyone in the sangha understand that Baddhiya's words
were an expression of his real happiness. Please take a pen and a sheet
of paper. Go to the foot of a tree or to your writing desk, and make a
list of all the things that can make you happy right now: the clouds in
the sky, the flowers in the garden, the children playing, the fact that
you have met the practice of mindfulness, your beloved ones sitting in
the next room, your two eyes in good condition. The list is endless. You
have enough already to be happy now. You have enough to be free from
coming and going, up and down, birth and death. Nourish yourself every
day with the wonderful things that life has to offer you. Nourish
yourself in the present moment. Walk in the kingdom of God.

What Are We Running After? If we are not fully present and not alive,
either for our loved ones or ourselves, where are we? We are running,
running, running, even during our sleep. We run because our fear of
losing everything is chasing us. The practice of resurrection can help
us. When you come back to mindfulness and awareness, when the energy of
mindfulness is present in you, the energy of the Holy Spirit is present
in you. The Holy Spirit makes life possible. To be inhabited by the Holy
Spirit is our practice. To live every moment in the presence of the Holy
Spirit is not something abstract. It can be done when you drink your
juice or your tea. Drink in such a way that the Holy Spirit is present
in you. When you eat some muesli, some rice or some tofu, eat it in such
a way that the Holy Spirit is present in you. When you walk you should
allow the Holy Spirit to be walking in you. Please do not practice only
for the sake of form. Every walking meditation session is a new walking
meditation session. Walk in such a way that you will be nourished with
every step you make. Every meal should be a new meal where you can
nourish yourself with the energy of the Holy Spirit, the energy of
mindfulness. Every sitting session should be a new sitting session. Sit
in such a way that allows your new being to manifest. Let us practice
with friends. The sangha is intelligent enough, is smart enough not to
fall into

the trap of doing the practice as a routine and not as something
creative. Many of us are intelligent and creative. We should use our
intelligence and our creativity in order to keep the practice alive and
constantly renewed. It is perfectly possible to practice this kind of
Buddhist meditation as a Christian, as a Muslim, as a Hindu or as a Jew.
It doesn't matter what religion you practice, or even if you practice no
religion at all. To practice does not mean to imitate the form. To
practice means to use our intelligence and our skills to make
nourishment and transformation possible in our self, engendering
nourishment and transformation in the people around us.

New Beginnings When you eat your bread or your croissant in the morning,
eat in such a way that the bread becomes life. Celebrate the Eucharist
every morning while breaking the bread or biting into your croissant.
Feel alive; feel that you are in touch with the whole cosmos. If the
piece of bread is the body of Jesus, it is also the body of the cosmos.
"This piece of bread is the body of the cosmos," we can say. Eating with
mindfulness allows you to recognize the piece of bread as the body of
the cosmos. When you eat like this, you are a new person. Allow the new
being to manifest in you. You can do this practice by yourself. You can
also practice this with others in order to help your brothers and
sisters renew themselves every moment of their daily practice. When we
begin the practice, we have the gift of beginner's mind. Beginner's mind
is a beautiful mind. You are motivated by the desire to practice, to
transform yourself, to bring peace and joy into yourself, and that peace
and joy becomes contagious. Allow yourself to be a torch, and allow the
flame of your torch to be transmitted to other torches. Practicing like
that, you can help peace and joy grow in the entire world. The practice
of resurrection should be taken up by each of us. When we practice it
with success we will also help other people around us. This is the true
practice of being alive. Whatever we do in our daily practice---walking,
sitting, eating or sweeping the floor---the purpose of all these things
is to help us become alive again. Be alive in every moment, and by
waking up yourself, you will wake up the world. Waking up is the very
nature of the teaching and the practice. "Budh" means to wake up. We
call the one who is awake a Buddha. The Buddha is someone who dispenses
the teachings and the practice of awakening. Each of us can transform
his-or herself into a lamp that can help the entire world awaken.

Seven

CONTINUING MANIFESTATIONS

The Buddha has advised us that we should not accept any teachings as
true just because a famous master teaches them or because they are found
in holy books. This also includes the Buddhist canon. We can only accept
teachings that we have put into practice with our own awakened
understanding and that we can see with our own experience to be true.
The Buddha said our true nature is the nature of no birth and no death.
Let us look again and see if this is true. If you light a candle and the
flame keeps burning until the whole candle is finished, is the candle
still there or not? The Buddha says there is no annihilation. We have
seen that this is true. And also we have seen that the concept of
permanence is not applicable to things as they are. So the truth lies
somewhere in between. Here, we must look deeply with all our
concentration. Do you think that the flame on the candle is going down
only in a vertical direction? If you think so, then you are following
the flame in time. You may also think in this way about your own life
span: that it is going in a linear direction and that one day it will
end. You may think that you were born on a point on a vertical line, a
point you may call 1960. You may think that you will die on a point
somewhere farther down on that line, which you may call 2040. All you
can see is yourself moving in time like the candle. But you are not just
moving in a linear direction. You might think that the flame is just
going down. You might think that the candle will die. In fact the flame
is going out in many other directions. It is giving out light all around
itself to the north, south, east and west. If you had a very sensitive
scientific instrument, you would be able to measure the heat and light
that the candle is sending out into the universe. The candle is going
into you as an image, as light and as heat. You are like a candle.
Imagine you are sending light out around you. All your words, thoughts
and actions are going in many directions. If you say something kind,
your kind words go in many directions, and you yourself go with them. We
are transforming and continuing in a different form at every moment.
This morning you said something unkind to your child. With those unkind
words you went into her heart. Now you are regretting what you said. It
does not mean that you cannot transform what you have said by admitting
your

mistake to your child, but if you fail to do so, those unkind words may
stay with your child for a long time.

Three Dimensions Now I am writing a dharma book. It is made of my
understanding and my practice. When I write a dharma book, I am not
going in a linear direction. I am going out into you, and I am being
reborn in different forms in you. In Buddhism we talk of the three
actions, the three dimensions---the dimensions of body, speech and
mind---at every moment of our lives. Try to see this and understand this
truth; you do not need to wait until your body disintegrates to go on
the journey of rebirth. At this very moment we are being born and we are
dying. We are being reborn not in one single form but in many forms. I
would like you to imagine a firecracker. When you light a firework it
does not go down in a vertical direction. It goes out in many
dimensions, and the sparks go out in all directions. So do not think
that you go in only one direction. You are like fireworks. You go out
into your children, your friends, your society and the whole world. In
the morning when I do sitting meditation, to my left and to my right are
monks. I have been reborn in them by sitting with them. If you look
carefully you will see me in them. I am not waiting to be reborn after I
die. I am being reborn in this moment, and I want to be reborn in a good
direction. I want to hand on to my lay and monastic friends the most
beautiful and happy things of my life so that they can have a good
rebirth for me and for themselves. Our ignorance, anger and despair
should not be reborn. When they are reborn they bring more darkness and
suffering into the world. The more happiness and love that can be reborn
the better, because it will make this world more beautiful and kind.
Therefore you and I should be living our weeks, days and hours in order
to be reborn constantly as happiness, love and kindness. One day as I
woke up I remembered the words of a folk song, "My father and mother
have given me much merit." Their merit is my generosity, love,
forgiveness and capacity to offer joy and happiness to others. They have
given me this precious inheritance. Our children are our continuation.
We are our children and our children are us. If you have one or more
children, you have already been reborn in them. You can see your
continuation body in your son or your daughter, but you have many more
continuation bodies as well. They are in everyone you have touched. And
you cannot know how many people your words, actions and thoughts have
touched.

Giving Our Heat and Light When the flame of the candle has given its
light and its heat all around it, that light and heat are the
continuation of the candle. That light and heat go out in a horizontal
plane. In order to give the light and heat in a horizontal plane, it
must also burn in a vertical direction. Without the horizontal
dimension, there cannot be a vertical dimension. And without the
vertical dimension, there can be no horizontal dimension. Ask yourself,
"Where shall I go after this?" Our actions and our words, which are
being produced at this moment, take us in a linear direction. But they
also take us in a lateral direction as they flow into and influence the
world around us. They can make the world more beautiful and bright. That
beauty and brightness can go into the future. We should not look for our
real selves in just one vertical direction. When I make a pot of oolong
tea, I put tea leaves into the pot and pour boiling water on them. Five
minutes later there is tea to drink. When I drink it, oolong tea is
going into me. If I put in more hot water, making a second pot of tea,
the tea from those leaves continues to go into me. After I have poured
out all the tea, what will be left in the pot is just the spent tea
leaves. The leaves that remain are only a very small part of the tea.
The tea that goes into me is a much bigger part of the tea. It is the
richest part. We are the same; our essence has gone into our children,
our friends and the entire universe. We have to find ourselves in those
directions and not in the spent tea leaves. I invite you to see yourself
reborn in forms that you say are not yourself. You have to see your body
in what is not your body. This is called your body outside of your body.
You do not have to wait until the flame has gone out to be reborn. I am
reborn many times every day. Every moment is a moment of rebirth. My
practice is to be reborn in such a way that my new forms of
manifestation will bring light, freedom and happiness into the world. My
practice is not to allow wrong actions to be reborn. If I have a cruel
thought or if my words carry hatred in them, then those thoughts and
words will be reborn. It will be difficult to catch them and pull them
back. They are like a runaway horse. We should try not to allow our
actions of body, speech and mind to take us in the direction of wrong
action, wrong speech and wrong thinking.

Living Through Birth and Death If there were not birth and death in
every moment, we could not continue to

live. In every moment, many cells in your body have to die so that you
can continue to live. Not only the cells of your body but all the
feelings, perceptions and mental formations in the river of
consciousness in you are born and die in every moment. I remember the
day a friend brought the ashes of his father, who had been cremated, to
the Upper Hamlet of Plum Village. He asked to be allowed to sprinkle
this ash by the walking meditation path, and I agreed. He may have
thought that the only thing his father had left behind on the walking
meditation path was his ash. But when his father was alive, he had
walked on that path where his ashes were now sprinkled. We performed the
ceremony of sprinkling the ashes. Afterward, I turned to the group and
said, "Each of us has left our body on this walking meditation path, not
only this person who has died, but each of us. Every time we practice
walking on this path we leave behind cells from our body." Whenever you
scratch yourself, thousands of dead skin cells fall to the ground. When
you walk on the meditation path, you not only leave behind the skin
cells of your body, you also leave behind your feelings, perceptions and
mental formations. Whether you spend an hour or a week in Plum Village,
after you have gone, you leave behind many traces of yourself. The cells
that you leave behind on the path become grass and wild flowers. Your
continuation body is still there in Plum Village. It is in your children
and grandchildren also. It is in every part of the world. When the flame
of the candle reaches the end of the wick and goes out, it is still
there. You cannot find it by looking only in a linear direction. You
have to find it also in the horizontal direction. In the Tibetan
tradition, whenever a high lama dies, fellow monks wait a few years and
then go and look for the continuation body of that person. The
continuation is called a tulku in Tibetan. The high lama may have left a
poem toward the end of this life, which is thought to contain clues
about where his continuation body might be found. Using this poem, his
disciples go looking for a young child who would be a suitable
candidate. They go to the house of that child, bringing with them some
instruments such as a bell, rosary or teacup that their teacher had
used. They mix them in with similar items that he had not used. The
young child has to pick out from this assortment the instruments of the
high lama who has passed away. If he does this, then, after passing
other examinations, he is proclaimed as the continuation of the deceased
teacher. The monastic disciples of the former high lama ask the parents
to give permission to take the child to the monastery so that he can
continue to be their teacher for the next generation. There is something
very appealing about this tradition. The disciples have so much love and
respect for their teacher that they want to keep their teacher with them
after he has passed away. I have often said to my friends in Plum

Village that they should not wait for me to pass away in order to look
for my continuation body. They have to look for me now because I have
already been reborn in many young children. If you were standing with me
now, would you see my spiritual children beside me? They are all my
continuation. I have hundreds of thousands of continuations in young
people who continue the practice of mindfulness. If you look with dharma
eyes, you will see me reborn in many forms. Although my books and my
dharma talks are not allowed to be published in Vietnam, I am there. My
teachings are still circulated widely, although they are not legally
allowed. The security police confiscate my books and secretly read them.
Others print and publish them underground. So I continue in Vietnam.
There are young monks and nuns in Vietnam who are practicing the dharma
doors that I teach. If you go to Vietnam you will see me there. The body
that you see here is just one manifestation of myself. My presence in
Vietnam influences the spiritual life, the culture and the young people
of Vietnam. Someone who says I am not in Vietnam does not have dharma
eyes. I have taught in prisons, and my books have been distributed in
correctional facilities throughout the United States. Many prisoners
have read and enjoyed them. One time I was able to visit a
maximum-security prison in Maryland. It was so strict that not even an
ant could find its way in without being stopped. I taught the prisoners
on the subject of being free wherever you are. This teaching has been
transcribed and published as a book.\* Many copies have been given to
prisons so that prisoners can practice and smile, and can suffer less.
They manage to find real joy even in prison life, so I know that I am
now in prison. Those prisoners who have practiced help other prisoners.
All the prisoners who come into touch with my teachings are my
continuation body. When you look for me, do not look at this body. Look
outside this body.

Fireworks If you learn to see yourself every day going out in a lateral
direction and being reborn at every moment, you will be able to find
yourself in the future by looking in that lateral dimension. You are
just like a firework going off in every moment. The firework diffuses
its beauty around itself. With your thoughts, words and actions you can
diffuse your beauty. That beauty and goodness goes into your friends,
into your children and grandchildren and into the world. It is not lost,
and you go into the future in that way. If you look for yourself like
that, you will be able to see your continuation in the future. You will
not be caught in the idea that you will be annihilated.

You will not be caught in the notion that you will not exist anymore
when you die. The truth is that you are not permanent, but neither are
you annihilated. Can you see yourself being reborn every moment of the
past? All your ancestors continue in you, and when you transform the
habit energies that they have transmitted to you, you are being reborn
in the past. For instance, maybe your ancestors had the habit of always
running, needing to be working or doing something to survive. They did
not have the time to stop, breathe and be in touch with the wonderful
things that life has to offer. You, too, used to be like that, but you
have now met the practice. Now you can stop, you can breathe and be in
touch with the wonderful things of life for your ancestors. Maybe your
genetic or spiritual ancestors had beautiful traits that your parents or
the spiritual teachers you met during your life have failed to manifest
fully. Now you can rediscover those things in yourself, and you can
revive what seemed to have been lost. That is also being reborn in the
past. There was an American Vietnam veteran I knew. The guerrillas had
killed his comrades, and he was determined to take revenge on the people
of the village where his comrades had died. He made sandwiches of bread
with explosives in the filling and left them at the entrance of the
village. Some children came and found the sandwiches and began to eat
them. Soon they were writhing and howling in pain. Their parents ran to
the scene, but it was too late. The area was remote, without ambulances
and medical equipment, and the children could not be brought to the
hospital quickly enough. All five of them died. After he returned to the
United States, the soldier could not overcome his guilt. His mother
tried to comfort him. She said, "My son, those things happen in war.
There is nothing to feel bad about." But still, he suffered so much.
Whenever he found himself in a room with children, he could not bear it.
He had to run out. During one of my tours in the United States, a
retreat was organized for war veterans. I taught them how to walk and
breathe in order to transform their fear, guilt and suffering. I said to
this veteran, "You have killed five children; that is true. But you can
save the lives of hundreds of children. Do you know that every day, tens
of thousands of children die for want of food and medicine? You can
bring food and medicine to some of them." He practiced as I advised, and
that person who, twenty years ago, had killed five children was
immediately reborn in the past as someone who saved the lives of twenty
children. Learn to look deeply like this, and your regrets and your lack
of confidence will be transformed. You will have new energy, which will
not only sparkle in the past but will also shine in the present and the
future.

Eight

FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS: THE PRACTICE OF TOUCHING THE EARTH

Many of us spend a lot of time asking the question: "Why do I have to
die?" The more important question to ask ourselves is: "What happens
before I die?" You must go to your beloved one and ask: "Darling, who
are you? Are you the same person as the one I married thirty years ago
or are you different? Why have you come here? Where will you go? Why
shall I have to weep one day when you die?" These are very important
questions that cannot be answered by our intellect alone. We need
something deeper and more complete. The practice of Touching the Earth
can help us touch our true nature of no birth and no death. If we
practice Touching the Earth as the Buddha practiced, it can help us to
achieve real insight. It is written in the sutras that the day before
Prince Siddhartha became the Buddha, the Enlightened One, he had a
little doubt about his ability to become fully awake. He had been quite
confident, but then something made him question it. So he practiced
Touching the Earth. He used his hand to touch the earth in order to
transform that doubt. The next day, Prince Siddhartha became Buddha. In
Buddhist temples throughout Asia, you will see statues of the Buddha
touching the Earth with his hand. Touching the Earth is a very deep
practice that can help us transform our fears, doubts, prejudice and
anger.

Touching Both Dimensions The historical dimension and the ultimate
dimension of reality are related to each other. If you can deeply touch
one, you can touch the other. Jesus Christ can be referred to as both
the Son of Man and the Son of God. As Son of Man, he belongs to the
historical dimension. As Son of God, he belongs to the ultimate
dimension. There is the historical Buddha but there is also the Buddha
who is not limited by space and time. We are all like that. We have a
historical dimension, which we live every day, but we also have an
ultimate dimension,

which we try to live using our spiritual practice. If we can live in the
ultimate dimension at the same time as we function in the historical, we
will have no more fear. When there is no more fear, there is true
happiness. A wave has a right to live her life as a wave, but she must
also learn to live her life as water because she is not only a wave. She
is also water. And water lives without the fear carried by the wave.
Touching the Earth is an easy and effective way to touch our ultimate
dimension. If you do this practice, one day you will touch your true
nature of no birth and no death. At that time, you will be liberated
from fear. You can become someone who rides majestically on the waves of
birth and death because you are no longer agitated by fear or anger.

Touching the Earth: The Historical Dimension Imagine the dimension of
time as a vertical line. Place yourself standing in the present on that
line with the past above you and the future below you. Establish
yourself in time. See all your ancestors that have come before you. The
youngest generation of your ancestors is your parents. All of them are
above you on this line of time. Then below you, see all your
descendants, your children, your grandchildren and all their future
generations. If you have no children, your descendants are the people
you have touched in your life, and all the people they in turn
influence. In you are both your blood ancestors and your spiritual
ancestors. You touch the presence of your father and mother in each cell
of your body. They are truly present in you, along with your
grandparents and great-grandparents. Doing this, you realize you are
their continuation. You may have thought that your ancestors no longer
existed, but even scientists will say that they are present in you, in
your genetic heritage, which is in every cell of your body. The same is
true for your descendants. You will be present in every cell of their
bodies. And you are present in the consciousness of everyone you have
touched. This is real, not imagined. This is the first touching of the
earth.

Pits and Trees Look into a plum tree. In each plum on the tree there is
a pit. That pit contains the plum tree and all previous generations of
plum tree. The plum pit contains

an eternity of plum trees. Inside the pit is an intelligence and wisdom
that knows how to become a plum tree, how to produce branches, leaves,
flowers and plums. It cannot do this on its own. It can only do this
because it has received the experience and heritage of so many
generations of ancestors. You are the same. You possess the wisdom and
intelligence of how to become a full human being because you inherited
an eternity of wisdom not only from your blood ancestors but from your
spiritual ancestors, too. Your spiritual ancestors are in you because
what you are by nature and what you are by nurture cannot be separated.
Nurturing transforms your inherited nature. Your spirituality and your
practice, which are parts of your daily life, are also in every cell of
your body. So your spiritual ancestors are in every cell of your body.
You cannot deny their presence. You have ancestors whom you admire and
of whom you are proud. You also have ancestors who had many negative
traits and of whom you are not proud, but they are still your ancestors.
Some of us have wonderful parents; others have parents who suffered a
lot and made their spouses and their children suffer. Or you may have
had spiritual ancestors who did not help you to appreciate the religion
practiced by your family and your community. You may not have respect
for them now, but they are still your ancestors.

Acceptance We need to return to ourselves and embrace our blood and our
spiritual ancestors. We cannot get rid of them. They are a fact and they
are there. They are part of our bodies and our souls. When you touch the
earth the first time, practice accepting all your ancestors just as they
are. This is very important. Unconditional acceptance is the first step
in opening the door to the miracle of forgiveness. Jesus said, "Forgive
us our trespasses as we forgive those who have trespassed against us."
He understood that the first step of forgiveness is to accept other
people just as they are, even if they have harmed us. To accept others
as they are, we must begin with ourselves. If we cannot accept ourselves
as we are, we will never be able to accept others. When I look at
myself, I see positive, admirable and even remarkable things, but I also
know that there are negative parts of me. So first I recognize and
accept myself. Wherever you are standing to practice Touching the
Earth---before a rock, or mountain, or flower or altar in your
home---practice conscious breathing. Breathing in and breathing out, you
visualize your ancestors, and you see all their positive and negative
points. Be determined to accept them all as your

ancestors without hesitation. After that, you prostrate, touching the
earth with your knees, your hands and your forehead. Stay in that
position while you continue the visualization: "Dear ancestors, I am
you, with all your strengths and weaknesses. I see you have negative and
positive seeds. I understand that you have been lucky and that good
seeds like kindness, compassion and fearlessness were watered in you. I
also understand that if you were not lucky and negative seeds like
greed, jealousy and fear were watered in you, then the positive seeds
did not have a chance to grow." If positive seeds are watered in a
person's life, it is partly because of luck and partly because of
effort. The circumstances of our lives can help us water the seeds of
patience, generosity, compassion and love. The people around us can help
us water these seeds, and so can the practice of mindfulness. But if a
person grew up in a time of war, or in a family and community with great
suffering, then that person may be full of despair and fear. If they had
parents who had suffered a lot and were afraid of the world and other
people, then they would transmit this fear and anger to their children.
If they grew up embraced by security and love, the good seeds nurtured
in them would grow, and these wonderful seeds would be transmitted. If
you can look like that at your ancestors, you will understand that they
are human beings who have suffered and have tried their best. That
understanding will remove all rejection and anger. It is very important
to be able to accept all your ancestors with both their strengths and
weaknesses. It will help you to become more peaceful and less afraid.
You can also see your elder brothers and sisters as your very young
ancestors because they were born before you. They too have weaknesses as
well as talents, which you have to accept because you realize that you
yourself have weaknesses and talents. This kind of acceptance is what
you realize as you touch the earth. If you need to, you can maintain the
prostrate position for five, ten or fifteen minutes to look deeply and
realize this acceptance. The first Touching of the Earth may have to be
repeated several times before you can become reconciled with your
parents and your ancestors. It takes a lot of practice, but it is
important to do because, since your parents and your ancestors are in
you, to reconcile with them is to reconcile with yourself. To deny your
ancestors is to deny yourself. If you can see that you are not separate
from your ancestors, that is great progress. I am sure you can be
successful after a few days or a week of this practice. You can do the
practice of Touching the Earth anywhere, before your ancestral altar,
before a tree, a cloud, a mountain or anywhere else you like. Standing
before a rock or a cloud or a tree or a flower on your altar, visualize
the presence of all your ancestors in you. It is not difficult, because
you are in

fact them. You are their continuation. Please practice with one hundred
percent of your being.

Touching the Future The next step in the practice of Touching the Earth
is to look at your descendants---your children, grandchildren, nieces
and nephews. If you have difficulties with them you should visualize as
follows: "I am not an entity separate from my children, because I am
continued by my children. They carry me into the future. My son,
daughter, friend or disciple is me." In the obituary notices they always
write, "Mister X has died and is survived by his sons and daughters."
The idea here is that the children continue to live for the father. My
disciples are me and I live every day in such a way as to be able to
transmit the best of myself to them because they are going to carry me
into the future. I have told my disciples that they should watch the
sunrise for me and I will watch the sunset and the stars for them with
their eyes. I am immortal because of my disciples. Just as you see
yourself in your parents and your ancestors, so you can see yourself in
your son and daughter. Thanks to your parents you have access to your
source in all your ancestors. My disciples have access to the Buddha and
ancestral teachers through me. Thanks to your children you have access
to the future. The son needs his father to have access to his source,
and the father needs his son to have access to the future and the
infinite. This is a very concrete practice that you can do alone or with
one or two friends for mutual support. In the beginning someone can help
you by guiding your practice as you do it. But later on you can guide
yourself.

Trying to Separate If you have difficulties with your son or daughter,
you may have the tendency to say: "You are not my daughter. My daughter
would not behave like that" or "You are not my son. My son would never
do things like that." If you look deeply at yourself, you will see that
these negative seeds are in you also. When you were young you made
mistakes and you learned from your suffering. When your child makes
mistakes, you need to help him understand so he will not do it again.
When you can see your own weaknesses, you can say: "Who am I not to
accept my son?" Your son is you. With this insight into

non-duality, you can reconcile with your children. The practice of
Touching the Earth is a path to reconciliation.

Right Concentration The Noble Eightfold Path, the path of the eight
right practices taught by the Buddha, has as its last component Right
Concentration. The concentration on no self, impermanence and
interconnectedness is what we realize when we touch the earth. Without
this concentration there will be no insight. If you can see yourself,
your parents and your children in the light of impermanence, no self and
interconnectedness, then reconciliation will come very naturally. Give
yourself time to practice Touching the Earth once a day or even twice.
You can use the following words to guide your visualization: "Touching
the earth, I connect with my ancestors and all descendants of my
spiritual and blood families." (Visualize this for a short time standing
before your preferred object, and then touch the earth). My spiritual
ancestors include the Buddha, the bodhisattvas and the Buddha's
disciples. They include my own spiritual teachers, those still alive and
those who have already passed away. They are present in me because they
have transmitted to me seeds of peace, wisdom, love and happiness. They
have woken up in me my own resource of understanding and compassion.
When I look at my spiritual ancestors, I see those who are perfect in
the practice of the mindfulness trainings, understanding and compassion,
and those who are imperfect. I accept them all because I see within
myself shortcomings and weaknesses also. Aware that my practice of the
mindfulness trainings is not always perfect, and that I am not always
understanding and compassionate, I open my heart and accept all my
spiritual descendants. Some of my descendants live in such a way as to
invite my confidence and respect, but there are those who have many
difficulties and are subject to ups and downs in their practice. I open
my heart and embrace them all equally. In the same way, I accept all my
ancestors on my mother's side and my father's side of the family. I
accept all their good qualities, all the virtuous things they have done,
and I also accept all their weaknesses. I open my heart and accept all
my blood descendants with their good qualities, their talents and also
their weaknesses. Whatever tradition your spiritual roots are in, you
can include teachers from that tradition. If you have Christian roots
your spiritual ancestors include Christ, Christ's disciples, the saints
and the Christian teachers who have touched your life. If you have
Jewish roots you may want to include the

patriarchs and matriarchs and the great rabbis. My spiritual ancestors,
blood ancestors, spiritual descendants and blood descendants are all
part of me. I am they and they are me. I do not have a separate self. We
all exist as part of a wonderful stream of life.

Meditation on the Historical Dimension The historical dimension is the
dimension of coming and going, birth and death. When we begin to touch
the historical dimension, often we can become afraid. We are afraid
because we do not yet understand that birth and death are not real. The
Buddha said, "Anything that is born must die." If there is birth, then
there must be death also. If the right is there the left must be there
also. If there is a beginning, then there must be an end. That is the
way things appear to be in the historical dimension. The monks, the nuns
and the laypeople in the time of the Buddha practiced recognizing birth
and death as realities. In order to face our fear, it helps to stabilize
the mind a little bit through meditation and contemplation. At first, it
is easier to practice when we are guided. Breathing is the vehicle that
carries concentration. It directs your mind to the object of your
meditation. We begin through the awareness of breathing, so that later,
when we need to contemplate, we will be able to direct the mind. We try
to direct the mind toward recognizing reality. This is a chant that is
recited daily in Buddhist monasteries: "Breathing in and out, I am aware
of the fact that I am of the nature to die; I cannot escape dying. I am
of the nature to grow old; I cannot escape old age. I am of the nature
to get sick. Because I have a body, I cannot avoid sickness. Everything
I cherish, treasure and cling to today, I will have to abandon one day.
The only thing I can carry with me is the fruit of my own action. I
cannot bring along with me anything else except the fruit of my actions
in terms of thought, speech and bodily acts." We have to recognize this
reality and smile. This is the practice of facing our own fear. Fear is
always there within us---the fear of getting old, the fear of getting
sick, the fear of dying, the fear of being abandoned by our loved ones.
It is very human to be fearful and to worry about it. The Buddha did not
advise us to suppress these fears. The Buddha advised us to invite these
fears to the upper level of our consciousness, recognize them and smile
at them. To do so was a daily practice for monks and nuns in the time of
the Buddha as it is for monks and nuns now. Every time your fear is
invited up, every time you recognize it and smile at it, your

fear will lose some of its strength. When it returns to the depth of
your consciousness, it returns as a smaller seed. That is why the
practice should be done every day, especially when you are feeling
mentally and physically strong. When you try to practice, your mind may
be running after many thoughts. But just come back to the awareness of
when you are breathing in and when you are breathing out. Just be aware
of it---you do not need to make your breath longer or deeper. You do not
need to change anything. Allow your breath to be just as it wants to be.
Keep your mind with the breath in awareness. After practicing like that,
the quality of your breathing will calm itself. When you feel calm
enough, use the words of the guided meditation below to help you
concentrate. The first time, you may like to hear or say to yourself the
whole sentence. As you continue, you can just remember a few key words.
You do not need to make a big effort. Just relax and let your breath and
the words be your support.

EXERCISE TO HELP US LOOK DEEPLY AND HEAL OUR FEAR

Breathing in, I am aware of my in-breath.

In

Breathing out, I am aware of my out-breath.

Out

Breathing in, I am aware that I grow old.

Old age

Breathing out, I know I cannot escape old age.

No escape

Breathing in, I am aware of my nature to have ill health.

Ill health

Breathing out, I know I cannot escape ill health.

No escape

Breathing in, I know I shall die.

Death

Breathing out, I know I cannot escape death.

No escape

Breathing in, I know that one day I shall have to abandon

Abandon all I

all I love and cherish.

cherish

Breathing out, I know I cannot escape abandoning all I cherish.

No escape

Breathing in, I know that my actions of body, speech and mind are my
only true belongings.

Actions true belongings

Breathing out, I know I cannot escape the consequences of No escaping my
actions. consequences Breathing in, I determine to live my days deeply
in mindfulness.

Living mindfully

Breathing out, I see the joy and benefit of living in the present
moment.

Joy and benefit

Breathing in, I vow to offer joy each day to my beloved.

Offering jo y

Breathing out, I vow to ease the pain of my beloved.

Easing pain

Acceptance, forgiveness and facing fear are the deepest results of
Touching the Earth in the historical dimension. Using the breath this
way, we can begin to heal. Then we can look at the next Touching of the
Earth.

Touching the Earth: Space In the first Touching of the Earth, you
practice while visualizing standing on the vertical line of time. Now
visualize a horizontal line, which represents the dimension of space.
This line representing space crosses the vertical line representing
time, the historical dimension. In space we see other living beings on
the planet Earth: men, women, children, elderly people, animals of every
species, trees, plants, minerals. When we look at a tree we may think
that the tree is outside of us. But if we look more deeply we shall see
that the tree is also within us. The trees are your lungs because
without the trees you could not breathe. The trees create

the oxygen, which is now part of my body, and I create the carbon
dioxide, which is now part of the tree. We have lungs in our body, but
the trees breathe for us too and can also be called our lungs. Our own
lungs are working with the trees to help us breathe. The Jataka Tales
are stories about the lives the Buddha lived before he became
enlightened. In those stories we hear how the Buddha was a tree, a bird,
a tortoise, a rock, a cloud before he was a human. We too, before
manifesting in human form, were trees, one-celled animals, large
animals, clouds, forests, rocks. It is not difficult to see in the light
of scientific evolution. Matter is neither created nor destroyed. It can
change into energy, and energy can change back into matter, but it won't
be destroyed. We have always been a part of everything else, and
everything else has always been a part of us. We have all been trees,
roses and animals. We still are trees at this moment. Look deeply at
yourself and you see the tree, the cloud, the rose and the squirrel in
you. You cannot take them out of yourself. You cannot take the cloud out
of you because you are made of seventy percent water. The continuation
of the cloud is rain. The continuation of rain is the river. The
continuation of the river is the water you drink in order to survive. If
you take the continuation of the cloud out of you, you cannot continue.

Angels Everywhere Looking deeply into the dimension of space, we will
also see all the enlightened beings. All the great beings, the
bodhisattvas. We will see God. Look hard and you will see bodhisattvas
everywhere. You will see men and women who have compassion and who do
everything they can to help and protect humanity. In Plum Village we
practice evoking the names of bodhisattvas such as Avalokiteshvara, the
bodhisattva of deep listening; Samantabhadra, the bodhisattva of great
action; Manjushri, the bodhisattva of great understanding; Kshitigarbha,
the bodhisattva who always goes to the darkest places, where suffering
is unbearable, to help all people. These are the bodhisattvas we know
about because their stories have been passed down to us. There are also
countless unknown bodhisattvas everywhere whose work expresses their
love, compassion and deep commitment to the world. Their hearts are full
of love, and they are not interested in consuming many things. They want
to live simply in order to have time and energy to support others. They
are everywhere. I know a bodhisattva who lives in Holland. Her name is
Hebe. During World War II she helped twenty thousand Jews escape the
Holocaust. I do not know how she

did it. Looking at her you see that she is very small and she only has
two hands. I met her and worked with her when she was helping with
Vietnamese war orphans. There are also bodhisattvas who do not seem to
be very active, but they are very calm and kind and their presence
inspires us with love, understanding and tolerance. There are countless
bodhisattvas like that in the world. We should live so that we have time
to recognize and touch their presence. Bodhisattvas are not gods or
figures from the past. They are living around you in flesh and blood.
They have much energy, understanding and compassion, and we can benefit
from being near them. Great Beings, bodhisattvas, cannot be recognized
by their outer appearance. Sometimes they are small children who bring
us much joy. Our own children and our friends are bodhisattvas.
Sometimes they make us suffer, but they also help us to grow in love and
understanding. The bodhisattvas never grow weary of the suffering around
them and never give up. They are the ones who give us the courage to
live. Kshitigarbha, who goes into the darkest places to help all beings,
is not just one person. He has so many manifestations in all the
different hell realms, which we can find right in this world.
Sadaparibhuta, the bodhisattva who says, "I would never dare to despise
anyone," is also everywhere. Even if someone does not seem to have the
ability to be awakened, he sees that within everyone there is that
capacity. Sadaparibhuta helps everyone to have self-confidence and
remove any feelings of inferiority. This kind of complex paralyzes
people. Sadaparibhuta's specialty is to be in touch with and water the
seeds of the awakened mind or the mind of love in us. This bodhisattva
is not just a person in the Lotus Sutra but can be found right here in
our society in many different guises. We have to recognize the
bodhisattva Sadaparibhuta, who is around us in flesh and bones.
Manjushri is the bodhisattva who has understanding---someone who can
understand us can make us infinitely happy. Manjushri is able to see our
suffering and our difficulties and never blames or punishes us. He is
always beside us to encourage us and shine light on us. Manjushri is not
a legendary figure but is present around us in many guises, sometimes as
a younger sister or brother or nephew or niece. We do not worship
imaginary or mythological figures. Bodhisattvas are not figures from the
past living up in the clouds. The bodhisattvas are real people who are
filled with love and determination. When we can understand someone
else's suffering and feel love for him or her, we are in touch with the
bodhisattva of great understanding. The bodhisattva of deep listening,
Avalokiteshvara, is also around us.

Psychotherapists have to learn the art of listening as deeply as
bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara, the one who looks deeply with her ears.
When we can listen deeply to our children or our parents,
Avalokiteshvara is already in our hearts. The bodhisattva of wonderful
sound, Gadgadashvara, can use music, writings and sound to awaken
people. If you are a poet, a writer or a composer you can be that
bodhisattva. Your artistic creations are not just to help people forget
their pain momentarily but to water the seeds of awakened understanding
and compassion in others. Among us are many writers, poets and composers
who are using the wonderful ocean of sound to serve the way of
understanding and love by making the dharma doors, which the Buddha
taught, more accessible. That is the meaning of one of the aspirations
of Samantabhadra: I aspire to use the Great ocean of Sound, Giving rise
to words of wonderful effect, That praises the Buddha's ocean of
virtues, In the past, the present and the future. *When you touch the
earth you connect with the great beings because they are a part of the
earth and a part of you. Living in today's world, it is easy to become
the victim of despair. You must protect yourself. The best way is to be
in touch with bodhisattvas that are active in compassion and love. We
should be in touch with Buddhas and bodhisattvas here today, in the
present moment, and not just light incense and pray to them. When we are
truly in touch with them we have much energy by seeing that they are in
us and that we are their continuation, not only in time but also in
space. We are one of the arms of these bodhisattvas. Our arm can stretch
very far, over thousands of miles. Our arms can reach the darkest places
on Earth. We have friends everywhere who are our arms, and we can be
their arms also. "Awakened understanding is the practitioner's only
career" is a quotation from the sutra on the Eight Realizations of Great
Beings.* All other careers are not really worth following. No honors or
fame can be compared with the awakened understanding that we have when
we practice stopping and looking deeply into the nature of things. When
through understanding we cease to be angry, we are already manifesting
the seed of great understanding from within us. Let us live in such a
way that bodhisattvas may manifest within us. Let us be bodhisattvas
right now by the way we speak and act. Do not

think that you will be a bodhisattva later on this evening. Evoking the
names of the bodhisattvas of deep listening, great understanding, great
action and great aspiration and being in touch with the qualities of
these bodhisattvas will give us the infinite energy we need to embrace
beings who are suffering in the world.

Becoming the Pirate In touching the earth, we touch the great beings,
and we also touch all the suffering beings. We must be in touch with
both. We must remember that there are beings caught in the deepest kind
of suffering, like war, oppression and injustice. They have no way to
speak out about the suffering and injustice that they have to bear.
There are pirates who are raping young girls. There are rich merchants
selling arms to poor nations where children do not have food to eat or
schools to attend. There are factory owners who use children as their
workforce. There are people who are dying in prisons and reeducation
camps. In leprosy camps there are children and adults without limbs,
illiterate and without hope. These hell realms need bodhisattvas. When
we stand before the mountain or flower and visualize just before we
touch the earth the second time, we see that we are not only
bodhisattvas but we are also the victims of oppression, discrimination
and injustice. With the energy of the bodhisattvas we embrace victims
everywhere. We are the pirate about to rape the young girl and we are
the young girl who is about to be raped. Because we have no separate
selves, we are all interconnected and we are with all of them. How we
live our life affects everything. So we must think, How have we lived
our life so that that young man in Thailand has been able to become a
rapist? We have only looked to our own material needs. The family into
which that young man was born has been stuck in miserable poverty for
many generations. His father was a fisherman who only knew one way to
forget his troubles and that was by drinking. He did not know how to
bring up his sons, and he beat them often. His mother did not know how
to provide education for her children. At thirteen years old he had to
accompany his father on the boat and learn to be a fisherman. When his
father died he continued in his father's place. He had no resources of
understanding and love. He was tempted to become a pirate because in
just one day a pirate can have real gold, which could lift him out of
his miserable state that he feared would go on forever. On the ocean
there was no police force, so why not follow the example of the other
pirates and rape the young girls on the boat they plundered?

If we had a gun we could shoot that young man, and he would die, but
would it not have been better to help him to understand and to love?
Where were the politicians, the statesmen and the educators to help him?
Last night on the shores of Thailand hundreds of babies were born to
fishing families. If those children are not properly cared for, brought
up and educated, some of them will become pirates. Whose fault is that?
It is our fault: statesmen, politicians, the electorate who puts them in
power and the educators. We cannot blame only that young man. If I had
been born a poor child who was never educated, who had a mother and a
father who were illiterate, who had been poor all their lives and did
not know how to bring me up, I could have become a pirate. If you were
to shoot me dead, would it solve anything? Who is that pirate? He could
be me, and the child he raped could also be me. All the suffering of
living beings is our own suffering. We have to see that we are they and
they are us. When we see their suffering, an arrow of compassion and
love enters our hearts. We can love them, embrace them and find a way to
help. Only then are we not overwhelmed by despair at their situation. Or
our own.

Don't Drown in Despair When you are in touch with the suffering in the
world, it is so easy for despair to overwhelm you. But we do not need to
be drowned by despair. Throughout the war in Vietnam young people easily
became the victims of despair because the war went on for so long and it
seemed it would never end. It is the same with the situation in the
Middle East. Young Israelis and Palestinians feel that the heavy
atmosphere of war will never end. We have to practice to protect our
children and ourselves from despair. Bodhisattvas can stand up and
resist despair by their ability to listen deeply, to love, to understand
and to be deeply committed. As we touch the Earth the second time we are
in contact with great and small bodhisattvas everywhere, and we feel
their energy. Animals, plants and minerals also suffer because of the
greed of human beings. The earth, the water and the air are suffering
because we have polluted them. The trees suffer because we destroy the
forests for our own profit. Some species have become extinct because of
the destruction of the natural environment. Humans also destroy and
exploit one another. According to the teachings of Buddhism, all beings
have the capacity of awakened nature. How can we stop ourselves from
collapsing in despair? It is because Buddhas and bodhisattvas are
present in the world. They are not somewhere else in a faraway paradise.
Whether we are living or dying, they are here, with

us.

Benefiting Everyone Touching the Earth helps us to purify our bodies and
our minds. It helps us to maintain the awakened understanding of
impermanence, interconnectedness and no self. The Buddha has said that
whoever sees inter-being sees the Buddha. So as we touch the earth we
see Buddhas in us and we see ourselves in the Buddhas. We see all
suffering beings in us and we see ourselves in them. As we keep the
prostrate position, the boundary between self and other is removed. Then
we know what we should do and should not do in our daily lives. Because
of this insight, we can do many things of great benefit. What have you
done with your life? Has what you have done been of real benefit to
yourself, your loved ones and all beings? The deep commitment of the
bodhisattva is to relieve suffering. It is to make a career out of
becoming an Awakened One, a Buddha. When we make the decision to have
our career be that of the bodhisattva, we can let go of all the
meaningless things that had attracted us before. We can let go of fame,
we can let go of having a lot of money. When we make the decision, those
things are easy to let go of. The Buddhas are in us; we are in the
Buddhas. We can become Buddhas. We can become enlightened.

Guiding Ourselves Use the following words to guide you in the beginning
of your practice of the second touching: "Touching the earth, I connect
with all people and all species that are alive at this moment in this
world with me." (Visualize for a short time standing before your
preferred object, before you touch the earth.) I am one with the
wonderful pattern of life that radiates out in all directions. I see the
close connection between others and myself, how our happiness and
suffering is interconnected. I am one with those bodhisattvas and great
beings who have overcome the ideas of birth and death and are able to
look compassionately at the different forms of birth and death without
fear. I am one with those bodhisattvas who can be found in many places
on this planet. They have peace of mind, understanding and love. They
are able to touch what is wonderful, nourishing and healing, and bring
it to others. They

have the capacity to embrace the world with a heart of love and arms of
caring action. I too am someone who has enough peace, joy and freedom to
be able to offer fearlessness and joy to those around me. I do not feel
loneliness or despair when I feel the love and the happiness of
bodhisattvas presently alive on this earth. Seeing their love and seeing
the suffering of all beings helps me to live in a meaningful way with
true peace and happiness. Strengthened by the love of bodhisattvas, I am
able to see myself in all the beings who suffer. I am one with those who
were born disabled or who have become disabled because of war, accident
or illness. I am one with those who are caught in a situation of war or
oppression. I am one with those who find no happiness in family life,
who have no roots or peace of mind, who are hungry for something
beautiful and wholesome to embrace and to believe in. I am someone at
the point of death who is very afraid, who does not know what is going
to happen and fears being destroyed. I am a child who lives in a place
where there is miserable poverty and disease, whose legs and arms are
like sticks, and who has no future. I am also the manufacturer of bombs,
which are sold to poor countries. I am the frog swimming in the pond and
I am also the snake who needs the body of the frog to nourish its own
body. I am the caterpillar or the ant that the bird is looking for to
eat, but I am also the bird that is looking for the insect to eat. I am
the forest that is being cut down. I am the rivers that are being
polluted, and I am the person who cuts down the forest and pollutes the
rivers and the air. I see myself in all beings and I see all beings in
me.

Looking Deeply at No Birth and No Death When we begin to understand that
we are everything, our fear begins to disappear. We have deeply touched
the dimensions of space and time. But to really be free of fear, we must
look deeply into the ultimate dimension of no birth, no death. We need
to free ourselves from these ideas that we are our body, and that we
die. This is where we will discover the place of no fear. This is the
third Touching of the Earth. Here is a guided meditation to help you
prepare for it. Breathing in, I know that I am breathing in.

In

Breathing out, I know that I am breathing out.

Out

Breathing in, I am aware of a wave on the ocean.

Wave

Breathing out, I smile to the wave on the ocean.

I smile

Breathing in, I am aware of the water in Water the wave.

in wave

Breathing out, I smile to the water in the wave.

I smile

Breathing in, I see the birth of the wave.

Birth of wave

Breathing out, I smile to the birth of the wave.

I smile

Breathing in, I see the death of the wave.

Death of wave

Breathing out, I smile to the death of the wave.

I smile

Breathing in, I see the birthless nature of the water.

Water not born

Breathing out, I smile to the birthless nature of the wave.

I smile

Breathing in, I see the deathless nature of the water.

Water deathless

Breathing out, I smile to the deathless nature of the water.

I smile

Breathing in, I see the birth of my body.

Birth of my body

Breathing out, I smile to the birth of my body.

I smile

Breathing in, I see the death of my body.

My body dies

Breathing out, I smile to the death of my body.

I smile

Breathing in, I see the birthless nature of my body.

Birthless nature of body

Breathing out, I smile to the birthless nature of my body.

I smile

Breathing in, I see the deathless nature of my body.

Deathless nature of body

Breathing out, I smile to the deathless nature of my body.

I smile

Breathing in, I see the birthless nature of my consciousness.

Consciousness not born

Breathing out, I smile to the birthless nature of consciousness.

I smile

Breathing in, I am only aware of my in-breath.

In

Breathing out, I am only aware of my out-breath.

Out

I Am Not My Body When I was a novice I thought that the business of
going beyond birth and death was something very remote. I thought I
would never be able to realize it in one lifetime. But birth and death
are just ideas. All we need to do is overcome these ideas. When I
learned that, I saw that such a feat was not impossible. These two ideas
have imprisoned us for so many lifetimes. Now we see that we are more
than our bodies. Now we see that we have no life spans. We have no
limits. We experience this in meditation. If we have been successful in
the first and second Touching of the Earth, this third touching is as
simple as a child's game. The third Touching of the Earth is like a
circle placed around the vertical line of time in the first touching and
the horizontal line of space in the second touching. In the first
touching, we were released from the view that we are separate from our
ancestors and separate from our descendants. We were

released from our notion of time. In the second touching, we were
released from the view that we are separate from the Buddhas, the
bodhisattvas, the Great Beings, the suffering beings, the animals, the
plants, everything. We were released from our notion of space. This time
we touch the earth and are released from the view that we are our body,
and that we are subject to birth and death. Generally, we think that we
are our bodies. We think that when our bodies disintegrate, we
disintegrate. The Buddha taught clearly that we are not this body. I
often ask my young friends who are not yet thirty years old, "Where were
you in 1966 when I left Vietnam?" They should not reply that they did
not yet exist. They have to see that they were around, in their parents
and their grandparents. You can use the following words to guide you in
your initial practice of the third touching: "Touching the Earth, I let
go of the idea that I am this body and my life span is limited."
(Standing before your preferred object, visualize for a short time
before you touch the Earth.) I see that this body, made up of the four
elements, is not really me and I am not limited by this body. I am part
of a stream of life of spiritual and blood ancestors that for thousands
of years has been flowing into the present and for thousands of years
flows on into the future. I am one with my ancestors. I am one with all
people and all beings, whether they are peaceful and fearless or
suffering and afraid. At this moment I am present everywhere on this
planet. I am also present in the past and in the future. The
disintegration of this body does not touch me, just as when the plum
blossom falls it does not mean the end of the plum tree. I see myself as
a wave on the surface of the ocean. My nature is the ocean water. I see
myself in all the other waves and all the other waves in me. The
appearance and disappearance of the form of the wave does not affect the
ocean. My dharma body and wisdom life are not subject to birth and
death. I see the presence of myself before my body manifested and after
my body has disintegrated. Even in this moment I see how I exist
elsewhere than in this body. Seventy or eighty years is not my life
span. My life span, like the life span of a leaf or of a Buddha, is
limitless. I have gone beyond the idea that I am a body that is
separated in space and time. Those of you who have touched things deeply
in the dimension of space and time will be able to touch this ultimate
dimension. After you have touched the wave, you learn to touch the
water.

No Separation

The Buddha said the nature of your reality is the nature of no birth and
no death; no coming, no going; no being, no non-being; no same, no
different. This teaching sounds as though it contradicts the teaching
that everything that is born must die, the teaching that we cannot
escape death, sickness and old age. Practice looking deeply. You will
realize that birth is a notion, death is a notion, coming is a notion,
going is a notion, being is a notion and non-being is also a notion. We
have to remove all notions concerning reality. Then we touch the
ultimate reality, or suchness. Suchness is a technical term. It means
that reality is as it is. You cannot say anything about it; you cannot
describe it. You can say that God is the ultimate reality and anything
that can be said about God is wrong. Any notion, any idea concerning God
cannot describe God. Nirvana is the same. Nirvana is the removal of all
notions and concepts so that reality can reveal herself fully to you. In
the historical dimension, observing a wave, we can talk about the birth
of the wave, the death of the wave, the wave as being high or low, more
or less beautiful, this wave and that wave, and so on. Concerning the
ultimate dimension, water, all the adjectives, all the ideas that you
use to describe the wave, are no longer valid. There is no birth, no
death; no this, no that; no high, no low; no more beautiful, no less
beautiful. The wave does not have to die in order to become water. The
wave is water in this very moment. Practice this now so that you do not
feel separated from your loved one when she dies. If you have deep
insight, you will not feel abandoned. Every day I look deeply at
everything around me: the trees, the hills, my friends. I see myself in
them all and I know I shall not die. I will continue in many other
forms. When my friends look at me they should see me in forms other than
this visible body. This daily practice will help them not to cry when
the moment comes for my present manifestation to disappear. For when
this manifestation disappears, it will leave room for other
manifestations.

Nine

ACCOMPANYING THE DYING

Anathapindika was a very dear lay disciple of the Buddha. He was from
the kingdom of Koshala, north of the Ganga River in the foothills of the
Himalayan Mountains. Anathapindika was a successful and respected
merchant and businessman. He was beloved by his countrymen for his
generous heart. His real name was Sudatta, but he was given the honorary
title Anathapindika, meaning, "the one who takes care of the destitute."
This was in appreciation for his tireless efforts in supporting poor
people, orphans and the homeless. One day when he was about thirty years
old, he traveled on business to the kingdom of Magadha, where the Buddha
also happened to be staying. When he arrived in Magadha, he went first
to visit his younger sister and her husband, who were living there at
the time. He was surprised when he was not greeted with the customary
ceremony and attention. When he asked his sister why she was not
spending any time with him, she replied that the entire household was
busy preparing to receive a wonderful teacher who was called the Buddha.
Upon hearing the name of the Buddha, he was very curious. He asked his
sister, "Who is that?" She answered by speaking so respectfully about
the Buddha that it inspired him to want to go and see the Buddha as soon
as possible. Early the next day Anathapindika went to the Bamboo Grove
Monastery, where the Buddha was speaking. The talk moved him deeply.
Bowing to the Earth, Anathapindika invited the Buddha to come to his
hometown to share the teaching and practice with his friends and family.
Although this was only the third year of the Buddha's ministry, he
already had more than one thousand two hundred monastic disciples. Among
the monks traveling with the Buddha was the Venerable Shariputra.
Shariputra had already been a well-known spiritual teacher before he
became a student of the Buddha. When Shariputra became a disciple of the
Buddha, all his younger dharma brothers and students joined him. The
Buddha accepted Anathapindika's invitation to go to Shravasti, which was
the capital city of the kingdom of Koshala. Anathapindika went ahead to
prepare for the Buddha's visit. He needed a monk to accompany him home
to help. The Buddha asked the Venerable Shariputra, who was very
talented in building community, to go with him. Shariputra and
Anathapindika, one

monk and one layperson, soon became very close friends. Some people
think that only monastics can be close to monastics and that only
laypeople can be close to laypeople. But this is not so. If both
monastics and laypeople are motivated by a deep desire to practice the
mindfulness trainings and to look deeply, they can be very intimate
friends, coworkers and copractitioners. There is no discrimination. A
monk can be a good monk, a layperson can be a good layperson, and they
can also be close friends. Anathapindika wanted to offer the Buddha a
piece of property on which to build a monastery in Koshala. After
looking extensively, he felt there was only one place beautiful enough.
It was a lovely park belonging to a member of the royal family of
Koshala, the Prince Jeta. Since Anathapindika was very wealthy, he
thought he could convince the prince to sell him this property. The
prince had planted many beautiful trees on the property, so it was much
more than a piece of land---it was like a paradise. When Anathapindika
came to the prince and asked to buy the land, the prince refused.
Anathapindika offered more money, and still the prince refused. In the
end Anathapindika said: "How much do you want for it? I am ready to pay
any amount." The prince replied, "If you can cover all the land with
gold leaf, then I will sell it to you." When the prince said this, he
was actually joking. He never believed that Anathapindika would accept
his proposal, but he did. Anathapindika soon brought enough gold leaf to
cover the whole area of land. The prince still did not want to sell it,
but his advisors said: "You must sell it. You are a prince of the royal
family. You've already given your word and you cannot break it." Prince
Jeta found it difficult to understand that a spiritual teacher could be
so extraordinary and that Anathapindika could respect and love him so
much that he would pay such a huge sum to buy a piece of land as a gift.
People told the prince that the Buddha, who was still a young teacher,
was fully awakened and that his teachings and his compassion were beyond
compare. Seeing the great faith and admiration of Anathapindika, Prince
Jeta stopped him just before he had covered all of the land and said:
"You've given me so much gold already. That's enough. I want to offer to
the Buddha the trees I have planted on the land as a gift from myself to
the Buddha." That is why the place is called the Anathapindika Jeta
Grove. It was land purchased and given to the Buddha by Anathapindika,
but the trees were given by Prince Jeta. The Buddha loved this park very
much and spent twenty consecutive annual rainyseason retreats there. You
can visit the park still and see the archaeological remains of ancient
Buddhist monasteries. All during the years following his meeting with
the Buddha, Anathapindika continued his work helping the poor and
supporting the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha. He was the Buddha's
good friend as was the king of Koshala.

Anathapindika had a lovely family, and his wife and two children also
became students of the Buddha. The entire family came every week to the
Jeta Grove to hear dharma talks and enjoy the practice of mindfulness.
Often Anathapindika would bring fellow businessmen to meet the Buddha
and receive his teachings. On one famous occasion, he brought more than
five hundred businessmen to the Jeta Grove, where the Buddha gave a
dharma talk on practice of mindfulness for laypeople. Most of the
friends of Anathapindika accepted the five mindfulness trainings.
Throughout his life, Anathapindika took a great deal of pleasure and
happiness in supporting the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha. Although
throughout his life he experienced many successes, there were also many
difficult moments in his life. One time he lost his entire fortune, but
with the help of his employees and friends he was able to rebuild his
business and his wealth. Thirty-five years after his first meeting with
the Buddha, he fell very ill. Hearing of his sickness, the Buddha came
to visit him and urged him to practice mindful breathing while lying in
bed. Then the Buddha charged the Venerable Shariputra with taking good
care of his old friend. The Buddha asked Shariputra to remain in Koshala
with Anathapindika and to help him die peacefully. When Shariputra
learned that Anathapindika was fast approaching death, he asked his
younger brother in the dharma, the Venerable Ananda, to go with him to
see his old friend. Ananda was a cousin of the Buddha and had memorized
all the Buddha's dharma talks. He is one of the main reasons we have the
teachings of the Buddha today. After finishing their daily alms round,
the two of them went to the house of Anathapindika. When the two monks
arrived, Anathapindika, who needed them very much in this difficult
moment, was happy to see them. He tried his best to sit up and greet
them in a proper manner, but he could not because he was so weak.
Shariputra said to him, "My dear friend, don't try to sit up; just lie
down and we will bring two chairs and sit close to you." Then,
Shariputra asked, "Dear friend, how do you feel in your body? Do you
feel pain? If so, is it increasing or is it decreasing?" Anathapindika
answered, "Dear friend, it does not seem that the pain in my body is
decreasing. It seems it is increasing all the time." Shariputra then
said, "In that case, I suggest we practice a guided meditation on the
Three Jewels." He began to offer a meditation on the Buddha, the dharma
and the sangha, with the support of the Venerable Ananda sitting beside
him. Shariputra was considered to be one of the most brilliant monastic
disciples of the Buddha. He was like the right arm of the Buddha. He was
the elder brother to thousands of monks and nuns. He knew

that Anathapindika had gotten a great deal of pleasure over the years
serving the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha. He also knew that for
Anathapindika this meditation would water seeds of happiness in him at
that difficult moment. He shared with Anathapindika the practice of
recollecting the wonderful nature of the Buddha, the dharma and the
sangha. In just five or six minutes the pain that Anathapindika felt
throughout his body lessened as the seeds of happiness in him were
watered. His balance was restored. Anathapindika smiled. Watering the
seeds of happiness is a very important practice for the sick or dying.
All of us have seeds of happiness inside us, and in difficult moments
when we are sick or when we are dying, there should be a friend sitting
with us to help us touch the seeds of happiness within. Otherwise seeds
of fear, of regret or of despair can easily overwhelm us. When
Anathapindika was able to smile, Shariputra knew that the balance
between the joy and pain in him had been restored. He invited
Anathapindika to continue the guided meditation. He said, "Dear friend,
please practice together with Ananda and myself as follows. Breathing
in, I see that this body is not me. Breathing out, I am not caught in
this body. I am life without limit. I have never been born and I will
never die." When you are about to die, you may not be very aware of your
body. You may experience some numbness, and yet you are caught in the
idea that this body is you. You are caught in the notion that the
disintegration of this body is your own disintegration. That is why you
are fearful. You are afraid you are becoming nothing. The disintegration
of his body cannot affect the dying person's true nature. You have to
explain to him that he is life without limit. This body is just a
manifestation, like a cloud. When a cloud is no longer a cloud, it is
not lost. It has not become nothing; it has transformed; it has become
rain. Therefore we should not identify our self with our body. This body
is not me. I am not caught in this body. I am life without limit. In
fact, we have to begin this practice with our eyes, nose, ears, tongue,
body and mind: "These eyes are not me. I am not caught in these eyes. I
am life without boundaries. These ears are not me. I am not caught in
these ears. I am life without limit. This nose is not me, I am not
caught in this nose and I am life without boundaries." This practice
helps us not to identify ourselves with our eyes, ears, nose, tongue and
body. We explore each sense consciousness and each sense organ so that
we can see that we are not them. We are much more than the manifestation
of our sense organs. The cessation of the manifestations does not affect
us. Then we look at and see what else we might think is our identity.
Beyond the body and the senses are the five aggregates of form,
feelings, perceptions, mental formations and consciousness. We have to
look deeply at each one and

say, "These things are not me." Perceptions, feelings, ideas come and
go. They cannot be me. Consciousness, just like perceptions, feelings
and mental formations, is just a manifestation. When conditions are
sufficient, these manifestations are present. When conditions are no
longer sufficient, these manifestations are no longer present. Present
or not present, these manifestations are not me. Shariputra guided
Anathapindika through the sense consciousnesses and the five aggregates,
and Anathapindika saw that they were not him. So Shariputra began the
guided meditation on the Four Elements. He said to Anathapindika, "Dear
friend, let us continue our meditation. The element earth in me is not
me. (Here 'earth' means everything that is solid: flesh, bones, muscles
and organs.) The fire element or the heat to keep warm and digest food
is not me. I am not caught in the fire element or the heat in me. The
water element in me is not me. There is water everywhere in and around
me. I am free of the element water. The air element in me is not me
because I am life without boundaries." Shariputra continued like that.
Finally, Anathapindika was guided in the meditation on Interdependent
Origination. "Dear friend, let us look more deeply. When conditions are
sufficient, my body manifests itself. It does not come from anywhere,
and after disintegration it does not go anywhere." When things manifest,
we cannot really call them being. When things stop their manifestation,
we cannot really describe them as non-being. We are free from notions of
coming, going, being, non-being, birth, death, same and different. It
was exactly the kind of practice and teaching that we understand when we
contemplate a cloud, a flame or the sunflowers. When he had practiced to
that point, Anathapindika began to cry. Ananda was surprised. Venerable
Ananda was much younger than Shariputra, and he was not able to see the
transformation and liberation Anathapindika had undergone in those few
moments. He thought Anathapindika was crying because he regretted
something or did not succeed in his meditation. Ananda asked, "Dear
friend, why are you crying? Do you regret anything?" Anathapindika said,
"No, Venerable Ananda, I don't regret anything." Ananda then asked,
"Maybe your practice was not successful?" Anathapindika replied, "No
Venerable Ananda, it was very successful." Ananda asked, "Then why are
you crying?" Anathapindika answered with tears in his eyes, "Venerable
Ananda, I am crying because I am so moved. I have served the sangha, the
dharma and the Buddha for thirty-five years and yet I have never
received and practiced such wonderful teachings as these the Venerable
Shariputra has given me today. I am so happy! I am so free!" Ananda then
said to him, "Dear friend, you may not know it, but we monks and nuns
receive this kind of teaching almost every day."

Anathapindika smiled and in his feeble voice said quietly, "Dear
Venerable Ananda, please go back to the monastery and tell the Lord
Buddha that I do understand that many laypeople are so busy and that
they will not make the time to receive and practice this kind of
teaching. But there are many of us who are free enough and are available
enough to receive this teaching and this practice. Please ask the Lord
Buddha to dispense this teaching and this practice to us, the laypeople
also." Knowing that this was the last request of Anathapindika, the
Venerable Ananda answered him, "Of course I will do as you ask. I will
tell the Lord Buddha as soon as I return to the Jeta Grove." Shortly
after the visit of the two monks, Anathapindika died peacefully and
without pain. This story is recorded in a discourse called "The
Teachings to be Given to the Dying."\* I would like to advise anyone who
is able to please study the discourse and to practice it. Please do not
wait until you have to face the problem of dying in order to study and
practice it. Please practice looking deeply now in order to touch your
nature of no birth, no death; no coming, no going; no same, no
different. If you do so, you will stop your grief and suffering. If you
do this practice with diligence and effort, you will nurture the element
of non-fear in you. You will be able to die happily and peacefully. It
is very possible to live happily and to die peacefully. We do this by
seeing that we continue our manifestation in other forms. It is also
possible to help others to die peacefully if we have the elements of
solidity and non-fear in us. So many of us are afraid of non-being.
Because of this fear, we suffer a lot. That is why the reality that we
are a manifestation and a continuation of many manifestations should be
revealed to the dying person. We are then not affected by the fear of
birth and death, because we understand that these are just notions. This
is a very important insight that can liberate us from fear. I have taken
the words and teachings from the sutra to be "Given to the Dying" in the
Anguttara Nikaya and made them into a song. It is a lullaby song that
can be sung to the person who is nearing their last breath: This body is
not me; I am not caught in this body, I am life without boundaries, I
have never been born and I have never died. Over there the wide ocean
and the sky with many galaxies All manifests from the basis of
consciousness.

Since beginningless time I have always been free. Birth and death are
only a door through which we go in and out. Birth and death are only a
game of hide-and-seek. So smile to me and take my hand and wave
good-bye. Tomorrow we shall meet again or even before. We shall always
be meeting again at the true source, Always meeting again on the myriad
paths of life. The first line can be repeated with These eyes...These
ears...This nose... This tongue...This mind...These forms...These
sounds...etc. instead of This body (e.g., These eyes are not me; I am
not caught in these eyes...) Singing this song to a dying person can
help them be free from thinking that they have a permanent identity that
is connected to any part of the body or mind. All things that are
composite decompose, but our true selves do not disappear into oblivion.
This kind of guided meditation helps us to avoid being caught in the
idea that we are this body, we are this thought, and we are this
emotion. We are actually not these things. We are life without limit. We
are not caught in birth, we are not caught in death, we are not caught
in being, and we are not caught in non-being. This is the truth of
reality. So please do not be too busy in your daily life. Please take
time to practice. Learn how to live happily, peacefully and joyfully
today. Please learn the practice of looking deeply and understanding the
true nature of birth and death so you can die peacefully and without
fear. This is something everyone can do. If you can practice so that you
have no fear, when one of your friends or dear ones is dying, you will
be able to help them. You have to know what you really need to do and
what you really do not need to do. You are intelligent enough to be able
to use your time skillfully. You do not need to waste your time doing
those things that are unnecessary and trifling. You do not have to be
rich. You do not need to seek fame or power. What you need is freedom,
solidity, peace and joy. You need the time and energy to be able to
share these things with others. Our happiness does not rely on our
having a lot of money or fame. Our security comes from whether we
practice and keep the mindfulness trainings. Once we have the
mindfulness trainings and the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha looking
after us, we are happy. Our two eyes are bright, our smile is

fresh, and our steps are solidly on the path of a free life. Our
happiness flows over to those around us. We do not give our time to
things that are superficial. We use our time to practice so that the
quality of our lives will be better. This is the most precious gift any
of us can leave our children or our grandchildren. This is the best that
we can share with our friends. We need time to receive, practice and
learn about the wonderful teachings of the Buddha, like those taught to
Anathapindika at the time of his death. Taking refuge in our family,
friends and community, in the sangha, we change our way of life. We have
to live with peace and joy right away and not wait for the future to do
it. We have to be well right now, right here, peaceful and joyful in the
present moment. There is no way to happiness---happiness is the way. The
teaching given by Shariputra should be given to everyone early on in
life. Anathapindika was very lucky to receive the teaching at the last
moment. Things are impermanent and we do not know in advance when we
shall breathe our last. We may not be as lucky as Anathapindika to have
good spiritual friends by our side to guide us in meditation at the time
of our death. That is why we should not leave it until it is too late.
We should learn the practice right now so that we will be able to guide
ourselves.

A New Story of Dying In the early 1990s I was on my way to the Omega
Institute in upstate New York to lead a retreat when I learned that an
old friend of ours was dying in a hospital just north of New York City.
His name was Alfred Hassler. He had been director of the Fellowship of
Reconciliation. In 1966 and 1967, he and I had traveled together to many
countries, organizing efforts to end the war in Vietnam. Later, I was no
longer allowed to go back to Vietnam because I had spoken out in the
West against the violation of human rights by both warring parties,
North and South. Alfred went to Vietnam in my place to help coordinate
the peace work there. He helped support our friends in setting up camps
to take care of refugees and victims of the war. We together sponsored
more than eight thousand orphans. When I came to the United States in
1966, it was the Fellowship of Reconciliation that organized my first
speaking tour. On that tour, I called for an end to the war in Vietnam.
When Sister Chan Khong and I arrived at the hospital, Alfred was already
in a coma. Dorothy, his wife, and Laura, his daughter, were there with
him. Laura Hassler had volunteered with us at the office of the
Vietnamese Buddhist Peace Delegation in Paris when she was very young.

When Dorothy and Laura saw us, they were very happy. Laura tried her
best to call Alfred back from his coma. "Daddy, Daddy, Thay is here!
Sister Chan Khong is here," she said. But Alfred didn't come back; he
was in a very deep coma. I asked Sister Chan Khong to sing to him. A
dying person has the capacity to hear, even though we may not realize
it. So Sister Chan Khong sang the song that begins, "This body is not
me, I am not caught in this body, I am life without boundaries, I have
never been born, I will never die." She sang it a second time and again
for a third time. In the middle of the third time, Alfred awoke and
opened his eyes. Laura was so happy! She said, "Daddy, do you know that
Thay is here? Do you know that Sister Chan Khong is here?" Alfred could
not say anything. Looking into his eyes, we felt that he knew we where
there. Sister Chan Khong began to talk to him about the experiences we
had working together for peace in Vietnam: "Alfred, remember the time
you were in Saigon trying to see the monk Tri Quang? The U.S. had
decided to bomb Hanoi the day before, and the Venerable Tri Quang was so
angry that he vowed not to see any Westerners, either doves or hawks.
"When you arrived he refused to open the door. Alfred, do you remember
that you sat there and wrote a note that said, 'I have come as a friend
to help stop the war in your country, and not as an enemy. I will not
eat anything or drink anything until you open the door for me!' You
slipped the note under the door. You remember that? You said, 'I will
sit here until you open the door.' Do you remember? Just fifteen minutes
later he opened the door. He smiled with a broad smile and invited you
in. Alfred, remember the time you were in Rome, and there was a vigil
conducted by three hundred Catholic priests, each one bearing the name
of a Buddhist monk who had been imprisoned in Saigon for refusing the
draft?" Sister Chan Khong continued to talk to him about the happiness
we experienced during the time we were working for peace. It had a
wonderful effect. She tried to do exactly what Shariputra did for
Anathapindika. She was watering the seeds of happiness in him. Alfred's
happiness was made of his intention to serve peace and to end suffering
for others. When those seeds of happiness were watered, it restored a
balance between the joy and the pain in him. He suffered much less. At
that time I was massaging his feet. I was thinking that when a person is
dying he might not be very aware of his body because the body is somehow
numb. Laura asked, "Daddy, do you know that Thay is massaging your
feet?" He didn't say anything but looking into his eyes we were sure
that he knew we were there. Suddenly he opened his mouth and said,
"Wonderful, wonderful!" After that he sank into a coma again and never
came back. That night I had to give an orientation talk to the
retreatants at Omega. We said good-bye and told Dorothy and Laura that
they should do as Sister Chan Khong and I had been doing: talking and
singing to Alfred. The next morning

I received a message from Dorothy telling us that Alfred had died quite
peacefully a few hours after we left. Those who are unconscious have a
way to hear us if we are truly present and peaceful as we sit by their
bedside. Ten years ago a university student living in Bordeaux heard
that his mother was dying in California, and he cried a lot. He did not
know if when he arrived home in California his mother would still be
alive. Sister Chan Khong told him to fly to California immediately and
that if his mother was still alive when he arrived, he should practice
just as Shariputra had practiced with Anathapindika. She told him that
he should speak about the happy experiences mother and son had shared
together. He was to recount stories from her early married life and her
youthful years. He should tell her these stories because they would
bring her joy, even if she were not conscious. When he arrived in the
hospital, she was already unconscious. Although he did not wholly
believe that an unconscious person could hear, he nevertheless did as
Sister Chan Khong had instructed him. The doctors told him that his
mother had been unconscious for a week and they had no hope that she
would regain consciousness before she died. After he had talked to her
lovingly for one and a half hours, she woke up. When you sit by the
bedside of a dying person and you are calm and totally present in body,
mind and soul, you will be successful in helping that person pass away
in freedom. A few years ago, Sister Chan Khong had to visit her elder
sister in the hospital after a complication from a liver transplant.
After two years, her body was rejecting the liver. She was in terrible
pain. When Sister Chan Khong walked into the hospital, she saw that
everyone in the family had given up all hope of being able to do
anything. Although her sister was unconscious, she was still writhing,
groaning and screaming in terrible pain. All her children, even her
daughter who was a doctor, felt powerless. Sister Chan Khong arrived at
the hospital with a cassette tape of the monks and nuns of Plum Village
chanting the name of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva of
great compassion. Although her sister was unconscious, Sister Chan Khong
put the cassette tape in the tape player next to the bed and, after
putting the headphones on her sister's ears, turned the volume near
maximum. Five or six minutes later, something amazing happened. Her
sister lay completely quiet. She was no longer writhing, groaning or
screaming. She stayed peaceful like that until she passed away five days
later. Throughout those five days, Sister Chan Khong's sister continued
to listen to the recitation of the name of the bodhisattva. She had
visited Buddhist temples many times and had heard the recitation of the
name of the bodhisattva of compassion often. Hearing it again on her
deathbed watered

the seeds in her of that which was most precious and joyful while she
was alive. She had a spiritual dimension to her life and she had faith.
She had heard sutra recitations and listened to teachings of the dharma
many times. The cassette tape playing the chanting of the monks and nuns
had reached those seeds of happiness. They were seeds that the doctors
did not know how to touch. Anyone could have done what Sister Chan Khong
did, but no one had thought to do it. Our consciousness is like a
television with many channels. When we push the button on the remote
control, the channel we choose appears. When we sit by the bedside of a
dying person, we have to know which channel to call up. Those who are
closest to the dying person are in the best position to do this. If you
are accompanying someone who is dying, use those sounds and images from
the life of the person that will water the seeds of their greatest
happiness. In the consciousness of everyone are the seeds of the Pure
Land and of nirvana, of the kingdom of God and of paradise. If we know
how to practice and penetrate the reality of no birth and no death, if
we realize that coming and going are just ideas, and if our presence is
solid and peaceful, we can help the dying person. We can help the person
not be scared and not to suffer much. We can help the person die
peacefully. We can help ourselves live without fear and die peacefully.
We can help ourselves to understand that there is no dying. To see that
there is no death and there is no fear. There is only continuation.

THICH NHAT HANH has lived an extraordinary life in an extraordinary
time. Since the age of sixteen, he has been a Buddhist monk, a peace
activist and a seeker of the way. He has survived persecution, three
wars, and more than thirty years of exile. He is the master of a temple
in Vietnam, the lineage of which goes back more than two thousand years
and, indeed, is traceable to the Buddha himself. The author of more than
one hundred books of poetry, fiction and philosophy, Thich Nhat Hanh has
founded universities and social service organizations, and has rescued
boat people. He led the Vietnamese Buddhist delegation at the Paris
Peace Talks; and he was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize by the
Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. He makes his homes in France and
Vermont.

Thich Nhat Hanh has retreat communities in southwestern France (Plum
Village), Vermont (Green Mountain Dharma Center), and California (Deer
Park Monastery), where monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen practice the
art of mindful living. Visitors are invited to join the practice for at
least one week. For information, please write to:

Plum Village 13 Martineau 33580 Dieulivol France
NH-office@plumvillage.org (for women) LH-office@plumvillage.org (for
women) UH-office@plumvillage.org (for men) www.plumvillage.org For
information about our monasteries, mindfulness practice centers, and
retreats in the United States, please contact:

Green Mountain Dharma Center P.O. Box 182 Hartland Four Corners, VT
05049 Tel: (802) 436-1103 Fax: (802) 436-1101 MF-office@plumvillage.org
www.plumvillage.org

Deer Park Monastery 2499 Melru Lane Escondido, CA 92026 Tel: (760)
291-1003 Fax: (760) 291-1172 Deerpark@plumvillage.org

\*Be Free Where You Are by Thich Nhat Hanh, published by Parallax Press.

\* Ibid., 288, or the last chapter of the Flower Ornament Sutra,
translated by Thomas Cleary.

\* Ibid., 286.

\* Ibid., 267.


