Thank you for downloading this Atria Books eBook. Join our mailing list
and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great
books from Atria Books and Simon & Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

OceanofPDF.com

Contents

Foreword by Jeffrey Hopkins, Ph.D. Introduction: The Need for Peace and
Kindness I. THE BASICS 1. Three Ways to Practice II. PRACTICING MORALITY
2. Identifying the Scope of Suffering 3. Discovering How Trouble Starts
and Stops 4. Refraining from Harm 5. Extending Help 6. Aspiring to
Enlightenment III. PRACTICING CONCENTRATED MEDITATION 7. Focusing the
Mind IV. PRACTICING WISDOM 8. Examining How Beings and Things Exist 9.
The Middle Way 10. Mind and the Deep Nature of Mind

V. TANTRA 11. Deity Yoga VI. STEPS ALONG THE WAY 12. Overview of the
Path to Enlightenment Selected Readings OceanofPDF.com

Foreword

I first heard His Holiness the Dalai Lama teach in 1972. Just three days
after my arrival in Dharamsala in northern India he started a
sixteen-day lecture series for four to six hours each day on the stages
of the path to enlightenment. I had begun studying Tibetan and
practicing Tibetan Buddhism in 1962, and my teachers, particularly
gifted in the intricacies of Tibetan commentaries, had prepared me for
study with Tibetan refugee scholar-yogis in India. But, to be frank, I
did not think that a governmentally appointed reincarnation---born in
northeastern Tibet in 1935 and recognized through prophecies, visions,
extraordinary occurrences, and tests as the Fourteenth Dalai Lama at the
age of two---could possibly live up to the billing. However, I was
amazed. He spoke on a wide range of topics concerning the path to
enlightenment, capturing my mind and heart with concepts, large and
small, that clarified issues long unresolved, expanded on others, and
drew me into new areas of understanding. In Tibetan the Dalai Lama
speaks with such great speed and clarity that it was impossible for me
to be distracted. Once, he became particularly inspired while describing
the reflections for generating compassion. His voice rose in pitch to a
level that he jokingly described as his "goat-voice," in which I heard
the inspired absorption of a poet. During that series of lectures he
presented the full range of practices leading to enlightenment, often
juxtaposing topics that others leave in isolation---all this with the
depth of a philosopher. The same dual voice of poet and philosopher is
present here in this book, sometimes touching the heart with moving
descriptions of the condition of life and the beauties of altruism, and
at other times making careful distinctions about profound practices like
meditation on emptiness, which serve as nourishment for years of
contemplation.

At the age of five the Dalai Lama was brought to Lhasa, the capital of
Tibet, where he underwent the full curriculum of monastic training. Due
to the Communist Chinese invasion of eastern Tibet in 1950, he suddenly
had to take the reins of Tibetan government at age sixteen. Despite
attempts to cooperate with the invaders, he was faced with imminent,
personal danger and escaped to India in 1959. In exile, he has
successfully re-established centers for the broad range of Tibetan
culture. He has traveled extensively throughout most of the world,
bringing a message---not just to Buddhists and other religious
believers, but to everyone---about the importance of kindness to the
very fabric of society. In recognition of his untiring efforts on behalf
of Tibetans and all peoples, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in
1989. His Holiness has published many books, some for a general audience
and others for those particularly interested in Buddhism. In this book
he draws on a long tradition of spiritual practice in Tibet and on his
own experience to offer suggestions on how to practice a spiritual path
that will lead to mental clarity and emotional transformation. In this
way, he shows how life can be made meaningful. Throughout the thirty
years that I have known him and during the ten that I served as his
chief translator on lecture tours in the United States, Canada,
Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Australia, Great Britain, and
Switzerland, I have witnessed his embodiment of these practices to the
very core of his being. It is important for us to recognize that this
insightful, compassionate, humorous, and marvelous person rose from
Tibetan culture. We need to value that culture as one of the world's
great wonders. Jeffrey Hopkins, Ph.D. Professor of Tibetan Studies,
University of Virginia OceanofPDF.com

Introduction The Need for Peace and Kindness

I travel to many places around the world, and whenever I speak to
people, I do so with the feeling that I am a member of their own family.
Although we may be meeting for the first time, I accept everyone as a
friend. In truth, we already know one another, profoundly, as human
beings who share the same basic goals: We all seek happiness and do not
want suffering.

TWO WAYS TO HAPPINESS There are two ways to create happiness. The first
is external. By obtaining better shelter, better clothes, and better
friends we can find a certain measure of happiness and satisfaction. The
second is through mental development, which yields inner happiness.
However, these two approaches are not equally viable. External happiness
cannot last long without its counterpart. If something is lacking in
your perspective---if something is missing in your heart---then despite
the most luxurious surroundings, you cannot be happy. However, if you
have peace of mind, you can find happiness even under the most difficult
circumstances. Material advancement alone sometimes solves one problem
but creates another. For example, certain people may have acquired
wealth, a good education, and high social standing, yet happiness eludes
them. They take sleeping pills and drink too much alcohol. Something is
missing, something still not satisfied, so these people take refuge in
drugs or in a bottle. On the other hand, some people who have less money
to worry about enjoy more peace. They sleep well at night. Despite being
poor in a material sense, they are content and happy. This shows the
impact of a

good mental attitude. Material development alone will not fully resolve
the problem of humanity's suffering. In this book I offer you, the
reader, valuable techniques from Tibetan traditions which, if
implemented in daily practice, lead to mental peace. As you calm your
mind and your heart, your agitation and worry will naturally subside,
and you will enjoy more happiness. Your relationships with others will
reflect these changes. And as a better human being, you will be a better
citizen of your country, and ultimately a better citizen of the world.

KINDNESS We are all born helpless. Without a parent's kindness we could
not survive, much less prosper. When children grow up in constant fear,
with no one to rely on, they suffer their whole lives. Because the minds
of small children are very delicate, their need for kindness is
particularly obvious. Adult human beings need kindness too. If someone
greets me with a nice smile, and expresses a genuinely friendly
attitude, I appreciate it very much. Though I might not know that person
or understand their language, they instantly gladden my heart. On the
other hand, if kindness is lacking, even in someone from my own culture
whom I have known for many years, I feel it. Kindness and love, a real
sense of brotherhood and sisterhood, these are very precious. They make
community possible and thus are crucial in society.

THE HUMAN POTENTIAL Each of us has a valid sense of self, of "I." We
also share fundamental goals: We want happiness and do not want
suffering. Animals and insects also want happiness and do not want
suffering, but they have no special ability to consider how to achieve
deeper happiness or overcome suffering. As human beings, endowed with
this power of thought, we have this potential, and we must use it. On
every level---as individuals, and as members of a family, a community, a
nation, and a planet---the most mischievous troublemakers we face are
anger and egoism. The kind of egoism I refer to here is not just a sense
of I, but an

exaggerated self-centeredness. No one claims to feel happy while being
angry. As long as anger dominates our disposition, there is no
possibility of lasting happiness. In order to achieve peace,
tranquility, and real friendship, we must minimize anger and cultivate
kindness and a warm heart. This can be achieved through the practices I
will describe in this book. Developing a warm heart ourselves can also
transform others. As we become nicer human beings, our neighbors,
friends, parents, spouses, and children experience less anger. They will
become more warm-hearted, compassionate, and harmonious. The very
atmosphere becomes happier, which promotes good health, perhaps even a
longer life. You may be rich, powerful, and well-educated, but without
these healthy feelings of kindness and compassion there will be no peace
within yourself, no peace within your family---even your children
suffer. Kindness is essential to mental peace. As you will see in the
pages ahead, the central method for achieving a happier life is to train
your mind in a daily practice that weakens negative attitudes and
strengthens positive ones. The big question is whether or not we can
practice kindness and peace. Many of our problems stem from attitudes
like putting ourselves first at all costs. I know from my own experience
that it is possible to change these attitudes and improve the human
mind. Though it is colorless, shapeless, and sometimes weak, the human
mind can become stronger than steel. To train the mind, you must
exercise the patience and determination it takes to shape that steel. If
you practice improving your mind with a strong will and forbearance by
trying, trying, trying, no matter how many difficulties you may
encounter at the beginning, then you will succeed. With patience, and
practice, and time, change will come. Do not give up. If you are
pessimistic from the beginning, you cannot possibly succeed. If you are
hopeful and determined, you will always find some measure of success.
Winning the gold medal does not matter. You will have tried your best.

INTERDEPENDENCE Much of the world is now connected by a web of
electronic communication and instant information. In the twenty-first
century our global economy has made nations and their people heavily
dependent upon one another. In ancient times,

trade between nations was not necessary. Today, it is impossible to
remain isolated, so if nations do not have mutual respect, problems are
bound to arise. Although there are grave signs of trouble between poorer
and richer nations, and between poorer and richer groups within nations,
these economic rifts can be healed by a stronger sense of global
interdependence and responsibility. The people of one nation must
consider the people of other nations to be like brothers and sisters who
deserve progress for their homelands. Despite the best efforts of world
leaders, crises keep erupting. Wars kill innocent people; the elderly
and our children die continuously, endlessly. Many soldiers who are
fighting are not there by their own initiative; real suffering is
experienced by these innocent soldiers, which is very sad. The sale of
weapons---thousands and thousands of types of arms and ammunition---by
manufacturers in big countries fuels the violence, but more dangerous
than guns or bombs are hatred, lack of compassion, and lack of respect
for the rights of others. As long as hatred dwells in the human mind,
real peace is impossible. We must do everything we can to stop war, and
to rid the world of nuclear weapons. When I visited Hiroshima, where the
first atomic bomb was dropped, when I saw the actual spot and heard the
stories of survivors, my heart was deeply moved. How many people died in
a single moment! How many more were injured! How much pain and
desolation nuclear war creates! Yet look at how much money is spent on
weapons of mass destruction. It is shocking, an immeasurable disgrace.
Advancements in science and technology have greatly benefited humankind,
but not without a price. While we enjoy the development of jet
airplanes, for example, which make it possible to easily travel the
world, enormously destructive weapons have also been created. No matter
how beautiful or remote their homelands, many people live in constant
fear of a very real threat: thousands upon thousands of nuclear warheads
poised for attack. But the button must be pushed by someone, and thus
human intention is ultimately responsible. The only way to achieve
lasting peace is through mutual trust, respect, love, and kindness. The
only way. Attempts by global powers to dominate one another through
competition in armaments---whether nuclear, chemical, biological, or
conventional---is counterproductive. How can a world full of hatred and
anger achieve real peace? External peace is impossible without inner
peace. It is noble to work at external solutions, but they cannot be
successfully implemented so long as people have hatred and anger in
their minds. This is where profound change has to begin. Individually we
have to work to change the basic perspectives on which our

feelings depend. We can only do so through training, by engaging in
practice with the aim of gradually reorienting the way we perceive
ourselves and others. The desperate state of our world calls us to
action. Each of us has a responsibility to try to help at the deeper
level of our common humanity. Unfortunately, humanity is too often
sacrificed in defense of ideology. This is absolutely wrong. Political
systems should actually benefit human beings, but, like money, they can
control us instead of work for us. If with a warm heart and patience we
can consider the views of others, and exchange ideas in calm discussion,
we will find points of agreement. It is our responsibility---out of love
and compassion for humankind---to seek harmony among nations,
ideologies, cultures, ethnic groups, and economic and political systems.
When we truly recognize the oneness of all humankind, our motivation to
find peace will grow stronger. In the deepest sense we are really
sisters and brothers, so we must share one another's suffering. Mutual
respect, trust, and concern for one another's welfare are our best hope
for lasting world peace. Of course, national leaders have a special
responsibility in this area, but every individual must also take the
initiative, regardless of religious belief. Just by being human, by
seeking to gain happiness and avoid suffering, you are a citizen of this
planet. We all are responsible for creating a better future. To achieve
a friendly attitude, a warm heart, respect for the rights of others, and
concern for their welfare you must train the mind. In this book I will
present a series of practices drawn from Tibetan traditions that will be
helpful in accomplishing these aims. The essential objective of daily
practice is to cultivate an attitude of compassion and calm---a state of
mind particularly crucial in human society today for its power to yield
true harmony among nations, races, and people from diverse religious,
political, and economic systems.

CREATING HARMONY The harmony and friendship that we need in our
families, nations, and the world can be achieved only through compassion
and kindness. By helping one another, with concern and respect, we can
solve many problems easily. Harmony cannot thrive in a climate of
mistrust, cheating, bullying and mean-spirited competition. Success
through intimidation and violence is temporary at best; its trifling
gains

only create new problems. This is why just a couple of decades after the
enormous human tragedy of the First World War, the Second World War was
fought, and millions more people were killed. If we examine our long
history of hatred and anger, we see the obvious need to find a better
way. We can only solve our problems through truly peaceful means---not
just peaceful words but a peaceful mind and heart. In this way we will
have a better world. Is this possible? Fighting, cheating, and bullying
have trapped us in our present situation; now we need training in new
practices to find a way out. It may seem impractical and idealistic, but
we have no alternative to compassion, recognizing human value and the
oneness of humanity: This is the only way to achieve lasting happiness.
I travel from country to country with this sense of oneness. I have
trained my mind for decades, so when I meet people from different
cultures there are no barriers. I am convinced that despite different
cultures and different political and economic systems, we are all
basically the same. The more people I meet the stronger my conviction
becomes that the oneness of humanity, founded on understanding and
respect, is a realistic and viable basis for our conduct. Wherever I go,
this is what I speak about. I believe that the practice of compassion
and love--- a genuine sense of brotherhood and sisterhood---is the
universal religion. It does not matter whether you are Buddhist or
Christian, Moslem or Hindu, or whether you practice religion at all.
What matters is your feeling of oneness with humankind. Do you agree? Do
you think this is nonsense? I am not a God King, as some call me. I am
just a Buddhist monk. What I am saying comes from my own practice, which
is limited. But I do try to implement these ideas in my daily life,
especially when I face problems. Of course, I fail sometimes. Sometimes
I get irritated. Occasionally I use a harsh word, but when I do,
immediately I feel "Oh, this is wrong." I feel this because I have
internalized the practices of compassion and wisdom that form the core
of this book. These daily practices are very useful and very valuable in
my own life. Therefore, knowing that you and I are of similar mind and
heart, I share them with you.

When I was only fifteen, the Chinese Communists invaded eastern Tibet,
and within a year the Tibetan government decided that I should direct
Tibet's affairs of

state. It was a difficult period as we watched our freedoms being
eroded, and in 1959 I was forced to escape from the capital under cover
of night. In exile in India, we faced daily problems ranging from our
need to adjust to the vastly different climate to our need to
re-establish cultural institutions. My spiritual practice gave me an
outlook that made it possible to keep searching for solutions without
losing sight of the fact that we are all humans led astray by wrong
ideas and united by common bonds, ready for improvement. This has taught
me that the perspectives of compassion, calm, and insight are essential
to daily life and must be cultivated in daily practice. Trouble is bound
to come, so cultivating the right attitude is crucial. Anger diminishes
our power to distinguish right from wrong, and this ability is one of
the highest human attributes. If it is lost, we are lost. Sometimes it
is necessary to respond strongly, but this can be done without anger.
Anger is not necessary. It has no value. I call compassion the global
staple. Human beings want happiness and do not want suffering. Mental
peace is a basic need for all humankind. For politicians, engineers,
scientists, homemakers, doctors, teachers, lawyers---for all people in
every endeavor---a healthy, compassionate motivation is the foundation
of spiritual growth.

OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK In the following chapters I will describe specific
Buddhist techniques for gaining mental peace and a greater capacity for
compassion within the framework of working to overcome what Buddhists
consider to be wrong notions about how beings and things exist. In
Buddhist terms, this is the path to enlightenment. However, anyone can
make use of particular steps toward self-improvement as they see fit. I
have arranged this book in six parts. It begins with The Basics, where
the story of the Buddha serves as a guide to meaningful living; here I
introduce the three aspects of spiritual practice---morality,
concentrated meditation, and wisdom--- which are the book's principal
themes. In the second part, Practicing Morality, I describe two types of
morality: reorienting physical and verbal deeds so as to cause no harm
to others, and cultivating deeper concern for others. In the third part,
Practicing Concentrated Meditation, I describe how to achieve mental
focus and

how to restore calm in stressful situations. This is followed by
Practicing Wisdom, which addresses the difficult but fruitful topic of
dependent-arising and emptiness. Here we go deeper into Buddhist
thinking as we consider the difference between the mind and its ultimate
nature. In this fourth part I hope to clear up any notion that Buddhism
is somehow nihilistic or pessimistic by describing the compatibility
between appearance and reality. These discussions of morality,
concentrated meditation, and wisdom flow into the fifth part, Tantra,
which presents a special yoga practice combining these three. I also
discuss here how desire can be used in the spiritual path by competent
practitioners. The concluding part, Steps Along the Way, presents an
overview of the path of practice from its beginnings right through to
enlightenment, a state wherein mind and body are fully developed in
order to be of service to others. From beginning to end, our focus is on
developing a good heart and mind through a moral attitude and an
understanding of reality, empowered by concentration. Think of morality,
concentrated meditation, and wisdom as a blueprint for enlightenment,
reminding us of the highest aim of practice---a transformation of
attitude toward peacefulness, compassion, calm focus, and wisdom.
Understanding the blueprint is itself part of the path, drawing us
toward the destination. I hope that parts of it may be of use, but if
not, that is all right, too! OceanofPDF.com

I THE BASICS OceanofPDF.com

1 Three Ways to Practice

BUDDHA'S ENLIGHTENMENT AS A MODEL According to some Buddhist schools,
Shakyamuni Buddha first became enlightened in India in the sixth century
B.C., through practice of the path. Others, however, believe that
Shakyamuni Buddha had achieved enlightenment long before and that in his
sixth century B.C. incarnation the Buddha was merely demonstrating the
path. In Tibet, we take the latter view, and followers learn from his
example how to practice in order to achieve enlightenment themselves. In
either case, we need to notice that: Shakyamuni Buddha was born into a
life of pleasure as a prince in an Indian royal family. At age
twenty-nine, upon seeing the suffering of the world, he gave up his
royal position, cut his own hair, left his family, and took on the
morality of a monastic, adopting a system of ethical behavior. For the
next six years he engaged in ascetic meditation for the sake of
achieving

concentrated meditation.

Then, under the Bodhi tree in Bodh Gaya, he practiced special techniques
for developing wisdom, and achieved enlightenment. He went on to teach
for forty-five years, and at age eighty-one, he died. In the Buddha's
life story we see the three stages of practice: morality comes first,
then concentrated meditation, and then wisdom. And we see that the path
takes time.

GRADUAL CHANGE Developing the mind depends upon a great many internal
causes and conditions, much like a space station depends on the work of
generations of scientists who have analyzed and tested even its smallest
components. Neither a space station nor an enlightened mind can be
realized in a day. Similarly, spiritual qualities must be constructed
through a great variety of ways. However, unlike the space station,
which is constructed by many people working together, the mind must be
developed by you alone. There is no way for others to do the work and
for you to reap the results. Reading someone else's blueprint of mental
progress will not transfer its realizations to you. You have to develop
them yourself. Cultivating an attitude of compassion and developing
wisdom are slow processes. As you gradually internalize techniques for
developing morality, concentration of mind, and wisdom, untamed states
of mind become less and less frequent. You will need to practice these
techniques day by day, year by year. As you transform your mind, you
will transform your surroundings. Others will see the benefits of your
practice of tolerance and love, and will work at bringing these
practices into their own lives.

THE THREE PRACTICES Buddha's teachings are divided into three
collections of scriptures: The discipline of morality The discourses on
concentrated meditation The manifest knowledge that explains the
training in wisdom In each of these scriptures, the main practice is
described as an extraordinary state that is created from the union of
(1) "calm abiding" (concentrated meditation) and (2) "special insight"
(wisdom). But in order to achieve such a union, first we must lay its
foundation: morality.

ORDER OF PRACTICE

Morality, concentrated meditation, and wisdom---this is the essential
order of practice. The reasons are as follows: In order for the wisdom
of special insight to remove impediments to proper understanding, and to
remove faulty mental states at their very roots, we need concentrated
meditation, a state of complete single-mindedness in which all internal
distractions have been removed. Otherwise the mind is too fractured.
Without such one-pointed concentrated meditation, wisdom has no force,
just as the flame of a candle in a breeze does not give off much
illumination. Therefore, concentrated meditation must precede wisdom.
Single-minded meditation involves removing subtle internal distractions
such as the mind's being either too relaxed or too tight. To do so we
must first stop external distractions through training in the morality
of maintaining mindfulness and conscientiousness with regard to physical
and verbal activities ---being constantly aware of what you are doing
with your body and your speech. Without overcoming these obvious
distractions, it is impossible to overcome subtler internal
distractions. Since it is through sustaining mindfulness that you
achieve a calm abiding of the mind, the practice of morality must
precede the practice of concentrated meditation. In my own experience,
taking the vows of a monk called for fewer external involvements and
activities, which meant that I could focus more on spiritual studies.
Vows to restrain counterproductive physical and verbal activities made
me mindful of my behavior and drew me to inspect what was happening in
my mind. This meant that even when I was not purposely practicing
concentrated meditation, I had to control my mind from being scattered
and thus was constantly drawn in the direction of one-pointed, internal
meditation. The vow of morality has certainly acted as a foundation.
Looking at the three practices---morality, concentrated meditation, and
wisdom ---we see that each serves as the basis for the next. (This order
of practice is clearly demonstrated in the Buddha's own life story.)
Therefore, all spiritual progress depends on a foundation of proper
morality. OceanofPDF.com

II PRACTICING MORALITY OceanofPDF.com

2 Identifying the Scope of Suffering

OVERVIEW OF THE TYPES OF MORALITY The main principle of Buddhist
morality is to help others and, if that is not possible, at least to do
no harm. This fundamental commitment to nonviolence, motivated by
concern for others, is central to the three types of morality in
Buddhism: The morality of individual liberation (which is the subject of
this chapter) is mainly practiced by refraining from physical and verbal
actions that cause harm. This practice is called "individual" because it
provides a way for a person to prepare to move beyond the repeated round
of birth, aging, sickness, and death, which Buddhists call cyclic
existence (or samsara). The morality of concern for others---called the
morality of Bodhisattvas (beings primarily concerned with helping
others)---is mainly practiced by restraining the mind from falling into
selfishness. For those practicing Bodhisattva morality, the essential
point is to refrain from self-cherishing, but also to refrain from ill
deeds of body and speech. The morality of Tantra centers around special
techniques for imagining a fully developed state of body and mind
effectively helping others. It provides a way to restrain and thus
transcend our limited perception of our bodies and minds so that we may
perceive ourselves shining with wisdom and compassion.

MORALITY OF INDIVIDUAL LIBERATION

Practicing the morality of individual liberation requires the
self-awareness needed to refrain from physical and verbal actions that
bring harm to others. This means abandoning what Buddhists call the ten
nonvirtues. These are organized into three categories. The physical
nonvirtues are killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct. The verbal
nonvirtues are lying, divisive talk, harsh speech, and senseless
chatter. The mental nonvirtues are covetousness, harmful intent, and
wrong views. Since motivation precedes and drives actions, controlling
it is the best way to prevent impulsive and possibly abusive physical
and verbal actions. When you suddenly want something and just reach out
and take it without considering the consequences, your desire is
expressing itself impulsively, without benefit of reflection. In daily
practice you learn to continually examine your motivation. When I was a
boy, Ling Rinpochay, who was then my junior tutor, was always very
stern; he never smiled, not even a little. This bothered me a lot. By
wondering why he was so humorless, I examined more and more what I was
doing in my own mind. This helped me develop self-awareness with regard
to my motivation. By my early twenties when I had matured, Ling
Rinpochay completely changed; he always had a big smile when we were
together. Effective practice of the morality of individual liberation
depends upon sound, long-term motivation. For example, one should not
become a monk or a nun to avoid having to work at a worldly job for food
and clothing. Also, it is not sufficient merely to seek to avoid
difficulty in this lifetime. To be motivated by such trifling purposes
does not help to achieve freedom from cyclic existence---the ultimate
reason to practice the morality of individual liberation. This is
confirmed by Buddha's life story. One day Shakyamuni slipped outside the
palace wall to experience life for himself. For the first time he saw a
sick person, an old person, and a corpse. Deeply troubled by the
suffering of sickness, aging, and death, he came to the conclusion that
worldly life is without substance. Later, inspired by several religious
practitioners, Buddha became captivated by the possibility of a higher,
more meaningful, spiritual life. At that point he escaped from the
palace, leaving his ordinary life behind to pursue that vision. What
does this teach us? Like Buddha we need to begin by becoming concerned
about the suffering of cyclic existence and by turning away from
temporary distractions. Influenced by this new attitude, we must take up
a system of morality by renouncing cyclic existence and by taking vows
of pure behavior through seeking to avoid the ten nonvirtues.

THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS In order to free ourselves from cyclic existence
we need to understand its nature. We need to (1) know the specific types
of suffering involved, (2) discover the causes of those sufferings, (3)
see if it is possible to remove those causes, and then (4) determine
what should be practiced. Renunciation, therefore, involves at least a
partial understanding of the four noble truths: 1. true suffering 2.
true sources of suffering 3. true cessations of suffering and its
sources 4. true paths for actualizing true cessations When Buddha began
teaching for the first time, he taught the four noble truths in the
order just given. However, this order does not reflect how these truths
come into being. In temporal sequence the second truth---the sources of
suffering--- precedes the first truth---suffering itself. Similarly, the
fourth truth---the paths of practice---must precede attainment of the
third---the cessations of suffering. However, Buddha taught the four
truths in the order of practice, not in the order in which they are
produced. In practice, you have to identify the extent of suffering
first, to know that this type of life is beset by misery; this deepens
your natural wish to be freed from pain. When you recognize suffering
for what it is, as Buddha did, then you will be drawn into discovering
its causes, the sources of suffering. Just as a doctor must first
diagnose a disease, you must understand the root cause of suffering
before you can treat it. Not until you have determined the sources of
suffering can you understand that there could be a cessation to it.
Also, without decisively understanding that the end of suffering is
possible, you might consider practice of this path just a fruitless
hardship. Then you can seek the true paths for actualizing true
cessations. This is why Buddha presented the four truths in the given
order of practice. I will discuss the first noble truth here and the
next three in Chapter Three.

THE FIRST NOBLE TRUTH: SUFFERING

Suffering is like a disease we have all contracted. To find the cure we
must carefully identify the full scope of the disease: pain, change, and
pervasive conditioning. 1. One level of suffering is out-and-out pain
that we all recognize as such. Even animals want to overcome it. The
physical and mental pains of daily life, like headaches and the anguish
of separation, fall into this category. 2. What we usually experience as
pleasure is mostly a diminishment of pain. If good food or drink, for
example, really were just pleasurable---if they had an inner nature of
pleasure---then no matter how much we ate or drank, we would feel
greater and greater happiness in equal measure. Instead, if we partake
excessively, we begin to suffer in our bodies and our minds. This
indicates that these experiences of pleasure have an inner nature of
pain. I like to tell the story of a family that buys a new television.
Compared to the old one, it is really great, and everyone watches it for
days on end. But eventually they get tired of it. This indicates that
the original pleasure has a nature of pain. Such states of temporary
happiness are called the suffering of change. 3. In addition to ordinary
pain and the suffering of change, there is a deeper level of suffering
called pervasive conditioning. Mind and body operate under the influence
of karma (tendencies created by previous actions) and of afflictive, or
counterproductive, emotions such as lust and hatred. In ordinary life we
are born from and into the pervasive influence of karma and afflictive
emotions. Even neutral states of feeling are under the influence of
causes and conditions beyond your control---you are stuck in a process
susceptible to suffering.

The Human Condition At the beginning of our life is birth, during which
we suffer, and at the end of our life is death, during which we also
suffer. Between these two come aging and illness. No matter how wealthy
you are or how physically fit you are, you have to suffer through these
circumstances. On top of this comes discontentment. You want more and
more and more. This, in a sense, is real poverty---always to be hungry,
hungry, hungry with no time to be satisfied. Others might not be rich,
but contentment provides them with fewer worries, fewer enemies, fewer
problems, and very good sleep. On more than one occasion, when I have
visited very nice homes in rich communities, I have peeked

inside the medicine chest in the bathroom and found some medications to
provide energy for the day and others to induce sleep at night.
Contentment might do both of these jobs better since it reduces anxiety
during the day, paving the way for sleeping peacefully. In the frenzy of
modern life we lose sight of the real value of humanity. People become
the sum total of what they produce. Human beings act like machines whose
function is to make money. This is absolutely wrong. The purpose of
making money is the happiness of humankind, not the other way round.
Humans are not for money, money is for humans. We need enough to live,
so money is necessary, but we also need to realize that if there is too
much attachment to wealth, it does not help at all. As the saints of
India and Tibet tell us, the wealthier one becomes, the more suffering
one endures. Even friends can bring suffering. Usually we feel that
friends bring us more pleasure and happiness, but sometimes they bring
more trouble. Today your friend has a nice smiling face, but in a moment
the conversation can turn sour, and you start to fight, with no trace of
friendship. We do gain happiness and satisfaction from our friends, but
it is impermanent; it is not true happiness. In a deep sense, ordinary
friendship also has a nature of pain. Look at your own body. No matter
how smooth your complexion and how fine your figure, if you shed even
one drop of blood, you are suddenly not so good looking. Under the skin
there is raw flesh; look deeper and you find bone. Skeletons in a museum
or a hospital make most of us uncomfortable, but we are all the same
underneath. Some people may be quite fat, others thin, some handsome,
yet if I look at them with an X-ray machine, I see a room full of
skeletons with huge eye sockets. Such is the real nature of our body.
Consider the pleasure of eating. Today I had some delicious food. When I
ate it, it was beautiful, but as it passed through my stomach and
intestines, it changed into something not so beautiful. When eating, we
avoid noticing that this is what happens, and we take pleasure,
thinking, "Oh, now this is a very good meal! I am really pleased." But
that beautiful food gradually passes through my body, and finally goes
into the toilet in a form nobody regards as beautiful. This stuff that
people regard as very dirty actually is made in this human body. In a
way, making stool is a principal function of our bodies! Eating,
working, and making money are meaningless in themselves. However, even a
small act of compassion grants meaning and purpose to our lives.

PERSISTENCE AND HOPE Analyze. Think, think, think. When you do, you will
recognize that our ordinary way of life is almost meaningless. Do not be
discouraged. It would be very foolish to give up now. On those occasions
when you feel most hopeless, you must make a powerful effort. We are so
accustomed to faulty states of mind that it is difficult to change with
just a little practice. Just a drop of something sweet cannot change a
taste that is powerfully bitter. We must persist in the face of failure.
In difficult personal circumstances the best recourse is to try to
remain as honest and sincere as possible. Otherwise, by responding
harshly or selfishly, you simply make matters worse. This is especially
apparent in painful family situations. You should realize that difficult
present circumstances are entirely due to your own past undisciplined
actions, so when you experience a difficult period, do your best to
avoid behavior that will add to your burden later on. It is important to
diminish undisciplined states of mind, but it is even more important to
meet adversity with a positive attitude. Keep this in mind: By greeting
trouble with optimism and hope, you are undermining worse troubles down
the line. Beyond that, imagine that you are easing the burden of
everyone suffering problems of that kind. This practice---imagining that
by accepting your pain you are using up the negative karma of everyone
destined to feel such pain---is very helpful. Sometimes when I am sick,
I practice taking others' suffering to myself and giving them my
potential for happiness; this provides a good deal of mental relief.
Every day in the early morning, and especially when I have the time, I
do this practice in a general way with regard to all living beings. But
in particular I single out Chinese leaders and those officials who must
make decisions on the spot to torture or kill particular Tibetans. I
visualize them, and draw their ignorance, prejudice, hatred, and pride
into myself. I feel that, because of my own training, even if in reality
I could absorb some portion of their negative attitudes, it could not
influence my behavior and turn me into a negative person. Therefore,
ingesting their negativities is not that much of a problem for me, but
it lessens their problems. I do this with such strong feeling that if
later in the day in my office I hear of their atrocities, although one
part of my mind is a little irritated and angry, the main part is still
under the influence of the morning practice; the intensity of the hatred
is reduced to the point where it is groundless. Whether this meditation
really helps those officials or not, it gives me peace of mind. Then I
can be more effective; the benefit is immense.

Under no circumstances should you lose hope. Hopelessness is a real
cause of failure. Remember, you can overcome any problem. Be calm, even
when the external environment is confused or complicated; it will have
little effect if your mind is at peace. On the other hand, if your mind
gives way to anger, then even when the world is peaceful and
comfortable, peace of mind will elude you.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE 1. Examine your motivation as often as you
can. Even before getting out of bed in the morning, establish a
nonviolent, nonabusive outlook for your day. At night examine what you
did during the day. 2. Notice how much suffering there is in your own
life: There is physical and mental pain from sickness, aging, and death,
which you naturally seek to avoid. There are temporary experiences, like
eating good food, that seem to be pleasurable in and of themselves but,
if indulged continuously, turn into pain: This is the suffering of
change. When a situation switches from pleasure to pain, reflect on the
fact that the deeper nature of the original pleasure reveals itself.
Attachment to such superficial pleasures will only bring more pain.
Reflect on how you are caught in a pervasive process of conditioning
that, rather than being under your control, is under the influence of
karma and afflictive emotions. 3. Gradually develop a deeper, more
realistic view of the body by considering its constituents---skin,
blood, flesh, bone, and so forth. 4. Analyze your life closely. If you
do, you will eventually find it difficult to misuse your life by
becoming an automaton or by seeking money as the path to happiness.

5. Adopt a positive attitude in the face of difficulty. Imagine that by
undergoing a difficult situation with grace you are also preventing
worse consequences from karmas that you would otherwise have to
experience in the future. Take upon yourself the burden of everyone's
suffering of that type. 6. Regularly evaluate the possible negative and
positive effects of feelings such as lust, anger, jealousy, and hatred.
When it becomes obvious that their effects are very harmful, continue
your analysis. Gradually your conviction will strengthen. Repeated
reflection on the disadvantages of anger, for example, will cause you to
realize that anger is senseless. This decision will cause your anger to
diminish gradually. OceanofPDF.com

3 Discovering How Trouble Starts and Stops

THE SECOND NOBLE TRUTH: SOURCES OF SUFFERING After identifying the scope
of suffering, we need to discover its sources, which are twofold:
afflictive, or counterproductive, emotions, and contaminated karmas.

Afflictive Emotions Since afflictive emotions contaminate karmas, or
actions, I will discuss them first. There are two classes of afflictive
emotions---one that is better expressed and the other that is better not
expressed. An example of the former is a terrible fear from the past
that becomes fixed in the mind. In this case, it is definitely
beneficial to let your feelings out and discuss the incident. When I was
around fourteen years old during the summer at the Norbulingka Palace,
the Regent (who at that time was my senior tutor) scolded me after a
teaching that he gave annually. With a harsh demeanor, he said, "Even if
your realization is equal to a god's, your behavior still has to conform
to a human being's." I was hurt because I felt that I was already acting
as an ordinary student listening to him even though I was the Dalai
Lama, ranking above him. I was irritated and remained uncomfortable for
the next few months. Then the Chinese Communists invaded eastern Tibet
in 1950, and I had to escape from Lhasa to Tromo in southwestern Tibet
near the Indian border. In time officials in Lhasa advised me that the
situation looked workable and that I should return. While on the way
back to Lhasa, we spent several days at the Regent's monastery,
Talungdra. One day he asked during a casual chat whether because of his
attitude I

ever had become upset. I mentioned what had happened, somewhat vaguely,
without much detail. What a relief this was! We went on to have a
pleasant stay at the monastery. It is better to talk about such things
that occur only once, whereas the other class of counterproductive
emotions---which include such feelings as lust, hatred, enmity,
jealousy, and belligerence---should not be expressed; they become more
and more frequent. Expressing them tends to make them stronger and more
prevalent. It is better to reflect on the disadvantages of engaging in
such emotions and to try to displace them with feelings of satisfaction
and love. We should forcefully overcome negative emotions when they
appear, but it would be even better to find ways to prevent them in the
first place. Lust and hatred give rise to the other counterproductive
emotions and thereby create a whole lot of trouble in this world. We
cannot be content to live with the consequences of lust and hatred. Of
the two, hatred is worse on an immediate basis because it so quickly
brings harm to others, but lust is responsible for driving on the
process of cyclic existence---the repeated round of birth, aging,
sickness, and death ---from lifetime to lifetime. The root of lust and
hatred is ignorance of the true nature of all living beings as well as
ignorance of the nature of inanimate things. This ignorance is not just
lack of knowledge but a consciousness that imagines the exact opposite
of the truth; it misapprehends what is actually so. There are many
levels of misperception, as in failing to understand what to adopt in
practice and what to discard in daily behavior, but here we are talking
about the ignorance at the root of all suffering. This is the notion
that sentient beings and other phenomena exist inherently, in and of
themselves. I will discuss this difficult topic later in Chapters Eight,
Nine, and Ten.

Contaminated Karmas All pleasure and pain depend on karmas, or former
actions that have created predispositions in the mind. Karmas can be
divided into virtuous and nonvirtuous according to whether they produce
pleasure or pain in the long run. For instance, if the effect of an
action is to establish a new human life, then that action is virtuous
because its long-term effect is a good transmigration. Conversely, if
the effect of an

action is to cause your rebirth as a hungry ghost, then that action is
nonvirtuous because its long-term effect is a bad transmigration. Karmas
can also be divided into those that etch the general outline of a new
lifetime by determining the type of birth as well as the length of life,
and those that fill in the details of a lifetime, such as prosperity,
good health, and so on. The former type is called a "path of action"
because that action (virtuous or not) serves as a path, or a means, to a
complete lifetime in either a happy transmigration or a bad
transmigration. To be a "path of action," a karma must have four
characteristics: motivating intention; correct identification of the
person or object; proper preparation; and successful completion.
Sometimes all of these factors occur, as in the case where you intend to
give to a beggar and actually do so; sometimes only the motivation is
present, and you intend to give to a beggar but do not actually do so;
or you may get the result unintentionally, if some money drops through a
hole in your pocket onto the sidewalk, and a beggar picks it up. Actions
that do not have all four characteristics could fall into the second
category, which fills in the details of a lifetime. Finally, karmas can
be divided into those performed by groups, such as organized charities,
and those undertaken individually. The effects of karmas can be
experienced in the same life, in the next life, or in a life after that.
Strong virtuous or nonvirtuous karmas with a powerful motivation to help
or harm can yield their effects during the same life. The Process of
Dying In order to understand the types of karma and the special features
of the highest levels of practice, we need to understand the dynamics of
three stages: the process of death; the intermediate state between this
life and the next; and the process of rebirth out of the intermediate
state. The transmission of karmas from one lifetime to another occurs at
death through a very subtle mind of clear light. Although this deepest
level of mind exists throughout life, it is manifest at death, and
therefore is often taught in this context. You can learn more about this
in many texts of Highest Yoga Tantra, spoken by Buddha, such as the
Guhyasamaja Tantra. These texts describe the many different categories
of mind or consciousness, ranging from gross to subtle. Subtler states
of mind are more powerful and effective when applied in spiritual
practice. The grossest level of consciousness perceives through the
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and

body. More subtle is mental consciousness, which itself ranges from
gross levels, such as ordinary thought, to deep sleep and fainting when
the breath has stopped, to the innermost subtle mind of clear light.
Except in extraordinary meditative states, the subtlest, or deepest
consciousness manifests itself only when we are dying. (Less withdrawn
and therefore brief versions of the subtle levels of consciousness also
occur when going to sleep, ending a dream, sneezing, yawning, and during
orgasm. I will discuss the last of these in Chapter Eleven.) The process
of dying involves a serial cessation, or dissolution, of the four
internal elements: earth (the hard substances of the body); water
(fluids); fire (heat); and wind (energy, movement). In ordinary life,
these elements serve as the basis for consciousness, but during the
process of dying their capacity to support consciousness decreases,
beginning with the earth element. Each step in this dissolution actually
increases the capacity of the next element to support consciousness.
Step by step it looks like this: 1. When the earth element, or hard
substances of your body, dissolves into the water element, the external
indication is that your body becomes thinner; internally, you see what
appears to be a mirage seen in a desert. 2. When the water element of
your body dissolves into the fire element, the external signs are that
the fluids in your body dry---your mouth dries, your nose puckers, and
so forth; internally, you see what has been described as puffs of smoke
from a chimney or smoke floating throughout a room. 3. When the fire
element of your body dissolves into the wind, or air, element, the
external indication is that the heat in your body diminishes;
internally, you see what look like fireflies at night or like scattering
sparks. Heat withdraws from the body in different ways---from the feet
upward to the heart or from the top of the head down. The former is
preferable because it indicates that the mind will exit the body either
upward or straight forward, not downward, and thus will most likely lead
to a favorable next lifetime. This is caused by virtuous karma. 4. Next,
the wind, or movement of energy in your body, dissolves into
consciousness, and your outer breath ceases; at this time you see an
appearance like the light above a flickering candle flame when the fuel
has almost been used up. (Some doctors would consider a person in this
state to be dead, but from the Buddhist point of view the mere cessation
of the outer breath does

not mean that consciousness has left the body.) The flickering light is
followed by the appearance of a steady flame. The final four phases of
dying involve the dissolution of grosser levels of consciousness into
subtler. This happens when the winds, or inner energies, that serve as
the mounts of consciousness dissolve. Think of consciousness as mounted
on energy like a rider on a horse. In preparation for the next phase,
the energies that served as the mounts of the many types of conceptual
consciousnesses dissolve, shifting the basis of consciousness from
grosser to subtler levels of energy. These naturally occur in four
phases: 5. Your mind itself turns into an omnipresent, huge, vivid white
vastness. It is described as a clear sky filled with moonlight---not the
moon shining in empty space but that space filled with white light.
Conceptual thought has vanished, and nothing appears except this vivid
whiteness, which is your consciousness. However, a subtle sense of
subject and object remains, so the state is slightly dualistic. 6. Your
mind turns into a red or orange vastness, more vivid than before;
nothing else appears. It is like a clear sky filled with sunlight---not
the sun shining in the sky but space itself, filled with red or orange
light. In this state the mind is even less dualistic. 7. Your mind
itself turns into a still more subtle, vividly black state; nothing else
appears. This is called "near-attainment" because you are close to
manifesting the mind of clear light. The mind of black vastness is like
a moonless, very dark sky just after dusk when no stars are seen. In the
beginning of this phase you are aware, but then you lose awareness as
you slip into even thicker darkness. 8. When the mind of black
appearance ceases, your mind itself turns into the fully aware mind of
clear light. Called the fundamental innate mind of clear light, this is
the most subtle, profound, and powerful level of consciousness. It is
like the sky's natural state at dawn (not sunrise)---without moonlight,
sunlight, or darkness. The passage through to the mind of clear light
can be fast or slow. Some people remain in the final stage, the mind of
clear light of death, for only several minutes; others stay for as long
as a week or two. Since the mind of clear light is so powerful,

it is valuable to practice, so many Tibetan practitioners rehearse these
stages of dying on a daily basis. I myself practice them six times daily
by imagining the eight levels of mind one by one (without, of course,
the physical changes in the first four stages). The eight levels of mind
are: 1. mirage 2. smoke 3. fireflies 4. flame of a candle 5. vivid white
sky-mind 6. vivid red or orange sky-mind 7. vivid black sky-mind 8.
clear light In the process of dying, we know that the person is still in
the clear light as long as the body does not begin to smell or rot.
There are Tibetans who have been tortured and, upon being returned to
their jail cells, sit cross-legged in the process of death, sustaining
the mind of clear light. Reportedly, their Chinese Communist prison
guards have been amazed by this. From the viewpoint of their own
dogmatism, they regard Buddhism as blind faith, so when they are faced
with such evidence, they try to keep quiet about it. In India, too,
quite a number of practitioners have remained in this state, sometimes
for a few days and in one case for around seventeen days. When a person
is abiding in the state of clear light, if the energy that supports this
deep level of mind begins to fluctuate, at that point consciousness
finally leaves the body, and the body or head shifts slightly. There are
many opportunities for further investigation into the various stages of
death. Modern science has done a great deal of research on energy waves,
the human brain, and its functions. Scientists and Buddhists share a
common interest in this area, and I believe we should work together to
probe the relationship between the mind and its inner energies, and
between the brain and consciousness. Buddhist explanations can
contribute to scientific research, and vice versa. This kind of
cooperation is already underway, and more would be helpful. Intermediate
State

All beings who are to be reborn as humans pass through an intermediate
state between this lifetime and the next. In this intermediate state
your body takes on a shape that resembles your body in the next life at
age five or six (although some say this is not necessarily so). When the
intermediate life ends, the bridge to the next lifetime has been
crossed. This process is carried out by the subtlest level of mind. The
Process of Rebirth With regard to rebirth, consciousness enters the womb
when the male and female fertilizing elements mix together---provided
there is nothing wrong in the womb or with the sperm, and provided all
the favorable factors such as karmic connection are present. However,
consciousness does not necessarily have to enter at the time when the
male and female are in union, for in our texts there are accounts of the
father's semen being inserted into the vagina separately from
intercourse. It seems that whether these elements come together inside
or, as sometimes is the case nowadays, outside the womb in vitro,
consciousness would have to enter while they mix. Still, it is difficult
to arrive at a decisive explanation from Buddhist texts since some books
say that fertilization takes place when male and female are at a point
of strong desire. This complex subject becomes more complicated in
modern times. Consider an instance when an embryo is refrigerated. Once
the connection has been made from the past life to the new life through
fertilization, would that being whose embryonic body is refrigerated
undergo the suffering of cold? The very beginning of the body has
already been established, and so, according to our explanations, the
organ of bodily feeling has already primitively formed (even though the
organs of vision and so forth have not). Is there physical sensation
from the next moment after fertilization? I have not come to a decision
on these points; they are topics for much discussion. If we assume that
the being in the embryo does suffer cold, this raises the question of
whether the person who puts the embryo in the refrigerator accumulates
bad karma from that action. This would depend on the person's
motivation. We cannot say that just because another being undergoes
suffering due to something that is somehow involved with you, you would
accumulate bad karma. For instance, even in normal circumstances a fetus
in the mother's womb undergoes suffering due to being in the womb, but
the mother does not accumulate any bad karma. Similarly, when the child
is born, it suffers again, but the mother

does not accumulate any bad karma. (If she did, a mother who gave birth
to many children would have accumulated a great deal of bad karma, which
is absurd!) Therefore, a person's motivation is the key to determine
what type of karma accumulates.

THE THIRD NOBLE TRUTH: TRUE CESSATIONS Since defilements of the mind
such as lust, hatred, jealousy, and belligerence are based on a
fundamental misconception of the nature of persons and objects, the
process of overcoming them requires a solution to that ignorance. The
question becomes how to uproot the ignorance that is the cause of
suffering. It cannot be pulled out like a thorn or removed through
surgery. In order to overcome this misconception of the nature of
persons and things, you have to understand their true nature. Then,
through continued meditation, you become accustomed to the truth and
increase the power of wisdom to undermine negative emotions rooted in
ignorance. At this point an explanation of emptiness would be helpful
since this is what wisdom realizes about the nature of persons and
things (see Chapters Eight--Ten). But, in brief, the fact that
defilements such as afflictive emotions can be extinguished at all is
due to the mind not being impure by nature. It has a pure essence.
Defilements are purified through meditation on the true nature both of
the mind and of all other things. Extinguishing these defilements is the
third noble truth of cessation---a state beyond suffering and its
causes.

THE FOURTH NOBLE TRUTH: TRUE PATHS True paths refer to three ways of
training that are the principal topics of this book ---morality,
concentrated meditation, and wisdom. Spiritual practice along these
paths leads to true cessations, culminating in nirvana and eventually
Buddhahood.

From beginningless time we have had a valid awareness, or consciousness,
of "I." This "I," or self, naturally and innately wants happiness and
does not want suffering, and this desire is valid---it is true and
reasonable. Consequently, all of us have the right to achieve happiness
and banish suffering. The fact that suffering and happiness themselves
change from moment to moment indicates that these experiences depend
upon causes and conditions. In order to get rid of suffering we need to
eliminate the causes and conditions of suffering, and in order to
achieve happiness we need to acquire the causes and conditions of
happiness. The first two noble truths apply to the impure phenomena
which we want to get rid of---true sufferings, which are the effects,
and true sources, which are the causes. The final two noble truths are
pure states which we want to attain---true cessations, which are the
effects, and true paths, which are the causes. The way Buddha taught the
four noble truths they contain two sequences---one of suffering, which
we seek to abandon, and one of happiness, which we seek to adopt.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE Having recognized the scope of suffering,
research its causes, or sources, and identify that the source of
suffering is ignorance of the true nature of persons and things, which
results in lust, hatred, and so forth. Realize that suffering can be
removed, it can be extinguished into the sphere of reality. Reflect that
this true cessation is attained through the practice of morality,
concentrated meditation, and wisdom---the true paths. OceanofPDF.com

4 Refraining from Harm

Buddhists take a vow of morality in the context of first taking
refuge---in Buddha, in the states of realization, and in the spiritual
community. Refuge is the foundation for the practice of morality. Buddha
teaches us how to find refuge from suffering and limitation, but the
chief refuge, or source of protection, is found in the states of
realization achieved through practicing morality, concentrated
meditation, and wisdom. Buddhist scriptures recommend that you hide your
good qualities and achievements like a lamp inside a vessel. You should
not advertise them unless there is great purpose in doing so. It is
considered a minor infraction of a monastic's vow if he or she achieves
the state of liberation and says to someone else, "I have attained
liberation." This being the case, it is difficult to determine what
stage of inner experience another person has achieved. I have had the
opportunity to meet several people who have attained extraordinary
spiritual development. There was a not very scholarly monk from my
Namgyel monastery who came out of Tibet to India around 1980. Since we
knew each other, we were casually chatting one day. He told me that
while he was in a Chinese Communist gulag for almost eighteen years, he
faced danger on a few occasions. I thought he was referring to a threat
to his own life. But when I asked, "What danger?" he answered, "Losing
compassion toward the Chinese." He considered this to be the danger!
Most of us would feel proud to tell others about how angry we got, as if
we were some kind of hero. A lama from the Drukpa Kagyu tradition and I
were very close. We met frequently and always used to joke, teasing each
other back and forth. On one occasion I asked him about his spiritual
experience. He told me that when he was young, he was staying with his
lama who had him perform the preliminary practice

of making a hundred thousand prostrations to the Buddha, the doctrine,
and the spiritual community. Early in the morning and late in the
evening he had to make prostrations on a low platform the length of his
body. His lama was meditating in the dark in the next room; so to trick
him into thinking he was making prostrations he would tap with his
knuckles on the prostration platform. Years later, after his lama passed
away, he was taking a meditation retreat in a cave, during which he
recalled his lama's great kindness over years of training him, and he
wept and wept. He almost fainted, but then experienced the clear light,
which he continuously practiced. Subsequently, after successful
meditations he occasionally would remember past lives in vivid
reflections before him. These firsthand stories have inspired me. There
are definitely practitioners today moving in the direction of
Buddhahood. Meeting these people increases our inspiration and
determination, and through them the teaching becomes alive. In this way
the spiritual community provides models for practitioners to look up to,
which can help lead us to refuge. These three---the Buddha, the states
of realization and doctrines that teach them, and the spiritual
community---are factors outside yourself that have greater capacity to
end suffering than you presently do. However, a Buddhist is not asking
them to grant happiness. Rather, happiness comes from putting the
doctrine into practice. Buddha teaches the actual refuge---how to
practice the doctrine---but the main responsibility lies in your own
implementation. To create the foundation for an eventual spiritual state
devoid of suffering and limitation we need to engage in the following
practice: 1. Identify the ten nonvirtues (see p. 29). 2. Identify the
ten virtues (which are the opposites of those nonvirtues). 3. Abandon
the former and adopt the latter.

LEVELS OF PRACTICE OF THE MORALITY OF INDIVIDUAL LIBERATION Because
people vary in their ability to keep certain vows, Buddha described
several different levels of moral practice. Within the morality of
individual liberation, there are:

those who live a householder's life, in a home rather than a monastery
those who have left a householder's life to become nuns or monks. If you
are capable of maintaining chastity for a lifetime, you can leave the
household and take monastic vows. If you cannot maintain chastity but
can keep vows, you can take certain layperson's vows that last an entire
lifetime, or others that last for only a day.

BENEFITS OF MORALITY We find many similarities in the monastic life in
all religions---simplicity, devotion through prayer or meditation, and
service to others. Christian clergy are especially committed to service
in the fields of education, health, and welfare, and Buddhist monastics
have much to learn from these Christian traditions. Practice of the
morality of individual liberation, whether lay or monastic, leads to
contentment. For example, monastics adhere to a limited diet---a small
breakfast and then lunch, with nothing after that. They have no right to
demand, "I want this food or that." Whatever they are offered on daily
rounds of begging, they must accept. Thus Buddhist monastics are not
necessarily vegetarian; whatever they get, they will eat. That is the
training of contentment regarding food. It alleviates anxiety about
getting this or that kind of food. Lay people can emulate this practice
by not insisting on special foods. Even if you are rich, you actually
cannot consume much more than poor people, except to your own detriment.
Both rich and poor have the same stomach. With regard to clothing, monks
and nuns are limited to only one set of robes. To own more than one, he
or she must get the blessing of another monastic, keeping in mind that
the extra robe also belongs to the other person. We cannot wear
expensive clothing. Prior to the Communist Chinese invasion, monks and
nuns sometimes wore luxurious clothes, which amounted to corruption and
selfdeception. (In a way, the Communist Chinese have been kind to us by
destroying these corruptions!) This limitation in dress is the practice
of contentment regarding clothes. Lay people can adopt a similar
practice through moderation in dress. The same is true for adornments.
Wearing more than one ring on each finger is certainly too much! It is a
mistake to think that it is really worthwhile to spend more on food,

clothing, and adornments just because you have more money. Rather, spend
more on health and education for poor people. This is not forced
socialism but voluntary compassion. Also it is essential for monastics
to be satisfied with adequate shelter. An elaborate home is not allowed.
This is called contentment with regard to shelter. Lay people can adapt
this practice by reducing the neverending quest for a better home and
for the furniture and decorations in it. Examine your attitudes toward
food, clothes, and shelter. By reducing expectations you will promote
contentment. The extra energy which is released should be devoted to
meditation and to achieve cessation of problems, corresponding to the
fourth and third noble truths. In this way, contentment is the basis,
and the resulting action is called liking meditation and abandonment. We
should be contented in material areas, for those are bound by
limitation, but not with regard to the spiritual, which can be extended
limitlessly. Though it is true that a discontented person who owned the
whole world might want to own a tourist center on the moon, that
person's life is limited, and even the amount that can be owned is
limited. It is better right from the beginning to be contented. However,
with regard to compassion and altruism there is no limit, and thus we
should not be content with the degree that we have. We are just the
opposite; in the spiritual field we are content with slight amounts of
practice and progress, but materially we always want more and more. It
should be the other way around. Everyone needs to practice this, whether
lay or monastic. Practicing the morality of individual liberation is
also helpful in increasing mindfulness and introspection. If a monastic
is about to commit certain acts even in a dream, he or she realizes "I
am a monk/nun; I should not act this way." Mindfulness comes from a
highly developed awareness of your physical and verbal actions, which
carries over into dream-time. If you pay close attention to your conduct
when eating, coming and going, sitting and standing, and so forth, then
a strong condition of mindfulness will take hold. The practice of the
morality of individual liberation also fosters tolerance and patience.
Buddha said that patience is the highest form of asceticism, and through
it one can reach nirvana. For monks and nuns, there are four qualities
of patience and tolerance to maintain: If someone pushes you around, you
should be tolerant, patient If someone shows anger to you, you should
not respond with anger

If someone hits you, you should not strike back If someone embarrasses
and insults you, you should not answer back These practices increase
patience. A person who has left the householder's life but hurts someone
else is not engaged in proper activity. There are stories of monks in
Tibet who have even gone to war! They threw themselves into battle
despite Buddha's repeated teaching that to harm anyone else is certainly
not virtuous for a monk or nun. Spiritual practice is not about
externals---food, clothes, or the like. Spiritual practice takes place
in our hearts, in our minds. "True change is within; leave the outside
as it is." If your behavior truly reflects an improved mind and heart,
that is fine. However, if you are just making a show of your spiritual
accomplishments in order to get money, for example, that is hypocrisy.
Practicing Buddhism means transforming your attitude. Monastic practices
can be incorporated into a layperson's life through a strong, conscious
wish to refrain from harming others, physically or verbally. This
requires patience that will withstand physical and verbal attack. A
gradual approach is far better than trying to jump too high too soon;
otherwise, there is great risk and danger. For the time being,
contribute to society and practice the teachings. Once you reach a
certain stage of experience, you can practice with greater force if you
become a monastic. These practices fit together step by step. Usually my
advice for beginners is to be patient; have fewer expectations of
yourself. It is most important to be an honest citizen, a good member of
the human community. Whether or not you understand profound ideas, it is
important to be a good person wherever you are right now. You should not
neglect a greater purpose for the sake of a smaller one. Consider both
the present and the long term, in the same way that temporary economic
gains should be considered in relation to longterm environmental needs.

I like to say that the essence of the Buddha's teaching can be found in
two sayings: If possible, you should help others. If that is not
possible, at least you should do no harm.

Refraining from harming others is the essence of the initial stage of
living the teachings of morality.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE 1. Notice your attachments to food, clothes,
and shelter, and adapt monastic practices of contentment to a
layperson's life. Be satisfied with adequate food, clothing, and
shelter. Use the additional free time for meditation so that you can
overcome more problems. 2. Develop a strong desire to refrain from
harming others either physically or verbally no matter whether you are
embarrassed, insulted, reviled, pushed, or hit. OceanofPDF.com

5 Extending Help

With the practice of doing no harm as your foundation, now you can
cultivate concern for others. First, through the morality of individual
liberation, we learned to control anger and the like, and now we can
begin learning how to comfort and serve others. The practices described
in Chapters Two through Four---abandoning the ten nonvirtues,
identifying the scope and process of suffering and the way beyond it
through the four noble truths, and adapting the monastic's detachment
from transient pleasures to a layperson's life---all create a necessary
background for the second stage, what we call the morality of the Great
Vehicle. Now, not only do you not harm others, but you carry more
responsibility for helping them. Not harming others is a defensive
practice, whereas the move to help others is proactive. Buddha teaches
three stages of morality: the morality of individual liberation, the
morality of concern for others, and the morality of Tantra. Helping
others is the Great Vehicle teaching, the heart of the second stage, or
Bodhisattva morality. It is also the focus of this chapter.

THE VALUE OF DIFFICULT CIRCUMSTANCES How can you cultivate this
other-concerned attitude? The main approach for orienting yourself
toward caring is to consider your importance relative to others. A
practice that traveled from India to Tibet involves first finding common
ground with others (equalizing) and then replacing your
self-centeredness with other-

centeredness. The Indian scholar-yogi Shantideva explains this practice
of equalizing and switching self and other thoroughly in his A Guide to
the Bodhisattva Way of Life, and many Tibetans have written commentaries
on his text. Real compassion extends to each and every sentient being,
not just to friends or family or those in terrible situations. To
develop the practice of compassion to its fullest extent, one must
practice patience. Shantideva tells us that if the practice of patience
really moves your mind and brings about a change, you will begin to see
your enemies as the best of friends, even as spiritual guides. Enemies
provide us some of the best opportunities to practice patience,
tolerance, and compassion. Shantideva gives us many marvelous examples
of this in the form of dialogues between positive and negative aspects
of one's own mind. His reflections on compassion and patience have been
very useful in my own practice. Read them and your whole soul can be
transformed. Here is an example: For a practitioner of love and
compassion, an enemy is one of the most important teachers. Without an
enemy you cannot practice tolerance, and without tolerance you cannot
build a sound basis of compassion. So in order to practice compassion,
you should have an enemy. When you face your enemy who is going to hurt
you, that is the real time to practice tolerance. Therefore, an enemy is
the cause of the practice of tolerance; tolerance is the effect or
result of an enemy. So those are cause and effect. As is said, "Once
something has the relationship of arising from that thing, one cannot
consider that thing from which it arises as a harmer; rather it assists
the production of the effect." Reflection on this type of reasoning can
help develop great patience, which, in turn, develops powerful
compassion. Real compassion is based on reason. Ordinary compassion or
love is limited by desire or attachment. If your life is easy and
everything is going smoothly, then you can maintain pretenses. However,
when you face really desperate situations, there is no time to pretend;
you have to deal with reality. Hard times build determination and inner
strength. Through them we can also come to appreciate the uselessness of
anger. Instead of getting angry, nurture a deep caring and respect for
troublemakers because by creating such trying circumstances, they
provide us with invaluable opportunities to practice tolerance and
patience.

My life has not been a happy time; I have had to pass through many
difficult experiences, including losing my country to Chinese Communist
invaders and trying to re-establish our culture in neighboring
countries. Yet I regard these difficult periods as among the most
important times in my life. Through them, I have gained many new
experiences and learned many new ideas---they made me more realistic.
When I was young and living high above the city of Lhasa in the Potala
Palace, I frequently looked at the life of the city through a telescope.
I also learned a lot from the gossip of the sweepers in the palace. They
were like my newspaper, relating what the Regent was doing, and what
corruption and scandals were going on. I was always happy to listen, and
they were proud to be telling the Dalai Lama about what was happening in
the streets. The harsh events that unfolded after the invasion in 1950
forced me to become directly involved in issues that otherwise would
have been kept at a distance. As a result I have come to prefer a life
of committed social action in this world of suffering. The most
difficult time for me was after the Chinese had invaded. I was trying to
satisfy the invaders so that the situation would not worsen. When a
small delegation of Tibetan officials signed a seventeen-point agreement
with the Chinese without the consent of either myself or the government,
we were left with no alternative but to attempt to work with the
agreement. Many Tibetans resented it, but when they expressed their
opposition, the Chinese reacted even more harshly. I was caught in the
middle, trying to cool down the situation. The two acting prime
ministers on their own complained about the conditions to the Chinese
government, which asked me to dismiss them. This is the type of problem
I had to face day by day as long as we were in Tibet. We could not
concentrate on improving our own situation, but I did set up a reform
committee to alleviate excessive charges of interest on debts and so
forth. Against Chinese wishes, I first visited India in 1956 to
celebrate the twenty-five hundredth year after Buddha's birth. While in
India I had to make the difficult decision of whether to return to
Tibet. I was receiving messages about open revolts in eastern Tibet, and
many officials in Tibet advised me not to return. Also, from past
experience I knew that as China developed more military strength, their
attitude would become more harsh. We could see that there was not much
hope, but at that time it was not clear that we would have a full
guarantee of effective support from the government of India or from
another government. In the end we chose to return to Tibet. But in 1959
when there was a mass escape to India, the situation was easier because
the dilemma was gone. We could

put all of our energy and time into building a healthy community with
modern education for the youth and at the same time try to preserve our
traditional ways of studying and practicing Buddhism. We were now
working in an atmosphere of freedom without fear. My own practice has
benefited from a life of great turbulence and trouble. You too can come
to see the hardships you endure as deepening your practice.

EQUALIZING AND SWITCHING SELF AND OTHER As Shantideva explains this
practice, first you realize that each and every other sentient being
wants happiness and does not want suffering, just like you; in this
fundamental way you and they are equal. Then, when you consider that you
are only a single person measured against an infinite number of other
sentient beings, you realize that it would be completely ridiculous
either to neglect the welfare of others or to use them for the sake of
your own pleasure. It would be far more reasonable to dedicate yourself
to their service. When you consider the situation this way, it becomes
very clear. No matter how important you may be, you are only a single
person. You have the same right to be happy as everyone else, but the
difference is that you are one, and they are many. To lose the happiness
of a single person is important, but not so important as losing the
happiness of many other beings. From this perspective you can cultivate
compassion, love, and respect for others. In a sense, all human beings
belong to a single family. We need to embrace the oneness of humanity
and show concern for everyone---not just my family or my country or my
continent. We must show concern for every being, not just the few who
resemble us. Differences of religion, ideology, race, economic system,
social system, and government are all secondary.

Being Wisely Selfish Put others first; you yourself come next. This
works even from a selfish viewpoint. Let me explain how this is
possible. You want happiness and do not want suffering, and if you show
other people kindness, love, and respect, they will respond in kind;
this way your happiness will increase. If you show other people anger
and hatred,

they will show you the same, and you will lose your own happiness. So I
say, if you are selfish, you should be wisely selfish. Ordinary
selfishness focuses only on your own needs, but if you are wisely
selfish, you will treat others just as well as you treat those close to
you. Ultimately, this strategy will produce more satisfaction, more
happiness. So, even from a selfish viewpoint, you get better results by
respecting others, serving others, and reducing self-centeredness. When
you are concerned about others, your own welfare is fulfilled
automatically. Consider the physical and verbal nonvirtues, which are
causes of being born in a bad situation. Someone with a small outlook
avoids killing, for example, out of a motivation to not accumulate a bad
karma imprinted in his or her own mind. Someone with a little broader
perspective avoids killing by thinking that it will prevent rebirth in a
good life where practice in order to leave the entire round of cyclic
existence could be continued. However, altruistic people consider
others' lives to be as important as their own and avoid murder out of
wanting to protect another person's life. This cherishing of others
makes a huge difference in the strength of the motivation to refrain
from killing. Those whose motivation is selfcentered could think that
even if they commit such an ill-deed, they could confess and seek to
ameliorate the karma, whereas someone who values another person's life
cares about the other's suffering and knows that it would not help that
person to confess to murder. The same is true for stealing, adultery,
lying, divisive talk, harsh speech, and even, I think, senseless
chatter. Another way that other-concern is so valuable is that it puts
your own situation in perspective. At one point I was particularly
saddened about the situation of Tibet, but then I remembered that I had
taken the Bodhisattva vows and every day frequently reflected on
Shantideva's prayer: As long as the sky exists And as long as there are
sentient beings, May I remain to help Relieve them of all their pain. As
soon as I remembered this, the whole feeling of burden immediately
cleared away, much like heavy clothes being lifted off me. Altruistic
commitment relieves specific causes of dejection by placing them in a
broader perspective; these causes should not discourage you. Most of
one's own troubles, worries, and sadness in this life comes from
self-cherishing. As I

mentioned above, being wisely selfish is not negative, but short-sighted
selfishness, concerned only with immediate satisfaction, is
counterproductive. A narrow perspective makes even a small problem
unbearable. Being concerned about all sentient beings widens your view,
making you more realistic. In this way an altruistic attitude helps to
reduce your own pain right now. My earnest request is that you practice
love and kindness whether you believe in a religion or not. Through this
practice you will come to realize the value of compassion and kindness
for your own peace of mind. After all, even though you may not be
concerned with other people, you are very much concerned with
yourself---no question about it---so you must want to achieve a peaceful
mind and a happier daily life. If you practice more kindness and
tolerance, you will find more peace. There is no need to change the
furniture in your house or move to a new home. Your neighbor may be very
noisy or very difficult, but so long as your own mind is calm and
peaceful, neighbors will not bother you much. However, if you are
generally irritable, even when your best friend visits, you cannot
become really happy. If you are calm, even your enemy cannot disturb
you. This is why I say that if you are really selfish, you are better
off being wisely selfish. This way you can fulfill your selfish motive
to be happy. That is much better than being self-centered, or foolishly
selfish, which will not succeed.

Visualization The following visualization technique is very helpful in
daily practice. 1. You remain calm and reasonable. 2. In front of you to
the right, imagine another version of yourself who is a solid mass of
egotistical self-centeredness, the kind of person who would do anything
to satisfy an urge. 3. In front of you to the left, visualize a group of
poor people who are not related to you, including some who are
destitute, needy, suffering. 4. Be calm and unbiased as you observe
these two sides. Now think, "Both want happiness. Both want to shed
suffering. Both have the right to accomplish these goals." 5. Consider
this: We often work long and hard for a better salary, or we spend a
great deal of money in hopes of gaining even more; we are willing to
make

temporary sacrifices for a long-term return. By the same logic, it makes
perfect sense for one single person to make sacrifices in order to help
a larger good. Naturally your mind will favor the side with the greater
number of suffering people. As an unbiased observer, consider your own
egotistical self there at your right side, neglecting the welfare of so
many, no matter how terrible their suffering. It simply is not good to
be like this. Though both sides that you are visualizing have an equal
right to happiness, there is no way to avoid the overwhelming need of
the greater number. The point is that you yourself must serve and help
other beings. This state of mind is undeniably difficult, but if you
practice it with great determination, then year by year, your mind will
change, will improve. In the midsixties I gave a teaching on
Tsongkhapa's Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, during which I
mentioned that if I achieved the first level of true cessation of
afflictive emotions, I would take a long rest. I really felt that way.
Even though I admired altruism, I thought it would be too difficult to
develop. Then around 1967 I received teaching on Shantideva's A Guide to
the Bodhisattva Way of Life from the Kagyu Lama Kunu Tenzin Gyeltsen and
began to reflect more on its meaning, along with Nagarjuna's Precious
Garland. Eventually I gained some confidence that with enough time I
could develop this high degree of compassion. Now, beginning from around
1970, every morning when I contemplate altruism, I cry. This is how
transformation takes place. I do not claim to have developed a high
degree of altruism, but I am confident that I can. Even if your
experience of altruistic motivation is modest, it will definitely give
you a degree of mental peace. Generating concern for others has vast
power to transform your mind. If you practice compassion for the sake of
all living beings--- including animals---then that same limitless merit
will accrue to you.

REALIZING OUR RESPONSIBILITY Even if you cannot, for the time being,
rise to the level of cherishing others more than yourself, at least you
can begin to see that it is not right to neglect others. We have a human
body and the power of human judgment, but if we use these only for

our own self-centered ends, and not for the sake of others, we are no
better than animals. In fact ants, to cite just one example, work
unselfishly for the community; we humans sometimes do not look good by
comparison. We are supposed to be higher beings, so we must act
according to our higher selves. If we look at world history, most great
tragedies that involved terrible loss of life were brought about by
human beings. Humans make the mess. Today millions of people live in
constant fear of racial, ethnic, and economic conflict. Who is
responsible for this fear? Not animals. The consequences of war include
the deaths of many animals, but this does not bother us; we are solely
concerned with ourselves. There is much talk about stopping war, but we
must go beyond wishful thinking. What is our human value when we live
with no show of compassion, no show of concern, just killing and eating
animals, and fighting and killing thousands of people? It is our
responsibility to clean up the mess. Nowadays, one of the best ways to
communicate is through television. People who work in television and
wish to practice this noble idea of caring for others could make a
substantial contribution. Although stories of lust and murder provide
exciting entertainment, they have negative influences deep in the mind.
We do not need this kind of entertainment all the time---although this
is probably none of my business! We must educate our young children in
the practice of compassion. Teachers and parents can instill in children
real, warmhearted human values to tremendous benefit. I noticed in a
newspaper that a toy company which usually makes toy rifles and so forth
deliberately stopped producing violent toys at Christmas. What a
wonderful idea! What an other-centered act!

DECIDING TO ACHIEVE ENLIGHTENMENT Once you get to the point of deeply
wanting to do whatever is possible to relieve suffering and uproot its
causes, and to help all beings achieve happiness and its causes, reflect
on how this could be brought about. It can only happen if other people
also come to understand how this works, and then implement those
practices. Therefore, your commitment to the highest welfare of other
beings can best be supported by teaching them how to practice and what
behavior to forsake, so that they themselves can have the power to
attain happiness and avoid suffering.

There is no other way. For this to happen, you yourself must know their
inner dispositions and interests as well as what to teach them. Thus,
for the sake of helping others, you should be fully prepared. What is
that preparation? You have to remove all obstacles in your own mind to
knowing everything that can be known. What compassionate
practitioners---called Bodhisattvas---really want is not just to
overcome the obstructions which prevent their own liberation; they want
to clear the way to omniscience so that they can gain access to other
people's dispositions and discern which techniques will help them. If it
were simply a matter of choice, the Bodhisattvas would choose to remove
the obstructions to omniscience first. However, the afflictive emotions
(keeping us trapped in cyclic existence) establish the obstructions to
omniscience, which are predispositions in the mind causing phenomena to
appear as if they are inherently existent. Without first overcoming the
chief afflictive emotion---the ignorance that believes in inherent
existence---you cannot overcome the predispositions deposited in the
mind by that ignorance. Through purification of the afflictive
obstructions as well as the predispositions established by them, you can
transform your own consciousness into the omniscient consciousness of a
Buddha, full enlightenment. To sum up, to bring about the complete
happiness of others it is necessary to become enlightened yourself. When
you understand this and resolve to seek enlightenment for their sake,
this is called the altruistic intention toward enlightenment, or
bodhichitta. By following Shantideva's practice of seeing self and
others as equally striving for happiness and then switching the emphasis
on your own aims over to those of infinite others, you can generate the
power of bodhichitta within you. There are three different styles of
altruistic attitude found in three types of people. The first type is
like a monarch, desiring to achieve Buddhahood first, as the most
effective way to help other beings. The second is like a boatman,
desiring to arrive at the other shore of enlightenment together with all
other beings. The third is like a shepherd, desiring that all others
should achieve Buddhahood first, before his or her own enlightenment.
The last two analogies only indicate the compassionate attitude of
certain types of practitioners; in actuality there is no case like the
boatman, of everyone attaining enlightenment simultaneously, nor like
the shepherd, prior to oneself. Rather, enlightenment always comes in
the first way, like a monarch, since Bodhisattvas eventually decide to
become enlightened as fast as possible so that they can more

effectively help others on a vast scale. As the Tibetan sage Sakya
Pandita says in his Differentiation of the Three Vows, Bodhisattvas have
two kinds of prayer-wishes, those that can be accomplished and those
that cannot. In Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva Way of Life
there are many examples of wishes that cannot actually be achieved but
are there for the sake of developing strong will and determination. For
example, the practice of giving away your own happiness and taking the
suffering of others upon yourself is not literally possible, except
perhaps for minor forms of suffering. Just as this practice, though
unrealistic, is intended to increase the courage of compassion, the
analogies of the boatman and shepherd serve to indicate how powerfully
Bodhisattvas wish to help others. Let me give an example of this
dedication that has been brought to the level of profound experience.
There was a scholarly practitioner from the Drashikyil monastery in the
northeastern province of Tibet called Amdo. In 1950 when the Chinese
Communists invaded and arrested one thousand out of the three thousand
monks at the monastery, a hundred of them were marked to be killed. He
was one of them. Taken to execution grounds, and just before being shot,
he prayed: May all the ill deeds, obstructions, and sufferings of beings
Be transferred to me, without exception, at this moment, And my
happiness and merit be sent to others. May all creatures be imbued with
happiness! Just a few moments before being killed, he had the spiritual
presence to remember the practice of taking on others' pain and giving
away his own happiness! It is easy to talk about such practice when
things are going well, but he was able to implement it at the hardest of
times. This is a clear indication of spiritual attainment acquired from
long practice.

As Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva Way of Life says, if a blind
person finds a jewel in a pile of garbage, she would cherish it dearly.
If, in the midst of the garbage of lust, hatred, and
ignorance---emotions that afflict our own minds and our world ---we
generate a compassionate attitude, we should cherish this like a jewel.
This precious discovery can give us happiness and real tranquility.
Alternatives such as taking a vacation or drugs only bring temporary
relief. A disciplined attitude of

true other-concern, in which you cherish others more than yourself, is
helpful both to you and to others. It does no harm to anyone,
temporarily or in the long run. Compassion is a priceless jewel. Care
about others at all times. If you cannot help others, do no harm. This
is the essential meaning of the practice of morality.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE On a daily basis, perform the visualization
in five steps described earlier: 1. Remain calm and reasonable. 2. In
front of you to the right, imagine another version of yourself,
egotistical and self-centered. 3. In front of you to the left, imagine a
group of poor people, suffering beings who are unrelated to you, neither
friend nor enemy. 4. Observe these two sides from your calm vantage
point. Now think, "Both want happiness. Both want to get rid of
suffering. Both have the right to accomplish these goals." 5. Consider
this: Just as usually we are willing to make temporary sacrifices for a
greater long-term good, so too the benefit of the larger number of
suffering beings to your left is much more important than this single
egotistical person on your right. Notice your mind naturally turning to
the side of the greater number of people. OceanofPDF.com

6 Aspiring to Enlightenment

WHY SEEK ENLIGHTENMENT? Compassion is the key to achieving a deeper
level of morality, yet how can we help others when we ourselves are
beset by wrong attitudes? Without being in a better position ourselves,
it is difficult for us to help others on the large scale we have been
discussing. For example, if you are going to help people who are
illiterate, you have to be educated. Similarly, to help so many sentient
beings we must achieve Buddhahood, since a Buddha has all the qualities
necessary to help them--- knowledge of all the techniques for spiritual
development and clairvoyant knowledge of their emotions, interests,
dispositions, and so forth. When you are moved through the practice of
compassion to feel concern for others, it is time for new values to take
root. We prepare the ground of our mind for these new values by engaging
in the ritual for aspiring to enlightenment. You are already equipped
with the basic qualities needed to attain complete enlightenment---the
luminous and cognitive nature of your mind. Therefore, focus on the
thought, "I will attain unsurpassed perfect enlightenment for the sake
of sentient beings throughout limitless space." Nurture this intention
until it is strong. The ritual for aspiring to altruistic enlightenment
is very helpful in this process.

SEVEN MERITORIOUS PRACTICES

This ritual, which should become part of your daily meditation, begins
with seven steps followed by a special offering. These practices
increase your force of merit, which in turn leads you more surely to
transformation. Through these forms of devotion you will intensify your
commitment to compassion; as you see below, they all involve paying
devotion to those special beings who teach compassion. 1.

Homage. Imagine Shakyamuni Buddha surrounded by innumerable

Bodhisattvas, filling the sky in front of you, and pay homage with your
body, speech, and mind. Put your palms together, and feel intensely that
you are respectfully taking refuge in the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. Say
out loud, "Homage to Shakyamuni Buddha and the Bodhisattvas." 2.
Offering. Spread out offerings, such as fruit or incense. Imagine
everything that might be suitable to be offered---whether you own it or
not---including your body, your resources, and your own virtue. Then
imagine offering these in their entirety to the Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas. 3. Disclosing ill deeds. We have all been responsible for
countless ill deeds of body, speech, and mind motivated by the desire to
do harm. In the spirit of full disclosure, develop a sense of regret for
having done them, as if through those actions you had eaten poison.
Generate, too, an intention to abstain from these actions in the future
as if to do otherwise might cost you your life. Think, "From the bottom
of my heart, I disclose to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas the ill deeds
that I have done." The main way to purify bad deeds is through regret.
The greater your regret, the stronger your intention not to repeat them
in the future. 4. Admiration. From the depths of your heart admire your
own virtuous actions and those of others. Take joy in the good things
you have done in this lifetime. Focus on specific good deeds such as
giving to a charity. The fact that you have a human body in this
lifetime and the opportunity to practice altruism is evidence of
virtuous actions in past lives. So take joy in those virtues, too, and
think to yourself, "I really did something good." Also take joy in the
virtues of others, whether you have seen them firsthand or not. Take joy
in the innumerable virtues of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas over
limitless time. By delighting in your own virtues and those of others,
you will keep from regretting your own virtuous deeds (wishing you had
not given to a charity because it caused your bank account to dwindle,
for example) and you will also avoid becoming jealous of the good deeds
of others, or competitive with them.

5. Entreaty. Ask the Buddhas who have become completely enlightened but
have not yet engaged in teaching spiritual doctrine, to do so on behalf
of all who suffer. 6. Supplication. Pray to the Buddhas not to pass
away. This is a specific request for Buddhas who have taught and are
nearing the time to pass away. 7. Dedication. Rather than directing your
practice of the previous steps toward temporary happiness and comfort in
this lifetime or the next, or to merely becoming liberated from cyclic
existence, dedicate it toward attaining highest enlightenment. Think,
"May these acts help me attain full and perfect enlightenment for the
sake of all sentient beings." Then imagine that the entire world system
has been purified and offer it with all conceivable marvels to the
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. This special offering nourishes compassion by
offering all things desirable to those who teach it.

COMMITTING TO HELP Now you are ready for the actual ritual of aspiring
to enlightenment for the care of others. It comes in two parts, the
first of which is the recitation of a short statement of refuge: "Until
I reach enlightenment I seek refuge in Buddha, the doctrine, and the
supreme spiritual community." In its most compassionate form, refuge is
the union of three attitudes: 1. Concern for the state of suffering of
all beings, not just for yourself. Concern, too, that they not seek mere
solitary relief from suffering but aspire to the altruistic
enlightenment of Buddhahood. 2. Faith in the Buddha, the states of
realization, and the spiritual community, maintaining the conviction
that through them all beings will find freedom from all suffering. 3.
Compassion, which means not being able to stand the enslavement of
others to suffering without doing something about it. Know that the
Buddha is the teacher of refuge, that the true paths and true cessations
are the actual refuge, and that the Bodhisattvas who have directly

realized the true nature of phenomena are our spiritual community,
leading all sentient beings to refuge. With that knowledge, aspire to
highest enlightenment by reciting: "Through the collections of merit of
my giving, morality, patience, effort, concentration, and wisdom, may I
achieve Buddhahood in order to help all beings." As you do, think to
yourself, "Through the force of these, may I achieve Buddhahood not to
help myself but to be of service to all sentient beings in order to help
them reach Buddhahood." This is called generation of a compassionate
intention to become enlightened in the form of a wish. This brings us to
the central part of the ritual. With a strong wish to attain Buddhahood
in order to serve other beings, imagine before you a Buddha or your own
spiritual teacher as a representative of him. 1. Recite the following as
if you were repeating it after the Buddha: Until I reach enlightenment I
seek refuge in Buddha, the doctrine, and the supreme spiritual
community. Through the collections of merit of my giving, morality,
patience, effort, concentration, and wisdom, may I achieve Buddhahood in
order to help all beings.

By saying this you are directing your virtuous actions not to some small
purpose in this life, or the next, but to the greatest purpose of
all---the attainment of total freedom for all beings. Generate this
attitude with great determination. 2. Make the second repetition with
even stronger resolve to make this altruistic goal a constant in your
day-to-day life: Until I reach enlightenment I seek refuge in Buddha,
the doctrine, and the supreme spiritual community. Through the
collections of merit of my giving, morality, patience, effort,
concentration, and wisdom, may I achieve Buddhahood in order to help all
beings.

3.  Make the third repetition with even greater determination, from the
    depths of your heart. Make a lasting, fully reasoned
    decision---unshakeable by circumstance---that the welfare of so many
    others is far greater than your own. Think, "Now when I have such a
    great opportunity, what could be more important than striving for
    the benefit of others! From now on, to the full extent of my
    ability, I will stop concentrating on my own welfare and will

commit myself deeply to the advancement of all beings. To accomplish
this, I will achieve unsurpassed perfect enlightenment." Recite: Until I
reach enlightenment I seek refuge in Buddha, the doctrine, and the
supreme spiritual community. Through the collections of merit of my
giving, morality, patience, effort, concentration, and wisdom, may I
achieve Buddhahood in order to help all beings.

This concludes the ritual. Through it you plant and nurture the seeds of
strong and unwavering compassion.

MAINTAINING COMMITMENT IN THIS LIFETIME There are four practices aimed
at keeping this altruism from deteriorating in this lifetime: 1. First,
increase your enthusiasm for becoming enlightened for the sake of others
by recalling again and again the benefits of doing so. 2. Then, increase
your concern for others by dividing the day and night into three periods
each, and during those periods take a little time from your day, or
rouse yourself from sleep, to practice the five-step visualization given
on page 84, even for just five minutes. This practice is very effective;
it becomes a regular habit, like eating food at a certain time. If you
cannot do this so often, visualize the steps three times in one morning
session that lasts around fifteen minutes, and do the same at night.
Ponder the meaning of your aim: "May I attain highest enlightenment for
others!" 3. The next practice requires vigilance: In seeking to gain
highest enlightenment for the sake of all beings, make sure not to
mentally neglect the welfare of even one. 4. Try to accumulate the two
forces of merit and wisdom as much as possible. To increase merit,
engage willingly in virtuous activities like generosity and morality. To
accumulate wisdom, you must come to understand the true way phenomena
exist. Since this is a complicated topic, we will be exploring it at
length in Chapters Eight--Ten. Suffice it to say here that it is helpful
to reflect on how phenomena arise and exist dependent on causes and
conditions.

MAINTAINING COMMITMENT IN FUTURE LIFETIMES In future lifetimes your
compassionate intention to become enlightened could weaken. You can
prevent this from happening by abandoning the four unwholesome
activities listed below, and by training in the four wholesome practices
that follow them.

Four Unwholesome Practices 1. Deceiving a high person such as an abbot,
ordination master, lama, or fellow practitioner about negative things
that you have done. 2. Causing others engaged in virtue to regret what
they are doing. 3. Criticizing or belittling those who express
compassion for others. 4. Deceit and misrepresentation to get others'
services.

Four Wholesome Practices 1. Do not lie to anyone at all. There are
exceptions, when lying can result in great benefit to others, but they
are rare. 2. Help others move toward the altruistic enlightenment of
Buddhahood, directly or indirectly. 3. Consider and treat Bodhisattvas
with the same respect as Buddha. Since we do not know who is and who is
not a Bodhisattva, we must treat all beings with respect. As a general
rule, place others above you. 4. Never cheat anyone and always remain
honest. If you have the resolve to train in these practices to generate
a determination to achieve Buddhahood for others, then make this
promise: "I will maintain my determination and never give it up." Those
who cannot maintain this level of training can forgo the promise and
instead can think, "May I attain highest enlightenment for the sake of
all beings!" People who are not Buddhists--- Christians, Jews, Moslems,
and so forth---can generate an other-concerned attitude of equal value
by thinking, "I will bring about help and happiness for all beings."

PRACTICAL INTENTION TO BECOME ENLIGHTENED When your aspiration to become
enlightened is firm, you should implement it in deeds. These are called
Bodhisattva deeds, and principal among them are the six perfections: 1.
Giving includes (1) donating material things such as money, clothing,
and food; (2) giving love; (3) giving the teachings of spiritual
doctrines and practices; and (4) giving relief from fearful situations
to all beings---including animals; help even an ant out of a puddle 2.
Morality, which refers mainly to the altruistic attitude and behavior of
Bodhisattvas 3. Patience, which is exhibited in stressful situations, or
used to sustain difficult endeavors, such as learning teachings and
practicing over a long period 4. Effort, which maintains enthusiasm for
virtue and assists all the other perfections 5. Concentration, which is
the practice of stable and intense meditation explained in the next
chapter 6. Wisdom, which is necessary for understanding the nature of
cyclic existence and impermanence, as well as dependent-arising and
emptiness The six perfections, in turn, can be condensed into the three
trainings of Bodhisattvas---training in the perfection of morality
(which includes the perfections of giving and patience), training in the
perfection of concentration, and training in the perfection of wisdom.
The perfection of effort is required for all three trainings. This is
how the six perfections are included in the three-fold practice of
morality, concentrated meditation, and wisdom that is the focus of this
book. When you arrive at the feeling in the depths of your heart that
you must engage in Bodhisattva deeds---these being the six perfections
or, seen another way, the three-fold practice---this is the appropriate
time to take the Bodhisattva vows of the practical intention to become
enlightened.

In essence, all beings are united by the desire to gain happiness and
avoid suffering. We are also the same in that it is possible to remove
suffering and attain happiness, to which we all have an equal right.
Then what is the difference between you and all others? You are a
minority of one. It is easy to see that the vast number of sentient
beings hoping for happiness and seeking an end to suffering are more
important than any one person. It is therefore eminently reasonable for
you to commit yourself to the welfare of innumerable others, to use your
body, speech, and mind for their good, and to abandon an attitude of
just taking care of yourself.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE First take the seven preliminary steps: 1.
Pay homage to Shakyamuni Buddha surrounded by innumerable Bodhisattvas,
whom you imagine filling the sky before you. 2. Offer all wonderful
things---whether you own them or not---including your body, your
resources, and your own virtue, to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 3.
Disclose the countless ill deeds of body, speech, and mind you have
perpetrated with an intent to harm others. Regret having done them, and
resolve to abstain from them in the future. 4. Admire from the depths of
the heart your own virtues and those of others. Take joy in the good
things you have done in this and previous lives, thinking, "I have done
something good." Take joy in the virtues of others, including those of
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 5. Entreat the Buddhas who have become
completely enlightened but have not yet taught, to teach for the sake of
those who suffer. 6. Supplicate the Buddhas not to pass away. 7.
Dedicate these six practices to attaining highest enlightenment. Then
undertake the central part of the ritual for aspiring to
enlightenment: 1. With a strong determination to attain Buddhahood in
order to serve other beings, imagine a Buddha in front of you, or your
spiritual teacher as a

representative of Buddha. 2. Recite three times as if you are repeating
after him or her: Until I reach enlightenment I seek refuge in Buddha,
the doctrine, and the supreme spiritual community. Through the
collections of merit of my giving, morality, patience, effort,
concentration, and wisdom, may I achieve Buddhahood in order to help all
beings.

To maintain and strengthen this profound altruism in this life perform
the following: 1. Recall again and again the benefits of developing an
intention to become enlightened for the sake of others. 2. Divide the
day into three periods and the night into three periods, and during each
of those periods take a little time out or rouse yourself from sleep and
practice the five-step visualization given in the last chapter. It is
also sufficient to visualize the five steps three times in one morning
session that lasts around fifteen minutes, and three times in one night
session for fifteen minutes. 3. Avoid mentally neglecting the welfare of
even one being. 4. As much as possible, engage in virtuous activity with
a good attitude, and develop a rough understanding of the nature of
reality, or maintain a wish to do so and work at it. To maintain and
strengthen this profound altruism in future lives: 1. Do not lie to
anyone at all, unless you can help others greatly through lying. 2.
Directly or indirectly help people to progress toward enlightenment. 3.
Treat all beings with respect. 4. Never cheat anyone, and always remain
honest. In essence, think again and again, "May I become able to help
all beings." OceanofPDF.com

III PRACTICING CONCENTRATED MEDITATION OceanofPDF.com

7 Focusing the Mind

Let us take a moment to review how progress toward a meaningful life
unfolds: First comes morality, then concentrated meditation, then
wisdom. Wisdom relies on the single-mindedness of meditation, and
meditation depends upon the selfawareness of morality. In the last five
chapters we have discussed the practice of morality, which makes you
more settled and peaceful and your mind ready for more spiritual
advancement. With a conscious mode of behavior, concentrated meditation,
called calm abiding, can be accomplished. Still, your mind is too
scattered for increasingly effective meditative practice which requires
full concentration. Even a small noise here or there can immediately
distract you. Since it is absolutely necessary to make the mind much
more focused so that wisdom can take hold, I will discuss in this
chapter the process of developing the profoundly concentrated state of
calm abiding. First I will briefly describe the various types of
meditation so that you can understand the place that calm abiding takes
among them.

TYPES OF MEDITATION There are many ways to meditate. Two basic types of
meditation are analytical meditation and stabilizing meditation. In
analytical meditation you analyze a topic trying to understand it
through reasoning. For instance, you might meditate on why things are
impermanent by reflecting on how they are produced by causes or how they

disintegrate moment by moment. In stabilizing meditation you fix your
mind on a single object or topic, such as impermanence. (Calm abiding is
cultivated through stabilizing meditation.) Another way of dividing
meditation is between subjective meditation and objective meditation. In
subjective meditation your aim is to cultivate in the mind a new, or
strengthened perspective, or attitude. The cultivation of faith is an
example of this type of meditation; faith is not the object on which you
are concentrating but an attitude that is being meditatively cultivated.
(Cultivation of compassion is subjective meditation because you are not
meditating on compassion but seeking to make your consciousness more
compassionate.) In objective meditation you meditate on a topic, such as
on impermanence, or an object, such as on the golden body of a Buddha.
You can meditate in the manner of wishing. For example, you might wish
to be filled with the compassion and wisdom of a Buddha. Or, you can go
one step further, into imaginative meditation in which you envision that
you have qualities that you actually do not yet have. The practice of
deity yoga, for example, calls for meditating on yourself as an ideal
being whose body is made from the light of wisdom. Of these various
forms of meditation let us discuss how to practice the stabilizing
meditation of calm abiding. As mentioned above, the aim of stabilizing
meditation is to strengthen the mind's ability to focus on a single
object or topic, which in turn enables the mind to overcome problems at
their root. It will also help you to be more alert and sharp in daily
life; it will gradually increase your power of memory, which is useful
in all parts of your life.

ACHIEVING CALM ABIDING Since in this type of meditation you are seeking
to achieve a deeply concentrated state of mind you need the
following: 1. The initial cause, morality, which brings you a peaceful,
relaxed, conscientious mode of behavior and thus removes coarse
distractions. 2. A time and place for practice apart from the commotion
of daily life. Make time for meditation in your daily schedule. For
focused meditation, being alone in a

secluded, quiet spot is crucial. Since noise is the thorn preventing
concentration, at the beginning it is very important to stay in a quiet
place. Consider taking a retreat for your vacation. 3. A suitable diet
fostering clarity of mind. For some health conditions, it may be
necessary to eat meat, but, generally speaking, vegetarian food is best.
According to the morality of individual liberation, there is no
prohibition against eating meat on occasion. But you should not eat meat
that is purposely killed for you, and you should not ask for it if it is
not offered. Indeed, it would be most welcome if the majority of people
did become vegetarian. Some Great Vehicle scriptures prohibit the eating
of meat, since concern for others is the heart of Great Vehicle
morality. Also, eating too much food is not good, so eat less. Of
course, drinking alcohol is out of the question, as are all
mind-altering drugs. Smoking is not advisable. If a bearded man was
smoking while entering into deep meditation, he would risk having his
beard catch on fire! 4. The right amount of sleep. Too much makes your
mind dull, and too little can be disruptive. You have to figure out what
the right amount is for you. 5. Physical posture is critical to focused
meditation, especially at this early stage. If possible, assume the
full- or half-lotus position. Use two cushions, putting a smaller one
under your rear so that your rear is higher than your knees, the effect
being that no matter how much you meditate you will not be as likely to
become tired. Straighten your backbone like an arrow; bend your head
just a little downward; aim your eyes over the nose to the front; put
your tongue against the roof of the mouth; leave your lips and teeth as
usual; and leave your arms a little loose, not forcing them against the
body. With regard to positioning the hands, Japanese Zen practitioners
usually put the left hand, palm up, on top of the right, which is also
palm up. Tibetans put the right hand, palm up, on top of the left, which
is also palm up. In Tantric practice it is important to put the right
hand on top of the left, with both palms up, and with the two thumbs
pressed together in the form of a triangle, the base of which is about
four finger-widths below the navel.

The Object of Meditation There are many possible objects of the
stabilizing meditation for achieving calm abiding:

The breath. Some texts speak of watching the inhalation and exhalation
of breath through the nose but do not address the topic of how deep to
breathe. Other texts explain how to imagine the movement of breath in
specific areas in the body. In one type of breathing exercise, you pull
up the lower airs, or energies, and press down the upper energies,
holding them as if in a vessel just below the navel. Your body,
feelings, mind, or phenomena such as impermanence. These meditations are
called establishments through mindfulness. The first letter of your name
on a disc of light outside or inside your body. In Thailand
practitioners often meditate within applying mindfulness to whatever
they do. While walking they are mindful of putting the right foot
forward, then the left, then the right. In general a good object of
meditation for a Buddhist is an image of the body of Shakyamuni Buddha;
for a Christian it could be an image of Jesus. Gaze at it so that it
appears to your mind internally when you close your eyes. Meditate on
the figure at eye level, not too high or low, at a distance of about
four or five feet. At the beginning it is difficult to get the object of
meditation to appear clearly in your mind. To avoid dulling your
perception, try frequent, intense five-minute sessions rather than long
meditations. (Four to sixteen of these brief sessions daily is ideal.)
When it finally appears internally, you have found your object of
meditation. Now fix your mind continuously upon it.

Counteracting Excitement and Laxity To achieve calm abiding, both
stability and clarity are needed with respect to the object of
meditation. Thus the biggest obstacles to sustained meditation are
excitement and laxity. Excitement prevents stability. When the mind does
not stay on the object but becomes distracted or scattered, the object
of meditation is lost. There is also a subtle form of excitement, where
even if the object is not lost, a corner of the mind is thinking about
something else. You need to identify excitement and, through
mindfulness, not let your mind come under its influence. Lethargy, a
heaviness of mind and body, is an obstacle to clarity. Lethargy also
causes laxity, which prevents clarity. In coarse laxity the mind sinks;
the object of

meditation fades and is lost. In subtle laxity, the object is not lost,
but the clarity of the object and of the mind diminish a little because
the mind's intensity has weakened; the mind is a little too loose. The
mind might stay quite clearly on the object of meditation, but without
true alertness; this state is often mistaken for proper meditation. When
your mind is too intense, and you experience excitement, you need to
loosen it, like loosening the strings of a guitar a bit. Similarly, when
you have laxity, your mind is not intense enough, so you need to
increase its intensity by making it a little more taut, like tightening
the strings. As you see, the mind needs to be tuned like a fine stringed
instrument.

Mindfulness and Introspection The force behind developing concentrated
meditation is mindfulness, which is the ability to stay with an object,
not allowing distraction. You exercise mindfulness by putting your mind
back on its object of meditation every time it falters, which will
happen again and again. When you become skilled in maintaining
mindfulness on the object, you need to use introspection. As
Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva Way of Life says, the special
function of introspection is periodically to inspect your activities,
whether physical or mental. In the process of developing calm abiding,
the task of introspection is to determine whether the mind has come, or
is about to come, under the influence of laxity or excitement. At the
start, periods of laxity and excitement are strong, but, with effort,
these become weaker and less frequent, and the periods of being able to
stay on the object lengthen. Gradually, even subtle laxity and
excitement lose their force and disappear. Ultimately, the ability of
the mind to stay one-pointedly on the object, free from the faults of
excitement and laxity, increases. When through mindfulness and
introspection you can sustain the continuum of holding the object, it is
possible to achieve concentrated meditation within six months. Initially
you must forcibly put your mind on the object of meditation with great
exertion; then from time to time you engage the object without great
exertion; then you engage it in a relaxed way continuously; and finally
you spontaneously stay on the object without needing to make any effort
to remove excitement and laxity. If you are able to remain on your
object for four hours vividly and continuously, you have achieved firm
stability. Unfavorable states of body and

mind are gone, and a bliss of physical and mental pliancy is attained.
At that point, you have achieved calm abiding.

Qualities of Calm Abiding To be endowed with calm abiding, the mind must
have the stability to hold fast to one object, but this alone is not
sufficient. The mind must also be clear, but this, too, is not enough.
Its clarity should be intense, alert, and sharp; the mind cannot be even
a little dull. These fine adjustments to the mind to make it susceptible
to calm abiding are not easily accomplished. In Dharamsala, India, one
of the Tibetans practicing concentrated meditation told me that the
cultivation of one-pointed concentration was worse than imprisonment in
a Chinese jail! Because it is difficult, it is important to prepare
carefully, moving from step to step. Do not push yourself too hard,
especially at first, otherwise you run the risk of becoming upset or
even having a nervous breakdown. The goal here is daily practice, where
you choose an object of meditation, and as you focus on it, try to
achieve and maintain stability, clarity, and intensity.

Concentrating on the Mind Itself Calm abiding can also be achieved
through daily meditations on the mind itself. One of the advantages of
observing the mind now is that it will strengthen your ability to
manifest the mind of clear light as you are dying. First identify the
mind's essential nature of luminosity and knowing, unsullied by thought,
and then concentrate on it. This is one among many levels of
thoughtlessness (I will describe meditation on the ultimate nature of
the mind in Chapter Ten). To prepare for concentrating on the mind
itself you need to overcome emotional obstacles by engaging in the
accumulation of positive merit, such as through developing compassion as
discussed earlier. The next step is to become familiar with the nature
of your own mind. The best time for this is early in the morning, just
after waking up, but before all your sense faculties have become active.
Your eyes are not yet open. Look at, or within, consciousness itself.
This is a good opportunity to experience the clear light nature of the
mind. Do not let your mind think on what has happened in the past, nor
let it chase after things that might

happen in the future; rather, leave the mind vivid, without any
constructions, just as it is. In the space between old and new ideas,
discover the natural, unfabricated, luminous and knowing nature of the
mind unaffected by thought. When you remain this way, you understand
that the mind is like a mirror, reflecting any object, any conception,
and that the mind has a nature of mere luminosity and knowing, of mere
experience. After you recognize the nature of the mind as luminosity and
knowing, stay with it. Using your powers of mindfulness and
introspection remain in that state. If a thought comes, just look into
its very nature, and the concept will lose its power and dissolve of its
own accord. Sometimes, with exertion, you can prevent a thought from
fully forming. More likely, though, when you reach this state of
recognizing the basic, unaffected, unfabricated nature of the mind,
thoughts will dissolve as they form, and even when they do come, they
will not be powerful. Know that just as the waves of the ocean are made
of water, thoughts are made of the luminous, knowing nature of the mind.
And through continual daily practice, thoughts will weaken and disappear
without any other exertion. This practice of meditation itself sharpens
your mind and improves your memory, qualities that are certainly useful
beyond spiritual practice, whether in business, engineering, raising a
family, or being a teacher, doctor, or lawyer. This practice also helps
on a daily basis with anger. When you get irritated, you can concentrate
on the nature of the anger itself and thereby undermine its force.
Another benefit of such mental training emerges from the close
connection between body and mind. When you are young and physically fit,
your mind is powerful. It is particularly valuable to begin training
then, so that as you age, your mind stays fresh and positive through the
body's changes. After all, the human brain is a special endowment, and
it would be a pity to let it weaken through neglect, surrendering its
powers to age until, animallike, its only job is to take care of the
body. For practitioners, early mental training, and especially
concentration on the mind, is important preparation for the final day,
when your mind must remain clear and sharp to make use of special
techniques during the stages of death or at least to influence rebirth
into the next life. Dullness of mind at this critical point can be very
dangerous. A real guarantee for a good rebirth is to be able to conduct
your practice during the stages of dying. Your state of mind just before
rebirth is influential in determining the character of your next life.
You may have accumulated great merit in your life, but if you leave it
with a dull mind, you jeopardize the form that your next life will take.
On

the other hand, even if you committed some regrettable deeds in your
lifetime, when the final day comes, if you are prepared and determined
to use that occasion to the fullest, your next rebirth will definitely
be good. Therefore, strive to train the mind to be fresh, alert, and
sharp.

OTHER TECHNIQUES FOR ACHIEVING MENTAL CALM In difficult situations it is
easy to become emotionally worked up. Buddhism offers many techniques
for relieving stress and finding calm in the trying situations we face
every day. These techniques vary according to the situation and the
person. It is particularly effective to use the power of analytical
meditation to address problems directly, rather than trying to avoid
them. Here are some examples of this technique. When you are confronted
with trouble, do whatever you can to overcome it, but if it is
insurmountable, then reflect on the fact that this trouble is due to
your own actions in this, or a previous, life. Understanding that
suffering comes from karma will bring some peace as it reveals that life
is not unjust. Otherwise sorrow and pain might seem to be meaningless.
Initially a problem can seem solid and intractable, until you
investigate its true nature. To do this, work at understanding the range
of suffering in your own life. Ordinary mind and body have a nature of
suffering, just as it is the nature of fire to be hot and burning. In
the same way we have learned how to work with the nature of fire, we can
learn how to work with suffering in our lives. Consider trouble from a
broader perspective. If someone accuses you, rather than lashing out,
imagine that this accusation loosens the chains of your own
self-cherishing, and thereby enhances your ability to care for others.
Reframe bad circumstances as forces assisting your spiritual
development. This technique is difficult to implement but very powerful
when you succeed. When you are jealous or wish harm on an enemy, instead
of stewing over that person's bad qualities, reflect on his or her
attributes. Most people are a mixture of good and bad qualities---it is
hard to find anyone who is bad in all respects.

Reflect on the emptiness of inherent existence---this is the deepest
analytical meditation and something I will explore in the next three
chapters. Or, you can use stabilizing meditation for a temporary rest:
If you cannot stop worrying over something in the past or what might
happen in the future, shift your focus to the inhalation and exhalation
of your breath. Or recite this mantra: om mani padme hum (pronounced "om
mani padmay hum"). Since the mind cannot concentrate on two things
simultaneously, either of these meditations causes the former worry to
fade.

It seems to me that all religions could benefit from Buddhist meditation
techniques ---single-minded concentration could be applied usefully in
many situations. In all walks of life we can benefit from focusing the
mind and increasing memory.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE 1. Choose an object of meditation and focus
your mind on it, trying to achieve and maintain stability, clarity, and
intensity. Avoid laxity and excitement. 2. Alternatively, identify the
fundamental state of the mind, unsullied by thought, in its own
state---mere luminosity, the knowing nature of the mind. With
mindfulness and introspection remain in that state. If a thought arises,
just look into the very nature of that thought; this will cause it to
lose its power and dissolve of its own accord. OceanofPDF.com

IV PRACTICING WISDOM OceanofPDF.com

8 Examining How Beings and Things Exist

OVERVIEW OF WISDOM IN SPIRITUAL PRACTICE To generate the type of love
and compassion that motivates you to seek Buddhahood, not for yourself
but for the sake of others, first you must confront suffering by
identifying its types. This is the first noble truth. From the time we
are born to the time we die we suffer mental and physical pain, the
suffering of change, and pervasive suffering of uncontrolled
conditioning. The second and third noble truths lead us to understand
the causes of suffering and whether or not those causes can be removed.
The fundamental cause of suffering is ignorance---the mistaken
apprehension that living beings and objects inherently exist. This
chapter will show that beings and objects, in fact, do not exist this
way. We all have a valid, proper sense of self, or "I," but then we
additionally have a misconception of that "I" as inherently existing.
Under the sway of this delusion, we view the self as existing under its
own power, established by way of its own nature, able to set itself up.
This sense of inherent existence can even be so strong that the self
feels independent from mind and body. For instance, if you are weak from
sickness, you might feel that you could switch bodies with someone who
is stronger. Similarly, when your mind is dull, you might feel that you
could switch your mind with someone else's sharp mind. However, if there
were such a separate I---self-established and existing in its own
right---it should become clearer and clearer under the light of
competent analysis as to whether it exists as either mind or body, or
the collection of mind and body, or different from mind and body. In
fact, the closer you look, the more it is not found. This turns out to
be the case for everything, for all phenomena. The fact

that you cannot find them means that those phenomena do not exist under
their own power; they are not self-established. Sometime during the
early sixties when I was reflecting on a passage by Tsongkhapa about
unfindability and the fact that phenomena are dependent on
conceptuality, it was as if lightning coursed within my chest. Here is
the passage: A coiled rope's speckled color and coiling are similar to
those of a snake, and when the rope is perceived in a dim area, the
thought arises, "This is a snake." As for the rope, at that time when it
is seen to be a snake, the collection and parts of the rope are not even
in the slightest way a snake. Therefore, that snake is merely set up by
conceptuality. In the same way, when the thought "I" arises in
dependence upon mind and body, nothing within mind and body---neither
the collection which is a continuum of earlier and later moments, nor
the collection of the parts at one time, nor the separate parts, nor the
continuum of any of the separate parts---is in even the slightest way
the "I." Also there is not even the slightest something that is a
different entity from mind and body that is apprehendable as the "I."
Consequently, the "I" is merely set up by conceptuality in dependence
upon mind and body; it is not established by way of its own entity. The
impact lasted for a while, and for the next few weeks whenever I saw
people, they seemed like a magician's illusions in that they appeared to
inherently exist but I knew that they actually did not. That experience,
which was like lightning in my heart, was most likely at a level below
completely valid and incontrovertible realization. This is when my
understanding of the cessation of the afflictive emotions as a true
possibility became real. Nowadays I always meditate on emptiness in the
morning and bring that experience into the day's activities. Just
thinking or saying "I" as in "I will do such and such" will often
trigger the feeling. But still I cannot claim full understanding of
emptiness. A consciousness that conceives of inherent existence does not
have a valid foundation. A wise consciousness, grounded in reality,
understands that living beings and other phenomena---minds, bodies,
buildings, and so forth---do not inherently exist. This is the wisdom of
emptiness. Understanding reality exactly opposite to the misconception
of inherent existence, wisdom gradually overcomes ignorance.

Remove the ignorance that misconceives phenomena to inherently exist and
you prevent the generation of afflictive emotions like lust and hatred.
Thus, in turn, suffering can also be removed. In addition, the wisdom of
emptiness must be accompanied by a motivation of deep concern for others
(and by the compassionate deeds it inspires) before it can remove the
obstructions to omniscience, which are the predispositions for the false
appearance of phenomena---even to sense consciousness---as if they
inherently exist. Therefore, full spiritual practice calls for
cultivating wisdom in conjunction with great compassion and the
intention to become enlightened in which others are valued more than
yourself. Only then may your consciousness be transformed into the
omniscience of a Buddha.

SELFLESSNESS Both Buddhists and non-Buddhists practice meditation to
achieve pleasure and get rid of pain, and in both Buddhist and
non-Buddhist systems the self is a central object of scrutiny. Certain
non-Buddhists who accept rebirth accept the transitory nature of mind
and body, but they believe in a self that is permanent, changeless, and
unitary. Although Buddhist schools accept rebirth, they hold that there
is no such solid self. For Buddhists, the main topic of the training in
wisdom is emptiness, or selflessness, which means the absence of a
permanent, unitary, and independent self or, more subtly, the absence of
inherent existence either in living beings or in other phenomena.

Two Truths To understand selflessness, you need to understand that
everything that exists is contained in two groups called the two truths:
conventional and ultimate. The phenomena that we see and observe around
us can go from good to bad, or bad to good, depending on various causes
and conditions. Many phenomena cannot be said to be inherently good or
bad; they are better or worse, tall or short, beautiful or ugly, only by
comparison, not by way of their own nature. Their value is relative.
From this you can see that there is a discrepancy between the way things
appear and how they actually are. For instance, something may---in terms
of how it appears--- look good, but, due to its inner nature being
different, it can turn bad once it is

affected by conditions. Food that looks so good in a restaurant may not
sit so well in your stomach. This is a clear sign of a discrepancy
between appearance and reality. These phenomena themselves are called
conventional truths; they are known by consciousness that goes no
further than appearances. But the same objects have an inner mode of
being, called an ultimate truth, that allows for the changes brought
about by conditions. A wise consciousness, not satisfied with mere
appearances, analyzes to find whether objects inherently exist as they
seem to do but discovers their absence of inherent existence; it finds
an emptiness of inherent existence beyond appearances.

Empty of What? Emptiness, or selflessness, can only be understood if we
first identify that of which phenomena are empty. Without understanding
what is negated, you cannot understand its absence, emptiness. You might
think that emptiness means nothingness, but it does not. Merely from
reading it is difficult to identify and understand the object of
negation, what Buddhist texts speak of as true establishment or inherent
existence. But over a period of time, when you add your own
investigations to the reading, the faultiness of our usual way of seeing
things will become clearer and clearer. Buddha said many times that
because all phenomena are dependently arisen, they are relative---their
existence depends on other causes and conditions and depends on their
own parts. A wooden table, for instance, does not exist independently;
rather, it depends on a great many causes such as a tree, the carpenter
who makes it, and so forth; it also depends upon its own parts. If a
wooden table or any phenomenon really were not dependent---if it were
established in its own right---then when you analyze it, its existence
in its own right should become more obvious, but it does not. This
Buddhist reasoning is supported by science. Physicists today keep
discovering finer and finer components of matter, yet they still cannot
understand its ultimate nature. Understanding emptiness is even deeper.
The more you look into how an ignorant consciousness conceives phenomena
to exist, the more you find that phenomena do not exist that way.
However, the more you look into what a wise consciousness understands,
the more you gain

affirmation in the absence of inherent existence. Lust and hatred are
ruled by ignorance, and so cannot be generated limitlessly.

Do Objects Exist? Since, as we have established, when any phenomenon is
sought through analysis, it cannot be found, you may be wondering
whether these phenomena exist at all. However, we know from direct
experience that people and things cause pleasure and pain, and that they
can help and harm. Therefore, phenomena certainly do exist; the question
is how. They do not exist in their own right, but only have an existence
dependent upon many factors, including a consciousness that
conceptualizes them. Once they exist but do not exist on their own, they
necessarily exist in dependence upon conceptualization. However, when
phenomena appear to us, they do not at all appear as if they exist this
way. Rather, they seem to be established in their own right, from the
object's side, without depending upon a conceptualizing consciousness.
When training to develop wisdom, you are seeking through analysis to
find the inherent existence of whatever object you are
considering---yourself, another person, your body, your mind, or
anything else. You are analyzing not the mere appearance but the
inherent nature of the object. Thus it is not that you come to
understand that the object does not exist; rather, you find that its
inherent existence is unfounded. Analysis does not contradict the mere
existence of the object. Phenomena do indeed exist, but not in the way
we think they do. What is left after analysis is a dependently existent
phenomenon. When, for example, you examine your own body, its inherent
existence is negated, but what is left is a body dependent on four
limbs, a trunk, and a head.

If Phenomena Are Empty, Can They Function? Whenever we think about
objects, do we mistakenly believe that they exist in their own right?
No. We can conceive of phenomena in three different ways. Let us
consider a tree; there is no denying that it appears to inherently
exist, but: 1. We could conceive of the tree as existing inherently, in
its own right.

2. We could conceive of the tree as lacking inherent existence. 3. We
could conceive of the tree without thinking that it inherently exists or
not. Only the first of those is wrong. The other two modes of
apprehension are right, even if the mode of appearance is mistaken in
the second and the third, in that the tree appears as if inherently
existent. If objects do not inherently exist, does this mean that they
cannot function? Jumping to the conclusion that because the true nature
of objects is emptiness, they are therefore incapable of performing
functions such as causing pleasure or pain, or helping or harming, is
the worst sort of misunderstanding, a nihilistic view. As the Indian
scholar-yogi Nagarjuna says in his Precious Garland, a nihilist will
certainly have a bad transmigration upon rebirth, whereas a person who
believes, albeit wrongly, in inherent existence goes on to a good
transmigration. Allow me to explain. You need a belief in the
consequences of actions to choose virtue in your life and discard
nonvirtue. For the time being, the subtle view of the emptiness of
inherent existence might be too difficult for you to understand without
falling into the trap of nihilism, where you are unable to understand
that phenomena arise in dependence on causes and conditions
(dependent-arising). For the sake of your spiritual progress it would be
better for now to set aside trying to penetrate emptiness. Even if you
mistakenly believe that phenomena inherently exist, you can still
develop an understanding of dependent-arising and apply it in practice.
This is why even Buddha, on occasion, taught that living beings and
other phenomena inherently exist. Such teachings are the thought of
Buddha's scriptures, but they are not his own final thought. For
specific purposes, he sometimes spoke in nonfinal ways.

In What Way Is Consciousness Mistaken? Because all phenomena appear to
exist in their own right, all of our ordinary perceptions are mistaken.
Only when emptiness is directly realized during completely focused
meditation is there no false appearance. At that time, the dualism of
subject and object has vanished, as has the appearance of multiplicity;
only emptiness appears. After you rise from that meditation, once again
living beings and objects falsely appear to exist in and of themselves,
but through the power of having realized emptiness, you will recognize
the discrepancy between

appearance and reality. Through meditation you have identified both the
false mode of appearance and the false mode of apprehension.

Let us return to the central point: All of us have a sense of "I" but we
need to realize that it is only designated in dependence upon mind and
body. The selflessness that Buddhists speak of refers to the absence of
a self that is permanent, partless, and independent, or, more subtly, it
can refer to the absence of inherent existence of any phenomenon.
However, Buddhists do value the existence of a self that changes from
moment to moment, designated in dependence upon the continuum of mind
and body. All of us validly have this sense of "I." When Buddhists speak
of the doctrine of selflessness, we are not referring to the
nonexistence of this self. With this "I," all of us rightfully want
happiness and do not want suffering. It is when we exaggerate our sense
of ourselves and other phenomena to mean something inherently existent
that we get drawn into many, many problems.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE As an exercise in identifying how objects and
beings falsely appear, try the following: 1. Observe how an item such as
a watch appears in a store when you first notice it, then how its
appearance changes and becomes even more concrete as you become more
interested in it, and finally how it appears after you have bought it
and consider it yours. 2. Reflect on how you yourself appear to your
mind as if inherently existent. Then reflect on how others and their
bodies appear to your mind. OceanofPDF.com

9 The Middle Way

THE NEED FOR BOTH CONCENTRATION AND WISDOM Buddhist texts tell us that
upon realizing emptiness, the illusion of inherent existence weakens,
but this is unlikely after a single, brief realization. If you have not
attained one-pointed concentration (calm abiding of the mind), you
cannot use mere understanding of emptiness to uproot the illusion of
inherent existence. Rather, you need to engage in analysis again and
again; through concentrated meditation, your mind will become strong,
deep, stable, and capable of one-pointed concentration on
emptiness---which gradually works to diminish grosser levels of the
misperception of reality. This is the reason why Buddha's Sutras as well
as the three lower Tantras all say that calm abiding (concentrated
meditation) is a prerequisite for special insight (wisdom). The
stabilizing meditation used in calm abiding and the analytical
meditation used in special insight are not differentiated by the objects
of meditation; both could have either emptiness or conventional
phenomena as their focus. The difference is that observing emptiness
from a state of calm abiding requires physical and mental suppleness
induced through stabilizing meditation on emptiness, whereas special
insight observing emptiness additionally involves physical and mental
suppleness induced by analytical meditation with respect to emptiness.
That degree of suppleness can only be gained after attaining the easier
level of suppleness produced by stabilizing meditation. Therefore, you
need to achieve calm abiding before special insight. Although calm
abiding could be achieved through taking emptiness as its object, this
is only for practitioners who have already understood emptiness.
Usually,

however, practitioners first achieve one-pointed meditation and then
gain the view of emptiness through reasoned analysis.

THE NEED FOR REASONING All Buddhist schools agree that the analytical
reasoning process which leads to an inference (a conceptual realization)
derives from basic, shared, direct perception. As an example let us
consider the following reasoning: A plant does not inherently exist
because of being a dependent-arising. You begin by reflecting on the
fact that a plant is a dependent-arising because its production depends
on certain causes and conditions (such as a seed, soil, sunlight, and
water), but eventually the reasoning process must be supported by direct
perception, or it cannot stand. We can see with our eyes that plants
change; they grow, mature, and finally dry up. In this sense, inference
is blind, since it must eventually rely on direct perception. Inference
depends on reasoning, which in turn rests on basic, shared, indisputable
experience through direct perception. Knowable objects can be divided
into the obvious, the slightly obscure, and the very obscure. In order
to understand a very obscure topic it is necessary to rely on scripture,
but even for this type of inference it is not sufficient just to cite
one scripture as validation for another. You must analyze whether: there
are any internal contradictions among scriptures on that topic there is
any contradiction between what the scripture says about that topic and
what is evident in direct perception there is any contradiction between
what the scripture says about that topic and what can be understood
through basic inference, derived by reasoning. So even in these very
obscure cases based on scripture, analysis is needed. Buddha set out
four steps for establishing reliability: 1. Do not rely on just the
person but rely on the doctrine. 2. With respect to the doctrine, do not
rely on just the words but rely on the meaning.

3. With respect to the meaning, do not rely on just meaning requiring
interpretation but rely on meaning that is definitive. 4. With respect
to the definitive meaning, do not rely on just dualistic understanding
but rely on the wisdom of direct perception of the truth. Buddha also
said: Like gold, upon being scorched, cut, and rubbed, My word is to be
adopted by monastics and scholars Upon analyzing it well, Not out of
respect \[for me\]. In the process of reasoning, it is very effective to
state absurd consequences of wrong views in order to overcome the
potency of that wrong idea, and then make a proof statement. When I was
studying logic as a youth, a scholar once told me that, both in debate
(with a Buddhist who asserts inherent existence) and in your own
analytical meditation, it is a rather soft approach to use a syllogistic
statement such as "My body is without inherent existence because it is a
dependent-arising." However, it has more impact to use an absurd
consequence such as "It follows that my body could not be a
dependent-arising because it inherently exists," because it is
fundamental to Buddhism that all phenomena are dependent-arisings.

COMPATIBILITY OF DEPENDENT-ARISING AND EMPTINESS Buddha himself, in
setting forth Sutras, and Nagarjuna and his spiritual sons--- Aryadeva,
Buddhapalita, and Chandrakirti---in commenting on the meaning of those
Sutras, use the fact that phenomena are dependent-arisings as the final
reason for establishing emptiness. This indicates that phenomena in
general are not nonexistent and that impermanent phenomena are fit to
perform functions. When Buddha taught the four noble truths, first he
identified true sufferings, sources, cessations and paths, and then
said:

Sufferings are to be recognized, but there is nothing to be recognized.
The sources of suffering are to be abandoned, but there is nothing to be
abandoned. Cessation is to be actualized, but there is nothing to be
actualized. The path is to be meditated, but there is nothing to be
meditated. The meaning of this is that although there are factors among
the four noble truths to be conventionally (and validly) recognized,
abandoned, actualized, and meditated, there is nothing to be ultimately
recognized, abandoned, actualized, and meditated. From the viewpoint of
ultimate reality, all of these are beyond activity; everything has the
same taste in the emptiness of inherent existence. In this way, Buddha
set out the perspectives of the two truths---conventional and ultimate.
All phenomena---causes and effects, actions and agents, good and bad,
and so forth---merely conventionally exist, only nominally exist; they
are dependentarisings. Because phenomena depend upon other factors for
their existence, they are not independent. This absence of
independence---or emptiness of inherent existence---is their own
ultimate truth. You will come to comprehend this true emptiness of
inherent existence when you become dissatisfied with mere appearances
and you use analysis to probe beneath the surface. When you thoroughly
understand appearance and emptiness, you will also understand that they
are in harmony with one another. Appearance does not preclude emptiness,
and emptiness does not preclude appearance. Failing to understand this
you might believe in virtue, nonvirtue, cause and effect, and so forth,
but then be unable to believe in emptiness. Similarly, you might think
that you understand emptiness but then be unable to believe in the facts
of cause and effect---help or harm, pleasure or pain---that arise
dependent upon conditions. Without proper understanding, emptiness and
appearance seem to prohibit each other. However, phenomena are empty of
inherent existence because they depend for their existence on other
conditions. And conversely, phenomena are capable of functioning because
they are empty of the solidity of inherent existence. If phenomena were
not empty of inherent existence, if they did exist by their own power,
then they could not be affected by other causes and conditions---they
would not change. In that case, they would not cause pleasure and pain,
help and harm. Good and bad would be impossible. Full realization of
dependent-arising brings with it the double understanding of appearance
and emptiness of inherent existence. The extremes of utter nonexistence

and inherent existence are simultaneously cleared away by this twin
understanding. Knowing that phenomena arise prevents believing in the
extreme of nihilism by allowing objects and beings to function in this
world---allowing for the cause and effect of karma. Knowing that
phenomena are dependent also prevents believing in the extreme of
inherent existence by eliminating that phenomena exist in their own
right. Through understanding these two truths, you arrive at the middle
way.

The Heart Sutra What is the relationship between objects and their
emptiness? This profound topic is addressed in a scripture on the
perfection of wisdom, called the Heart Sutra, which is recited and
meditated daily throughout Great Vehicle Buddhist countries, such as
China, Japan, Korea, Mongolia, Tibet, and Vietnam. It is a short and
pithy presentation by Buddha about the wisdom required to overcome
problems at their roots and---in conjunction with an other-directed
motivation and compassionate deeds---to attain the omniscience of a
Buddha. Here is the Heart Sutra in its entirety: Homage to the
supramundane victorious perfection of wisdom. This is what I have heard:
At one time, the Supramundane Victor was residing together with a great
community of monastics and a great community of Bodhisattvas on Vulture
Mountain in Rajagriha. At that time, the Supramundane Victor was
absorbed in the concentrated meditation of the enumerations of phenomena
called "perception of the profound." At that time the Bodhisattva great
being, the Superior Avalokiteshvara, also was observing the practice of
the profound perfection of wisdom and was viewing even these five
aggregates \[forms, feelings, discriminations, compositional factors,
and consciousnesses\] as empty of inherent existence. Then, through the
Buddha's power, the venerable Shariputra said to the Bodhisattva great
being, the Superior Avalokiteshvara: How should a child of good
lineage---who wishes to practice the profound perfection of
wisdom---train? The Bodhisattva great being, the Superior
Avalokiteshvara, replied to Shariputra:

Shariputra, sons or daughters of good lineage who wish to practice the
profound perfection of wisdom should view \[phenomena\] as follows. They
should correctly and thoroughly view even these five aggregates as empty
of inherent existence. Form is emptiness; emptiness is form. Emptiness
is not other than form; form is not other than emptiness. Similarly,
feelings, discriminations, compositional factors, and consciousnesses
are empty. Shariputra, in that way all phenomena are empty---without
characteristics, not produced, not ceasing, not defiled, not separated
from defilements, not decreasing, not increasing. Therefore, Shariputra,
in emptiness there are no forms, no feeling, no discriminations, no
compositional factors, no consciousness, no eyes, no ears, no nose, no
tongue, no body, no mind, no forms, no sounds, no odors, no tastes, no
tangible objects, no \[other\] phenomena. In emptiness there is no eye
constituent through to no mental constituent and through to no mental
consciousness constituent. In emptiness there is no ignorance and no
extinguishment of ignorance through to no extinguishment of aging and
death. Similarly, in emptiness there are no sufferings, sources,
cessations, and paths; no exalted wisdom, no attainment, and also no
nonattainment. Therefore, Shariputra, since Bodhisattvas, the great
beings, have no attainment, they rely on and reside in this profound
perfection of wisdom. Their minds are without obstruction and without
fear; having thoroughly passed beyond error, they go to the finality of
nirvana. Even all the Buddhas in the past, present, and future become
manifestly and completely awakened into unsurpassed, complete, perfect
enlightenment in reliance on this profound perfection of wisdom.
Therefore, the mantra of the perfection of wisdom is the mantra of great
knowledge, the unsurpassed mantra, the mantra equal to the unequalled,
the mantra thoroughly pacifying all suffering. It should be known that
since it is not false, it is true. To state the mantra of the perfection
of wisdom:

Tadyata gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi svaha. (It is thus:

Proceed, proceed, proceed beyond, thoroughly proceed beyond, be founded
in enlightenment.)

In that way, Shariputra, Bodhisattva great beings should train in the
profound perfection of wisdom. Then, the Supramundane Victor rose from
that concentrated meditation and said to the Bodhisattva great being,
the Superior Avalokiteshvara: Good, good, good. Child of good lineage,
it is so. It is so. In just the way that you have indicated, the
profound perfection of wisdom should be practiced. Even the Ones Gone
Thus admire this. The Supramundane Victor having pronounced this, the
venerable Shariputra, the Bodhisattva great being Avalokiteshvara, all
those in the surrounding retinue, and the worldly beings---including
gods, humans, demigods, and aroma-eaters---admired this and praised what
the Supramundane Victor said.

Form and Emptiness Drawing from a long tradition of Indian and Tibetan
commentaries on the Heart Sutra I will offer some food for thought on
its central passage: "Form is emptiness; emptiness is form. Form is not
other than emptiness; emptiness is not other than form." This pithy
statement contains much meaning: 1. All persons and things are dependent
upon their causes and upon their parts and cannot exist independently of
them. They are dependent-arisings; consequently they are empty of
inherent existence. Because all phenomena are dependent-arisings, they
have a nature of emptiness. 2. Conversely, as beings and things have no
independent or inherent nature, they must rely on other factors. They
must be dependent-arisings. 3. The emptiness of forms is not separate
from forms. Forms themselves, which are produced and disintegrate due to
the presence of conditions, are by their own nature empty of inherent
existence. 4. This absence of inherent existence is their final reality,
their mode of abiding, their final mode of being. 5. In sum, the
production and disintegration, increase and decrease, and so forth of
forms are possible because forms are empty of self-powered existence.

Phenomena such as forms are said to dawn from within the sphere of the
nature of emptiness. Consequently, the Heart Sutra says, "Form is
emptiness; emptiness is form; form is not other than emptiness;
emptiness is not other than form." In this way, emptiness and
dependent-arising are shown to be in harmony. In brief, forms are not
empty because of emptiness, forms themselves are empty. Emptiness means
not that a phenomenon is empty of being some other object but that it
itself is empty of its own inherent existence. That a form is emptiness
means that the final nature of a form is its natural lack of inherent
existence; because forms are dependent-arisings, they are empty of an
independent self-powered entity. That emptiness is form means that this
natural lack of inherent existence---which is the absence of a
self-powered principle---makes possible the forms which are its sport or
which are established from it in dependence upon conditions. Since forms
are the bases of emptiness, emptiness is form; forms appear as like
reflections of emptiness. In my own experience it is easier to
understand that because things are dependent-arisings they are empty of
inherent existence than it is to understand that because things are
empty, they must be dependent-arisings. Although intellectually I know
the latter very well, experience on the level of feeling is more
difficult. Nowadays I often reflect on a statement in Nagarjuna's
Precious Garland: A person is not earth, not water, Not fire, not wind,
not space, Not consciousness, and not all of them. What person is there
other than these? First he considers whether the physical elements of
the body---earth (hard things), water (fluids), fire (heat), wind (air),
and space (the empty spaces such as the gullet)---could be the self.
Next he examines consciousness. Then he considers whether the collection
of all of these could be the self. Finally, he rhetorically asks whether
the self could be other than these. In none of these ways can the self
be found. Then Nagarjuna does not immediately draw the conclusion that
the self is not real. Rather, right after that stanza, he says that the
self is not nonexistent but is a dependent-arising which is set up
dependent upon those six constituents named

above. Then, based on this fact of dependence, he draws the conclusion
that the self is not real: Due to being \[set up in dependence upon\] a
composite of six constituents, A person is not real. Here, "not real"
does not just mean that the self cannot be found when sought from among
or separate from the six constituents. Nagarjuna is making the point
that although the mind realizing the emptiness of inherent existence
sees a mere absence, that very mind promotes an understanding that the
self is a dependentarising. I feel that the way he presents this is full
of impact, avoiding both the extreme of holding that the self inherently
exists and the extreme of holding that the self does not exist at all.
Like the two sides of the hand, when looked at one way by examining its
deeper nature, there is the emptiness of inherent existence, but when
looked at from the other side, there is the appearance of the phenomenon
itself. They are one entity. Therefore, form is emptiness, and emptiness
is form. You have to be able to understand that the import of emptiness
is also the meaning of dependent-arising. They are deeply connected. As
your insight into emptiness grows clearer, you will see more and more
that objects depend on causes and conditions and on their parts, and
they bring about pleasure and pain because they do not exist inherently.
If you come to feel that everything is useless because it is empty, you
are mistaking emptiness for nihilism. Properly understanding emptiness
means realizing how we must rely on cause and effect. The natural and
full understanding of emptiness means a profound understanding of the
union of appearance and emptiness.

The understanding of emptiness is fantastic, is it not? It can serve as
an antidote to the misconception of inherent existence, and yet in
itself it also assists in greater understanding of cause and effect.
That is real understanding of emptiness. It is impossible to explain the
import of the realization of emptiness in the context of just hearing or
reading an explanation. It is something that has to be worked at over a
long period of time together with the practices of morality---refraining
from harm and extending compassion---and through making supplications to
Buddhas,

Bodhisattvas, and other teachers for help in overcoming obstacles. We
need many positive causes.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE Frequently reflect on how phenomena arise in
dependence on causes and conditions, and try to see how this opposes the
way persons and things appear to be so solidly existent, to exist in
their own right, to exist inherently. If you tend toward nihilism,
reflect more on dependent-arising. If, by concentrating on causes and
conditions, you tend to reinforce the inherent existence of phenomena,
then put more emphasis on how dependence contradicts this so-solid
appearance. You will probably be pulled from one side to the other; the
true middle way takes time to find. OceanofPDF.com

10 Mind and the Deep Nature of Mind

In a scripture on perfect wisdom, Buddha makes the following profound
statement: In the mind, the mind is not to be found; the nature of the
mind is clear light. To understand the levels of meaning in this
statement, you have to identify what the mind is, analyze its deeper
nature, and investigate how good and bad effects come about. Let us
examine the various parts of the statement. 1. The phrase "in the mind"
is concerned with what mind is---its luminous and knowing nature. In
Chapter Seven, on concentrated meditation, we talked about the luminous
and knowing nature of the mind and how, although it exists throughout
every moment of mind, it is necessary to set aside previous thoughts and
not begin new ones in order to identify it. 2. When Buddha says "the
mind is not to be found," this indicates that luminosity and knowing
nature are not the mind's deepest and final nature. Rather, the ultimate
nature of the mind is "clear light," its emptiness of inherent
existence. You might think Buddha is saying that the mind does not
exist, but this is not the case. I, as the explainer, am explaining this
statement through the workings of my own mind, and you, the reader, are
reading by the workings of your mind. We are always using the mind, and
it is always right with us, but we do not know it well. Thus, even
though it is difficult to identify the mind, it exists and is being
analyzed as to whether it is its own deep nature.

It is clear that the mind exists, but since it is not established as its
own final nature and basic disposition, what is its mode of being? Its
deep nature is a mere emptiness of its own inherent existence. This
means that the faulty defilements that pollute the mind---such as
ignorance, lust, and hatred---are temporary, and therefore separable
from the mind. Once these defilements are understood to be superficial
and not in the mind's basic nature, we see that the deep nature of the
mind is clear light, emptiness.

DEFILEMENTS ARE SUPERFICIAL, THE NATURE OF THE MIND IS CLEAR LIGHT
Buddhist texts explain in different ways the statement, "Defilements are
superficial, the nature of the mind is clear light." Still, this is not
a matter of Buddha's saying something so vague that it could be
interpreted in any way one wishes. Rather, it has many different
explicit and implicit meanings. In Highest Yoga Tantra there are many
ways of drawing meaning out of an abstruse statement. One can explain
its literal meaning, its general meaning, its hidden meaning, and its
final meaning. To clarify Buddha's statement, "Defilements are
superficial, the nature of the mind is clear light," in combination with
Tantra, I will cite the Magical Array Tantra which is a section in the
Repetition of the Names of Manjushri Tantra: The perfect Buddhas arise
from A. A is the supreme of letters. From among the four meanings listed
above, I will give a general explanation of this statement. The letter A
is a negative particle in Sanskrit. It indicates emptiness, which is the
absence, or negation, of inherent existence. When the Magical Array
Tantra says that "The perfect Buddhas arise from A," this means that the
Buddhas dawn from within the noumenal sphere of emptiness; or, put
another way, the Buddhas dawn from meditating on the emptiness of
inherent existence. Through meditation, defilements are extinguished in
the noumenal sphere of reality (the emptiness of inherent existence).
Emptiness, symbolized by A, is the supreme topic, and therefore the
Magical Array Tantra says, "A is the supreme of letters."

Also, from the viewpoint of Highest Yoga Tantra, the letter A refers to
the indestructible drop within which a Buddha body is achieved. In
Highest Yoga Tantra, Buddhahood arises by concentratedly focusing on the
indestructible drop at the heart center. The final body of a Buddha has
the nature of the indestructible drop. This adds to our understanding of
the statement that the perfect Buddhas arise from the letter A. What is
the indestructible drop? It is the union of the very subtle wind and the
very subtle mind. Mind knows objects, whereas wind, or inner energy,
causes consciousness to engage objects. Since this is the case, with a
union of wind and mind there are changes in consciousness.

BEGINNINGLESS MIND Consciousness is nonphysical. It does not have a
color or shape or the obstructive quality of physical things. Its entity
is mere luminosity and cognition, and when it meets with certain
conditions (such as when an object is present and a sense faculty is
functioning properly), it reflects that object. That the mind changes
from moment to moment, and appears in different aspects, indicates that
the mind operates under the other-influence of causes and conditions. A
mind arises in dependence upon a former mind of similar type, which
requires that there has been an earlier beginningless continuum of mind.
If the production of a mind did not need to depend upon former moments
of mind but could just be produced causelessly, then a mind could be
produced anywhere and any time, which is absurd. Similarly, if
consciousness was not produced as a continuation of a former entity of
consciousness and instead were produced from something physical, either
it would always, absurdly, be produced or it would never be produced,
which is also absurd. This indicates that consciousness is a
continuation of a former entity of consciousness. Because consciousness
is based in a former moment of consciousness, there can be no beginning
to its continuum. There is no beginning of consciousness, and there is
no end to it. This continuum makes possible the transformation of the
mind into improved states. When the mental continuum is associated with
impure states, our experience is limited to the realm of cyclic
existence. When the mental continuum breaks free from impure states, we
can achieve nirvana. In this way, all

phenomena are the artifice, or sport, of the mind. The impure phenomena
of cyclic existence are the sport of impure mind; the pure phenomena of
nirvana are the sport of pure mind.

FAULTY STATES OF MIND DEPEND UPON IGNORANCE Since it is said that "In
the mind, the mind is not to be found; the nature of the mind is clear
light," impure states of mind such as desire and hatred are not part of
the nature of mind and must be produced by ignorance---a consciousness
misconceiving inherent existence---either in the present moment or from
an earlier source. All faulty states of mind have mistaken consciousness
as their root. Ignorance is a form of consciousness that is mistaken
with respect to the object of its attention; it is wrong about it; it
has no valid cognition as its root. A mistaken awareness and an
awareness with a valid foundation have contradictory ways of
apprehending phenomena, so the one harms the other. When, in your
practice, you become accustomed to correct attitudes, faulty states of
mind naturally diminish until finally they are extinguished. The very
system of the Buddhist teaching is based on natural contradiction. We
want happiness and do not want suffering. The pain we seek to avoid
mainly stems from mental attitudes, and since the source of mental
suffering is afflictive emotions either directly or indirectly, we have
to consider whether there are any forces opposing them. If, for
instance, anger causes suffering, then we must find a contradictory
force. For anger it is love and compassion. Although anger and
love/compassion are all consciousnesses, they have contradictory ways of
apprehending the same object. Their realizations are opposites.
Similarly, if a room is too hot, there is no way to reduce the heat but
to introduce cold. Just as heat and cold oppose each other, so too do
opposing mental states, pure and impure. To the extent you develop one,
the other decreases. Therefore, it is possible to remove faulty states
of mind. Antidotes exist.

UNION OF THE CONVENTIONAL AND THE ULTIMATE

The mind itself is a conventional truth; the reality of the mind, its
emptiness of inherent existence, is its ultimate truth. These two truths
are contained in one indivisible entity. Just as there is a union of the
two truths, conventional and ultimate, with respect to the mind, so
there is a union of the two truths with respect to each and every
object: Its appearance is a conventional truth; and its emptiness of
inherent existence is its ultimate truth. Final reality is known through
the reasoning of dependent-arising. For instance, because the mind is a
dependently arisen entity, the mind is empty of inherent existence. When
you understand emptiness through the reasoning of dependentarising, you
realize that all phenomena are unions of dependent-arising and
emptiness; appearance and emptiness are perceived as harmonious.
Dependently arisen appearances of conventional phenomena provide the
context for teaching compassion---called "the vast path," as there is
such a huge variety of appearances. The emptiness of the inherent
existence of appearances provides the basis for teaching what is known
as "the profound path," because emptiness is the final nature of
phenomena---peaceful, free from conceptualizations, and of one taste.
Through meditatively cultivating these two paths---the vast aspect of
compassion and the profound wisdom of emptiness---in an inseparable way,
faulty states of mind in your continuum undergo gradual transformation.
They are gradually removed, and the excellent attributes of a Buddha's
mind and body emerge. Buddhahood is achieved through the unified
cultivation of both motivation and wisdom. However, motivation and
wisdom have their own respective imprints on Buddhahood. The result of
cultivating motivation is the Form Bodies of a Buddha, which exist for
the sake of fulfilling the well-being of others. The imprint of
cultivating wisdom is the Truth Body of a Buddha, which is the
fulfillment of your own development. What are the main forms of
motivation and wisdom? The primary motivation is an other-directed
intention to become enlightened, inspired by love and compassion and
inspiring the practice of compassionate deeds such as giving, morality,
and patience. The main form of wisdom is an intelligent consciousness
realizing the emptiness of inherent existence.

The foundations of Buddhism have three aspects. The basis is the two
truths, conventional and ultimate. From these two truths the path
emerges with the twin

factors of motivation and wisdom, each related to its respective truth.
The fruit, or result of travel on the path, is actualization of the two
bodies---the Form Bodies and Truth Body of a Buddha. To bring this all
together, on the basis of the two truths--- conventional and
ultimate---you practice the two qualities of the path---motivation and
wisdom---which leads you to achieve the fruit, the Form and Truth Bodies
of a Buddha.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE 1. Identify the luminous and knowing nature
of the mind, unclouded by thoughts. 2. Probe the deeper nature of the
mind again and again to reveal its absence of inherent existence, its
emptiness, by reflecting on the mind's dependence on causes and
conditions and dependence on parts---including the fact that any length
of time that passes in the mind depends on earlier and later parts of
that time period. 3. Try to realize the compatibility of the appearance
of the mind with its emptiness of inherent existence; see how these two
mutually support each other. OceanofPDF.com

V TANTRA OceanofPDF.com

11 Deity Yoga

In Buddhism there are basically two types of practices: Sutra and
Tantra. So far we have been discussing Sutra practice. The special
purpose of Tantra is to provide a faster path so that qualified
practitioners can be of service to others more quickly. In Tantra the
power of imagination is harnessed to meditation in a practice called
deity yoga. In this practice you imagine 1) replacing your mind as it
ordinarily appears, full of troubling emotions, with a mind of pure
wisdom motivated by compassion; 2) substituting your body as it
ordinarily appears (composed of flesh, blood, and bone) with a body
fashioned from compassionately motivated wisdom; 3) developing a sense
of a pure self that depends on purely appearing mind and body in an
ideal environment, fully engaged in helping others. As this distinctive
practice of Tantra calls for visualizing yourself with a Buddha's body,
activities, resources, and surroundings, it is called "taking
imagination as the spiritual path." Let us consider a qualm about this
practice. You are considering yourself to have Buddha qualities which
you presently do not have. Is this, then, a correct type of meditative
consciousness? Yes. Your mind is involved in understanding reality, out
of which you are appearing as a deity. Therefore, your mind, from this
viewpoint, is correct. Also, you are purposely imagining yourself as
having a divine body even if you do not presently possess one. This is
an imaginative meditation; you are not convinced from the depths that
you actually have pure mind, body, and selfhood. Rather, based in clear
imagination of ideal body and mind, you are cultivating the sense of
being a deity, compassionately helping others. To be a special trainee
of Tantra---that is to say, the kind of trainee for whom Buddha
specifically set forth the practice of Tantra---a practitioner must have
sharp faculties and have already attained stable wisdom realizing
emptiness, or be ready

for speedy activation of this wisdom. The requirements for just
practicing Tantra are less rigorous; still, to engage in Tantra at any
level demands a powerful intention to become enlightened for the sake of
others, and a feeling that this needs to be done very quickly. At the
beginning of Tantric practice, the basic way to develop calm abiding is
to meditate on your own body as if it were that of a deity. When you
meditate on a divine body, first you meditate on emptiness, gaining as
much awareness of the emptiness of inherent existence as you can. When
you have acclimated to this state, you use that very mind itself as the
basis out of which the deity appears. The mind, realizing emptiness,
appears as the deity and his or her surroundings. First you meditate on
emptiness; out of that the deity appears; then you concentrate on the
deity. In this way, deity yoga combines wisdom and compassionate
motivation; a single consciousness realizes emptiness and also appears
compassionately in the form of an altruistic deity. In the Sutra system,
although there is a union of wisdom and compassionate motivation, the
practice of wisdom is only affected by the force of the practice of
motivation, and the practice of motivation is only affected by the force
of the practice of wisdom; they are not contained within one
consciousness. A distinguishing feature of Tantra is that they are.
Inclusion of motivation and wisdom within one consciousness is what
makes Tantra's progress so swift. When I was a young boy, Tantra was
just a matter of blind faith. At age twentyfour I lost my own country,
and then after coming to India started really reading Tsongkhapa's
explanations on emptiness. Then, after moving to Dharamsala, I put more
effort into the study and practice of the stages of the path, emptiness,
and Tantra. So it was only in my late twenties after gaining some
experience of emptiness that deity yoga made sense. One time in the main
temple in Dharamsala I was performing the ritual of imagining myself as
a deity of Highest Yoga Tantra, called Guhyasamaja. My mind continuously
remained on the recitation of the ritual text, and when the words "I
myself " came, I completely forgot about my usual self in relation to my
combination of mind and body. Instead, I had a very clear sense of "I"
in relation to the new, pure combination of mind and body of Guhyasamaja
that I was imagining. Since this is the type of self-identification that
is at the heart of Tantric yoga, the experience confirmed for me that
with enough time I could definitely achieve the extraordinary, deep
states mentioned in the scriptures.

INITIATION To practice Tantra it is especially important to gain access
to the transmission of blessings from previous great beings. Blessings
also exist in Sutra practice, but they are crucial in Tantra. The first
means of entry to these blessings is through the door of initiation.
There are four classes of Tantras---Action, Performance, Yoga, and
Highest Yoga Tantra---each with it own initiations to ripen the mind for
practice, and each with its own meditations. Where do you receive
initiation? In a mandala, comprised of ideal surroundings and divine
residents which all are manifestations of compassion and wisdom. There
are mandalas of varying complexity for all four Tantras. Some are
painted. Others are constructed from colored sands, and still others
comprise a special class of concentration mandalas. In order to receive
initiation and to take vows in a mandala of Yoga Tantra or Highest Yoga
Tantra, the lama conducting the ceremony must have the full complement
of qualifications. All four sets of Tantras place special emphasis on
the attributes of the lama, in keeping with Buddha's detailed
descriptions of teachers' qualifications for the various stages of the
path. Remember also Buddha's admonition to rely not just on the person
but on the doctrine. You should not be overwhelmed by a teacher's
reputation. Most important, the teacher must know the doctrine, the
practices, well.

PLEDGES AND VOWS In the two lower Tantra sets---Action and
Performance---there is no clear indication that Tantric vows must be
taken upon initiation; nevertheless, there are many pledges to be kept.
In the two higher Tantra sets---Yoga and Highest Yoga--- after receiving
initiation with all of its facets, you must take Tantric vows in
addition to pledges. Yoga Tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra have fourteen
basic vows as well as lists of infractions to guard against, but as they
differ in their respective paths, even the basic vows differ slightly.
Since the practice of Tantra is mainly concerned with overcoming the
appearance of yourself and your surroundings as ordinary (in order to
overcome the conception of these as ordinary), you visualize yourself to
have a Buddha's body, compassionate activities, resources,

and abode. Therefore, most of the pledges are concerned with
substituting ideal for ordinary appearances, and restraining your own
estimation of yourself, your companions, your environment, and your
activities as being ordinary. Except for the particular vow of
individual liberation that lasts for just twentyfour hours, all of the
other vows of individual liberation are taken for an entire lifetime
(although it is possible to rescind one's vows and give back one's
ordination). By contrast, Bodhisattva and Tantric vows extend right
through to the time of highest enlightenment, as long as one has not
committed a root infraction. First one assumes the morality of
individual liberation, then Bodhisattva morality, and finally Tantric
morality. Householders who take the Bodhisattva and Tantric vows keep a
householder's version of the vows of individual liberation. The
Kalachakra Tantra, which flourished during the eleventh century in India
and became a principal Tantra of the New Translation Schools in Tibet,
states that if there are three teachers of Tantra, one with
householder's vows, another with the vows of a novice monastic, and a
third with the vows of a full-fledged monastic, the person who has taken
the vows of a full-fledged monastic should be considered higher than the
others. This indicates the high estimation that even this Tantric system
places on the monastic morality. The Guhyasamaja Tantra says that
externally you should keep the discipline of the practice of individual
liberation, and internally maintain an affinity for the practice of
Tantra. In these ways the practice of Sutra and Tantra work together.

USING SEX IN THE PATH Let us begin to consider the role of sexual desire
in the path in Tantra by looking at the prohibition against sexual
misconduct in the morality of individual liberation, which is entirely
based on the principle of refraining from harm. Specific sexual
misconduct is identified in detail in Vasubandhu's Treasury of Manifest
Knowledge. For a male it would be to cohabit with someone else's wife,
or with someone who is under the care of her family. For a female it is
the same; it is prohibited to cohabit with someone else's husband or
with someone who is under the care of his family. Some have suggested,
ridiculously, that since Vasubandhu's text explains the ten nonvirtues
from the viewpoint of a male, there is no fault if a female engages in
the nonvirtues---and thus there are no prohibitions for a female!

For Buddhists, sexual intercourse can be used in the spiritual path
because it causes a strong focusing of consciousness if the practitioner
has firm compassion and wisdom. Its purpose is to manifest and prolong
the deeper levels of mind (described earlier with respect to the process
of dying), in order to put their power to use in strengthening the
realization of emptiness. Otherwise, mere intercourse has nothing to do
with spiritual cultivation. When a person has achieved a high level of
practice in motivation and wisdom, then even the joining of the two sex
organs, or so-called intercourse, does not detract from the maintenance
of that person's pure behavior. Yogis who have achieved a high level of
the path and are fully qualified can engage in sexual activity, and a
monastic with this ability can maintain all the precepts. One Tibetan
yogi-adept, when criticized by another, said that he ate meat and drank
beer as offerings to the mandala deity. Such Tantric practitioners
visualize themselves as deities in a complete mandala, within
realization that the ultimate deity is the ultimate bliss---the union of
bliss and emptiness. He also said that his sexual practice with a
consort was undertaken for the sake of developing real knowledge. And
that indeed is the purpose. Such a practitioner can make spiritual use
not only of delicious meat and drink, but even of human excrement and
urine. A yogi's meditation transforms these into real ambrosia. For
people like us, however, this is beyond our reach. As long as you cannot
transform piss and shit, these other things should not be done! Buddha
set out a specific series of stages on the path precisely for this
reason. The preliminary stage is training in the vows of individual
liberation. If you live as a monk or nun, your conduct has a more sound
basis---there is little danger of excessive distraction. Even if you
cannot fully implement such vows, there is not much risk. Then simply
practice, practice, practice. Once you develop inner strength, you can
control the four internal elements---earth, water, fire, and wind (or
five elements if inner space is included). Once you can fully control
these internal elements, then you can control the outer five elements.
Then you can make use of anything. How does sexual intercourse help in
the path? There are many different levels of consciousness. The
potential of grosser levels is very limited, but the deeper, more subtle
levels are much more powerful. We need to access these subtler levels of
mind. But in order to do so, we need to weaken and temporarily stop
grosser consciousness. To accomplish this it is necessary to bring about
dramatic changes in the flow of inner energies. Even though brief
versions of the deeper levels of mind

occur during sneezing and yawning, they obviously cannot be prolonged.
Also, previous experience with manifesting the deeper levels is required
to make use of their occurrence in deep sleep. This is where sex comes
in. Through special techniques of concentration during sex, competent
practitioners can prolong very deep, subtle, and powerful states and put
them to use to realize emptiness. However, if you engage in sexual
intercourse within an ordinary mental context, there is no benefit. A
Buddha has no use for sexual intercourse. Deities depicted in a mandala
are often in union with a consort, but this does not suggest that
Buddhas have to rely on sexual intercourse for their bliss. Buddhas have
full bliss within themselves. Deities in union spontaneously appear in
mandalas for the benefit of people with very sharp faculties who can
make use of a consort and the bliss of sexual union in practicing the
quick path of Tantra. In much the same way, the Tantric Buddha
Vajradhara appears in peaceful aspects and wrathful aspects, but this
does not mean that Vajradhara has these two aspects to his personality.
Vajradhara is always totally compassionate. Rather, his spontaneous
appearance in various ways is for the sake of trainees. Vajradhara
appears in just the way that the trainee should meditate when using
afflictive emotions such as lust or hatred in the process of the path.
To corral such powerful emotions into the spiritual path trainees cannot
be imagining that they have the peaceful body of Shakyamuni Buddha.
Deity yoga is required. Since in the case of hatred, for instance, it is
necessary to meditate on your own body in a fierce form, Vajradhara
automatically appears in the appropriate ferocious form to show the
trainee how to meditate. The same is true for sexual yoga; trainees who
are capable of using the bliss arising from the desire involved in
gazing, smiling, holding hands, or union must perform the appropriate
deity yoga; they could not be imagining themselves as Shakyamuni, a
monk. The purpose of Vajradhara's various appearances is neither to
scare the trainees nor to excite desire in them, but to show how to do
imaginative meditation in those forms in order eventually to overcome
afflictive emotions. A Buddha is capable of appearing spontaneously
without exertion in whatever way is appropriate. The form of these
appearances is shaped by the needs of others, not for the sake of that
Buddha. From a Buddha's own point of view, that Buddha has the total
self-fulfillment of the Truth Body, in which he or she remains forever.

Remember that Tantric morality is built on the morality of individual
liberation and on the morality of compassion. The aim of Tantra is to
achieve Buddhahood on a faster path in order to be of service to others
more quickly.

SUMMARY FOR DAILY PRACTICE Since the practice of Tantra is primarily to
transform how you see yourself, others, the environment, and your
activities, it can be helpful to visualize yourself as having a
compassionate motivation, a pure body, and conduct that benefits others.
OceanofPDF.com

VI STEPS ALONG THE WAY OceanofPDF.com

12 Overview of the Path to Enlightenment

GRADUAL PROGRESS How does a practitioner gradually proceed to Buddhahood
through meditatively cultivating the paths of motivation and wisdom? In
the Heart Sutra, Buddha expresses the levels of the path in a short,
profound statement, "Tadyata gate gate paragate parasamgate bodhi
svaha," (pronounced "Tadyata gatay gatay paragatay parasamgatay bodee
svaha") which means: "It is thus: Proceed, proceed, proceed beyond,
thoroughly proceed beyond, be founded in enlightenment." Let us examine
this more closely, starting with the first word, "gate" ("proceed" or
"go"). Who is proceeding? It is the "I" or self that is designated in
dependence upon the continuum of the mind. From what are you proceeding?
You are moving away from cyclic existence, that state of being under the
influence of contaminated actions and counterproductive emotions. To
what are you proceeding? You are proceeding to Buddhahood endowed with a
Truth Body, forever free of suffering and the sources of suffering
(afflictive emotions), as well as the predispositions established by
afflictive emotions. Upon what causes and conditions do you depend as
you proceed? You are proceeding in dependence on a path that is a union
of compassion and wisdom. Buddha is telling trainees to go to the other
shore. From the viewpoint of the trainee, cyclic existence is on the
near side, it is close at hand. On the far shore, a distant place, is
nirvana---the state of having passed beyond suffering.

THE FIVE PATHS When Buddha says, "Tadyata gate gate paragate parasamgate
bodhi svaha" ("It is

thus: Proceed, proceed, proceed beyond, thoroughly proceed beyond, be
founded in enlightenment"), he is telling trainees to proceed over the
five paths:

gate---the path of accumulation; gate---the path of preparation;
paragate---the path of seeing; parasamgate---the path of meditation;
bodhi---the path of no more learning. Let us identify the nature of
spiritual advancement over these five paths: 1. What is the initial
path, the path of accumulation? It is that period when you mainly
practice other-directed motivation and thereby accumulate great stores
of merit. Also, although you are practicing a union of motivation and
wisdom, your realization of emptiness has not reached the level of
mutually supportive stabilizing meditation and analytical meditation
called "a state arisen from meditation." On this path you achieve
powerfully concentrated meditation, and are working toward a state
arisen from meditation realizing emptiness. 2. At the point at which you
achieve a state of wisdom arisen from meditation realizing emptiness,
you pass to the path of preparation. By becoming more and more familiar
with this state, together with cultivating compassionate motivation, you
gradually perceive the appearance of emptiness more clearly over the
four levels of the path of preparation (heat, peak, forbearance, and
highest mundane qualities). 3. Eventually emptiness is realized
directly, without even subtle contamination from dualistic appearance,
which has vanished. This is the beginning of the path of seeing---the
path of initial direct realization of the truth concerning the deep
nature of phenomena. At this point in the Great Vehicle, the ten
Bodhisattva levels (called grounds because on them special spiritual
qualities are engendered) begin. During the path of seeing and path of
meditation, two types of obstructions, intellectually acquired and
innate, are respectively overcome. Intellectually acquired states of
mind come about through adherence to false systems. For example, there
are followers of some Buddhist

schools who believe that phenomena conventionally exist by way of their
own character, based on the unfounded "reasoning" that if phenomena were
not established in this way, they could not function. This kind of
misconception, polluted by an invalid system of tenets, is called
artificial, or intellectually acquired. Even if you have acquired no new
predispositions through wrong conceptual thinking in this lifetime,
everyone has in their mental continuum predispositions established by
adhering to wrong views in former lifetimes. By contrast, innate faulty
states of mind have existed in all sentient beings--- from insects to
humans---since beginningless time, and operate of their own accord
without depending on faulty scripture and reasoning. 4. Intellectually
acquired, or artificial, obstructions are removed through the path of
seeing, whereas innate obstructions are more difficult to overcome
(because you have been conditioned to these faulty states of mind since
beginningless time). They must be removed by continued meditation on the
meaning of emptiness. Because such meditation must take place repeatedly
over a long period of time, this phase of the path is called the path of
meditation. Indeed, you have meditated on emptiness earlier, but the
path of meditation refers to a path of extended familiarization. On this
level you pass through the remaining nine Bodhisattva grounds. From
among the ten grounds, the first seven are called impure, the last three
are called pure. This is because on the first seven grounds you are
still in process of removing afflictive obstructions and thus these
seven are not yet purified. Through the first part of the eighth ground
you are removing afflictive emotions. The balance of the eighth, ninth,
and tenth grounds enable you to overcome the obstructions to
omniscience. 5. Now, through using the diamondlike concentrated
meditation achieved at the end of the ten Bodhisattva grounds---the
culmination of still having obstructions yet to be overcome---you can
effectively undermine the very subtle obstacles to omniscience. The very
next moment of your mind becomes an omniscient consciousness, and
simultaneously the deep nature of the mind becomes the Nature Body of a
Buddha. This is the fifth and final path, the path of no more learning.
From the very subtle wind, or energy---which is one entity with that
mind---various pure and impure physical forms spontaneously spring forth
to assist sentient beings; these are called the Form Bodies of a Buddha.
This is Buddhahood, a state of being a source of help and happiness for
all sentient beings.

Let me take a moment here to address the many misconceptions about
whether or not women can attain Buddhahood. In the Sutra Great Vehicle,
there is no indication that a woman cannot achieve Buddhahood. However,
the texts state that, during the practices for accumulating merit over
three periods of countless great eons, you will arrive at a time when
the karma you are working at will mature as the physical marks and
beauties of a Buddha; at this time, according to the Sutra Great
Vehicle, it helps to have strong physical support, so you naturally come
to have the body of a male. Those texts also say that in the final
lifetime before you achieve Buddhahood, you need to have the body of a
male. However, Highest Yoga Tantra, which we consider to be the final
system, says that not only can a woman achieve Buddhahood but she can do
so right in this lifetime.

QUALITIES OF BUDDHAHOOD In all forms of Buddhism, practice is based on
the intention to leave cyclic existence. Additionally, in the Great
Vehicle you are motivated by the otherconcerned intention to become
enlightened. In Tantra, through techniques that enhance the development
of the concentrated meditation which is the union of calm abiding and
special insight, you can achieve the state of Buddhahood in which all
obstructions---the afflictive obstructions preventing liberation from
cyclic existence and the obstructions to omniscience preventing
Buddhahood---have been removed. A Buddha's qualities are described as
different "bodies" which can be divided into two general types: the
Truth Body, for the fulfillment of your own welfare the Form Bodies, for
the fulfillment of others' welfare. Form Bodies, in turn, can be divided
by how they appear to beings on different levels of purity and impurity:
Highly advanced trainees can access the Complete Enjoyment Body. Other
levels of trainees experience a wide variety of Emanation Bodies. The
Truth Body can also be divided into two types, the Nature Body and the
Exalted Wisdom Body. The Nature Body can be further subdivided into a
state of natural purification and a state of purification of
adventitious (or caused) defilements. The Exalted Wisdom Truth Body can
be further divided according to many different viewpoints. Maitreya's
Ornament for Clear Realization specifies

twenty-one sets of uncontaminated exalted wisdoms which can be
subdivided into one hundred and forty-six sets.

PRACTICING FOR THE LONG HAUL This has been a brief explanation of: the
ground---the two truths, conventional and ultimate; the paths built on
that ground---motivation and wisdom; the fruits of the paths---the Form
Bodies and Truth Body of a Buddha. It is helpful to have this overview
of the structure of practice, but you need to remember that realization
is generated through many causes and conditions---proper understanding,
accumulation of merit, and overcoming of obstructions. If you have not
first accumulated merit and purified ill deeds, it is difficult to gain
realization just from trying to meditate. Therefore it is important to
work through each of the prerequisites. Engagement in the prerequisites
is not just a matter of filling some sort of count, or even of
completing retreat for three years and three phases of the moon (as some
might imagine from the fact that many retreats take this long), or for
any other period of time. Instead, you must accumulate merit and purify
obstructions until certain realizations are generated. You may spend
your entire lifetime doing so, with the goal of improving future lives.
Sometimes, because of a lack of knowledge, people who perform long
retreats end up with considerable pride about the mere fact that they
finished the retreat. The increase in pride yields an increase in anger,
jealousy, and competitiveness. The same can happen with mere book
knowledge of doctrine. It is not easy; afflictive emotions are tricky.
Practice is not something you do for a couple of weeks or a couple of
years. It takes place over many lifetimes, for eons and eons. As we have
seen, some texts say enlightenment is achieved after accumulating the
collections of merit and wisdom for three periods of countless great
eons. If you consider this statement properly, it can encourage you to
adopt a patient, persistent attitude through difficult circumstances. If
learning this saddens you, this could be due to your desire to achieve
Buddhahood swiftly out of your great concern for others. It could also
be a sign of insufficient courage. Enlightenment cannot be attained
without working hard at it. To believe otherwise means you are harboring
some form of selfishness.

This is the entire process of the path. Even though Tibetans might not
have wealth that can be kept in a wallet, they have this wealth that is
kept in the mind! The stated good intentions of the various religions
are not sufficient; we must implement them in daily life in society.
Then we can know the real value of their teachings. If a Buddhist, for
instance, meditates in a temple but outside the temple does not enact
those contemplative ideals, that is not good. We must practice in daily
life. The real value of practice is seen when we face a difficult
period. When we are happy and everything goes smoothly, then practice
seems not so urgent, but when we face unavoidable problems such as
sickness, old age, death, or other desperate situations, it becomes
crucial to control your anger, to control your emotional feelings, and
to use your good human mind to determine how to face that problem with
patience and calm. If we practice this way, our first hope is that we
may overcome the problem, but, if not, at least the problem cannot
disturb your mental peace. That is good, is it not? You are facing the
situation and retaining your peace of mind---without taking drugs or
trying to pull your thoughts away from it. That is why we take such
great interest in our weekends and vacations! Five days a week you are
very busy, working hard to make money, then on the weekend you go to
some remote place with that money and have a nice time! This means you
are trying to take your mind off your problem. But the problem is still
there. However, if you have a good mental attitude, it is not necessary
to divert yourself. When you can face the situation and analyze the
problem, then, like a big piece of ice in the water, it will gradually
melt away. If you practice sincerely, you will experience its real
value. According to Buddha's own word, his teaching will last here for
five thousand years. At the end of that five thousand years it will
finally be destroyed by someone who is a reincarnation of Buddha
himself, since when that day comes there will be no further value in the
teaching. However, there are a billion world systems like ours, with
limitless billions of those. In some of them the teaching is newly being
introduced; in some it is waning. The teaching continually remains
somewhere at all times. The Buddhas never disappear, and the teaching
never vanishes.

SUMMARIES FOR DAILY PRACTICE Here in one place are the summaries for
practice gathered from throughout the book. Focus on ones suitable for
your level at this point. Or, you could alternate among them over the
course of a week. Cultivated patiently over time, the practices will
become more and more familiar, and your life will become more
meaningful.

Morality of Individual Liberation 1. Examine your motivation as often as
you can. Even before getting out of bed in the morning, establish a
nonviolent, nonabusive outlook for your day. At night examine what you
did during the day. 2. Notice how much suffering there is in your own
life: There is physical and mental pain which you naturally seek to
avoid, such as sickness, aging, and death. There are temporary
experiences, like eating good food, that seem to be pleasurable in and
of themselves but, if partaken continuously, turn into pain---this is
the suffering of change. When a situation switches from pleasure to
pain, reflect on the fact that the deeper nature of the original
pleasure is revealing itself. Attachment to such superficial pleasures
will only bring more pain. Reflect on how you are caught in a general
process of conditioning that, rather than being under your control, is
under the influence of karma and afflictive emotions. 3. Gradually
develop a realistic view of the body through examining its
constituents---skin, blood, flesh, bone, and so forth. 4. Analyze your
life closely. You will eventually find it difficult to misuse it by
becoming machinelike or by merely seeking money as a surrogate for
happiness. 5. Adopt a positive attitude in the face of difficulty.
Imagine that by undergoing a difficult situation you are also
undermining worse consequences from other karmas that you would
otherwise have to experience in the future. As a mental exercise, take
upon yourself the burden of everyone's suffering of that type.

6. Evaluate the possible negative and positive effects of feelings such
as lust, anger, jealousy, and hatred. When it becomes obvious that their
effects are harmful, you will have arrived at the conclusion that there
are no positive results of, say, anger. Analyze more and more, and
gradually your conviction will strengthen; repeated reflection on the
disadvantages of anger will cause you to realize that it is senseless,
and even pathetic. This decision will cause your anger gradually to
diminish. 7. Having recognized the scope of suffering, research its
cause, and identify that the source of suffering is ignorance of the
true nature of persons and things, and that lust, hatred, and so forth
are based on this ignorance. Realize that suffering can be removed, can
be extinguished into the sphere of reality. Reflect that this true
cessation is attained through the practice of morality, concentrated
meditation, and wisdom---true paths. 8. Notice your attachments to food,
clothes, and shelter, and adapt monastic practices of contentment to a
layperson's life. Be satisfied with adequate food, clothing, and
shelter. Use the additional free time for meditation so that you can
overcome more problems. 9. Develop a strong wish to refrain from harming
others, either physically or verbally, no matter whether you are
embarrassed, insulted, reviled, pushed, or hit.

Morality of Concern for Others Perform the five-step visualization for
developing compassion: 1. Remain calm and reasonable. 2. In front of you
to the right, imagine another version of yourself, egotistical and
self-centered. 3. In front of you to the left, imagine a group of poor
people, suffering beings who are unrelated to you, neither friend nor
enemy. 4. Observe these two sides from your calm vantage point. Now
think, "Both want happiness. Both want to get rid of suffering. Both
have the right to accomplish these goals." 5. Consider this: Just as
usually we are willing to make temporary sacrifices for a greater
long-term good, so the benefit of the larger number of suffering beings

to your left is much more important than this single egotistical person
on your right. Notice your mind naturally turning to the side of the
greater number of people. Perform the ritual for the aspiration to
enlightenment. First take the seven preliminary steps: 1.

Make homage to Shakyamuni Buddha surrounded by innumerable

Bodhisattvas, whom you imagine filling the sky in front of you. 2. Offer
all wonderful things---whether you own them or not---including your
body, your resources, and your own virtue, to the Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas. 3. Disclose the countless ill deeds of body, speech, and
mind you have perpetrated with an intent to harm others. Regret having
done them, and intend to abstain from them in the future. 4. Admire from
the depths of the heart your own virtues and those of others. Take joy
in the good things you have done in this and previous lives, thinking,
"I really did something good." Take joy in the virtues of others,
including those of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 5. Entreat the Buddhas who
have become completely enlightened but have not yet taught, to teach for
the sake of those who suffer. 6. Supplicate the Buddhas not to pass
away. 7. Dedicate these six practices to attaining highest
enlightenment. Then undertake the central part of the ritual for
aspiring to enlightenment: 1. With a strong determination to attain
Buddhahood in order to serve other beings, imagine a Buddha in front of
you, or your spiritual teacher as a representative of Buddha. 2. Recite
three times as if you are repeating after him or her: Until I reach
enlightenment I seek refuge in Buddha, the doctrine, and the supreme
spiritual community. Through the collections of merit of my giving,
morality, patience, effort, concentration, and wisdom, may I achieve
Buddhahood in order to help all beings.

To maintain and strengthen this profound altruism in this life perform
the following:

1. Recall again and again the benefits of developing an intention to
become enlightened for the sake of others. 2. Divide the day into three
periods and the night into three periods, and during each of those
periods take a little time out or rouse yourself from sleep and practice
the five-step visualization given earlier. It is also sufficient to
visualize the five steps three times in one morning session that lasts
around fifteen minutes, and three times in one night session for fifteen
minutes. 3. Avoid mentally neglecting the welfare of even one being. 4.
As much as possible, engage in virtuous activity with a good attitude,
and develop a rough understanding of the nature of reality, or maintain
a wish to do so and work at it. To maintain and strengthen this profound
altruism in future lives: 1. Do not lie to anyone at all, unless you can
help others greatly through lying. 2. Directly or indirectly help people
to progress toward enlightenment. 3. Treat all beings with respect. 4.
Never cheat anyone, and always remain honest. In essence, think again
and again, "May I become able to help all beings."

Concentrated Meditation 1. Choose an object of meditation and focus your
mind on it, trying to achieve and maintain stability, clarity, and
intensity. Avoid laxity and excitement. 2. Alternatively, identify the
fundamental state of the mind unsullied by thought, just in its own
state---mere luminosity, the knowing nature of the mind. With
mindfulness and introspection remain in that state. If a thought arises,
just look into the very nature of that thought itself; this will cause
it to lose its power and dissolve of its own accord.

Wisdom As an exercise in identifying how objects and beings falsely
appear in perception, try the following:

1. Observe how an item such as a watch appears in a store when you first
notice it, then how its appearance changes and becomes even more
concrete as your interest grows, and finally how it appears after you
have bought it and consider it yours. 2. Notice at various times how you
yourself appear to your mind as if existent in and of yourself, without
depending on mind and body. 3. Then, frequently reflect on how phenomena
arise in dependence on causes and conditions, and observe how this
contradicts the way people and things appear to exist in their own
right, to exist inherently. If you tend toward nihilism, reflect more on
dependent-arising. If, by concentrating on causes and conditions, you
tend to reinforce the inherent existence of phenomena, put more emphasis
on how dependence contradicts this so-solid appearance. You will
probably be pulled from one side to the other; the true middle way takes
time to find. Also: 1. Identify the luminous and knowing nature of the
mind, unclouded by thoughts and without any conceptual overlay. 2. Probe
the deeper nature of the mind repeatedly to reveal its absence of
inherent existence, its emptiness. Reflect on the mind's dependence on
causes, conditions, and parts. For the mind, any length of time of the
mind---whether one minute or the shortest moment---depends on earlier
and later parts of that time period. 3. Try to realize the compatibility
of the appearance of the mind with its emptiness of inherent existence;
see how these two mutually support each other.

Tantra Since the practice of Tantra is primarily to transform how you
see yourself, others, and the environment, it can be helpful to
visualize yourself as having a compassionate motivation, pure body, and
activities benefiting others.

Though my own knowledge is limited and my experience is also very poor,
I have tried my best to help you understand the full breadth of the
Buddha's teaching. Please implement whatever in these pages appears to
be helpful. If you follow another religion, please adopt whatever might
assist you. If you do not think it would be helpful, just leave it
alone. OceanofPDF.com

Selected Readings

H.H. the Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso. The Dalai Lama at Harvard.
Translated and edited by Jeffrey Hopkins; coedited by Elizabeth Napper.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1989. ---------Kindness, Clarity,
and Insight. Translated and edited by Jeffrey Hopkins; coedited by
Elizabeth Napper. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1984.
---------The Meaning of Life. Translated and edited by Jeffrey Hopkins.
Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2000. Hopkins, Jeffrey. Buddhist Advice for
Living and Liberation: Nagarjuna's Precious Garland. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow
Lion Publications, 1998. ---------Cultivating Compassion. New York:
Broadway Books, 2001. Lopez, Donald S. The Heart Sutra Explained.
Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1988. Wallace, Vesna
A., and B. Alan Wallace. A Guide to the Bodhisattva Way of Life. Ithaca,
N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1997. OceanofPDF.com

We hope you enjoyed reading this Atria Books eBook. Join our mailing
list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other
great books from Atria Books and Simon & Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

OceanofPDF.com

POCKET BOOKS, a division of Simon & Schuster, Inc. 1230 Avenue of the
Americas, New York, NY 10020 www.SimonandSchuster.com Copyright © 2002
by His Holiness the Dalai Lama and Jeffrey Hopkins, Ph.D. All rights
reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof
in any form whatsoever. For information address Pocket Books, 1230
Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020 ISBN: 0-7434-2708-4 ISBN-13:
978-0-7434-4257-2 (eBook) First Pocket Books hardcover printing January
2002 POCKET and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon & Schuster,
Inc.

Designed by Jaime Putorti OceanofPDF.com


