OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

Copyright © 2021 by Brené Brown All rights reserved. Published in the
United States by Random House, an imprint and division of Penguin Random
House LLC, New York. Random House and the House colophon are registered
trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC. Grateful acknowledgment is made
to the following for permission to reprint previously published
material: HarperCollins Publishers: Brief excerpts from this page and
this page of All About Love by bell hooks, copyright © 2000 by Gloria
Watkins. Used by permission of HarperCollins Publishers. Routledge, an
imprint of Taylor & Francis Group: Excerpt from Teaching to Transgress
by bell hooks, copyright © 1994 by Gloria Watkins. Reprinted by
permission of Routledge, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group. Hardback
ISBN

9780399592553 ebook ISBN 9780399592577

randomhousebooks.com Book design by Global Prairie, adapted for ebook
Cover design and illustration: Global Prairie, collage based on original
art by PRRINT!, using illustrations by Gavin Aung Than
ep_prh_5.8.0_138640666_c0_r0

OceanofPDF.com

Contents Cover Title Page Copyright Introduction

#1: Places We Go When Things Are Uncertain or Too Much: Stress,
Overwhelm, Anxiety, Worry, Avoidance, Excitement, Dread, Fear,
Vulnerability #2: Places We Go When We Compare: Comparison, Admiration,
Reverence, Envy, Jealousy, Resentment, Schadenfreude, Freudenfreude #3:
Places We Go When Things Don't Go as Planned: Boredom, Disappointment,
Expectations, Regret, Discouragement, Resignation, Frustration #4:
Places We Go When It's Beyond Us: Awe, Wonder, Confusion, Curiosity,
Interest, Surprise #5: Places We Go When Things Aren't What They Seem:
Amusement, Bittersweetness, Nostalgia, Cognitive Dissonance, Paradox,
Irony, Sarcasm #6: Places We Go When We're Hurting: Anguish,
Hopelessness, Despair, Sadness, Grief #7: Places We Go with Others:
Compassion, Pity, Empathy, Sympathy, Boundaries, Comparative Suffering
#8: Places We Go When We Fall Short: Shame, Self-Compassion,
Perfectionism, Guilt, Humiliation, Embarrassment #9: Places We Go When
We Search for Connection: Belonging, Fitting in, Connection,
Disconnection, Insecurity, Invisibility, Loneliness

#10: Places We Go When the Heart Is Open: Love, Lovelessness,
Heartbreak, Trust, Self-Trust, Betrayal, Defensiveness, Flooding, Hurt
#11: Places We Go When Life Is Good: Joy, Happiness, Calm, Contentment,
Gratitude, Foreboding Joy, Relief, Tranquility #12: Places We Go When We
Feel Wronged: Anger, Contempt, Disgust, Dehumanization, Hate,
Self-Righteousness #13: Places We Go to Self-Assess: Pride, Hubris,
Humility Cultivating Meaningful Connection Dedication Gratitude Notes
Illustration Credits By Brené Brown, PhD, MSW About the Author About the
Illustrator

OceanofPDF.com

Introduction

Heart is sea, language is shore. Whatever sea includes, will hit the
shore. --- RUMI

How It Started I am not a sentimental keeper of things. Maybe it's
because I come from a long line of people who hold on to
everything---every receipt and photo and old department store box. From
the time I was in my early twenties, I often had the unenviable task of
packing up the houses of relatives who could no longer live at home or
who had died. If the movie montage version of this chore exists, I've
never experienced it. It's miserable. First, no one in my family is
going to admit that they might, at some point, get sick or die. My
people die with a look of defiance on their face and shit in every
drawer. This leaves me and my sisters packing, crying, cussing, and
using every single tool we've learned in therapy to resist turning on
one another when we're exhausted. That's actually the only time we
laugh--- when one of us says "I wish I could take out my rage on y'all"
and the other two, without even looking up, say, "Yeah. Same."

There is nothing sweet about packing up. It's hard physical work and an
emotional minefield. Do I keep it? Do I trash it when no one is looking?
Should I feel bad? Am I bad? Maybe I should box it all up and let my
kids deal with it when it's their turn? As far as my own stuff goes, I
was Marie Kondo before Marie Kondo was cool. Just like I'm convinced
that my car goes faster after I get an oil change, I can feel my house
sighing with relief when I take five bags of stuff to the local shelter.
There's a lift and a lightness. And a sense of control. The house stands
a little straighter without the extra weight, and I feel freer with a
little less baggage. Becoming a parent made the purging tricky. In 1999,
when I was pregnant with Ellen, I saw something on TV---a reality show
or a movie or something---that showed how a mother had kept all of her
son's drawings and used them to decorate for his wedding rehearsal
dinner. Jesus. So much pressure. From that point forward, every one of
the 5,684 pieces of art that my kids brought home became an emotional
negotiation about their rehearsal dinner. At some point I realized that
unless I was hosting this dinner in a stadium, one box of curated pieces
was enough. I saved some, framed and hung pieces all over the house,
photographed some of them, and, when no one was looking, put the rest in
the garbage. Way down deep where no one could see. So, given my tendency
to throw out everything, I'm always fascinated when I come across an old
box of my own stuff. I must have thought something was really important
if it warranted saving. If you put all of my memorabilia and artifacts
together, you would get the most accurate story of who I was and what I
valued at any one point in my life. And you'd probably need no more than
a standard issue dining room table to lay it out. I came across this old
college paper several years ago---when I was starting this book. It's
not a great or even a very good paper, but it knocked me off

balance for a few months. Why have I been thinking about emotions for so
long? Why has this always been so important? Can I even remember a time
when I wasn't thinking about emotions? As I unpacked a few other things
in the box---a lifeguard whistle, poems I'd written, a mixtape from
Steve, and a few pictures---my time capsule transported me back to my
Flock of Seagulls asymmetrical haircut and a 1974 Volvo 240D with a
floorboard that was so rusted out I could see the road pass beneath as I
drove. I spent a couple of days with my 1987 self and learned some
things that I had either never known or never acknowledged, or things I
possibly once knew and pushed way down.

I come from a very tough,
suck-it-up-get-it-done-and-don't-talk-aboutfeelings family. Both of my
parents had a hard upbringing with a lot of trauma, and despite their
own unhappiness, they considered the life they gave us the height of
mythical suburban bliss. In their high school years, my dad was the
rage-and-grief-fueled football captain and my mom was the head of the
drill team and president of half a dozen clubs. She was everything she
needed to be to redeem the reputation of what was inconceivable in the
Leave It to Beaver 1950s---having an alcoholic mother. When I was
growing up, there was a lot of unpredictable behavior and intense
emotion in our home. There was intense love and there was intense rage.
There was intense laughter and intense hurt. But even the good times
were dicey, because they could turn in an instant. I am the oldest of
four, so I often felt the brunt of the madness, along with the
responsibility of protecting my siblings from the unpredictable swings.
When things were bad, I was the protector. When things were great, I was
the protector-in-waiting, always on the outside of the fun, easily
teased for being too serious, and always knowing that we were one
sideways glance or one smart-ass comment from chaos. By the time I was
in middle school, I had used a combination of my mom's magazines and
after-school specials to diagnose myself as "crazy." I know that's a
pathologizing word, but back then it was all I had. First, nothing, I
mean nothing, was discussed or normalized in my family. Not feelings or
fears or periods or friend problems or puberty or money issues or
extended family members who struggled with addiction and mental health
issues---nothing. We are all good. Any question or attempt to understand
the things that were clearly not good was immediately shut down in
punitive ways. For children, it's easy for everything to become a source
of shame when nothing is normalized. You assume that if no one is
talking about it, it must be just you.

Second, my parents were confusing. My parents were and are good people
who did the very best they could with the tools they had. Sometimes
those tools weren't enough. Growing up, they seemed to be funny, loving,
well liked, smart, great storytellers, and caring neighbors. People
loved them. Because they were predictably good outside the house, and
wildly unpredictable inside, I assumed it was us. And because I was the
oldest, I assumed it was mostly me. And again, it was shaming for all of
us when the inside behaviors didn't match the families on TV. Something
was wrong and it must be us. We were wrong. As if all of this wasn't
enough to navigate, I had magic powers. And I couldn't talk about them
or ask anyone what to do with them. I wasn't allowed to see The
Exorcist, Sybil, or Carrie, but I knew enough about these movies to use
them as my reference points for unwell teenage girls. Needless to say, I
was worried. Can you imagine how this conversation would have gone over
with parents who wanted nothing more than to fit in and be the suburban
ideal? Hey, Mom and Dad, I didn't make the drill team, I don't have a
date with a football player to Homecoming, and I got in trouble for
saying "shithead" in English. But I do have secret powers. At the time,
I would have told you that I could predict the future. I couldn't tell
you what was going to happen in twenty years, but I could tell you with
stunning accuracy what was going to happen in twenty minutes. And when
you're young and navigating a tough time at home combined with moving
and changing schools in fourth grade, sixth grade, and eighth grade,
twenty minutes is all the future you have. So, yes. I could predict the
future. I knew which snarky comment would produce a laugh and which one
would set off a fight. And I knew why. I knew that the comment about too
much dessert was funny when someone felt good about how they looked and
how the same comment would unleash a screaming match if someone didn't
feel good about themselves that day or that hour.

I knew everyone's shame triggers and the unwanted identities that
elicited their shame. I knew how it was important for everyone to be
perceived, when we could poke fun, and how long we had to get the hell
out of Dodge if we got that wrong. I knew that everyone in our family
was really smart and funny, yet there were flavors of teasing that
people used to work out stress or hurt, and once unleashed, that type of
teasing wouldn't stop until someone was crying. I also knew every inch
of the supposedly "socially acceptable" place for processing anger, like
driving and sporting events. I started out as an athlete but quit as
soon as I could. It was too humiliating. Today, when I see that parent
at my kids' events, I have to put myself in a trance or leave. The irony
is that the first time my dad came to one of Ellen's field hockey games,
he got out of his folding chair in the middle of the game and started
pacing along the fence line. When I went over to ask him what was wrong,
he said, "These girls are under too much pressure. These parents and
coaches are really piling it on. And someone's going to get hurt with
those big sticks." Who are you? The terrifying road rage moments of my
childhood left me and my nervous system incapable of handling raging
drivers. A couple of years ago, I had a driver pick me up at the airport
for a work trip. He got angry when someone passed us on the right side
of the freeway, so he started speeding up and slamming on the brakes to
prevent that driver from sliding in front of us in the passing lane. I
had to say, "I need you to pull over and let me out or stop driving like
this." He laughed like I was joking until I put the driving service
dispatch operator on speakerphone. I was eight or nine years old the
first time I realized that my superpowers worked outside the house. Our
neighborhood swim team coach liked some people and disliked others, and
his preferences seemed to change every day. Everyone tried to figure it
out---some of the kids even ran experiments--- but no one could solve
it. Except me. I knew the secret.

This coach liked effort more than natural talent. He liked the kids who
tried, even if they didn't win. And, my God, he loved backstroke. So
every day when I got to practice, I'd pick the lane with the people who
tried the hardest, not the best swimmers but the people who were dying
by the time they reached the wall. Luckily, "dying by the time you reach
the wall" was a good fit for me. And for free stroke, I'd always swim
backstroke. He was a yeller, but I was never once on the receiving end
of it. I also had a really awful piano teacher who would shame and
humiliate students. Because of my secret powers, I was never victimized
by the teacher, but that wasn't enough. I could barely tolerate watching
it happen to others, so I did my best to set the class up for success.
One day, as I was showing my friend the scale we were working on, we
both started giggling about something (probably how terrible I was at
piano). The instructor went nuts and screamed "Why are you laughing?" We
didn't move a muscle. Finally she said, "One of you is going to the
principal's office---who's it going to be?" It only took me a couple of
seconds to work out that my parents would be okay with my getting in
trouble, but this girl had an older brother who was constantly in
trouble. I had even seen her mom at the school crying and picking him up
from the principal's office. I shot straight up. "Me." She told me to
sit back down and set her sights on the girl sitting next to me, who was
trembling. I looked at her and said, "No. I will not sit down. It was
me." She lost her mind. But I was never afraid. I marched down to the
office, gave the principal's assistant my home phone number, and refused
to talk to anyone until my parents got there.

I told my parents that I had to stand up for someone who was getting
picked on and who was afraid. My dad had me moved out of piano and we
stopped for ice cream on the way home. He was proud of me for standing
up to a bully. I was proud of myself for accurately predicting how
everything would play out, but it wasn't a warm and fuzzy moment for me.
The irony was too obvious. Maybe I couldn't actually predict the future,
but I did have top-level observation powers. I understood that people
would do almost anything to not feel pain, including causing pain and
abusing power, and I understood that there were very few people who
could handle being held accountable for causing hurt without
rationalizing, blaming, or shutting down. What surprised me the most
when I was growing up was how little other people seemed to understand
or even think about the connection between feelings, thinking, and
behavior. I remember often thinking, Oh, God. Do you not see this
coming? I didn't feel smarter or better, just weirder and pained by the
amount of hurt that we are capable of causing one another. The
observation powers were partly survival and partly how I'm wired.
Everyone, including me, seemed so desperate to feel more connected to
their own lives and to one another, but no one was looking in the right
places. No one was thinking about how it all works together. Everyone
seemed disembodied from their own inner world and disconnected from
other people. Too many lonely and secret lives. As I edged into my late
teens and early twenties, my powers waned. Or, it's probably more
accurate to say, my power of observation was dulled by a thick layer of
beer, cigarettes, dance halls, and behavior that constantly jumped the
line between girls-just-want-to-have-fun and self-destructive
self-medicating. As it turns out, being able to see what's coming
doesn't make it any less painful when it arrives. In fact, knowing
probably just upped my anticipatory anxiety and my intolerance for
vulnerability. The

eggshells weren't on the ground; they were duct-taped to the soles of my
shoes. I could never step lightly enough or run fast enough to get away
from the cracking, so I made everything around me so loud that it
drowned out the sound. It's awful that the same substances that take the
edge off anxiety and pain also dull our sense of observation. We see the
pain caused by the misuse of power, so we numb our pain and lose track
of our own power. We become terrified of feeling pain, so we engage in
behaviors that become a magnet for more pain. We run from anger and
grief straight into the arms of fear, perfectionism, and the desperate
need for control. Oh, God. Did I not see this coming? Over the course of
several years, I learned that if understanding power and the connections
between the way we feel, think, and act was my superpower, numbing was
my kryptonite. Inspired by my mom, who, after my parents' divorce,
worked several jobs and started therapy, I got help. I got sober and
started doing my own work. It may be just a couple of sentences here,
but it was years of terrifying change, hard goodbyes, and boundaries---a
truckload of boundaries. When we stop numbing and start feeling and
learning again, we have to reevaluate everything, especially how to
choose loving ourselves over making other people comfortable. It was the
hardest work I've ever done and continue to do. I learned that taking
the edge off is not rewarding, but putting the edge back on is one of
the most worthwhile things we can do. Those sharp edges feel vulnerable,
but they are also the markers that let us know where we end and others
begin.

Understanding and feeling those edges brings grace and clarity. The
edges taught me that the more I used alcohol, food, work, caretaking,
and whatever else I could get my hands on to numb my anxiety and
vulnerability, the less I would understand my feelings, thoughts, and
behaviors. I finally realized that trying to outrun and outsmart
vulnerability and pain is choosing a life defined by suffering and
exhaustion. Still today, the more I pay attention to my life and the
messages from the edges, the more I'm able to choose a way of life that
doesn't demand constant vigilance and preparedness. And when there are
things outside my control that do demand high alert---COVID, for
example---I know running away from the pain and anxiety is way more
risky than leaning in and locking eyes with it. I've learned that power
is not bad, but the abuse of power or using power over others is the
opposite of courage; it's a desperate attempt to maintain a very fragile
ego. It's the desperate scramble of self-worth quicksand. When people
are hateful or cruel or just being assholes, they're showing us exactly
what they're afraid of. Understanding their motivation doesn't make
their behavior less difficult to bear, but it does give us choices. And
subjecting ourselves to that behavior by choice doesn't make us
tough---it's a sign of our own lack of self-worth. I know more than I'd
like about being subjected to this kind of behavior when I don't want to
be, volunteering to experience it just to prove to myself and others
that I'm tough, and, sadly, perpetrating it as well. I can get really
scary when I'm scared if I'm not paying attention. I also learned that
when you hold someone accountable for hurtful behaviors and they feel
shame, that's not the same as shaming someone. I am responsible for
holding you accountable in a respectful and productive way. I'm not
responsible for your emotional reaction to that accountability. Sadly,
I've also learned that sometimes, even when the pain takes your

breath away, you have to let the people you love experience the
consequences of their own behavior. That one really hurts. Last, I know
I will never have to stop learning these things. Over and over. I've
made a lot of progress, but the learning will never stop. I'm just
grateful that I can find and feel the edges today. I love that saying,
"The center will hold." I believe that in the midst of struggle, the
center will hold if, and only if, we can feel the edges.

How It's Going Although I started honing my power of observation in
kindergarten, I officially began studying the connection between how we
think, feel, and act over twenty years ago. In addition to researching,
I now spend most of my time writing, talking to and learning from social
scientists and experts on my podcasts, and working in organizations with
leaders who are scaling courage-building skills and creating culture
change. In some ways a lot has changed, and in other ways not enough has
changed. For example, today if you ask me to identify the biggest
barriers to developing brave leaders or cultivating courage in our
families or bringing justice to communities, I'd go right back to what I
believed was true about people when I was a kid: People will do almost
anything to not feel pain, including causing pain and abusing power;
Very few people can handle being held accountable without rationalizing,
blaming, or shutting down; and

Without understanding how our feelings, thoughts, and behaviors work
together, it's almost impossible to find our way back to ourselves and
each other. When we don't understand how our emotions shape our thoughts
and decisions, we become disembodied from our own experiences and
disconnected from each other. Fifteen years ago, when we first
introduced a curriculum based on my shame resilience research, we asked
participants in the training workshops to list all of the emotions that
they could recognize and name as they were experiencing them. Over the
course of five years, we collected these surveys from more than seven
thousand people. The average number of emotions named across the surveys
was three. The emotions were happy, sad, and angry. When I think about
this data, I think back to a quote from the philosopher Ludwig
Wittgenstein that I came across in college: "The limits of my language
mean the limits of my world." What does it mean if the vastness of human
emotion and experience can only be expressed as mad, sad, or happy? What
about shame, disappointment, wonder, awe, disgust, embarrassment,
despair, contentment, boredom, anxiety, stress, love, overwhelm,
surprise, and all of the other emotions and experiences that define what
it means to be human? Imagine if you had a shooting pain in your left
shoulder that was so severe it actually took your breath away. The pain
kept you from working, sleeping, and fully engaging in your life. When
you finally arrive at the doctor's office and she asks what's going on,
there's suddenly tape over your mouth and your hands are tied behind
your back. You try yelling through the tape and freeing your hands so
you can point to your shoulder, but there's no use. You're just
there---inches and minutes from help and possible relief---but you can't
communicate or explain the pain. I would imagine in that situation most
of us would either fall to the floor in despair

or fling ourselves around the room in uncontrollable rage. This is not
that different from what can happen to us when we are unable to
articulate our emotions. We feel hopeless or we feel a destructive level
of anger. Language is our portal to meaning-making, connection, healing,
learning, and self-awareness. Having access to the right words can open
up entire universes. When we don't have the language to talk about what
we're experiencing, our ability to make sense of what's happening and
share it with others is severely limited. Without accurate language, we
struggle to get the help we need, we don't always regulate or manage our
emotions and experiences in a way that allows us to move through them
productively, and our self-awareness is diminished. Language shows us
that naming an experience doesn't give the experience more power, it
gives us the power of understanding and meaning. Additionally, we have
compelling research that shows that language does more than just
communicate emotion, it can actually shape what we're feeling. Our
understanding of our own and others' emotions is shaped by how we
perceive, categorize, and describe emotional experiences---and these
interpretations rely heavily on language. Language speeds and
strengthens connections in the brain when we are processing sensory
information. But newer research shows that when our access to emotional
language is blocked, our ability to interpret incoming emotional
information is significantly diminished. Likewise, having the correct
words to describe specific emotions makes us better able to identify
those emotions in others, as well as to recognize and manage the
emotional experiences when we feel them ourselves. Our ability to
accurately recognize and label emotions is often referred to as
emotional granularity. In the words of Harvard psychologist Susan David,
"Learning to label emotions with a more nuanced vocabulary can be
absolutely transformative." David explains that if we don't have a
sufficient

emotional vocabulary, it is difficult to communicate our needs and to
get the support that we need from others. But those who are able to
distinguish between a range of various emotions "do much, much better at
managing the ups and downs of ordinary existence than those who see
everything in black and white." In fact, research shows that the process
of labeling emotional experience is related to greater emotion
regulation and psychosocial well-being. These benefits seem to be
related to the additional information we learn from recognizing what
emotion we are feeling. David states that emotions "signal rewards and
dangers. They point us in the direction of our hurt. They can also tell
us which situations to engage with and which to avoid. They can be
beacons, not barriers, helping us identify what we most care about and
motivating us to make positive changes." Work by other researchers
substantiates David's thinking, indicating that our emotions help us
make sense of our surroundings and provide needed input for managing
ourselves and responding effectively to others.

Making Meaning Eduardo Bericat, a sociology professor at the University
of Seville, says "As human beings we can only experience life
emotionally." My hope for this book is that together we can learn more
about the emotions and experiences that define what it means to be
human---including the language that allows us to make sense of what we
experience. I want to open up that language portal so even more of us
can step through it and find a universe of new choices and second
chances---a universe where we can share the stories of our bravest and
most heartbreaking moments with each other in a way that builds
connection.

I know these universes of new choices and second chances exist because
I've discovered them for myself. As I've researched and written about
human emotion and experience, my family---including my parents---have
cheered me on, read my work, and leaned into learning. The process has
been messy and imperfect, but it's been healing and powerful to be a
part of a family that now has the language and skill to align the love
we feel with the way we actually show up with each other. There are
still tough times, and it's easy to default to the old ways, but we've
seen what's possible and we're making progress. In the following
chapters, we're going to explore eighty-seven emotions and experiences
that have been organized into groups. I say emotions and experiences
because some of these are not emotions---they're thoughts that lead to
emotion. And if you asked ten emotion researchers which ones of these
are emotions, you'd probably get ten different answers. The NYU
neuroscience professor Joseph LeDoux explains, "It's been said that
there are as many theories of emotions as there are emotion theorists."
The matter is complex because human emotions and experiences are studied
from the perspective of philosophy, sociology, psychology, neuroscience,
medicine, and mental health (to name just a few disciplines), and
research topics include studies of facial expression, physiology, brain
imaging, genetics, personality traits, cross-cultural analysis, and
more. Some researchers place all emotions into one of two
categories---low arousal and high arousal---while others like to label
them positive and negative. The approaches to understanding emotion are
nearly endless. When the author of a 2015 Atlantic article, Julie Beck,
asked colleagues to define emotion, she got these varying responses:
Individual-specific reactions to experiences Sensitivity to events

Your mind's reaction to experience The description of intangible human
feelings, the powerful internal sensations that color our every
experience. In Beck's article, Alan Fridlund, a social and clinical
psychologist at the University of California, Santa Barbara, is quoted
as saying, "The only thing certain in the emotion field is that no one
agrees on how to define emotion." While there are many disagreements
about the nature of human emotions and experiences, scientific study has
narrowed the gaps of what we know to be true. For example, when
comparing two studies conducted twenty-two years apart (1994 and 2016)
that polled emotion research experts, Paul Ekman (a leading expert
himself) concluded that these authorities have come much closer to
agreement on many emotion topics. He states that the more recent survey
found "broad areas of agreement about the evidence for some of the major
issues about the nature of emotion." For example, 80 percent of emotions
experts now agree that there are universal voice and facial expression
signals that reflect our emotional experience. One area that remains
under debate is how many human emotions and experiences exist. Ekman
believes there is clear evidence for seven universal emotions (although
he really talks about these as emotion "families"). He also believes
that there are ten additional emotions that are close to having
sufficient evidence for being universal and eleven more on which the
jury is still out. Emotion researchers Alan Cowen and Dacher Keltner
believe that at least twenty-seven or twenty-eight emotions are required
to convey the range of human experience. Based on my research on the
importance of emotional nuance, I have chosen to take a broader
approach. These nuances matter, particularly when we are trying to
accurately convey our experiences to others. Therefore, the

emotions and experiences categorized in this book span beyond what many
researchers would call "basic." The list of emotions and experiences
that I present in this book first emerged from a content analysis of
comments from an online course I was teaching that had several main
sections on emotion and story. From 2013 to 2014, 66,625 participants
were enrolled in the course and there were more than 550,000 comments.
The comments were de-identified (no names) and exported to spreadsheets.
After going through the human subjects approval process, I analyzed the
data using two questions: What are the emotions and experiences that
emerge the most often, and which emotions and experiences do people
struggle to name or label? This yielded approximately 150 emotions and
experiences. From here, we invited a group of experienced therapists who
work in diverse mental health settings to a focus group process that I
led. The therapists' experience ranged from addiction and community
mental health to college counseling to inpatient psychiatry and
individual and group psychotherapy. We posted all 150 of the emotions
and experiences on the walls of the room, and the clinicians were asked
to physically tag them with red, yellow, or green stickers based on this
criteria: In my experience working with clients, the ability to name
this emotion or experience is essential to being able to process it in a
productive and healing manner. Let me just say how much I love my job!
This was such an amazing experience. Here's a picture of me with the
therapists after we finished our group process.

BACK ROW LEFT TO RIGHT: Wesley Clayton, Gabriel Ramirez FRONT ROW LEFT
TO RIGHT: Debbie Sieck, Helen Stagg, Sarah Luna, Brené Brown, Ashley

Brown Ruiz, Chinyere Eigege, Cheryl Scoglio, Sasha Coles

Emotions and experiences that received all green stickers were
automatically included on the list. We debated and discussed the yellow
and red stickers, and those were not included unless defining them
offered clarity to the emotions and experiences that were marked green.
Over a three-year period, I worked closely with Dr. Ronda Dearing, our
senior director of research, reviewing close to fifteen hundred academic
publications. As we started researching the emotions and experiences
that made the list, there were times that we would add a word that was
helpful to define for comparative reasons---especially if we have a
tendency to

confuse the words in question (e.g., jealousy and envy). I couldn't have
done this work without her. At first the terms were in alphabetical
order, but in 2020, our summer college interns told us that learning
about the emotions and experiences was most effective when the terms
were in groups that highlighted the subtle and not-so-subtle differences
between experiences. They explained that grouping them based on how they
relate and compare to one another reflects more of our lived experiences
and enhances learning. When interns teach, we listen and learn. Thank
you, Ellen and Prerna! Once we had the final list, we used the course
data to better understand how people actually use language when
describing their feelings. How we talk about our experiences is often
not even close to how those experiences are discussed by researchers. My
commitment is to deliver work that is empirically based and accessible
and that resonates with our lived experiences and lived language. I know
what a privilege it is to have spent my education and career working
closely with research participants, practitioners (therapists,
counselors, organizers, leaders, and others) and educators (from
kindergarten teachers to doctoral professors). Without this diverse
group of people, I'd have no career, which is why I consider them my
most important audience when I'm researching and writing. I figure that
if these groups have the courage to share their experiences and stories
with me, I'm going to do my best to present the research findings in
ways that are meaningful for them and their work, including using
accessible language and stories. If the research participants,
practitioners, and educators don't get what I'm saying, or find it
irrelevant because of how it's presented, I've failed. This is not the
way I'm trained---there is absolutely no emphasis on accessibility

in academia---but I'm a social worker before I'm anything else, and
"meeting people where they are" is an ethical mandate from this
perspective. Sometimes I'm successful, sometimes I need to do better.
Sometimes I fail. And when I fail, I hear about it. Thankfully. I want
this book to be an atlas for all of us, because I believe that with an
adventurous heart and the right maps, we can travel anywhere and never
fear losing ourselves. Even when we don't know where we are.

You Are Here In most of my books, I've shared the line "I am a mapmaker
and a traveler." It's my way of telling you that I don't have the
answers. I have data, and I use that data to chart a course that I'm
sharing with you and trying to navigate at the same time. I don't have
it figured out, and most of my research has surprised me and kicked my
ass. I stumble and fall a lot as I try to put what I learn into
practice. This book is no exception. In the three years that we've been
working on this research, I learned that I was misusing language and
that I had a profound misunderstanding of several of these concepts. I
also came across new research that shifted my thinking on emotions and
how I'll talk about them in the future. This research also taught me
that there are times when I can't even offer you a map. I simply don't
have access to some of the places you've been and many of the places
you'll need to go. This is one of those times. For this work, we are all
the mapmakers and the travelers.

When I settled on using a map metaphor for the book, the first person I
called was Dr. Kirk Goldsberry, my friend and colleague at the
University of Texas at Austin. Kirk is a mapmaker and a cartography
scholar. He knows and loves maps. He also knows and loves basketball.
Realizing that the accuracy of his shots depended on his court position,
he used his cartography skills to analyze and present spatial basketball
data to readers in new ways. He was the vice president for strategic
research for the San Antonio Spurs, the lead analyst for Team USA
Basketball, and a visiting researcher at the Harvard Institute of
Quantitative Social Sciences. Kirk is best known for his sports writing,
including his book Sprawlball: A Visual Tour of the New Era of the NBA.
Kirk explained that there are two ways to make a map: actual exploration
to collect your own data, and using data provided by other people.
Either way, maps are about layers. If you're using existing data, you
might start with elevation, then use a different set of data to layer on
roads, then perhaps use hydrography data to find the lakes, streams, and
rivers, and so on. He helped me understand that while different maps may
use different layers, the one thing that all maps do is provide readers
with orientation. But mapmaking is not as easy as simply stacking data
on top of data. There's an art and science to how cartographers
prioritize and integrate the data. And, according to Kirk, 50 to 60
percent of the challenge of mapmaking is labeling the map in a way that
appropriately prioritizes the right information. He explained, "The
interaction between the layers is the story of the map. It is the
narrative structure of what we see when we read a map. The layers tell
us the hierarchy of what's most important." When he said that, I could
immediately picture a Texas state map on which Houston, Austin, Dallas,
and San Antonio immediately grab your attention and Luckenbach and Hondo
require a solid squint and some finger tracing. The labeling tells me
which cities are the biggest and where they are in relation to one
another.

Kirk told me, "Maps are the most important documents in human history.
They give us tools to store and exchange knowledge about space and
place." I know I'm a map geek, but when he said that, I got goosebumps.
We are meaning makers, and a sense of place is central to
meaning-making. Where am I? How did I get here from there? How do I get
there from here? These questions are central to understanding the
physical world, and they're central to understanding our internal
worlds. Whether we're looking at a map of Texas or reflecting on a tough
conversation with someone we love, we need landmarks to orient us, and
we need language to label what we're experiencing. And, just like a map,
the interaction between the layers of our emotions and experiences tells
our story. But rather than elevation and roads and water, human emotions
and experiences are layers of biology, biography, behavior, and
backstory. As you make your way through this book, you'll see that in
order to recognize, name, and make sense of our feelings and
experiences, we have to: 1. Understand how they show up in our bodies
and why (biology) 2. Get curious about how our families and communities
shape our beliefs about the connection between our feelings, thoughts,
and behavior (biography) 3. Examine our go-to (behaviors), and 4.
Recognize the context of what we're feeling or thinking. What brought
this on? (backstory)

These are the questions that help us make meaning of our lives. So
often, when we feel lost, adrift in our lives, our first instinct is to
look out into the distance to find the nearest shore. But that shore,
that solid ground, is within us. The anchor we are searching for is
connection, and it is internal. To form meaningful connections with
others, we must first connect with ourselves, but to do either, we must
first establish a common understanding of the language of emotion and
human experience. OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#1 Places We Go When Things Are Uncertain or Too Much Stress, Overwhelm,
Anxiety, Worry, Avoidance, Excitement, Dread, Fear, Vulnerability

Stressed and Overwhelmed The restaurant is packed. It's loud, every
table is full, and people are lined up out the door. There's at least
one angry person at every table who is desperately trying to wave down a
waiter. "We never got our bread!" "We need more tea!" "We've been
waiting on our salads for twenty minutes!" "We need our check unless you
don't want us to pay for this crappy service!" You can hear the kitchen
manager's booming voice through the swinging doors:

"The food on the line is dying---let's go, let's go!" "We've got
desserts ready for table 10 and bread ready for tables 3, 4, and 8." But
only one waiter showed up for the shift. And it's me. And I can't speak,
for some reason. And I'm wearing a bathing suit and huge fins that make
it hard to walk and impossible to run. This is one of my least favorite
recurring bad dreams. I hate it because, after six years of waiting
tables and bartending for a high-pressure, highexpectation restaurant
group through college and grad school, I know that feeling all too well.
We made a lot of money, but we worked our asses off. And the pressure
left a mark. Still today, if Steve is in the kitchen and I walk behind
him, I'll shout, "Behind you!" And if I spy someone leaning against the
counter during a family kitchen clean-up after dinner, I have to stop
myself from saying, "Hey! If you have time to lean, you have time to
clean." The language and habits of that job were survival, and they
stuck. Weirdly---or maybe not---the majority of my current leadership
team have significant restaurant experience. Maybe we attract one
another, or maybe I'm just drawn to the capacity for grind. If you work
on our team and you step over a sugar packet on the floor because
picking that up is someone else's job---you're not a good fit. Stressed
and overwhelmed remind me of two restaurant terms that my team and I
often use today: "in the weeds" and "blown." Back in the day, if I
walked into the kitchen and told another waiter "I'm in the weeds"---the
response would be, "What do you need?" I might say, "Can you take bread
to tables 2 and 4, and re-tea tables 3 and 5, please?"

Being in the weeds and pulling out of the weeds happened to everyone on
almost every shift. It was just part of the job, and you learned to
manage it. Walking into the kitchen and saying "I'm blown"---well,
that's completely different. The kitchen gets really quiet. No one asks
what you need. Normally, someone runs to the hostess stand to find out
what tables you're running that shift---they don't even assume you know
at this point. The kitchen manager, who would never get involved in an
"in the weeds" situation, pulls all the tickets for your guests to
evaluate what's happening and immediately assigns your tables to other
waitstaff. When you're blown, you can either step outside or into the
cooler or go to the bathroom (and cry). Whatever you need. You're
expected back in ten minutes, ready to go, but for ten minutes, there's
a complete takeover. In six years, it happened to me twice, both times
due to pure exhaustion at the end of triple shifts that I was working
because tuition was due. Stressed is being in the weeds. Overwhelmed is
being blown.

Stressed We feel stressed when we evaluate environmental demand as
beyond our ability to cope successfully. This includes elements of
unpredictability, uncontrollability, and feeling overloaded. ---
Stressful situations cause both physiological (body) and psychological
(mind and emotion) reactions. However, regardless of how strongly our
body responds to stress (increases in heart rate and cortisol), our
emotional reaction is more tied to our cognitive assessment of whether
we can cope with the situation than to how our body is reacting. I found
this really interesting because I always assumed that my emotions
responded to my

body freaking out. But really, my emotions are responding to my
"thinking" assessment of how well I can handle something.

--- Just as getting in and out of the weeds is a part of every waitstaff
shift in a restaurant, navigating stressors is a daily part of living.
However, daily stress can take a toll. In fact, chronic exposure to
stressors can be detrimental to health. High levels of perceived stress
have been shown to correlate with more rapid aging, decreased immune
function, greater inflammatory processes, less sleep, and poorer health
behaviors.

Overwhelmed If stress is like being in the weeds, feeling overwhelmed is
like being blown. Overwhelmed means an extreme level of stress, an
emotional

and/or cognitive intensity to the point of feeling unable to function. I
love this definition of "overwhelmed" from the Merriam-Webster online
dictionary: "completely overcome or overpowered by thought or feeling."
--- We all know that feeling that washes over us and leaves us
completely unsure of what to do next. Even when people ask "How can I
help?" or "What needs to be done?"---responding with organized thoughts
feels impossible. This is also when I can get really crappy and think to
myself, If I had the wherewithal to figure out what comes next and how
we need to approach all of this, I wouldn't be walking around in circles
crying and talking to myself. --- Feeling stressed and feeling
overwhelmed seem to be related to our perception of how we are coping
with our current situation and our ability to handle the accompanying
emotions: Am I coping? Can I handle this? Am I inching toward the
quicksand? Jon Kabat-Zinn describes overwhelm as the all-too-common
feeling "that our lives are somehow unfolding faster than the human
nervous system and psyche are able to manage well." This really
resonates with me: It's all unfolding faster than my nervous system and
psyche can manage it. When I read that Kabat-Zinn suggests that mindful
play, or no-agenda, nondoing time, is the cure for overwhelm, it made
sense to me why, when we were blown at the restaurant, we weren't asked
to help problem-solve the situation. We were just asked to engage in
non-doing. I'm sure experience

taught the managers that doing nothing was the only way back for someone
totally overwhelmed. The non-doing also makes sense---there is a body of
research that indicates that we don't process other emotional
information accurately when we feel overwhelmed, and this can result in
poor decision making. In fact, researcher Carol Gohm used the term
"overwhelmed" to describe an experience where our emotions are intense,
our focus on them is moderate, and our clarity about exactly what we're
feeling is low enough that we get confused when trying to identify or
describe the emotions. In other words: On a scale of 1 to 10, I'm
feeling my emotions at about 10, I'm paying attention to them at about
5, and I understand them at about 2. This is not a setup for successful
decision making. The big learning here is that feeling both stressed and
overwhelmed is about our narrative of emotional and mental
depletion---there's just too much going on to manage effectively.

Anxiety For me, anxiety feels like what I lovingly call the "Willy Wonka
shit tunnel." There's a frightening scene in the original Willy Wonka
film that starts out as a sweet boat ride through a magical land of
supersized candy and turns into an escalating scene of fear and loss of
control. As the boat enters a dark tunnel, the mood turns. The boat
starts going faster and faster while terrible images flash on the walls,
including a close-up of a millipede crawling over someone's face, a
chicken getting its head cut off, and a lizard eating a bug. None of it
makes narrative sense; it's just scary and confusing.

All of this is happening while the passengers---children and their
parents--- are freaking out and Willy Wonka, played by the incredible,
wild-eyed Gene Wilder, is maniacally reciting this poem at an
increasingly frenetic rate: There's no earthly way of knowing Which
direction we are going. There's no knowing where we're rowing Or which
way the river's flowing. Is it raining? Is it snowing? Is a hurricane
a-blowing? Not a speck of light is showing So the danger must be
growing. Are the fires of hell a-glowing? Is the grisly reaper mowing?
Yes! The danger must be growing For the rowers keep on rowing. And
they're certainly not showing Any signs that they are slowing! That's
what anxiety feels like to me. Escalating loss of control,
worst-casescenario thinking and imagery, and total uncertainty.

Let. Me. Off. The. Boat. As the team and I reviewed the research, what I
learned about language and how some of these experiences work together
felt like a life jacket for me--- something that would keep me afloat if
I had to jump off that boat before it headed into the shit tunnel. I
hope it does for you too.

--- The American Psychological Association defines anxiety as "an
emotion characterized by feelings of tension, worried thoughts and
physical changes like increased blood pressure." Anxiety can be both a
state and a trait. To better understand this, let's get clear on what
these terms mean. The best explanation I've come across is from The
Oxford Review Encyclopaedia of Terms. Here's how they explain it: A
trait is considered to be something that is part of an individual's
personality and therefore a long-term characteristic of an individual
that shows through their behavior, actions, and feelings. It is seen as
being a characteristic, feature, or quality of an individual. For
example, someone who says "I am a confident person" or "I am just an
anxious person" is stating that these attributes are part of who they
are. A state, on the other hand, is a temporary condition that they are
experiencing for a short period of time. After the state has passed,
they will return to another condition. For example, someone who says "I
am feeling quite confident about this interview" or "I feel nervous
about doing this" is describing states. I loved their closing sentence,
which may be the understatement of the decade: "However, working out
what is really a trait and what is a state can often be difficult and is
the content of much scientific argument at times." So, when we say that
anxiety can be both a state and a trait, it means that some of us feel
anxious mainly in response to certain situations, while some of us can
be naturally more predisposed to anxiety than others.

Generalized anxiety disorder is different from both trait and state
anxiety. According to Johns Hopkins Medicine, "generalized anxiety
disorder is a condition of excessive worry about everyday issues and
situations." It lasts longer than six months, and "in addition to
feeling worried, you may also feel restlessness, fatigue, trouble
concentrating, irritability, increased muscle tension, and trouble
sleeping." Approximately one-third of U.S. adults will be affected by an
anxiety disorder in their lifetime; however, it is estimated that fewer
than half of people with diagnosable anxiety disorders seek any type of
professional treatment. It's very difficult to work through an anxiety
disorder without professional help. I'd describe myself as having
frequent state anxiety with trait rising, and I know that therapy has
been essential for me in terms of recognizing and understanding my
reactions and developing techniques for working through my feelings of
anxiety. I've also had to give up caffeine, commit to eight to nine
hours of sleep a night, and exercise almost every day. An intolerance
for uncertainty is an important contributing factor to all types of
anxiety. Those of us who are generally uncomfortable with uncertainty
are more likely to experience anxiety in specific situations as well as
to have trait anxiety and anxiety disorders. Our anxiety often leads to
one of two coping mechanisms: worry or avoidance. Unfortunately, neither
of these coping strategies is very effective. Worrying and anxiety go
together, but worry is not an emotion; it's the thinking part of
anxiety. Worry is described as a chain of negative thoughts about bad
things that might happen in the future.

What really got me about the worry research is that those of us with a
tendency to worry believe it is helpful for coping (it is not), believe
it is uncontrollable (which means we don't try to stop worrying), and
try to suppress worry thoughts (which actually strengthens and
reinforces worry). I'm not suggesting that we worry about worry, but
it's helpful to recognize that worrying is not a helpful coping
mechanism, that we absolutely can learn how to control it, and that
rather than suppressing worry, we need to dig into and address the
emotion driving the thinking. Avoidance, the second coping strategy for
anxiety, is not showing up and often spending a lot of energy zigzagging
around and away from that thing that already feels like it's consuming
us. And avoidance isn't benign. It can hurt us, hurt other people, and
lead to increased and mounting anxiety. In her book The Dance of Fear,
Dr. Harriet Lerner writes, "It is not fear that stops you from doing the
brave and true thing in your daily life. Rather, the problem is
avoidance. You want to feel comfortable, so you avoid doing or saying
the thing that will evoke fear and other difficult emotions. Avoidance
will make you feel less vulnerable in the short run, but it will never
make you less afraid." The entire premise of this book is that language
has the power to define our experiences, and there's no better example
of this than anxiety and excitement. Anxiety and excitement feel the
same, but how we interpret and label them can determine how we
experience them. Even though excitement is described as an energized
state of enthusiasm leading up to or during an enjoyable activity, it
doesn't always feel great. We can get the same "coming out of our skin"
feeling that we experience when we're feeling anxious. Similar
sensations are labeled "anxiety" when we perceive them negatively and
"excitement" when we perceive them positively. One important strategy
when we're in these feelings is to take a

deep breath and try to determine whether we're feeling anxiety or
excitement. Researchers found that labeling the emotion as excitement
seems to hinge on interpreting the bodily sensations as positive. The
labels are important because they help us know what to do next. Dread
occurs frequently in response to high-probability negative events; its
magnitude increases as the dreaded event draws nearer. Because dread
makes an anticipated negative event even worse, we often prefer to get
unpleasant things over with quickly, even if doing them sooner means
that they will be more unpleasant (e.g., a more painful procedure now is
preferred to a less painful procedure later). I felt so called out when
I read this. I can convince myself that an experience is going to be
disastrous and work myself into a dread-frenzy. It's terrible, because
even if it goes well, I'm so dread-exhausted that I can't enjoy it. For
anxiety and dread, the threat is in the future. For fear, the threat is
now ---in the present. Fear is a negative, short-lasting, high-alert
emotion in response to a perceived threat, and, like anxiety, it can be
measured as a state or trait. Some people have a higher propensity to
experience fear than others. Fear arises when we need to respond quickly
to physical or psychological danger that is present and imminent.
Because fear is a rapid-fire emotion, the physiological reaction can
sometimes occur before we even realize that we are afraid. The typical
responses are fight, flight, or freeze. In the research, you can find
many lists of what elicits fear in us. The items range from rodents and
snakes, to the inability to see our surroundings, to observing our
children in peril. However, no matter how much the lists vary, one item
is on every list I've seen: the fear of social rejection. We can never
forget that we experience social pain and physical pain in the same

part of our brains, and the potential exposure to either type of pain
drives fear. To close this section, I want to go back to my friend and
mentor Dr. Harriet Lerner. She writes, "Throughout evolutionary history,
anxiety and fear have helped every species to be wary and to survive.
Fear can signal us to act, or, alternatively, to resist the impulse to
act. It can help us to make wise, selfprotective choices in and out of
relationships where we might otherwise sail mindlessly along, ignoring
signs of trouble." Like all of the experiences in this book, both our
anxiety and our fear need to be understood and respected, perhaps even
befriended. We need to pull up a chair and sit with them, understand why
they're showing up, and ask ourselves what there is to learn. Dismissing
fear and anxiety as not useful to our quest for connection is as
dangerous as choosing to live in constant fear and anxiety.

Vulnerability Vulnerability is the emotion that we experience during
times of uncertainty, risk, and emotional exposure. It first emerged in
my dissertation research, and it has been validated by every study I've
done since. Through our research and training, we've asked tens of
thousands of people to give us examples of vulnerability from their own
lives. These are a few of the answers that directly pierce the emotion:
The first date after my divorce

Talking about race with my team Trying to get pregnant after my second
miscarriage Talking about my feelings Starting my own business Watching
my child leave for college Remembering that leaders don't have all the
answers, but ask important questions Apologizing to a colleague about
how I spoke to him in a meeting Sending my son to orchestra practice
knowing how badly he wants to make first chair and knowing there's a
really good chance he will not make the orchestra at all Waiting for the
doctor to call back Giving and getting feedback Getting back up to bat
after striking out While these are uncomfortable and difficult
experiences, there is no evidence that they are indicators of weakness.
In fact, this is one of the biggest myths of vulnerability. We've found
that across cultures, most of us were raised to believe that being
vulnerable is being weak. This sets up an unresolvable tension for most
of us, because we were also raised to be brave. There is no courage
without vulnerability. Courage requires the willingness to lean into
uncertainty, risk, and emotional exposure. In my most recent research on
courage and leadership, the ability to embrace vulnerability emerged as
the prerequisite for all of the daring leadership behaviors. If we can't
handle uncertainty, risk, and emotional

exposure in a way that aligns with our values and furthers our
organizational goals, we can't lead. In a world where perfectionism,
pleasing, and proving are used as armor to protect our egos and our
feelings, it takes a lot of courage to show up and be all in when we
can't control the outcome. It also takes discipline and selfawareness to
understand what to share and with whom. Vulnerability is not
oversharing, it's sharing with people who have earned the right to hear
our stories and our experiences. Vulnerability is not weakness; it's our
greatest measure of courage.

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#2 Places We Go When We Compare Comparison, Admiration, Reverence, Envy,
Jealousy, Resentment, Schadenfreude, Freudenfreude

Comparison Swimming is the trifecta for me---exercise, meditation, and
alone time. When I'm swimming laps you can't call me or talk to me, it's
just me and the black stripe. The only thing that can ruin a swim is
when I shift my attention from my lane to what's happening in the lanes
next to me. It's embarrassing, but if I'm not paying attention, I can
catch myself racing the person next to me, or comparing our strokes, or
figuring out who has the best workout set. When I go into comparison, I
completely lose the meditation and alone time I need. And I once hurt my
shoulder trying to race a twentysomething triathlete in the next lane. I
have this picture hanging in my study as a reminder to focus on my
journey and to stop checking the lanes next to me. It applies to my time
in the pool and everything else---how I parent, my work, my
relationships--- everything! Researching comparison helped me understand
that, like it or

not, I'm probably going to check the lanes next to me. But what I do
next is up to me. Let's dive in. Sorry, I had to. Comparison is actually
not an emotion, but it drives all sorts of big feelings that can affect
our relationships and our self-worth. More often than not, social
comparison falls outside of our awareness---we don't even know we're
doing it. This lack of awareness can lead to us showing up in ways that
are hurtful to ourselves and others. All of the experiences in this
section are connected to comparison, and the goal is to raise our
awareness about how and why they happen so we can name them, think about
them, and make choices that reflect our values and our heart. We're
going to start with comparison then get into more specific experiences.
Researchers Jerry Suls, René Martin, and Ladd Wheeler explain that
"comparing the self with others, either intentionally or
unintentionally, is a pervasive social phenomenon," and how we perceive
our standings or rankings with these comparisons can affect our
self-concept, our level of aspiration, and our feelings of well-being.
They describe how we use comparison not only to evaluate past and
current outcomes, but to predict future prospects. This means
significant parts of our lives, including our future, are shaped by
comparing ourselves to others.

I've collected data on comparison for years, starting with the research
that informed The Gifts of Imperfection. Guidepost #6 in the list of
guideposts for wholehearted living is "cultivating creativity and
letting go of comparison." Comparison is a creativity killer, among
other things. Here is my definition of comparison: Comparison is the
crush of conformity from one side and competition from the other---it's
trying to simultaneously fit in and stand out. Comparison says, "Be like
everyone else, but better." At first it might seem that conforming and
competing are mutually exclusive, but they're not. When we compare
ourselves with others, we are ranking around a specific collection of
"alike things." We may compare things like how we parent with families
who have totally different values or traditions from ours, but the
comparisons that get us really riled up are the ones we make with the
folks living next door, or on our child's soccer team, or at our school.
We don't compare our house to the mansions across town; we compare our
yard to the yards on our block. I'm not swimming against Katie Ledecky's
times, I'm just interested in the stranger in the lane next to me. When
we compare, we want to be the best or have the best of our group. The
comparison mandate becomes this crushing paradox of "Fit in and stand
out!" It's not be yourself and respect others for being authentic, it's
"Fit in, but win." I want to swim the same workout as you, and beat you
at it. Many researchers talk in terms of upward and downward
comparisons. Specifically, Alicia Nortje writes, "When we engage in
upward social comparison, we compare ourselves to someone who is
(perceived to be or

performing) better than we are. In contrast, when we engage in downward
social comparison, we compare ourselves to someone who is (perceived to
be or performing) worse than we are. The direction of the comparison
doesn't guarantee the direction of the outcome. Both types of social
comparison can result in negative and positive effects." Most of us
assume that upward comparisons always leave us feeling "not enough" and
downward comparisons make us feel "better than." But researcher Frank
Fujita writes, "Social comparisons can make us happy or unhappy. Upward
comparisons can inspire or demoralize us, whereas downward comparisons
can make us feel superior or depress us. In general, however, frequent
social comparisons are not associated with life satisfaction or the
positive emotions of love and joy but are associated with the negative
emotions of fear, anger, shame, and sadness." These are important
findings because, regardless of the different outcomes, in the end,
comparing ourselves to others leads us to fear, anger, shame, and
sadness. Here's what makes all of this really tough: Many social
psychologists consider social comparison something that happens to us.
Fujita writes, "From this perspective, when we are presented with
another person who is obviously better or worse off, we have no choice
but to make a social comparison. 'It can be hard to hear an extremely
intelligent person on the radio, or see an extremely handsome one in the
grocery store, or participate on a panel with an expert without engaging
in social comparison no matter how much we would like not to' (Goethals,
1986, p. 272)...Even if we do not choose whether or not to make a
comparison, we can choose whether or not to let that comparison affect
our mood or self-perceptions." Whenever I find myself in comparison
mode, I think back to an Unlocking Us podcast conversation that I had
with my friend Scott Sonenshein about his wonderful book Stretch. Scott
is an organizational psychologist, a researcher, and a professor at Rice
University. In the book and on the

podcast, Scott talks about the popular comparison cliché "the grass is
always greener on the other side" and the idea that people spend a lot
of time and money trying to get their grass pristine because they want
to outdo their neighbors. As someone who can fall prey to comparing
myself and my life to edited and curated Instagram feeds, I laughed so
hard when he told me that due to the physics of how grass grows, when we
peer over our fence at our neighbor's grass, it actually does look
greener, even if it is truly the same lushness as our own grass. I mean,
does it get better than that? The grass actually does look greener on
the other side, but that means nothing comparatively because it's all
perspective. So the bad news is that our hardwiring makes us default to
comparison---it seems to happen to us rather than be our choice. The
good news is that we get to choose how we're going to let it affect us.
If we don't want this constant automatic ranking to negatively shape our
lives, our relationships, and our future, we need to stay aware enough
to know when it's happening and what emotions it's driving. My new
strategy is to look at the person in the lane next to me, and say to
myself, as if I'm talking to them, Have a great swim. That way I
acknowledge the inevitable and make a conscious decision to wish them
well and return to my swim. So far, it's working pretty well. Below are
some of the ways we respond to others, often when comparing to our own
situations. The more we know, the more we can choose connection over
comparison.

Admiration and Reverence We feel admiration when someone's abilities,
accomplishments, or character inspires us, or when we see something else
that inspires us, like art or nature. Interestingly, admiration often
leads to us wanting to improve ourselves. It doesn't, however, make us
want to be like the person or thing we admire---we just want to be
better versions of ourselves. For example, I admire many female
athletes. I don't want to be a professional on tour, but they do inspire
me to be the best athlete I can be. Okay, sometimes I want to be a
professional on tour. But the senior tour. Reverence, which is sometimes
called adoration, worship, or veneration, is a deeper form of admiration
or respect and is often combined with a sense of meaningful connection
with something greater than ourselves. I can't think of this word
without thinking of church. This research definition is probably why:
"Reverence is a cardinal virtue characterized by the capacity of feeling
deep respect, love, and humility for something sacred or transcendent."
What's interesting is that while admiration fosters self-betterment,
reverence seems to foster a desire for connection to what we revere---we
want to move closer to that thing or person. A bonus word for our list
is irreverent. After reading all the research related to reverence, I
was curious about how it was defined, because I see it all the time on
Netflix. It must be a key tag for their algorithm. They have tags for
irreverent comedies, irreverent sitcoms, irreverent adult animation,
irreverent stand-up, irreverent British comedies, and more.

I normally do not like any of the shows with the "irreverent" tag. I
looked it up in the Cambridge English Dictionary online---their
definition was, not surprisingly, very straightforward: "not showing the
expected respect for official, important, or holy things." I'm not sure,
but I think my adult experiences with unchecked authority leave me wary
of reverence, and my upbringing, where social conformity was important,
leaves me uncomfortable with irreverence. Translation: I sometimes laugh
at irreverent humor. Then I feel bad.

Envy and Jealousy Let me be the first to say that I've been using these
words all wrong. And I'm pretty sure it's because, like most people, I
don't like to say that I'm feeling envious---even when I am. I'd rather
offer a friendly, "Man, that's amazing. I'm so jealous." But as it turns
out, I'm probably not jealous when I say that, I'm envious. But I don't
like the way that sounds. Here's what I've learned. There are several
debates about the inner workings of envy and jealousy, but there seems
to be a consensus that these are two significantly different emotions,
starting with these definitions: Envy occurs when we want something that
another person has. Jealousy is when we fear losing a relationship or a
valued part of a relationship that we already have. According to
researchers Richard H. Smith and Sung Hee Kim,

Envy typically involves two people and occurs when one lacks something
enjoyed by another. The target of envy may be a person or a group of
persons, but the focus of envy is that one lacks something compared with
a specific target, whether it be a target individual or target group.
Jealousy typically involves three people and occurs when one fears
losing someone to another person. Envy and jealousy result from
different situations, generate distinct appraisals, and produce
distinctive emotional experiences.

Envy A 2015 study found that 90 percent of recalled episodes of envy can
be attributed to one of three categories: 1. Attraction (e.g., physical
attractiveness, romantic attraction, social popularity); 2. Competence
(e.g., intelligence, knowledge); and 3. Wealth (e.g., financial status
or lifestyle). There's not full agreement in the research, but it
appears that some envy comes with hostility. (I want that, and I don't
want you to have it. I also want you to be pulled down and put down.)
Some experiences of envy don't include hostile feelings. (I want that,
but you can have it too, and I don't want you to be put or pulled down.)
The fact that hostility and a desire for denigration are sometimes part
of envy makes it tough to own that emotion. What would we say? I'm
envious, but not the bad kind. Swear.

Jealousy Jealousy doesn't seem to be a singular emotion but rather a
cognitive evaluation in response to feeling anger, sadness, and/or fear.
In other words, we think jealousy in response to how we feel. According
to researchers Mingi Chung and Christine Harris, jealousy typically
involves a triad---two people in a relationship and a rival; the rival
is usually another person, but occasionally it is something else, such
as loss of valuable relationship time to a favored activity. They write,
"The core form of jealousy primarily involves threats to relationship
rewards including loss of a loved one's attention, affection, or
resources to another." We mostly think of jealousy in the context of
romantic relationships, but jealousy also applies to parent/child
interactions, sibling relationships, friendships, and coworker
relationships. In children, jealousy most often relates to loss of
parental attention or perceived special treatment of a sibling that they
believe to be unfair. In adults, there are the familiar scenarios like
our partner flirting with someone at a party or a close friend suddenly
spending a lot of time with a new friend. But sometimes we might even
feel a pang of jealousy when a partner or friend spends a lot of time
alone, doing something that doesn't involve us. We might feel anger, or
sadness, or fear, but what goes through our mind is that we are jealous.
And the reason for our jealousy (and the accompanying emotion) is that
the other person or activity is threatening to take time away from our
relationship. While jealousy is frequently considered more socially
acceptable than envy, it can often lead to more dire consequences. For
example, some research has found that high levels of jealousy are
directly related to problem drinking and to interpersonal violence when
drinking. Other research has

found that frequent experiences of jealousy combined with problematic
alcohol use are related specifically to higher levels of physical
assault and sexual coercion. But is all jealousy dangerous? No. It's
normal to feel some level of jealousy, and research shows that in small
doses and expressed appropriately, it's a normal part of healthy
relationships. I love how the poet Maya Angelou frames it. "Jealousy in
romance is like salt in food. A little can enhance the savor, but too
much can spoil the pleasure and, under certain circumstances, can be
life-threatening." Last, it's interesting to note that people who are
more satisfied in their romantic relationships are less likely to be
jealous about potential relationship threats; however, they are more
likely to react negatively to actual relationship breaches. Even after
learning about these distinctions, it still feels hard to use the word
"envious." Maybe it's because envy can have that hostility component?
Also, I wonder if, unconsciously, we don't use the term because it's one
of the "seven deadly sins," and two of the ten commandments are warnings
against envy. Is it in our upbringing and our culture to feel shame
about feeling envy? Additionally, the term "jealous" has worked its way
into our vocabulary in a way that can sound almost complimentary or
admiring: "Your vacation pics are great. I'm so jealous!" And who can
get mad when we use "jelly" for jealous---it's funny and sounds benign
in a sticky-sweet way. I love those shoes---I'm so jelly. No one would
wonder if you're thinking, I want those, I don't want you to have those,
and you're going down. Regardless of whether we choose to change our
language or not, understanding the nuances of that language can help us
ask ourselves the right questions when we're experiencing jealousy or
envy. If we're feeling

afraid or sad or angry or we're deep in "coveting mode"---we have the
tools now to ask ourselves: Am I fearful of losing something I value to
another person, or do I want something someone else has? If I want
something that someone else has, do I want to see them lose it, or is it
not about that? If I'm scared I'm losing something important to me, what
kind of conversation do I need to have with that person?

Resentment Understanding resentment---how it works in my life, where it
comes from, and how I stay out of it---has been one of my lifelong
struggles. This is not something that's easy for me to share with you,
because, on top of struggling with resentment, I'm judgmental toward my
own resentment. Let me explain. We know from the research that unwanted
identity is the most powerful elicitor of shame. If you want to know
what's likely to trigger shame for you, just fill in this sentence stem:
It's really important for me not to be perceived as
\_\_\_\_\_­\_\_\_\_\_­\_\_\_\_\_­\_. "Resentful" and "bitter" are
definitely on my list. So, I struggle with feeling resentment and I
struggle with how struggling with resentment makes me feel. For years, I
assumed that resentment was a form of anger related to my perfectionism.
I mostly felt resentful toward people whom I perceived to be not working
or sacrificing or grinding or perfecting or advocating as hard as I was.
You want to see me go into full-tilt resentment, just watch someone tell
me, "Yeah. I stopped working on it---it's not exactly perfect, but it's
good enough" or "I know it's due tomorrow, but I'm wiped out so I'm
packing it in" or "I don't get involved in those issues---they really
don't affect me."

Ugh. IT IS ON. I've spent decades working on my perfectionism, and that
helped, but resentment remained an issue. Then, all of a sudden, in one
sentence---my life changed. I was interviewing the emotions researcher
and writer Marc Brackett for our Unlocking Us podcast, and we were
chatting before the actual recording started. Out of the blue, I said,
"Before we start, I've got a personal question. Is resentment part of
the anger family?" Without hesitation, Marc replied, "No. Resentment is
part of envy." Oh, holy shit. I'm not mad because you're resting. I'm
mad because I'm so bone tired and I want to rest. But, unlike you, I'm
going to pretend that I don't need to. I'm not furious that you're okay
with something that's really good and imperfect. I'm furious because I
want to be okay with something that's really good and imperfect. Your
lack of work is not making me resentful, my lack of rest is making me
resentful. My life changed. Maybe it's unfair to say that it changed in
one sentence because I've been curious and committed to figuring out my
resentment for twenty-six years---maybe it's a case of "when the student
is ready, the teacher appears." And why twenty-six years? Because I
remember the moment I saw resentment in another person and thought, "Oh,
no. She's so unlikable. So awful. But so painfully relatable. I don't
want to be that person."

It was 1995, and I was alone at the movie theater watching Home for the
Holidays. It's a funny, smart movie, directed by Jodie Foster, about
adult children gathering at their parents' house on Thanksgiving Day.
Two siblings, played by Holly Hunter and Robert Downey, Jr., are
unconventional free spirits who have both moved away and maintained a
close relationship. Then there's the sister, played brilliantly by
Cynthia Stevenson, who never left, who takes care of the parents (more
than they'd like), who is paralyzed by perfectionism, and whose rigidity
makes her the brunt of family jokes. She's bitter and resentful and
exhausted. After dinner goes very wrong, and a turkey ends up in the
perfect sister's lap, she and her obnoxiously uptight family leave. Then
there's a scene when Cynthia Stevenson's character is in the basement of
her house, working out on her StairMaster, and Holly Hunter's character
comes over to apologize for Thanksgiving turning into a circus. The
resentful sister goes off about how she's the only one who grew up and
how the other two shirked all of the responsibilities that she now has
to bear alone. After she says something really cruel to Holly Hunter's
character, she looks down at her StairMaster and signals for her sister
to leave: "Do you mind? This is the only thing I do all day that I
like." Yikes. I don't think I've ever been that bad, but as I said, it
was painfully relatable. And scary to think that I could even be on that
trajectory. Now when I start to feel resentful, instead of thinking,
What is that person doing wrong? or What should they be doing? I think,
What do I need but am afraid to ask for? While resentment is definitely
an emotion, I normally recognize it by a familiar thought pattern: What
mean and critical thing am I rehearsing saying to this person? Here's
our definition:

Resentment is the feeling of frustration, judgment, anger, "better
than," and/or hidden envy related to perceived unfairness or injustice.
It's an emotion that we often experience when we fail to set boundaries
or ask for what we need, or when expectations let us down because they
were based on things we can't control, like what other people think,
what they feel, or how they're going to react.

Schadenfreude Schadenfreude is a compound of the German words schaden,
meaning harm, and freude, meaning joy. It's pronounced sha-din-froy-da.
And the world is full of it these days. The German language is known for
accurately capturing nuanced emotions, often with compound words that
make the meaning very clear. In the case of "schadenfreude," it simply
means pleasure or joy derived from someone else's suffering or
misfortune. All of us on the research team were confident that no
English equivalent existed, and the articles we read seemed to agree;
however, I recently read a piece in The Irish Times in which a reader
made the argument that "epicaricacy" captures the same meaning. It means
rejoicing at, taking fun in, or getting pleasure from the misfortune of
others. The word is derived from the ancient Greek epi (upon), kharis
(joy), and kakos (evil). "Epicaricacy" is far less fun to say than
"schadenfreude," and other than that article, I've never heard it used
and can't even find it in most dictionaries. "Schadenfreude," on the
other hand, is a word I hear a lot. In an article in The Wall Street
Journal, the reporter Ben Cohen explains, "It is an old German word
whose usage in English dates to the 1850s, spiking in American
publications after World War II but then fading, according to Google
data. It returned nearly a half century later, some linguists say,
because of a 1991 episode of The Simpsons." More recently the term made
a guest appearance on Ted Lasso when one of the characters was rejoicing
in another character's misfortune until Ted

Lasso declared the office a "schadenfreude-free zone." While
schadenfreude may be fun to say and it's an increasingly used term in
the United States, it's a tough emotion. There's a cruelty and
insecurity about it. Taking pleasure in someone else's failings, even if
that person is someone we really dislike, can violate our values and
lead to feelings of guilt and shame. But, make no mistake, it's
seductive, especially when we're sucked into groupthink. It's easy to
build counterfeit connection with collective schadenfreude. I say
"counterfeit" because when we see someone who we don't like, we disagree
with, or is outside our group stumble, fall, or fail, it's tempting to
celebrate that suffering together and to stir up collective emotion.
That kind of bonding might feel good for a moment, but nothing that
celebrates the humiliation or pain of another person builds lasting
connection.

Schadenfreude involves counter-empathy---our emotional reaction is
incongruent with another person's emotional experience. When someone
else is suffering and we feel joy, there is decreased activity in the
area of the brain that processes empathy and increased activity in the
reward centers. In other words, when we feel schadenfreude, it shuts
down the area of our brain that we use when feeling empathy and lights
up the areas of the brain that make us feel good and that entice us to
engage in similar behaviors in the future. I think it's important to
point out, especially in this political and social climate, that when we
feel relieved, grateful, or even happy that someone who has done
something hurtful, unethical, or unjust is held accountable, that's not
schadenfreude and normally doesn't stem from counter-empathy. On the
contrary, it can stem from empathy for the aggrieved. It's similar to
the distinction that when we hold someone accountable and they respond
to that accountability by feeling shame, it does not mean we've shamed
them. When we are relieved or happy to see someone held accountable for
wrongdoing, we're not automatically celebrating their suffering, but
more often we're grateful for the healing that accountability brings to
those who have been affected by the wrongdoing. Schadenfreude has
trait-like properties, meaning that some people have a tendency to take
greater pleasure in others' misfortune across a range of scenarios. It
is positively correlated with envy, aggression, narcissism, and anger,
and negatively correlated with empathy and conscientiousness. We often
don't talk about our schadenfreude because it can make us feel shame
and/or guilt. This came up a lot during the pandemic when vaccinated
people struggled with feeling outside their values over their
schadenfreude toward antivaccination folks who were diagnosed with
COVID. I wrestled with it myself. I remember thinking one day, Is this
who I want to be? Someone who celebrates people getting sick or dying---

regardless of the circumstance? I would justify it for a minute by
thinking: But they're threatening my health and the health of people I
love. In the end, I couldn't make it work with my values. But I'm still
angry, and without a viable accountability strategy, it's hard not to
let the shitty emotions take over. Researchers Richard H. Smith and
Wilco W. van Dijk grabbed my attention with this line about
schadenfreude: It's "an emotion typically born out of inferiority rather
than superiority." I would add that it doesn't always have to be about
inferiority; schadenfreude is also born out of fear, powerlessness,
and/or a sense of deservedness.

Freudenfreude To end on a positive note, let's talk a little about
freudenfreude, which is the opposite of schadenfreude---it's the
enjoyment of another's success. It's also a subset of empathy. In a
paper in World Journal of Psychiatry and Mental Health Research, the
psychologist Catherine Chambliss examines the role that freudenfreude
and schadenfreude play in depression. She writes, "When others report
success to us, they generally hope for an empathic response of shared
joy (Freudenfreude). If instead they get a negative, competitive
reaction, they may respond with confusion, disappointment, irritation,
or all three. Ongoing lack of Freudenfreude eventually can pose a fatal
challenge to a relationship, and in turn, relationship failure often
produces depression. We suspected that depressed folks might exhibit
deficiencies in Freudenfreude." I'm sharing this research with you
because I think it's invaluable to understand. As Steve and I support
our kids in learning how to cultivate

meaningful connection with the people in their lives, we've always told
them that good friends aren't afraid of your light. They never blow out
your flame and you don't blow out theirs---even when it's really bright
and it makes you worry about your own flame. When something good happens
to you, they celebrate your flame. When something good happens to them,
you celebrate their flame. To illustrate, we'd have our kids hold their
hands out, palms flat and open, and say, "If this is your flame and the
wind picks up, good friends cup their hands around your flame to prevent
it from going out. And you do the same for them." "No flame
blower-outers" was our way of saying "more freudenfreude, less
schadenfreude." One last thing from this article: shoy and bragitude. In
an intervention designed by researchers to increase freudenfreude, they
coined two new terms to describe behaviors that were very effective: 1.
Shoy: intentionally sharing the joy of someone relating a success story
by showing interest and asking follow-up questions. 2. Bragitude:
intentionally tying words of gratitude toward the listener following
discussion of personal successes. I love these terms and the practical
advice. When someone shares something great that's happened to them, we
can show interest and ask questions. When someone demonstrates joy when
we share ours, we can express gratitude: "Thank you for celebrating this
with me. It means so much that you're happy for me." Something about
freudenfreude reminds me of a leadership lesson I learned in Abby
Wambach's book Wolfpack. Abby is a two-time Olympic gold

medalist soccer player and FIFA World Cup Champion. She was the United
States' leading scorer in the 2007 and 2011 Women's World Cup
tournaments and the 2004 and 2012 Olympics. In Wolfpack, Abby writes
about the "Point and Run." She explains that every time she scored a
goal, the first thing she would do is point to the person who made the
assist or the coach who called the play. And the run was about
celebrating another person's victory. She writes, "You will not always
be the goal scorer. When you are not, you better be rushing toward her."
OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#3 Places We Go When Things Don't Go as Planned Boredom, Disappointment,
Expectations, Regret, Discouragement, Resignation, Frustration

Boredom Boredom is the uncomfortable state of wanting to engage in
satisfying activity, but being unable to do it. When we're bored we
experience a lack of stimulation, time seems to pass very slowly, and if
we're working on tasks, they seem to lack challenge and meaning. What's
unique about boredom is that, depending on the situation, it can wind us
up and leave us feeling irritable, frustrated, or restless, or, rather
than getting us worked up, it can leave us feeling lethargic. When we
have more control and autonomy over the boring tasks, it's more likely
that boredom will leave us feeling lethargic. If we have little autonomy
and control over the boring tasks, we are more likely to feel
frustration.

This resonates with me. If I assign myself something to do and it's
really boring, I normally end up mindlessly scrolling on social media.
If, however, I'm asked to do something by someone else and it turns out
to be boring, I can get really frustrated and irritated. While most of
us think of boredom as a negative feeling, it turns out that not all
experiences of boredom are bad. In fact, if it weren't for boredom, you
wouldn't be reading this book or any book by me. Let me explain the
research first. A recent study showed that simple, boring tasks or
mundane activities can allow our minds to wander, daydream, and create.
The lack of stimulation that defines "being bored" gives our imagination
room to play and grow. A big part of my book writing routine is watching
super predictable, formulaic mysteries---even ones I've seen ten times.
These shows would bore me to tears if I were in a normal mental space.
But when I'm coding data and writing, something weird happens. It's like
the shows lull the easily distracted part of my brain into a rhythmic
stupor, setting free the deeper, meaning-making part of my brain to
engage and start making connections between things that don't seem
connectable. I actually sit on my couch with a notepad next to me
because the more bored I get, the more ideas bubble to the surface. This
has been my process for thirty years, which is why, from the time my
kids were little, I never rushed to alleviate their boredom. If I could
wait out the "I'm soooo bored" episodes, things would eventually turn
quiet and I'd find them doing something really important, like
daydreaming or creating. I've seen Ellen turn a boring day into a fully
choreographed song and dance routine to the Wicked soundtrack, and
Charlie go from "Ugh. I don't know what to do" to writing an illustrated
book about rocks. As researcher and writer Sherry Turkle says, "Boredom
is your imagination calling to you."

Disappointment and Regret Disappointment and regret can range from mild
discomfort to deep hurt. And, in my experience as a researcher and a
human being, we underestimate both in terms of the disconnection and
pain they can cause within us and in our relationships. Thankfully,
there are tools and practices that can help us better understand what's
behind these experiences and how to better set ourselves up for less
hurt when possible.

Disappointment There are many definitions of disappointment, but this
one emerged from our data and I think it's as clear and clean as it
gets:

Disappointment is unmet expectations. The more significant the
expectations, the more significant the disappointment. Because
disappointment and regret are so interwoven into our experiences of
vulnerability and shame, I talk about them to some degree in all of my
books. For Rising Strong, I did a deep research dive into both because
it's a book about the stories we tell ourselves when we're hurting, and
you can bet that these emotions are often front and center in these
narratives. With disappointment, it always starts with expectations.
I've found two categories of expectations in my work: expectations that
are unexamined and unexpressed (aka stealth expectations) and examined
and expressed expectations.

Unexamined and Unexpressed Expectations (aka Stealth Expectations) Every
day, sometimes every hour, we are consciously and unconsciously setting
expectations of ourselves and the people in our lives---especially those
closest to us. The unconscious, unexamined, and unexpressed expectations
are the most dangerous and often turn into disappointment. In fact, the
research tells us that disappointment is one of the most frequently
experienced emotions, and it tends to be experienced at a high level of
intensity. When we develop expectations, we paint a picture in our head
of how things are going to be and how they're going to look. Sometimes
we go so far as to imagine how they're going to feel, taste, and smell.
That picture we paint in our minds holds great value for us. We set
expectations based not only on how we fit in that picture, but also on
what those around us are doing in that picture. This means that our
expectations are often set on outcomes totally beyond our control, like
what other people think, what they feel, or how they're going to react.
The movie in our mind is wonderful, but no one else knows their parts,
their lines, or what it means to us. When the picture or movie fails to
play out in real life, we feel disappointed. And sometimes that
disappointment is severe and brings shame and hurt and anger with it.
It's a setup for us and for the people involved. Disappointment takes a
toll on us and our relationships. It requires considerable emotional
bandwidth. Researcher Eliane Sommerfeld explains that we come away from
the experience of disappointment feeling bad about ourselves and the
other person. Our negativity is tinged with astonishment and surprise,
and, at the same time we're trying to forgive, we're concealing
emotions. We're trying to think positively and urging ourselves to move
on. It's exhausting. I speak from experience. Here's a story that I
shared in Rising Strong.

For Steve and me, stealth expectations and disappointment have been the
sources of some of our most difficult arguments and hurt feelings. About
ten years ago, we noticed a pattern where one of us would feel
disappointment, resentment, and anger at the end of a weekend spent
trying to jointly juggle our family's hectic soccer--birthday
party--sleepover--school project schedules along with our own personal
obligations. It was so much easier when we were flying solo with the
kids over the weekends---but how on earth could it be easier for Steve
to hold down the fort when I'm out of town? Why is it simpler for me to
navigate a busy weekend when he's out of town or on call at the hospital
for hours on end? The arguments we had after we spent weekends together
often ended with one of us feeling disappointed and angry, and slipping
into blaming mode. Our frustration would turn into hurtful jabs: You're
not helpful. You don't make it any easier. You just make it harder. So
painful. I finally said to Steve, "I'm tired of this argument about it
being easier without the other one here. It totally hurts my feelings. I
feel like I don't belong here. Something about the story we're telling
ourselves is not true. I don't believe it." He confessed that it also
hurt his feelings, so we started examining the patterns. It took a lot
of trial and error---and several near meltdowns---until Steve finally
said, "When it's just me with the kids, I have no expectations for
getting my own stuff done. I give up my to-do list so I can actually
enjoy the craziness." It was that simple. This fight was all about
stealth expectations. To this day, when I'm on my own for a weekend with
the kids, I clear the expectations deck. Back then, however, when Steve
and I were both home, we set all kinds of wild expectations about
getting stuff done. What we never did was reality-check our expectations
or make them explicit. We just

tended to blame each other for our disappointment when our expectations
weren't realized. Now, before weekends, vacations, or even busy school
or workweeks, we talk about expectations. We specifically ask each
other, "What do you want this weekend to look like?" I might say, "This
is going to be a busy weekend. I'm down for whatever we need to do, but
I would like to swim at least one day and play pickleball for a couple
of hours on Saturday." Steve might say, "Let's try to grab dinner, just
the two of us, on Saturday night after we drop off Charlie. I'd like to
play water polo for a couple of hours on Sunday. What time is
pickleball?" That doesn't mean stealth expectations no longer trip us
up. They do. But now we help each other. We help each other
reality-check our expectations, we ask each other a lot of questions
about what we think will happen or what we want to happen, and we often
ask ourselves and each other: What's this about? What are you not
saying? These are vulnerable conversations, but worth the discomfort.
For example, with Steve, I want him to have a great weekend, and I know
he feels the same way about me. I've learned that my expectations often
come down to fear, a need for certainty, or a need for rest and play.
It's just so hard to ask sometimes. But it doesn't stop me from
expecting. We're also trying to teach our kids how to reality-check,
communicate, and dig into the intentions driving their expectations. We
try to model the questions: What expectations do you have going into
this? What do you want to happen? Why? What will that mean to you? Do
you have a movie in your head? And in this perception-driven world, the
big question is always:

Are you setting goals and expectations that are completely outside of
your control? Unexamined and unexpressed expectations can also lead to
serious disappointment at work. In Dare to Lead, I write about the power
of "painting done." When I hand off an assignment at work, I will often
say "Let me paint done"---and if I don't, you can be assured that the
person on my team will say "I'm on it. But I need you to paint done."
"Painting done" means fully walking through my expectations of what the
completed task will look like, including when it will be done, what I'll
do with the information, how it will be used, the context, the
consequences of not doing it, the costs---everything we can think of to
paint a shared picture of the expectations. It's one of the most
powerful tools we have. Here are some other examples of unchecked and
unexpressed expectations that came up in the research for Rising Strong.
It's going to be a great holiday! I've got everything planned to the
minute. Is this a setup for success? What do you need from this
gathering and why? Have you talked about your needs, or are you assuming
everyone is on board? Have you shared your plans and talked about why
they're important to you? Have you asked the other people what they want
and need? My sister-in-law is going to love her gift and be so impressed
with dinner. You have no control over her response. None. Is there
something you need for yourself or your relationship that a gift and
dinner won't deliver? If there's no response, or a response that isn't
what you expected, will you still feel good about buying the gift and
preparing dinner?

I can't wait to share my project presentation with the team tomorrow.
They're going to be blown away and really appreciate how hard I've
worked. Is there a way to feel validated other than your team's saying
something? It's dangerous to put your self-worth in other people's
hands. Again, no matter what you do, you can't control other people's
responses. These are recipes for disappointment and hurt. I know that
asking for what we need and talking openly about our expectations is
vulnerable. I'll pass on some advice that I got from a therapist early
on in my marriage. I told this therapist that I was really pissed off
because earlier that week, I had woken up on my birthday and there was
nothing in the house celebrating my day. It was my first birthday after
we were married and there were no signs taped to the wall or notes on
the kitchen table---nothing. I told her that we did these kinds of
things in my family and it really hurt my feelings that Steve didn't do
it for me. I was sure it was because he was too busy in his residency.
The therapist asked me if I had shared my expectations with Steve, or
explained to him how we did it in our family and asked him to celebrate
with me that way because it meant a lot to me. I rolled my eyes and
said, "If I have to ask, it's not worth it." She tilted her head and
said, "If you're not asking for what's important to you, maybe it's
because you don't think you are worth it." Shut up. You don't know me.
You're fired. Communicating our expectations is brave and vulnerable.
And it builds meaningful connection and often leads to having a partner
or friend who we can reality-check with. Steve and I still laugh about
this one:

We were packing for spring break at Disney World when Steve, who was
looking in my bag, said, "Babe, should we reality-check expectations for
the week?" Somewhat frustrated, I replied, "No. I think we're good,
babe." Steve pointed to the three books I had stuffed into my carry-on
bag and said, "Tell me about those." As I started to explain that I
wanted to sleep late, relax, and read some good mysteries over the
course of our week away, I suddenly heard what I was saying. Who am I
kidding? We're going to be at Disney World with five kids for seven
days! The only thing I'd be reading was the sign that says You Must Be
This Tall to Ride This Ride. Sure enough, we were out the door by eight
o'clock every morning of that vacation and I didn't read a thing, but we
had a great time---once I had reality-checked my expectations with
Steve's help.

Examined and Expressed Expectations Sometimes our expectations are
realistic, clearly communicated, and selfaware. By "self-aware," I mean
we're not unconsciously trying to get needs met without directly asking
for what we need---we understand the why behind the expectation. When we
are intentional and thoughtful about our expectations, and things don't
turn out how we thought they would, disappointment still hurts.
Potentially, a lot. One reason it can sting is precisely because we were
vulnerable and asked for what we needed or shared what we were excited
about. Very early in my shame research, I interviewed a woman named
Elizabeth. It's been fifteen years and I still think about her story.

After Elizabeth was told she was a "shoo-in" for a promotion in her
office, she learned that she did not get the position. She said, "I was
most ashamed because I'd told everyone how much it meant to me. I'd
talked about it with everyone---my husband, my kids, my neighbors, my
mom, my colleagues. It's not that I told everyone I was going to get it;
I was so honest about how much I wanted it. Instead of just feeling sad
and disappointed, I felt sad, disappointed, and ashamed." When someone
shares their hopes and dreams with us, we are witnessing deep courage
and vulnerability. Celebrating their successes is easy, but when
disappointment happens, it's an incredible opportunity for meaningful
connection. Think how powerful it might have been for Elizabeth to hear,
"You had such courage to apply for that promotion and even more courage
to be honest about how much you wanted it. I'm so proud to be your
daughter/son/mentor/friend/parent." When we've self-examined and shared
expectations with someone and we feel they've let us down, it's
important to keep the lines of communication open, circle back, and talk
about our feelings and move to accountability. "I let you know how
important this was to me..."

There is research that shows that one way to minimize disappointment is
to lower our expectations. True, optimism can sometimes lead to
increased disappointment, and I believe these findings are accurate, but
there is a middle path---a way to maintain expectations and stay
optimistic---that requires more courage and vulnerability: Examine and
express our expectations. There are too many people in the world today
who decide to live disappointed rather than risk feeling disappointment.
This can take the shape of numbing, foreboding joy, being cynical or
critical, or just never really fully engaging. Sometimes, when I'm in
one of those moods where I just want to pull the covers over my head and
stay in bed---and there were many of those days during quarantine---I
promise myself that I'm going to get less excited about things so I feel
less disappointed. Then I always remember this interview I did with a
man early on in my research. He was in his sixties, and I'll never
forget how he looked at me when he said: I used to think the best way to
go through life was to expect the worst. That way, if it happened, you
were prepared, and if it didn't happen, you were pleasantly surprised.
Then I was in a car accident and my wife was killed. Needless to say,
expecting the worst didn't prepare me at all. And worse, I still grieve
for all of those wonderful moments we shared and that I didn't fully
enjoy. My commitment to her is to fully enjoy every moment now. I just
wish she was here now that I know how to do that. I don't like the
vulnerability of leaning into good things, or the uncomfortable
experience of examining and expressing my expectations.

But I consider it more about discomfort than pain, which is what I heard
in this man's voice.

I've heard people say that disappointment is like a paper cut---painful,
but not long-lasting. I do believe we can heal disappointment, but it's
important not to underestimate the damage it inflicts on our spirit.
When I was researching Daring Greatly, I watched the magnificent
Japanese animated film Spirited Away, written and directed by Hayao
Miyazaki. There's a scene in the film where a young boy named Haku, who
has taken the form of a dragon, is being attacked by a relentless swarm
of birds. The attackers are actually origami birds, and they cut into
Haku, leaving him battered and bloodied. Disappointments may be like
paper cuts, but if those cuts are deep enough or if we accumulate them
over a lifetime, they can leave us seriously wounded. Yes, it takes
courage to reality-check, communicate, and dig into the intentions
behind our expectations, but that exercise in vulnerability helps us
maintain meaningful connection with ourselves and others.

Regret Both disappointment and regret arise when an outcome was not what
we wanted, counted on, or thought would happen. With disappointment, we
often believe the outcome was out of our control (but we're learning
more about how this is not always the case). With regret, we believe the
outcome was caused by our decisions or actions. Interestingly, research
shows that in the short term, we tend to regret bad outcomes where we
took action. However, when we reflect back over the long term, we more
often regret the actions we didn't take---what we didn't do---and we
think of those as missed opportunities.

As I reference in Rising Strong, I think one of the most powerful lines
about regret comes from George Saunders's 2013 commencement address at
Syracuse University. Saunders talked about how when he was a child, a
young girl was teased at his school and, although he didn't tease her
and even defended her a little, he still thought about it. He said: So
here's something I know to be true, although it's a little corny, and I
don't quite know what to do with it: What I regret most in my life are
failures of kindness. Those moments when another human being was there,
in front of me, suffering, and I responded... sensibly. Reservedly.
Mildly. While a meta-analysis (a study of studies) focusing on regret
indicates that approximately 90 percent of regrets fall into one of six
categories: education, career, romance, parenting, self-improvement, and
leisure, I've heard many research participants echo Saunders in
regretting failures of kindness. I know that some of my own biggest
regrets include failures of kindness, including failures of
self-kindness. While some people disagree with me, I firmly believe that
regret is one of our most powerful emotional reminders that reflection,
change, and growth are necessary. In our research, regret emerged as a
function of empathy. And, when used constructively, it's a call to
courage and a path toward wisdom. The idea that regret is a fair but
tough teacher can really piss people off. "No regrets" has become
synonymous with daring and adventure, but I disagree. The idea of "no
regrets" doesn't mean living with courage, it means living without
reflection. To live without regret is to believe we have

nothing to learn, no amends to make, and no opportunity to be braver
with our lives. One reason we may avoid regret is the fact that it can
be accompanied by an element of self-blame and even guilt. Maybe we
don't like the accountability that often comes with regret. When I was
writing Rising Strong, a friend of mine sent me a picture of a
tough-looking kid who had NO RAGRETS tattooed across his chest. I later
found out that the image was from the film We're the Millers. It's such
a perfect metaphor for what I've learned: If you have no regrets, or you
intentionally set out to live without regrets, I think you're missing
the power of regret to teach us. In the film, a character played by
Jason Sudeikis challenges the guy with the tattoo: "You have no regrets?
Like not even a single letter?" So funny. In our work, we find that what
we regret most are our failures of courage, whether it's the courage to
be kinder, to show up, to say how we feel, to set boundaries, to be good
to ourselves, to say yes to something scary. Regret has taught me that
living outside my values is not tenable for me. Regrets about not taking
chances have made me braver. Regrets about shaming or blaming people I
care about have made me more thoughtful. Sometimes the most
uncomfortable learning is the most powerful.

Discouraged, Resigned, and Frustrated Discouraged, resigned, and
frustrated are also ways that we feel when things aren't going or didn't
go as desired.

Here's a simple way to think about the differences between some of the
emotional experiences we have looked at in this chapter: Disappointed:
It didn't work out how I wanted, and I believe the outcome was outside
of my control. Regretful: It didn't work out how I wanted, and the
outcome was caused by my decisions, actions, or failure to act.
Discouraged: I'm losing my confidence and enthusiasm about any future
effort---I'm losing the motivation and confidence to persist. Resigned:
I've lost my confidence and enthusiasm about any future effort---I've
lost the motivation and confidence to persist. Frustrated: Something
that feels out of my control is preventing me from achieving my desired
outcome. Things to note here: Feeling discouraged and resigned is about
effort rather than outcome. With discouragement, we're losing the
motivation and confidence to continue with our efforts. With
resignation, we've lost the motivation to keep trying. Frustration
sometimes overlaps with anger. Both anger and frustration can result
when a desired outcome is blocked. The main difference is that with
frustration, we don't think we can fix the situation, while with anger,
we feel there is something we can do.

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#4 Places We Go When It's Beyond Us Awe, Wonder, Confusion, Curiosity,
Interest, Surprise

Awe and Wonder If I had influence with the good fairy who is supposed to
preside over the christening of all children, I should ask that her gift
to each child in the world be a sense of wonder so indestructible that
it would last throughout life, as an unfailing antidote against the
boredom and disenchantments of later years, the sterile preoccupation
with things that are artificial, the alienation from the sources of our
strength. --- RACHEL CARSON, The Sense of Wonder: A Celebration of
Nature for Parents and Children

Both awe and wonder are often experienced in response to nature, art,
music, spiritual experiences, or ideas. In the midst of these moments,
we can feel overwhelmed by the vastness of something that is almost
incomprehensible---it almost feels like what we're witnessing can't be
true

---like we're seeing something that doesn't fit with how we move through
and understand our everyday lives. Even seeing things we may fail to
notice on a regular basis, like a starry sky or a butterfly in the
garden, can stop us in our tracks on occasion. Both aweinspiring events
and the experiences that leave us filled with wonder often make us feel
small compared to our expansive universe. Small, but connected to each
other and to the largeness itself. We often use "awe" and "wonder"
interchangeably, which makes sense because as you can see, the
experiences share a lot in common. But there is a primary difference
between our experiences of these incredible emotions that's worth
understanding. I love how researchers Ulrich Weger and Johannes Wagemann
explain it. They write, "Wonder inspires the wish to understand; awe
inspires the wish to let shine, to acknowledge and to unite." When
feeling awe, we tend to simply stand back and observe, "to provide a
stage for the phenomenon to shine." Awe and wonder are essential to the
human experience. Wonder fuels our passion for exploration and learning,
for curiosity and adventure. Researchers have found that awe "leads
people to cooperate, share resources, and sacrifice for others" and
causes them "to fully appreciate the value of others and see themselves
more accurately, evoking humility." Some researchers even believe that
"awe-inducing events may be one of the fastest and most powerful methods
of personal change and growth." And we don't need to stand on a cliff
and see the Northern Lights to feel awe or wonder---although this is
absolutely on my bucket list. Sometimes I feel like my dog, Lucy, is
staring into my soul and I feel a huge sense of wonder. How did I end up
with an actual Ewok living in my house? How did this happen? It's
unreal. And as a parent, simple moments with my children have rendered
me speechless with awe. I thought this would

change as they got older, but even with a sixteen-year-old and a
twentytwo-year-old, the awe still takes my breath away on a regular
basis.

Confusion "I need time for my confusion." Confusion can be a cue that
there's new territory to be explored or a fresh puzzle to be solved. ---
ADAM GRANT, Think Again: The Power of Knowing What You Don't Know

If I ever start a punk band---which is not out of the question---I've
already nailed the name: The Zone of Optimal Confusion. It's perfect on
so many levels. The concept of optimal confusion is key to understanding
why confusion is good for us and why it's categorized as an epistemic
emotion---an emotion critical to knowledge acquisition and learning. It
turns out that confusion, like many uncomfortable things in life, is
vital for learning. According to research, confusion has the potential
to motivate, lead to deep learning, and trigger problem solving. A study
led by Sidney D'Mello found that when we're trying to work through our
confusion, we need to stop and think, engage in careful deliberation,
develop a solution, and revise how we approach the next problem. It
doesn't sound like a big deal, but how often do we observe people (and
ourselves) dismissing new data or information that challenges our ideas,
in order to avoid confusion or the risk of being wrong? If you ask me,
stopping to think, engaging in careful deliberation, and revising old
thinking are rare and courageous actions. And they require dealing with
a healthy dose of confusion. And that's uncomfortable. In an article in
Fast Company, Mary Slaughter and David Rock with the NeuroLeadership
Institute write, "To be effective, learning needs to be

effortful. That's not to say that anything that makes learning easier is
counterproductive---or that all unpleasant learning is effective. The
key here is desirable difficulty. The same way you feel a muscle 'burn'
when it's being strengthened, the brain needs to feel some discomfort
when it's learning. Your mind might hurt for a while---but that's a good
thing." Comfortable learning environments rarely lead to deep learning.
So, we have "the zone of optimal confusion" and "desirable difficulty"
(another great band name), but what happens when things get too
confusing? Based on D'Mello's research, too much confusion can lead to
frustration, giving up, disengagement, or even boredom. Learning
strategies most often used to help resolve confusion were seeking help,
finding the most important information, monitoring progress, and
planning a strategy.

Curiosity and Interest I've done a lot of research on curiosity,
starting with Rising Strong and most recently while working on Dare to
Lead. It turns out that curiosity is an irreducible component of
courageous leadership. Personally, understanding what it means to be
curious and what gets in the way has rearranged how I parent, teach, and
lead. Curiosity and interest are both important parts of our need for
meaningmaking, but are they the same thing, or are they totally
different experiences? It depends on whom you ask. Researchers don't
agree--- there's no consensus. However, in our research we found a clear
distinction between how we use the words and what they mean to us. Let's
start by looking at some examples of how we use the words. We often say
things like:

I want my kids to be curious and to show interest. I'm looking for
employees who are curious and demonstrate interest in our work. I value
curiosity in a person. They show interest in the topic. What starts to
take shape, as we look at how we talk about these terms, is the
difference between thinking and feeling, and between who we are and what
we're doing. Here's what emerged from our data: Curiosity seems to be
both a trait and a state. You can be a curious person and, regardless of
having this trait or not, you can feel curious about something in the
moment. Interest is more of a state ("interested" is not who we are but
how we are at a specific time). Curiosity seems to involve both feeling
(emotion) and thinking (cognition), while interest is really more about
thinking. Definitions: Interest is a cognitive openness to engaging with
a topic or experience. Curiosity is recognizing a gap in our knowledge
about something that interests us, and becoming emotionally and
cognitively invested in closing that gap through exploration and
learning. Curiosity often starts with interest and can range from mild
curiosity to passionate investigation.

In addition to the state and trait differences, the big things to
understand here are the heart and head investments. With interest, our
mind is open to seeing what's there, but with curiosity, we've
acknowledged a gap in what we know or understand, and our heart and head
are both invested in closing that gap. There is a thinking challenge and
an emotional experience of the satisfaction or potential satisfaction of
closing the gap. In Rising Strong, I talk about George Loewenstein's
groundbreaking 1994 article "The Psychology of Curiosity" and his
introduction of the "information gap" perspective. Loewenstein, a
professor of economics and psychology at Carnegie Mellon University,
proposed that curiosity is the feeling of deprivation we experience when
we identify and focus on a gap in our knowledge. What's important about
this perspective is that it means we have to have some level of
knowledge or awareness before we can become curious. We aren't curious
about something we are unaware of or know nothing about. This has huge
implications for education. Loewenstein explains that simply encouraging
people to ask questions doesn't go very far toward stimulating
curiosity. He writes, "To induce curiosity about a particular topic, it
may be necessary to 'prime the pump' "---to use intriguing information
to get folks interested so they become more curious and to create
opportunities for exposure to new ideas and experiences. Curiosity
doesn't exist without interest, but we can be interested and not have
our interest grow to curiosity. An increasing number of researchers
believe that curiosity and knowledge building grow together---the more
we know, the more we want to know.

Choosing to be curious is choosing to be vulnerable because it requires
us to surrender to uncertainty. We have to ask questions, admit to not
knowing, risk being told that we shouldn't be asking, and, sometimes,
make discoveries that lead to discomfort. Our "childlike" curiosity is
often tested as we grow up, and we sometimes learn that too much
curiosity, like too much vulnerability, can lead to hurt. As a result,
we turn to self-protection---choosing certainty over curiosity,

armor over vulnerability, knowing over learning. But shutting down comes
with a price---a price we rarely consider when we're focused on finding
our way out of pain. Einstein said, "The important thing is not to stop
questioning. Curiosity has its own reason for existence." Curiosity's
reason for existing is not simply to be a tool for acquiring knowledge;
it reminds us that we're alive. Researchers are finding evidence that
curiosity is correlated with creativity, intelligence, improved learning
and memory, and problem solving.

Surprise Similar to findings by researchers Sascha Topolinski and Fritz
Strack, my team and I define surprise as an interruption caused by
information that doesn't fit with our current understanding or
expectations. It causes us to reevaluate. We can think of surprise as "a
bridge between cognition and emotion." But it's a short bridge! Surprise
is the shortest-duration emotion, rarely lasting more than a few
seconds. In addition to being a short bridge, surprise is also an
amplifier. Once our thinking brain works out the unexpected thing that's
happening, we move into emotion. There's evidence that surprise
amplifies subsequent emotion, with more surprising events resulting in
stronger emotional reactions. SPOILER SPOILER ALERT: I'm pretty sure
this research explains why I do not like surprises. I'm not a fan of
having to manage amplified emotion while in the spotlight. But it's not
just my introversion and the spotlight

piece, I don't like surprises in movies or TV series either. I know many
of y'all will find this egregious, but I normally read the entire plot
of any potentially stressful movie before I watch it. People assume that
ruins it for me, but it doesn't. I can actually enjoy it better without
being thrown off the surprise bridge into amplified emotion. No, thank
you. However, I do understand why the research shows that surprising
news is more likely to be shared, surprising advertisements are more
likely to be noticed, and people are more likely to return to a
restaurant that was surprisingly better than expected. If I find a
restaurant or a product that is surprisingly great, I'll talk about it
to anyone who will listen. There's a strong relationship between
surprise and unexpectedness. In fact, several of the definitions of
"surprise" use the word "unexpected." However, in our lived experience,
we don't use the words synonymously. We normally use "surprise" for
experiences that link quickly to emotion. When we use the term
"unexpected," the experience starts with thinking (just like surprise),
but it often stays cognitive rather than bridging to emotion.

As you can see, "unexpected" doesn't convey emotion the way "surprise"
does!

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#5 Places We Go When Things Aren't What They Seem Amusement,
Bittersweetness, Nostalgia, Cognitive Dissonance, Paradox, Irony,
Sarcasm

What happens when we feel two competing emotions at the same time? Can
two seemingly contradictory thoughts both be true? Welcome to being
human! Competing emotions and contradictory thoughts are messy and can
feel uncomfortable, vulnerable, even irritating. But it's important to
remember that this push-pull is a reflection of our complexity, and if
we're willing to stay with it and stay curious, complexity is one of our
greatest teachers. The problem starts when we don't have the skills or
experience to tolerate the uncertainty and ambiguity and we give in to
the cravings for neat, mutually exclusive categories. There's nothing
more limiting than tapping out of tension and oversimplifying the
thoughts and feelings that have the power to help us understand who we
are and what we need.

Adam Grant has been the top-rated professor at the Wharton School of the
University of Pennsylvania for seven years. As an organizational
psychologist, he is a leading expert on how we can find motivation and
meaning, and live more generous and creative lives. Adam is a number one
New York Times bestselling writer, and his latest book, Think Again: The
Power of Knowing What You Don't Know, might be my new favorite. I love
talking to, learning from, and debating with Adam. We've been on each
other's podcasts and it's always fun. You can hear our brains grinding
over the airwaves. In Think Again, Adam writes about the problem of
oversimplifying and the importance of complexity:

As consumers of information, we have a role to play in embracing a more
nuanced point of view. When we're reading, listening, or watching, we
can learn to recognize complexity as a signal of credibility. We can
favor content and sources that present many sides of an issue rather
than just one or two. When we come across simplifying headlines, we can
fight our tendency to accept binaries by asking what additional
perspectives are missing between the extremes. This applies when we're
the ones producing and communicating information, too. New research
suggests that when journalists acknowledge the uncertainties around
facts on complex issues like climate change and immigration, it doesn't
undermine their readers' trust. And multiple experiments have shown that
when experts express doubt, they become more persuasive. When someone
knowledgeable admits uncertainty, it surprises people, and they end up
paying more attention to the substance of the argument. While Adam
didn't write this about our emotions, thoughts, and behaviors, the same
wisdom applies. When we gather information from our emotions, thoughts,
and behaviors, especially the layered, messy ones, the tension can serve
us. When we're communicating our feelings and thoughts to ourselves and
others, we might want to consider sharing our uncertainties. When
someone tells me, "I'm not sure how I feel. I'm sad, but weirdly I'm
also relieved"---my first thought isn't Yikes. They have no idea how
they feel! Or Hmmm, they don't have a lot of self-awareness. My first
thought is normally Oh, man. I get that, and I get how those feelings
can coexist. That makes sense. The uncertainty feels like self-awareness
to me.

When someone tells me, "Well, I'm not sure what I think about that
policy. I used to be a fierce proponent of it, but I'm learning more and
I'm not as sure as I used to be"---my first thought isn't What a
flip-flopper! My first thought is normally Wow. That's rare. What are
you learning? I'm curious. Again, it's counterintuitive, but
acknowledging uncertainty is a function of grounded confidence, and it
feels like humility to me.

Amusement The etymology of "amusement" is interesting. The word dates
from the late 1500s, when it meant a pleasurable diversion from work or
duty. According to researchers, amusement is connected to humor and
includes elements of unexpectedness, incongruity, and playfulness. It's
typically seen as a brief spike in a person's level of cheerfulness,
lasting only a few seconds. The definition of amusement that aligns with
our research is "pleasurable, relaxed excitation." Amusement differs
from happiness in that happiness is a general sense of pleasure, whereas
amusement appeals specifically to one's sense of humor. There are two
themes that clearly help distinguish amusement from other positive
emotions, like contentment, gratitude, interest, joy, love, or pride: 1.
An awareness of incongruity (there's something unexpected about what
causes us to be amused---we weren't expecting that punch line or that
behavior or that timing); 2. When we feel amusement, we feel playful
with those around us.

Is amusement important at work? Research shows that breaks involving
amusement may help replenish depleted cognitive resources, and that the
replenishment continues through difficult tasks. After reading the
research on amusement, I started thinking about how people say "I did
not find that amusing," and why it's sometimes said in a judgmental
voice. I don't have any data to support this supposition, but I wonder
if what we're saying is "That unexpected thing that you did or said that
was supposed to be funny was not funny." It's almost like You failed at
your attempt to be funny. That was neither playful nor pleasurable. It
takes me straight back to my parents reading a note from my teacher and
me trying to make a joke about what really happened in the classroom. I
can still hear my mom saying, "I'm not amused."

Bittersweet The bittersweet side of appreciating life's most precious
moments is the unbearable awareness that those moments are passing. ---
MARC PARENT, Believing It All

Bittersweet is a mixed feeling of happiness and sadness. As someone who
feels bittersweet about a lot of things---especially related to Ellen
and Charlie---I was curious about this emotion. With very few
exceptions, developmental milestones leave me feeling bittersweet. I'm
proud of Ellen and excited about her new apartment in a different city,
and I share Charlie's happiness about his new driver's license, but I'm
also sad when I walk by Ellen's room in our house, and I'm sad that I
don't get to drive

Charlie and his friends to school every morning (which is when you
overhear the best conversations).

I asked folks across my social media channels to share some examples of
experiences that felt bittersweet for them, and we received more than
forty thousand beautiful, heartfelt comments. I don't think I was fully
aware of the depth of humanity that lives in the curves of this emotion.
Here are some of the most commonly shared experiences and a few notes on
the context: Watching children grow up Leaving a job Divorce/Ending a
relationship Graduating Letting go of friendships that aren't working
Moving Death of a loved one Teachers watching students graduate Retiring
Coming home from vacation What all of the comments have in common is
sadness about letting go of something, mixed with happiness and/or
gratitude about what's been experienced and/or what's next. Several
things that are important to keep in mind about feeling bittersweet:
It's not the same as ambivalence (when we're unsure whether we're happy
or sad), it's feeling both at the same time.

One line of research indicates that multiple emotions, such as happiness
and sadness, may be rapidly vacillating below our consciousness, but our
interpretation may be a more integrated emotional experience. It's
possible that feeling bittersweet may be more frequently experienced or
recognized by people who have a more nuanced ability to interpret their
emotional states. Developmental research shows that the experience of
mixed emotion is not present in very young children, and that it
develops gradually. At around age seven or eight, children report
experiencing positive and negative emotions simultaneously, and by age
ten or eleven, they can recognize and understand the tension caused by
experiencing mixed emotions.

Nostalgia There's nothing wrong with celebrating the good things in our
past. But memories, like witnesses, do not always tell the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth. We need to cross-examine them,
recognizing and accepting the inconsistencies and gaps in those that
make us proud and happy as well as those that cause us pain. ---
STEPHANIE COONTZ, historian

The term "nostalgia" has a dark past, and I'm not so sure there's a
consensus about the term today.

Adrienne Matei, a Vancouver-based journalist and editor, has written a
brilliant essay on the history and global translation of the word. Matei
explains: In the late 1600s, Swiss medical student Johannes Hofer
noticed a pattern in his patients who were living far from home. Those
who were obsessed with returning to their estranged locations became
physically, sometimes fatally, sick. To reflect this phenomen\[on\], he
coined the medical term "nostalgia" in 1688, which he created by
combining the Greek words nostos (homecoming) and alga (pain). The
disease's reported symptoms included loss of appetite, fainting,
heightened suicide risk, and, according to Swiss doctor Albert Van
Holler, hallucinations of the people and places you miss....It ran so
rampant among Swiss mercenaries fighting far-flung wars that playing
"Khue-Reyen"---an old Swiss milking song that seemed to send soldiers
into a contagiously nostalgic frenzy---was punishable by death. Matei
goes on to explain how cures for nostalgia included being burned with a
hot poker and punishments included being buried alive. As I mentioned,
it's a powerful essay, and I encourage you to read it---you can find the
link in the notes section. Nostalgia was considered a medical disease
and a psychiatric disorder until the early nineteenth century. Today,
researchers describe nostalgia as a frequent, primarily positive,
context-specific bittersweet emotion that combines elements of happiness
and sadness with a sense of yearning and loss. The researchers also tell
us that feeling nostalgic involves putting ourselves at the center of a
story in which we're reminiscing about people we are close to or about
important events in our lives. Interestingly,

nostalgia is more likely to be triggered by negative moods, like
loneliness, and by our struggles to find meaning in our current lives.
There is some research that shows that nostalgia can serve us
psychologically, by increasing positive feelings and helping us
"navigate successfully the vicissitudes of daily life." I don't doubt
that the bittersweet recalling or romanticizing of our history can
relieve pain or help us deal with the hard parts of life, but at what
cost? Across our research, nostalgia emerged as a double-edged sword, a
tool for both connection and disconnection. It can be an imaginary
refuge from a world we don't understand and a dog whistle used to resist
important growth in families, organizations, and the broader culture and
to protect power, including white supremacy. What's spoken: I wish
things were the way they used to be in the good ol' days. What's not
spoken: When people knew their places. What's not spoken: When there was
no accountability for the way my behaviors affect other people. What's
not spoken: When we ignored other people's pain if it caused us
discomfort. What's not spoken: When my authority was absolute and never
challenged. So, is nostalgia good, helpful, bad, dangerous, or
detrimental? The answer is yes. Which is why we're lucky to have this
fascinating research from Sandra Garrido.

Garrido presents evidence that nostalgia can be a part of both healthy
and unhealthy coping strategies, depending on an individual's
personality and coping style. In her study, she found that for
individuals who are prone to depression or rumination, nostalgia tends
to be associated with negative emotional outcomes. The level of
divisiveness, uncertainty, and anxiety in the world today leads a lot of
us to struggle with rumination, which Garrido explains is an
"involuntary focus on negative and pessimistic thoughts." It's important
to note that she also differentiates rumination from reflection, which
is "highly adaptive and psychologically healthy." Rumination is also
different from worry. According to researchers, worry is focused on the
future, while rumination focuses on the past or on things about
ourselves that we're stuck on. Researchers believe that rumination is a
strong predictor of depression, makes us more likely to pay attention to
negative things, and zaps our motivation to do things that would improve
how we feel. This combination of rumination and nostalgia emerged from
our research as destructive and disconnecting. If you're wondering how
dangerous the combination can be, think back to the insurrection at the
U.S. Capitol on January 6, 2021, or examine the strategy used by every
authoritarian leader in history: Exploit fears by photoshopping a
picture of yesteryear to be everything people wanted it to be (but never
was), seduce people into believing that a make-believe past could exist
again, and give them someone to blame for ruining the picture and/or not
being able to restore the mythical utopia. Stephanie Coontz, whose quote
opens this section, explains that it's important to reality-check our
nostalgic ideas by uncovering and examining the tradeoffs and
contradictions that are often deeply buried in all of our

memories. Were the comfort and safety of that past existence real? If
so, were they at someone else's expense? We define nostalgia as a
yearning for the way things used to be in our often idealized and
self-protective version of the past.

Cognitive Dissonance My favorite book on cognitive dissonance is
Mistakes Were Made (but Not by Me): Why We Justify Foolish Beliefs, Bad
Decisions, and Hurtful Acts by Carol Tavris and Elliot Aronson. Talk
about feeling called out! I learned a ton about how we put a spit shine
on almost everything we do and remember. Or, as Aronson wrote in a more
recent book, how "human beings engage in all kinds of cognitive
gymnastics aimed at justifying their own behavior." The Tavris and
Aronson book's dedication reads: "For Leon Festinger, creator of the
theory of cognitive dissonance, whose ingenuity inspired this book."
Before we jump in, I want to share an abbreviated version of a story
about Festinger from their book. When I first read this story, it felt
impossible to believe. After surviving the past five years in the United
States, it now feels sadly plausible. We see these double-down behaviors
every day, especially in the antiscience movement. Tavris and Aronson
explain that in 1954, the social psychologist Leon Festinger and two
associates infiltrated a doomsday cult to find out what would happen
when the leader's prophecy failed to be fulfilled. The leader had
promised her followers that the world would end on December 21,

1954, but that they would be picked up by a flying saucer and
transported to safety at midnight on December 20. Tavris and Aronson
explained, "Many of her followers quit their jobs, gave away their
houses, and disbursed their savings in anticipation of the end. Who
needs money in outer space? Others waited in fear or resignation in
their homes." Festinger predicted that "the believers who had not made a
strong commitment to the prophecy...would quietly lose their faith" in
the leader when the world didn't end, and "those who had given away
their possessions and waited with other believers for the spaceship"
would double down on their belief in her mystical abilities. He
predicted that even if the prophecy did not materialize, the followers
who lost the most would demonstrate their increased commitment by doing
"whatever they could to get others to join them." At the time, this
hypothesis blew the doors off every existing theory about motivation and
human behavior. It was unthinkable that people would double down once
proven wrong. But by 4:45 a.m., when the spaceship was a no-show, their
leader shared a new vision of the world: Because of their strong faith,
they had been spared. As hypothesized by Festinger, the most invested
members responded by calling the media with the great news, and they
became even more invested evangelists for the group. Luckily, the
doomsday leader's prediction failed, but Festinger's prediction didn't,
and he changed the way we think about human behavior. Tavris and Aronson
write: The engine that drives self-justification, the energy that
produces the need to justify our actions and decisions---especially the
wrong ones ---is the unpleasant feeling that Festinger called "cognitive
dissonance." Cognitive dissonance is a state of tension that occurs when
a person holds two cognitions (ideas, attitudes, beliefs,

opinions) that are psychologically inconsistent with each other, such as
"Smoking is a dumb thing to do because it could kill me" and "I smoke
two packs a day." Dissonance produces mental discomfort that ranges from
minor pangs to deep anguish; people don't rest easy until they find a
way to reduce it. In this example, the most direct way for a smoker to
reduce dissonance is by quitting. But if she has tried to quit and
failed, now she must reduce dissonance by convincing herself that
smoking isn't really so harmful, that smoking is worth the risk because
it helps her relax or prevents her from gaining weight (after all,
obesity is a health risk too), and so on. Most smokers manage to reduce
dissonance in many such ingenious, if self-deluding, ways. Dissonance is
disquieting because to hold two ideas that contradict each other is to
flirt with absurdity, and, as Albert Camus observed, we are creatures
who spend our lives trying to convince ourselves that our existence is
not absurd. At the heart of it, Festinger's theory is about how people
strive to make sense out of contradictory ideas and lead lives that are,
at least in their own minds, consistent and meaningful. The theory
inspired more than three thousand experiments that, taken together, have
transformed psychologists' understanding of how the human mind works.
When we're faced with information that challenges what we believe, our
first instinct is to make the discomfort, irritation, and vulnerability
go away by resolving the dissonance. We might do this by rejecting the
new information, decreasing its importance, or avoiding it altogether.
"The greater the magnitude of the dissonance, the greater is the
pressure to reduce dissonance." In these challenging moments of
dissonance, we need to stay curious and resist choosing comfort over
courage. It's brave to invite new information

to the table, to sit with it and hear it out. It's also rare these days.
As Adam Grant writes, "Intelligence is traditionally viewed as the
ability to think and learn. Yet in a turbulent world, there's another
set of cognitive skills that might matter more: the ability to rethink
and unlearn."

Paradox The paradox is one of our most valuable spiritual
possessions...only the paradox comes anywhere near to comprehending the
fullness of life. --- CARL JUNG

While cognitive dissonance pushes us to resolve the tension of
conflicting information, paradox challenges us to straddle the tension
of two conflicting elements and recognize that they can both be true.
From its Greek origins, the term "paradox" is the joining of two words,
para (contrary to) and dokein (opinion). The Latin term paradoxum means
"seemingly absurd but really true." A paradox is the appearance of
contradiction between two related components. Although light and
darkness seem to be opposites, you can't have one without the
other---the opposing elements of a paradox are inextricably linked. Even
though the elements seem contradictory, they actually complement and
inform each other in ways that allow us to discover underlying truths
about ourselves and the world. Here's an example of a paradox from my
work:

Vulnerability is the first thing we look for in other people, and the
last thing we want to show them about ourselves. How can both of those
statements be true? If we dig into the tension of that statement, it
reveals truths about us: We're drawn to authentic, imperfect people, but
we're scared to let people see who we really are. I want to experience
your vulnerability, but I don't want to be vulnerable. Vulnerability is
courage in you and inadequacy in me. I'm drawn to your vulnerability but
repelled by mine. Embracing the paradox teaches us how to think deeper
and with more complexity. It invites us to reality-check the validity of
the statements above. It moves us away from oversimplifying how systems,
organizations, and humans work. Paradox is not an emotion. Much like
cognitive dissonance, it starts with thinking but brings in emotion as
we start to feel the tension and pull of different ideas. In the case of
paradox, our brain wants to solve the puzzle. However, paradoxes can't
be fully resolved using rationality and logic---we need to allow the
seeming contradictions to coexist in order to gain deeper understanding.
In this way, paradoxes force us to think in expansive ways and lean into
vulnerability. About 90 percent of the work I do these days is in
organizations, working with leaders. The idea of embracing paradox has
been fundamental to building organizational cultures for at least two
decades now. In Jim Collins and Bill Lazier's book BE (Beyond
Entrepreneurship) 2.0, Jim writes,

False dichotomies are undisciplined thought. In the words of F. Scott
Fitzgerald, "The test of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to
hold two opposed ideas in the mind at the same time, and still retain
the ability to function." Builders of greatness are comfortable with
paradox. They don't oppress themselves with what we call the "Tyranny of
the OR," which pushes people to believe that things must be either A OR
B, but not both. Instead, they liberate themselves with the "Genius of
the AND." Undisciplined thinkers force debates into stark "Tyranny of
the OR" choices; disciplined thinkers expand the conversation to create
"Genius of the AND" solutions. In our research, we found myriad
permutations of "Genius of the AND" dualities. For example: Creativity
AND Discipline Innovation AND Execution Humility AND Audacity Freedom
AND Responsibility In line with Jim's argument, a large body of research
shows that rejecting paradox can result in conflict and turmoil.
Conversely, engaging with a paradox and accepting the competing elements
as both valid can foster creativity, innovation, and productivity.
Paradoxes: hard and good.

Irony and Sarcasm I don't love putting these two words together. My
attempt at sarcasm.

I don't like going on the record about knowing the difference between
sarcasm and irony because it means I can't defend my clever use of
sarcasm by saying "I was just being ironic." My attempt at irony. Irony
and sarcasm are forms of communication in which the literal meaning of
the words is different, often opposite, from the intended message. In
both irony and sarcasm, there may be an element of criticism and humor.
However, sarcasm is a particular type of irony in which the underlying
message is normally meant to ridicule, tease, or criticize. Both irony
and sarcasm are easily misunderstood, especially when you're talking to
someone you don't know well, when there's already some heightened
emotion in the exchange, or when you're emailing or texting. As
explained in an overview of neurological findings related to irony and
sarcasm, "researchers suggest that the successful comprehension of irony
depends on the perceiver's ability to infer other people's mental
states, thoughts, and feelings." Which is exceptionally difficult over
text and email. Research on intent behind delivery of sarcastic
communication has been mixed, with some studies indicating that sarcasm
is intended to soften the blow and other research showing that sarcasm
is intended to be more hurtful than direct criticism. Recipients of
sarcastic communication have varying interpretations of intent, which do
not always map onto the intended meaning. One of the things that I
learned early in my work is the developmental requirements for
understanding irony and sarcasm. While we sometimes think of our kids as
being more than capable of sarcasm, the research tells us that
understanding the subtleties of irony and sarcasm is a developmental
process that involves coordination of multiple brain areas. According to

Ruth Filik and her colleagues, "children do not seem to distinguish
between irony and sarcasm until the age of nine or ten, when they master
secondorder mental state reasoning." Another group of researchers finds
that "Although middle-school-age children can correctly discern the
sarcastic speaker's meaning and attitude, appreciation of sarcasm's
humor develops through adolescence," and development of full
understanding of the nuances of both communication styles continues into
adulthood. I was raised in a family where sarcasm was confused with
intellectual ability and craft. When I was a kid, there were many
instances when teasing and sarcasm were too hurtful or went too far or
went on for too long. I remember reading when I was pregnant with Ellen
that the word "sarcasm" comes from a Greek word meaning "to tear flesh."
We didn't do it perfectly, but Steve and I set an intention to watch our
use of sarcasm around and with the kids. It can go wrong too quickly and
often ends up in shame and tears. I will confess, however, that my dear
friend Chaz and I can have so much fun with each other while trading
ironic and sarcastic comments. When I read that these behaviors can
sometimes enhance close relationships and highlight closeness, I wasn't
surprised. We've been friends for more than thirty years, and the verbal
sparring is great fun. I asked him why he thinks it works, and we agreed
that we're very careful and don't use sarcasm and irony to express
emotions and thoughts that we're afraid to talk about. We have plenty of
hard conversations, and we're diligent about not weaponizing words.
Sarcasm and irony are reserved for playfulness only. I think that's the
biggest watch-out with irony and sarcasm: Are you dressing something up
in humor that actually requires clarity and honesty? OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#6 Places We Go When We're Hurting Anguish, Hopelessness, Despair,
Sadness, Grief

Anguish Anguish...It's one of those words you understand the meaning of
just by the way that it sounds. It has this gnarling rasp to it as you
twist your mouth around to say it...kind of like what feeling it does to
your insides. It's an awful, drawn out, knotted up word. It's also one
of the things I feel without you. --- RANATA SUZUKI

Poets, artists, and writers approach the topic of anguish without
apology, often capturing it in a way that leaves us with a sense of
shock, heartbreak, and foreboding. We may not be clear on what we're
seeing or reading or hearing, but we are certain that we don't want to
move in closer, we don't want to know or relive that emotion, that
experience.

This painting by August Friedrich Albrecht Schenck hangs in the National
Gallery of Victoria in Melbourne, Australia. While little is known about
its artist, it has twice been voted one of the NGV's most popular
works---first in 1906 and then again a century later in 2011. The pained
mother surrounded by a murder of crows is hard to take in.

On the other end of the art-and-science spectrum, social science
researchers seem to steer clear of the concept of anguish altogether.
Many study around the construct, while others put it on a continuum that
includes less extreme emotions like sadness. Yet what emerged from my
work is that anguish is an emotion and an experience that is singular
and must be understood and named, especially for those of us who have
experienced it, will experience it, or may bear witness to it. Anguish
is an almost unbearable and traumatic swirl of shock, incredulity,
grief, and powerlessness. Shock and incredulity can take our breath
away, and grief and powerlessness often come for our hearts and our

minds. But anguish, the combination of these experiences, not only takes
away our ability to breathe, feel, and think---it comes for our bones.
Anguish often causes us to physically crumple in on ourselves, literally
bringing us to our knees or forcing us all the way to the ground. The
element of powerlessness is what makes anguish traumatic. We are unable
to change, reverse, or negotiate what has happened. And even in those
situations where we can temporarily reroute anguish with to-do lists and
tasks, it finds its way back to us. About ten years ago, I received a
call from someone I love very much. In the span of ninety seconds, they
shared that they had spent the night contemplating suicide, then
disclosed a major trauma that I did not know about---a violence that
tore through my memories and reorganized my history and my life. I was
standing on a sidewalk outside my church when I took the call. The kids
had run inside to find friends, and Steve was a few feet in front of me,
watching me after I said, "I wonder why this person is calling so early
on a Sunday---I better answer it." As I listened, I dropped my purse so
I could brace myself against the wall, clenching my cellphone in the
other hand and sliding down the brick wall. Pure anguish. After helping
me stagger to the car, Steve got the kids from inside the church and
drove me home. For months, it was a dance of desperate attempts to fix,
change, and help, followed by more anguish. Then ultimately I got help.
Today, a decade later, I no longer fall to the ground when I think about
that call, but it still evokes anguish and I am not the same. I'm still
me at my core, but it took time and help and processing for the bones to
come back, and they're slightly different than they were before.

Another example comes from a story that a graduate student named
Gabriella shared with me several years ago when we were talking about my
research and the experience of anguish. Gabi told the story of being in
high school and spending the weekend helping her best friend, Carmen,
prepare for her quinceañera. A quinceañera is a coming-of-age
celebration in many Latinx communities. It's a special milestone for
girls who are turning fifteen (quince in Spanish). The celebration often
starts with a religious service followed by a party. These gatherings
range from small gettogethers in the girl's home to huge parties in
hotel ballrooms. Sometimes there are even "courts," which are similar to
bridal parties. Gabi and Carmen had been best friends since middle
school, and Gabi wanted to be by Carmen's side for what she knew would
be an emotional weekend. Carmen's mother had died of ovarian cancer when
Carmen was twelve. Gabi told me that she was pretty sure that if it had
been up to Carmen, she would have skipped the quinceañera, but Carmen's
family insisted. The night before the celebration, Carmen and Gabi were
in Carmen's room, sitting on the bed texting with friends. They heard a
quiet knock on the door ---it was Carmen's dad, accompanied by her older
brother and her older sister. Gabi could tell by the look on their faces
that something serious was happening. Carmen's father stopped at the
door, and her brother and sister gently pushed past him until they were
standing just inside the room. Carmen stood up and looked at her father,
who had one foot in her room and one foot in the hall. He looked unsure,
and this made Carmen visibly nervous. "What is it, Papa?" she asked. Her
father, eyes cast down and hands slightly trembling, handed Carmen a
wooden box. Carmen held the box, nervously looking at her father and her
siblings.

Her sister said, "Open it, Carmen. It's okay." Carmen gave Gabi a
knowing look, and then opened the box. In it was the tiara that her
mother and her sister had worn at their quinceañeras. Both Carmen and
Gabi had been expecting this moment, and they both felt relieved that it
had arrived and would soon be past. They had even talked through what to
say and how to act with Carmen's father, who Carmen guessed would be in
tears. But then, unexpectedly, Carmen's father handed Carmen an
envelope. Carmen's father could barely speak: "Your mother wrote you
this note the week before she died. She wanted you to open it the day
before your quinceañera." Carmen grabbed the letter and immediately fell
to the floor. Gabi said, "She just sank. And moaned. It was like she was
being hurt and sucked into the ground." Before Gabi could understand
what was happening, Carmen's brother and her sister had both dropped to
their knees and were also on the floor, crying and burying their heads
in their hands. Carmen's father held on to the door frame for a minute
but ended up on the floor with his children. Gabi and I talked about how
what we think is a familiar grief---a grief we've come to know and
understand and even integrate into our lives---can surprise us again and
again, often in the form of anguish. This is especially true when
something sparks shock and incredulity in us, like the letter that
Carmen's mother had written to her. --- It's often hard to find our way
back into our bodies after experiencing anguish. This is why so much
effective trauma work today is not only about reclaiming our breath, our
feelings, and our thinking, but also getting our bones back and
returning to our bodies.

When we experience anguish and we don't get help or support, we can find
it difficult to get up off the floor and reengage with our lives. We go
through the motions, but we are still crumpled. I tried doing that for
several months until I realized that I needed to talk with someone to
help process that phone call and my anguish. There is another
alternative to not addressing the trauma of anguish---we can convince
ourselves that we're okay and keep ourselves upright by hanging our
crumpling anguish on rigidity and perfectionism and silence, like a wet
towel hanging on a rod. We can become closed off, never open to
vulnerability and its gifts, and barely existing because anything at any
moment could threaten that fragile, rigid scaffolding that's holding up
our crumpling selves and keeping us standing. The human spirit is
resilient, and just as we can reclaim our ability to breathe and feel
and think, we can rebuild the bones that anguish rips away. But it takes
help and time. I don't remember when or where I first saw Dark Elegy,
but I knew then that I'd never forget it. And I haven't. When I started
working on this book, I reached out to the artist and asked if I could
share her work as an example of anguish. She generously said yes. A note
from Suse Ellen Lowenstein: On December 21, 1988, while coming home for
the holidays, our older son Alexander was murdered along with 258 others
aboard Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland. A total of 270 people
lost their lives in that terrorist act, 259 aboard the jumbo jet and 11
on the ground. Alexander was 21 years young.

Dark Elegy is made up of 75 larger than life size pieces, each
portraying a mother or wife at that moment when they first heard the
awful news of the death of their loved one. What makes this memorial so
unique, even more so than the sheer number of pieces or the personal and
individual loss each mother portrays, is the fact that it was created by
one of those affected rather than by an outsider portraying someone
else's tragedy. I am one of the depicted figures. Although the concept
of my sculpture, Dark Elegy, was spawned out of this, my personal
tragedy, it has always been dedicated to all victims of terrorism. Dark
Elegy is a universal appeal for peace and dignity for all victims of
senseless hate and vengeance called terrorism and will be a beacon for
all peace-loving people.

Hope, Hopelessness, and Despair We need hope like we need air. To live
without hope is to risk suffocating on hopelessness and despair, risk
being crushed by the belief that there is no way out of what is holding
us back, no way to get to what we desperately need. But hope is not what
most of us think it is. It's not a warm, fuzzy emotion that fills us
with a sense of possibility. Hope is a way of thinking--- a cognitive
process. Yes, emotions play a role, but hope is made up of what
researcher C. R. Snyder called a "trilogy of goals, pathways, and
agency." We experience hope when:

1. We have the ability to set realistic goals (I know where I want to
go). 2. We are able to figure out how to achieve those goals, including
the ability to stay flexible and develop alternative pathways (I know
how to get there, I'm persistent, and I can tolerate disappointment and
try new paths again and again). 3. We have agency---we believe in
ourselves (I can do this!).

Dark Elegy Sculptures by Suse Ellen Lowenstein Photograph by Karen
Walrond

Hope is a function of struggle---we develop hope not during the easy or
comfortable times, but through adversity and discomfort. Hope is forged
when our goals, pathways, and agency are tested and when change is
actually possible. Unfortunately, there are times when hope isn't
sufficient to combat entrenched systemic barriers. It doesn't matter how
much hope we have if the deck is stacked or the rules apply to some but
not others--- that is actually a recipe for hopelessness and despair. We
think we should be able to overcome an obstacle; however, the system is
rigged so there is no possible positive outcome. It's also important to
know that hope is learned. According to Snyder, children most often
learn the habit of hope from their parents. To learn hopefulness,
children need relationships that are characterized by boundaries,
consistency, and support. Children with high levels of hopefulness have
experience with adversity. They've been given the opportunity to
struggle, and in doing that they learn how to believe in themselves and
their abilities. As someone who struggles watching my kids struggle, I
can tell you---this is hard. I remind myself of the saying "Prepare the
child for the path, not the path for the child." One thing that bolsters
my commitment to letting my kids figure out on their own things that are
both developmentally appropriate and possible is thinking about the
alternatives: hopelessness and despair.

Hopelessness and Despair Everything about these words is hard. First,
they are both emotions and experiences that can lead to feelings of
desperation and can pose serious threats to our well-being. Second, it
is really difficult to separate these two constructs and talk about them
as different experiences, yet they are. In the despair research, the
word "hopeless" is often used synonymously with

"despair." But in the research on hopelessness, we see very few mentions
of the concept of despair. Let's break it down. While hope is not an
emotion, hopelessness and despair are emotions. Hopelessness arises out
of a combination of negative life events and negative thought patterns,
particularly self-blame and the perceived inability to change our
circumstances. Let's look back at C. R. Snyder's work and reverse his
trilogy of goals, pathways, and agency to better understand
hopelessness. Hopelessness stems from not being able to set realistic
goals (we don't know what we want), and even if we can identify
realistic goals, we can't figure out how to achieve them. If we attempt
to achieve the goals, we give up when we fail, we can't tolerate
disappointment, and we can't reset. Last, we don't believe in ourselves
or our ability to achieve what we want. Hopelessness is serious. In more
than thirty years of research, Aaron Beck and his colleagues have
established that experiences of hopelessness are strongly and
specifically related to suicidality. There are two ways to think about
despair and its relationship to hopelessness: Hopelessness can apply to
a specific situation (such as feeling hopeless about finishing school or
feeling hopeless about our financial future) or to life more generally.
Despair is a sense of hopelessness about a person's entire life and
future. When extreme hopelessness seeps into all the corners of our
lives and combines with extreme sadness, we feel despair. I once heard
theologian Rob Bell define despair as "the belief that tomorrow will be
just like today." When we are in struggle and/or

experiencing pain, despair---that belief that there is no end to what
we're experiencing---is a desperate and claustrophobic feeling. We can't
figure a way out of or through the struggle and the suffering. When I
look at examples of hope practices in our research, I see commitments to
new ways of thinking about what we want to achieve and why. We need to
learn how to reality-check our goals and the pathways to them, and how
to take the shame out of having to start over many, many times when our
first plan fails. I used to ask my graduate students to submit a
semester-long goal the second week of school. After doing this for
years, I knew I could expect 90 percent of the goals to be unrealistic.
Setting realistic goals is a skill and a prerequisite for hope. When we
don't have these skills, small disappointments can grow into
hopelessness and despair. If we didn't learn hope from our parents, we
can still learn it as adults. But it's going to require skilled help and
support---a therapist or maybe even a coach. We all fear pain and
struggle, but they are often necessary for growth, and, more important,
they don't present the level of danger that hopelessness and despair
bring to us. We can't ignore hopelessness and despair in ourselves or
others---they are both reliable predictors of suicidal thoughts, suicide
attempts, and completed suicide, especially when hopelessness is
accompanied by emotional pain. In addition to cultivating a hope
practice---getting intentional about setting goals, thinking through
pathways, and developing a strong belief in ourselves and what we can
accomplish---we can also look to Martin Seligman's research on
resilience, especially what many people call his 3 Ps: personalization,
permanence, and pervasiveness. Personalization: When we experience
despair and hopelessness, we often believe that we are the problem and
forget to think about larger issues and

context. Self-blame and criticism don't lead to increased hopefulness;
they're quicksand. Realizing that outside factors play a role in our
struggles can give us a different lens on our experience. Permanence:
This one is tough, because thinking that our struggle will never end is
built in to the experiences of despair and hopelessness. This is the
"Tomorrow will be no different from today" thinking. One way to build
resilience is to practice thinking about the temporary nature of most
setbacks as a part of how we look at adversity on a daily basis. We
can't afford to wait to build this skill until we're up against
something huge in our lives. Permanence can be tough for me, so I've
developed the habit of asking myself, "I'm really scared, worried,
overwhelmed, stressed about what's happening. Will this issue be a big
deal in five minutes? Five hours? Five days? Five months? Five years?"
I've been doing it for about a year---I started it during the
pandemic---and now I try not to sink into fear until I've asked and
answered these questions. If nothing else, it pulls my thinking brain
online instead of letting my fear brain run the show. Pervasiveness:
Sometimes, when we're struggling, we fall into the trap of believing
that whatever we're up against has stained or changed every single thing
in our life. Nothing good is left. I recently found myself dealing with
a crisis at work that, for a moment, felt like the end of the world. I
felt as if this thing had swallowed me whole and nothing was left. Then
I got a text that said "hey mom do you know where my new goggles are?"
The first thing I thought was, Ah, the three Ps. There's a part of my
life---the biggest, most important part---that hasn't even been touched
by this. My second thought was: I need to apologize to my mom for
walking past my

stack of shit on the bottom of the stairs every day for seventeen years.
Those goggles have been on the stairs for a week.

Sadness As I was writing this book, I posted a question on Instagram,
Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter to all of the folks in our social media
community: What is your favorite sad movie? At last count we'd received
more than a hundred thousand enthusiastic responses. The films that came
up over and over include (in no particular order): Life Is Beautiful
Terms of Endearment Beaches The Joy Luck Club The Color Purple Steel
Magnolias Brokeback Mountain P.S. I Love You Inside Out Up Every movie
ever made where a dog dies. I can't even type this list without getting
a lump in my throat. I've seen lots of these---in fact, I've seen most
of the ones that people mentioned. Except for the ones where dogs die. I
was caught off guard in fourth grade with Where the Red Fern Grows and
Old Yeller. Both in the same year. That won't happen again. Not only was
I curious about the films, I became obsessed with analyzing the
descriptors and the reasons that people loved their films:

"Beautifully devastating." "So relatable." "What it means to be human."
"I bawl every time I see this but it's also an incredibly joyful film."
"It's been different movies depending on the season of my life." "I felt
less alone." "If I need to release some tears." "When I need a good
cry." "I don't really like the sadness, but I'm so affected by this
movie." "This film is the best in people and the worst." I'm not going
to tell you that sadness is wonderful and we need it. I'm going to say
that sadness is important and we need it. Feeling sad is a normal
response to loss or defeat, or even the perception of loss or defeat. To
be human is to know sadness. Owning our sadness is courageous and a
necessary step in finding our way back to ourselves and each other. Here
are four things that I think are important to know about sadness: 1.
Sadness and depression are not the same thing. Sadness is sometimes
referred to as "depressed mood." However, sadness is a common but not
essential feature of clinical depression. Technically, depression is a
cluster of symptoms that persist over a period of time. These symptoms
can include lack of interest in pleasant activities, loss of appetite,
excessive fatigue and/or insomnia, and difficulty concentrating. 2.
Sadness and grief are not the same thing. Although sadness is one part
of grief, grief involves a whole group of emotions and experiences.
(I'll tell you more about grief soon.) 3. There are positive aspects to
sadness. Joseph P. Forgas, a professor of psychology at the University
of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia, writes:

Though much has been made of the many benefits of happiness, it's
important to consider that sadness can be beneficial, too. Sad people
are less prone to judgmental errors, are more resistant to eye-witness
distortions, are sometimes more motivated, and are more sensitive to
social norms. They can act with more generosity, too. Forgas goes on to
explain, "Evolutionary theory suggests that we should embrace all of our
emotions, as each has an important role to play under the right
circumstances. So, though you may seek ways to increase happiness, don't
haphazardly push away your sadness. No doubt, it's there for good
reason." Additionally, some scholars have speculated that one function
of sadness is to cause the person to evaluate their life and consider
making changes in their circumstances following a negative event, as
well as to recruit help and support from others. My research has taught
me that acknowledging and naming our own sadness is critical in the
formation of compassion and empathy. In our saddest moments, we want to
be held by or feel connected to someone who has known that same ache,
even if what caused it is completely different. We don't want our
sadness overlooked or diminished by someone who can't tolerate what
we're feeling because they're unwilling or unable to own their own
sadness. 4. There's a reason we love sad movies. Researchers Julian
Hanich and colleagues investigated the sad-film paradox: How can a
negative emotion such as sadness go together with "aesthetic liking" and
even pleasure? Their findings totally align with the
hundred-thousand-plus comments from our community: We like to be moved.
We like to feel connected to what it means to be human, to be reminded
of our inextricable connection to one another. Sadness moves the
individual "us" toward the collective "us."

Their study revealed a "highly significant positive correlation between
sadness and enjoyment." However, this association is sequential. Sadness
leads to feeling moved, which in turn leads to enjoyment. "Hence sadness
primarily functions as a contributor to and intensifier of the emotional
state of being moved." Look back at that list of movies. They were
moving. I felt deeply moved by them.

Grief Grief does not obey your plans, or your wishes. Grief will do
whatever it wants to you, whenever it wants to. In that regard, Grief
has a lot in common with Love. --- ELIZABETH GILBERT

Grief is often thought of as a process that includes many emotions,
rather than a singular emotion. For a long time, we thought about the
grief process in terms of linear stages, but almost all of the recent
research actually refutes the idea that grief progresses in predictable,
sequenced stages. Robert A. Neimeyer, a psychology professor at the
University of Memphis and a clinician, is one of the world's most
prolific grief researchers. I often share his work with professionals
looking for training in grief work and with individuals who are
grieving. Neimeyer writes, "A central process in grieving is the attempt
to reaffirm or reconstruct a world of meaning that has been challenged
by loss." In my research, three foundational elements of grief emerged
from the data: loss, longing, and feeling lost. Loss---While death and
separation are tangible losses associated with grief, some of the
participants described losses that are more difficult to identify or
describe. These included the loss of normality, the loss of what could
be, and the loss of what we thought we knew or understood about
something or someone.

Longing---Related to loss is longing. Longing is not conscious wanting;
it's an involuntary yearning for wholeness, for understanding, for
meaning, for the opportunity to regain or even simply touch what we've
lost. Longing is a vital and important part of grief, yet many of us
feel we need to keep our longings to ourselves for fear we will be
misunderstood, perceived as engaging in magical or unrealistic thinking,
or lacking in fortitude and resilience. Feeling lost---Grief requires us
to reorient every part of our physical, emotional, and social worlds.
When we imagine the need to do this, most of us picture the painful
struggle to adjust to a tangible change, such as someone dying or moving
away. But this is a very limited view of grief. The more difficult it is
for us to articulate our experiences of loss, longing, and feeling lost
to the people around us, the more disconnected and alone we feel.
Talking about grief is difficult in a world that wants us to "get over
it" or a community that is quick to pathologize grief. The Center for
Complicated Grief at Columbia is another tremendous resource. Their
definitions (below) are very helpful when thinking about grief. I think
the most important line is "When a person adapts to a loss grief is not
over." It doesn't mean that we're sad the rest of our lives, it means
that "grief finds a place" in our lives. Imagine a world in which we
honor that place in ourselves and others rather than hiding it, ignoring
it, or pretending it doesn't exist because of fear or shame. I keep
thinking back to a conversation I had on Unlocking Us with the grief
expert David Kessler. I'll never forget him saying this: "Each person's
grief is as unique as their fingerprint. But what everyone has in common
is that no matter how they grieve, they share a need for their grief to
be witnessed. That doesn't mean needing someone to try to lessen it or
reframe it for them. The need is for someone to be fully present to the
magnitude of their loss without trying to point out the silver lining."

Professor Neimeyer's work supports this need for real connection in
healing. He writes, "Most people who struggle with complicating loss
feel a great press to 'tell the story,' to find someone willing to hear
what others cannot, and who can join them in making sense of the death
without withdrawing into awkward silence or offering trite and
superficial advice regarding the questions it poses." This need for
connection, for storytelling and story catching, is what makes group
therapy and support groups such powerful healing experiences for those
who are grieving. Working through complicated grief, however, requires a
mental health professional with training in complicated grief work.

The Center for Complicated Grief

Acute grief occurs in the initial period after a loss. It almost always
includes

strong feelings of yearning, longing, and sadness along with anxiety,
bitterness, anger, remorse, guilt, and/or shame. Thoughts are mostly
focused on the person who died and it can be difficult to concentrate on
anything else. Acute grief dominates a person's life.

Integrated grief is the result of adaptation to the loss. When a person
adapts

to a loss grief is not over. Instead, thoughts, feelings, and behaviors
related to their loss are integrated in ways that allow them to remember
and honor the person who died. Grief finds a place in their life.

Complicated grief occurs when something interferes with adaptation.

When this happens, acute grief can persist for very long periods of
time. A person with complicated grief feels intense emotional pain. They
can't stop feeling that their loved one might somehow reappear and they
don't see a pathway forward. A future without their loved one seems
forever dismal and unappealing....Grief dominates their thoughts and
feelings with no respite in sight. Relationships with family and friends
flounder. Life can seem purposeless, as if nothing matters without their
loved one. Others begin to feel frustrated, helpless, and discouraged.
Even professionals may be uncertain about how to help. People often
think this is depression, but complicated grief and depression are not
the same thing.

Based on the research of Tashel Bordere

Disenfranchised grief is a less-studied form of grief: grief that "is
not

openly acknowledged or publicly supported through mourning practices or
rituals because the experience is not valued or counted \[by others\] as
a loss." The grief can also be invisible or hard to see by others.
Examples of disenfranchised grief include loss of a partner or parent
due to divorce, loss of an unborn child and/or infertility, the
multitude of losses experienced by a survivor of sexual assault, and
loss of a loved one to suicide. As an illustrative example of
disenfranchised grief, Tashel Bordere explains that sexual assault
survivors suffer from numerous losses, many of which are invisible to
others. Some of these losses include loss of one's prior worldview, loss
of trust, loss of self-identity and self-esteem, loss of freedom and
independence, loss of a sense of safety and security, and loss of sexual
interest.

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#7 Places We Go with Others Compassion, Pity, Empathy, Sympathy,
Boundaries, Comparative Suffering

Compassion and Empathy Across the research and clinical practice
community, there are compelling debates happening right now about the
role that compassion and empathy play in how we connect with people who
are struggling. Some people argue that compassion is the best response,
some people argue that it's empathy, and some people think we need both
for different reasons. Everyone is trying to answer this question:
What's the most effective way to be in connection with and in service to
someone who is struggling, without taking on their issues as our own?
It's an important debate that is frustratingly hijacked on occasion by
folks who come up with new, arbitrary definitions for emotions that are
completely different from how we all use the terms. They change the
meaning, then argue that the emotion is "bad" based on their new
definitions. For example, someone might say that empathy is taking on
all

the feelings of another person, then argue that empathy is bad.
Unfortunately, this approach is often misleading and self-serving and
puts no value on how we use the word. I would argue that a lot of this
linguistic shell-gaming is about wanting to be contrarian. There's
nothing more seductive and clickable than a discovery that something we
believe to be good is bad: "Empathy is bad for you." When it comes to
language, I'm a populist. How we, the collective, use language matters
as much as, if not more than, arbitrary definitions that don't center
lived experiences. If research is going to serve people, it has to
reflect their experiences. There are significant differences between
compassion and empathy that are vital to understand if we want to
cultivate connection with others. There are also different definitions
and types of empathy. I'm going to try to sort it out here using a
combination of our research and that being done by other experts in the
field.

The Relationship Between Compassion and Empathy Here's what I've
learned: Compassion is a daily practice and empathy is a skill set that
is one of the most powerful tools of compassion. The most effective
approach to meaningful connection combines compassion with a specific
type of empathy called cognitive empathy. Let's get into it. Our working
definition of compassion first emerged from the data about ten years
ago. It's been revised over time, but the core has remained the same and
has stood the test of new data: Compassion is the daily practice of
recognizing and accepting our shared humanity so that we treat ourselves
and others with loving-kindness, and we take action in the face of
suffering. A very similar definition can be found in the research
literature: Compassion is a "virtuous response that seeks to address the
suffering and needs of a person through relational understanding and
action." What the majority of definitions share, including these, is
that compassion includes action. It's not just feeling, it's doing.
Compassion is fueled by understanding and accepting that we're all made
of strength and struggle---no one is immune to pain or suffering.
Compassion is not a practice of "better than" or "I can fix you"---it's
a practice based in the beauty and pain of shared humanity. In her book
The Places That Scare You, the American Buddhist nun Pema Chödrön
writes: When we practice generating compassion, we can expect to
experience our fear of pain. Compassion practice is daring. It involves
learning to relax and allow ourselves to move gently toward what scares
us....In cultivating compassion we draw from the wholeness of our
experience---our suffering, our empathy, as well as

our cruelty and terror. It has to be this way. Compassion is not a
relationship between the healer and the wounded. It's a relationship
between equals. Only when we know our own darkness well can we be
present with the darkness of others. Compassion becomes real when we
recognize our shared humanity. This paragraph completely rearranged my
parenting approach. I went from always wanting to fix things and make
them better to literally sitting in the dark with my kids. Before I
fully understood that the "action" part of compassion wasn't making
things better or fixing, I would race to flip on the metaphorical lights
when my kids were suffering. Now, I try to sit with them in the dark and
show them how to feel the discomfort. Talk about moving gently toward
what scares us. It's so painful, but now that I've been doing it for the
past decade, I can see how my kids are developing that sense of shared
humanity. I've even had the incredible fortune of witnessing them moving
toward others in pain without trying to solve. But I'm not going to lie.
It's still really hard. Sitting in the dark with them is not one bit
easier in the moment than it was ten years ago. Everything in my body is
screaming, "Make it better! Fix it!" Maybe this is an example of how
understanding emotion can be a life raft in a sea of turbulent feelings.
Sometimes I have to desperately cling to what I know, rather than act on
what I'm feeling in the moment.

Pity While compassion is not rescuing, it's also not pity. In fact, pity
is the near enemy of compassion. In her book Fierce Self-Compassion,
University of Texas researcher Kristin Neff writes, " 'Near enemy' is a
useful Buddhist concept referring to a state of mind that appears
similar to the desired state

---hence it is 'near'---but actually undermines it, which is why it's an
enemy." "Far enemies" are the opposite of emotions or experiences---the
far enemy of compassion might be cruelty. What's interesting is that
near enemies are often greater threats than far enemies because they're
more difficult to recognize. As we build our understanding of emotion
and experiences, the concept of near enemy is invaluable. To better
understand how this works, let's look at compassion and pity. In
Bringing Home the Dharma, Jack Kornfield writes, The near enemy of
compassion is pity. Instead of feeling the openness of compassion, pity
says, "Oh, that poor person. I feel sorry for people like that." Pity
sees them as different from ourselves. It sets up a separation between
ourselves and others, a sense of distance and remoteness from the
suffering of others that is affirming and gratifying to the self.
Compassion, on the other hand, recognizes the suffering of another as a
reflection of our own pain: "I understand this; I suffer in the same
way." It is empathetic, a mutual connection with the pain and sorrow of
life. Compassion is shared suffering. There's nothing worse than feeling
pitied, and we have the research to show us why it feels so isolating.
Pity involves four elements: a belief that the suffering person is
inferior; a passive, self-focused reaction that does not include
providing help; a desire to maintain emotional distance; and avoidance
of sharing in the other person's suffering. And, addressing the big
question about being with people without taking on their pain, Kornfield
goes on to say,

Another enemy of compassion is despair. Compassion does not mean
immersing ourselves in the suffering of others to the point of anguish.
Compassion is the tender readiness of the heart to respond to one's own
or another's pain without despair, resentment, or aversion. It is the
wish to dissipate suffering. Compassion embraces those experiencing
sorrow, and eliminates cruelty from the mind.

Empathy Empathy, the most powerful tool of compassion, is an emotional
skill set that allows us to understand what someone is experiencing and
to reflect back that understanding. Empathy has a huge upside.
Researchers Peter Paul Zurek and Herbert Scheithauer explain that
empathy helps interpersonal decision making; facilitates ethical
decision making and moral judgments; enhances short-term subjective
well-being; strengthens relational bonds; allows people to better
understand how others see them; and enhances prosocial and altruistic
behavior.

Most researchers agree that there are at least two elements to empathy:
cognitive empathy and affective empathy. Cognitive empathy, sometimes
called perspective taking or mentalizing, is the ability to recognize
and

understand another person's emotions. Affective empathy, often called
experience sharing, is one's own emotional attunement with another
person's experience. Based on my work, I believe meaningful connection
requires a combination of compassion and cognitive empathy or
perspective taking. In simple terms, the empathy I'm talking about is
understanding what someone is feeling, not feeling it for them. If
someone is feeling lonely, empathy doesn't require us to feel lonely
too, only to reach back into our own experience with loneliness so we
can understand and connect. Affective empathy, feeling something along
with the person who is struggling, is a slippery slope toward becoming
overwhelmed and not being able to offer meaningful support. There are
several models of and theories on empathy, but the one that aligns the
most closely with our data is Theresa Wiseman's research. She studied
empathy across helping professions and developed four attributes. We
added a fifth attribute from Kristin Neff, whose work on self-compassion
has been a life changer for me (more on that to come). Theresa Wiseman's
Attributes of Empathy: 1. Perspective taking: What does that concept
mean for you? What is that experience like for you? 2. Staying out of
judgment: Just listen, don't put value on it. 3. Recognizing emotion:
How can I touch within myself something that helps me identify and
connect with what the other person might be feeling? Check in and
clarify what you are hearing. Ask questions.

4. Communicating our understanding about the emotion: Sometimes this is
elaborate and detailed, and sometimes this is simply, "Shit. That's
hard. I get that." 5. Practicing mindfulness (from Kristin Neff): This
is not pushing away emotion because it's uncomfortable, but feeling it
and moving through it. Again, empathy is a tool of compassion. We can
respond empathically only if we are willing to be present to someone's
pain. If we're not willing to do that, it's not real empathy.

A few researchers argue that empathy is a skill set that can be used to
hurt people as well as in the service of compassion. I disagree. If
you're connecting to how I feel so you can leverage my emotions, we
shouldn't call that empathy---it makes no sense. We should call that
manipulation or exploitation. Language matters. Don't use a word that
has an almost universally positive connotation to describe a dangerous
behavior that is hurtful. Use a word that issues a caution and demands
accountability. Much more to come on this in the final chapter.

Sympathy Empathy is not sympathy---in fact, using the near enemy
concept, we can definitely consider sympathy the near enemy of empathy.
Rather than being a tool for connection, sympathy emerged in the data as
a form of disconnection. Sympathy is removed: When someone says "I feel
sorry for you" or "That must be terrible," they are standing at a safe
distance. Rather than conveying the powerful "me too" of empathy, it
communicates "not me," then adds, "But I do feel sorry for you."
Sympathy can even be a trigger for shame, which we will discuss in the
next chapter. Researchers found that cancer patients on the receiving
end of sympathy describe it as an unwanted, superficial, pity-based
response that, although well intended, is focused on the observer's
discomfort rather than on alleviating the patient's distress. Patients
prefer empathic and compassionate responses from others, seeing these
responses as more helpful and more genuine than sympathy responses.
Sympathy and pity are first cousins. They're the emotions of: We feel
bad for you. From way over here where the kind of misery you're
experiencing

doesn't happen. Lulu Wang, the writer and director of one of my favorite
films, The Farewell, tweeted, "Let's be clear. Empathy and pity are not
the same thing. When non-POC non-female tell our stories, they may think
they're creating empathy, but they unconsciously channel pity, which can
often look like empathy but it's not. The difference is hierarchy." This
is one reason we need to dispel the myth that empathy is "walking in
someone else's shoes." Rather than walking in your shoes, I need to
learn how to listen to the story you tell about what it's like in your
shoes and believe you even when it doesn't match my experiences. The
minute I try to put myself in your place rather than try to understand
the situation from your perspective, our empathic connection unravels.
Either I get sucked into the vortex of my own emotional difficulties,
or, because my experience doesn't match yours, I doubt what you're
telling me. We see this empathic miss all the time when we share our
experiences with people whose identities afford them more physical,
social, and emotional safety. "I'm imagining not being called on in a
meeting and I don't think it's so painful," says the man to the woman
who is often overlooked, or the white woman to the Black woman who is
routinely ignored---versus hearing what that experience felt like for
the person sharing the story and responding by saying, "Feeling
invisible is painful." I also want to talk about the concept of
compassion fatigue. This is a term used to refer to the emotional
exhaustion or burnout that can occur among caregivers. The term comes up
most frequently in research focusing on medical professionals (doctors,
nurses), but is also used as related to other clinical professions
(psychologists, therapists, social workers) and nonclinical service
professions (customer service, teaching).

There's compelling research that shows that compassion fatigue occurs
when caregivers focus on their own personal distress reaction rather
than on the experience of the person they are caring for. Focusing on
one's own emotional reaction results in an inability to respond
empathically to the person in need. In this view, the more appropriate
term, rather than "compassion fatigue," might be "empathic distress
fatigue." We're not hearing the story, we're inserting ourselves in the
story. Last, the number one question I get when I'm teaching empathy is
"How can I be empathic with someone if I haven't had their experience?"
It's a great question, because it exposes a dangerous myth about
empathy. Empathy is not relating to an experience, it's connecting to
what someone is feeling about an experience. When I'm working with
groups, I often ask participants to raise their hands if they know joy,
hurt, heartbreak, shame, grief, love, etc. At the end, after all of the
hands have been raised to every emotion, I say, "You're qualified." You
don't need to be the expert or experience what they've experienced. You
need to connect to your own experiences in a "thinking" way that creates
emotional resonance: Oh, yeah. I know that feeling. I'm not going to
fall into it right now, but I know it and I can communicate with you in
a way that makes you know you're not alone.

EMPATHY MISSES 1. Sympathy Versus Empathy I feel sorry for you. The
person who responds with sympathy ("I feel so sorry for you") rather
than empathy ("I get it, I feel with you, and I've been there"). The
subtext of this response is distance: These things don't happen to me or
people like me. If you want to see a shame cyclone turn deadly, throw
one of these at it: "Oh, you poor thing" or "Bless your heart."

2. Judgment You "should" feel shame! The person who hears the story and
actually feels shame for you. The friend gasps and confirms how
horrified you should be. Then there is an awkward silence. Then you have
to make this person feel better by convincing them that you're not a
terrible person. 3. Disappointment You've let me down. The person who
needs you to be the pillar of worthiness and authenticity. This person
can't help you because they are too disappointed in your imperfections.
You've let this person down. 4. Discharging Discomfort with Blame This
feels terrible. Who can we blame? You? Because shame is visceral and
contagious, we can feel it for other people. This person immediately
needs to discharge the discomfort and vulnerability of the situation by
blaming and scolding. They may blame/scold you: "What were you
thinking?" Or they may look for someone else to take the fall: "Who was
that guy? We'll kick his butt." Caution: Parents can fall easily into
this when a child shares a shaming story with them. "How did you let
this happen?" 5. Minimize/Avoid Let's make this go away. We minimize and
avoid when we want hard feelings to go away. Out of their own
discomfort, this person refuses to acknowledge that you're in pain
and/or that you're hurting: "You're exaggerating. It wasn't that bad.
You rock. You're perfect. Everyone loves you." 6. Comparing/Competing If
you think that's bad!

This person confuses connecting with you over shared experiences with
the opportunity to one-up you. "That's nothing. Listen to what happened
to me one time!" 7. Speaking Truth to Power Don't upset people or make
them uncomfortable. You hold someone accountable for language, comments,
or behavior that marginalizes or dehumanizes others, and it causes
discomfort or conflict. When this person observes this or hears your
story of what happened, they respond with, "I can't believe you said
that to your boss!" or "I can't believe you went there!" or "You can't
talk about that stuff with people" versus an empathic response of "That
must have been hard---you were really brave" or "It's hard to stand up
for what you believe in---thank you." 8. Advice Giving/Problem Solving I
can fix this and I can fix you. Sometimes when we see pain our first
instinct is to fix it. This is especially true for those of us whom
people seek out to help with problem-solving. In these instances, rather
than listen and be with people in their emotion, we start fixing.

From The Gifts of Imperfection (2020)

Boundaries Boundaries are a prerequisite for compassion and empathy. We
can't connect with someone unless we're clear about where we end and
they begin. If there's no autonomy between people, then there's no
compassion or empathy, just enmeshment. This has probably been one of
the most significant, soul-shaking learnings of my career. For a couple
of years, it made no sense to me at all. Why did all of the compassion
practitioners---therapists, counselors, monks ---that I interviewed talk
about the importance of boundaries? Why did the lack of boundaries and
judgment seem to go hand in hand in the data?

In The Gifts of Imperfection, I write, "The heart of compassion is
really acceptance. The better we are at accepting ourselves and others,
the more compassionate we become. Well, it's difficult to accept people
when they are hurting us or taking advantage of us or walking all over
us. This research has taught me that if we really want to practice
compassion, we have to start by setting boundaries and holding people
accountable for their behavior." I was recently struggling with a
boundary issue (yes, still) and I told my therapist that I refuse to go
back to saccharine---that I like solid better. Before I really
understood how impossible it is to be compassionate to myself or others
when people are taking advantage of me and when I'm prioritizing being
liked over being free, I was much sweeter but less authentic. Now I'm
kinder and less judgmental. But also firmer and more solid. Occasionally
salty. The best definition of boundaries still comes from my friend
Kelly Rae Roberts. Kelly Rae was an oncology social worker who followed
her dreams and became a prolific, globally recognized artist. After
experiences with some of her art students copying her work and selling
it, she addressed her art community with a very straightforward blog
post on "What's OK and What's Not OK" in terms of using her images. For
example, it's okay to be inspired by her work, but not okay to copy it
and sell it. This is a simple but profound way to set boundaries. As we
say in our organization, Clear is kind. Unclear is unkind. Too often we
forget about the "what is okay" part, and that leads to unnecessary
disconnection. When people set a boundary with us, we can feel that
they're denying us our right to our thinking and feeling. When we
explain up front what's okay, we move the focus to where it belongs:
This expression of your feelings or thinking is the problem.

It's okay to be pissed. It's not okay to raise your voice and pound on
the table. It's okay to change your mind. It's not okay to assume that
I'm okay with the changes without talking to me. It's okay to want to be
able to do the things your friends are allowed to do. I totally get
that. What's not okay is breaking our rules to do them. It's okay to
disagree with me, but it's not okay to ridicule my ideas and beliefs.

Comparative Suffering Empathy is not finite, and compassion is not a
pizza with eight slices. When you practice empathy and compassion with
someone, there is not less of these qualities to go around. There's
more. Love is the last thing we need to ration in this world. But fear
and scarcity trigger comparison, and even pain and hurt are not immune
to being assessed and ranked. Because COVID unleashed such massive fear
and anxiety, we saw comparative suffering everywhere: My husband died,
and that grief is worse than your grief over missing your daughter's
wedding. I'm not allowed to talk about how disappointed I am about my
job changing because my friend just found out that his wife has COVID.

You're worried about your teenager becoming disconnected and isolated
during quarantine when thousands of people in India are dying? What we
fail to understand is that the family in India doesn't benefit more if
you conserve your concern only for them and withhold it from your child
who is also suffering. Yes, perspective is critical. But I'm a firm
believer that sharing how we feel ---even complaining---is okay as long
as we piss and moan with a little perspective. Hurt is hurt, and every
time we honor our own struggle and the struggles of others by responding
with empathy and compassion, the healing that results affects all of us.
OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#8 Places We Go When We Fall Short Shame, Self-Compassion,
Perfectionism, Guilt, Humiliation, Embarrassment

I came across a quote the other day that read, "Science is not the
truth. Science is finding the truth. When science changes its opinion,
it didn't lie to you. It learned more." The first thing I thought of was
this section of the book. If you're familiar with any of my work, you
know that I've been researching and writing on shame, guilt,
humiliation, and embarrassment for more than twenty years. Over these
two decades, we've learned more about how these emotions work, and
researchers have come up with innovative ways of measuring them, but
nothing has fundamentally shifted my thinking on them---until recently.
New research on the connection between humiliation and violence has
completely changed the way I think about that emotion and reinforced my
belief that shame and humiliation will never be effective social justice
tools. We're going to talk about these four terms together because we
have the tendency to use them interchangeably, even though the
experiences are very

different in terms of biology, biography, behavior, backstory, and
self-talk. And they lead to radically different outcomes. We're also
going to talk about the important role self-compassion plays in moving
through shame and how perfectionism is a function of shame. Let's start
with some short definitions and examples to differentiate the four
emotions, then we'll dig deeper into each one. Shame---I am bad. The
focus is on self, not behavior. The result is feeling flawed and
unworthy of love, belonging, and connection. Shame is not a driver of
positive change. You get back a quiz and your grade is F. Your self-talk
is I'm so stupid. Guilt---I did something bad. The focus is on behavior.
Guilt is the discomfort we feel when we evaluate what we've done or
failed to do against our values. It can drive positive change and
behavior. You get back a quiz and your grade is F. Your self-talk is
Going to the party instead of studying for this quiz was so stupid
(versus I'm so stupid). Humiliation---I've been belittled and put down
by someone. This left me feeling unworthy of connection and disgusted
with myself. This was unfair and I didn't deserve this. With shame, we
believe that we deserve our sense of unworthiness. With humiliation, we
don't feel we deserve it. The student sitting next to you sees the F at
the top of your quiz and tells the class, "This idiot can't even pass a
quiz in here. He's as stupid as they come." Everyone laughs. You feel
dumb and enraged. Embarrassment---I did something that made me
uncomfortable, but I know I'm not alone. Everyone does these kinds of
things. Embarrassment is

fleeting, sometimes funny. Your teacher is handing out quizzes and you
come back from the bathroom with toilet paper stuck to your shoe.

Shame I hated the internal wounds, the words that said I was worthless
and unwanted, the teasing, the ridicule that echoed in my ears and
shattered my insides into dust. If given the choice, I'd have picked a
beating over being shamed. --- ANTWONE QUENTON FISHER, Finding Fish

Reading Antwone Fisher's book Finding Fish was a Sliding Doors moment
for me. I had just started researching shame and I was getting pushback
from every direction. Everyone thought it was too difficult a topic to
study. There were very few research articles on shame twenty years ago,
and the first one I found warned that the decision to study shame had
been the death of many academic careers. I devoured Finding Fish right
when it came out. Fisher writes about shame with such haunting detail
that it solidified my decision to study this emotion that we all
experience and all hate talking about. Here are my shame 1-2-3s: 1. We
all have it. Shame is universal and one of the most primitive emotions
that we experience. The only people who don't

experience it are those who lack the capacity for empathy and human
connection. 2. We're all afraid to talk about it. Sometimes we can feel
shame when we just say the word "shame." But it's getting easier as more
people are talking about it. 3. The less we talk about it, the more
control it has over us. Shame hates being spoken. When we hear the word
"shame," our first thought is either I have no idea what that means and
I don't want to know, or I know exactly what that is and I don't want to
talk about it. We can also make up that shame is something that happens
to other people, not us. But shame is in all of us. Here are some
examples shared by the research participants from our early study on
shame: Shame is hiding the fact that I'm in recovery. Shame is raging at
my kids. Shame is bankruptcy. Shame is getting laid off and having to
tell my pregnant wife. Shame is my boss calling me an idiot in front of
the client. Shame is not making partner. Shame is my husband leaving me
for my next-door neighbor. Shame is my partner asking me for a divorce
and telling me that she wants children, but not with me. Shame is my
DUI. Shame is infertility.

Shame is telling my fiancé that my dad lives in France when in fact he's
in prison. Shame is internet porn. Shame is flunking out of school.
Twice. Shame is hearing my parents fight through the walls and wondering
if I'm the only one who feels this afraid. Connection, along with love
and belonging (two expressions of connection), is why we are here, and
it is what gives purpose and meaning to our lives. Shame is the fear of
disconnection---it's the fear that something we've done or failed to do,
an ideal that we've not lived up to, or a goal that we've not
accomplished makes us unworthy of connection. I'm unlovable. I don't
belong. Here's the definition of shame that emerged from my research:
Shame is the intensely painful feeling or experience of believing that
we are flawed and therefore unworthy of love, belonging, and connection.
Shame thrives on secrecy, silence, and judgment. If you put shame into a
petri dish and douse it with these three things, it will grow
exponentially into every corner and crevice of our lives.

The antidote to shame is empathy. If we reach out and share our shame
experience with someone who responds with empathy, shame dissipates.
Shame needs you to believe that you're alone. Empathy is a hostile
environment for shame. Self-compassion also helps us move through shame,
but we need empathy as well for an important reason: Shame is a social
emotion. Shame happens between people and it heals between people. Even
if I feel it alone, shame is the way I see myself through someone else's
eyes. Self-compassion is often the first step to healing shame---we need
to be kind to ourselves before we can share our stories with someone
else. As I mentioned in the previous chapter, Kristin Neff's research on
selfcompassion has been a life changer for me. Neff runs the Center for
Mindful Self-Compassion, where she studies how we develop and practice

self-compassion. According to Neff, self-compassion has three elements:
self-kindness, common humanity, and mindfulness. This is how she defines
each of these elements: Self-kindness vs. self-judgment:
"Self-compassion entails being warm and understanding toward ourselves
when we suffer, fail, or feel inadequate, rather than ignoring our pain
or flagellating ourselves with self-criticism. Self-compassionate people
recognize that being imperfect, failing, and experiencing life
difficulties \[are\] inevitable, so they tend to be gentle with
themselves when confronted with painful experiences rather than getting
angry when life falls short of set ideals." Common humanity
vs. isolation: "Self-compassion involves recognizing that suffering and
personal inadequacy is part of the shared human experience---something
that we all go through rather than being something that happens to 'me'
alone." Mindfulness vs. over-identification: "Mindfulness is a
non-judgmental, receptive mind state in which one observes thoughts and
feelings as they are, without trying to suppress or deny them. We cannot
ignore our pain and feel compassion for it at the same time. At the same
time, mindfulness requires that we not be 'over-identified' with
thoughts and feelings, so that we are caught up and swept away by
negative reactivity." I highly recommend that you take her
self-compassion inventory at www.self-compassion.org. You can learn a
lot about your strengths and your areas that need attention. Being a
shame researcher for so many years, I'm really good at common humanity.
Even though shame says It's just you! I know we all struggle.
Self-kindness is my growth area for sure. Like most people, I talk to
myself in ways that I would never talk to people I love. I try to remind
myself---if I wouldn't talk that way to Ellen or Charlie when they make
a mistake or drop a ball, I shouldn't talk that way to myself.
Selfkindness is both more difficult and more revolutionary than we
think.

The Four Elements of Shame Resilience Across our research, the
participants who could move through shame without sacrificing their
values and authenticity shared four practices when overcoming shame. We
reverse-engineered how they worked through shame to come up with a
process that all of us can use. These steps rarely happen in this
order---they just all need to happen for us to develop resilience to
shame: Recognizing shame and understanding its triggers. Can you
physically recognize when you're in the grip of shame, name it, feel
your way through it, and figure out what messages and expectations
triggered it? This is why Neff's concept of mindfulness is so important.
We can't pretend it's not happening or get swept away (which is easy
with shame). Practicing critical awareness. Can you reality-check the
messages and expectations that are driving your shame? Are they
realistic? Attainable? Are they what you want to be or what you think
others need or want from you? Reaching out. Are you owning and sharing
your story? We can't experience empathy if we're not connecting.
Speaking shame. Are you talking about how you feel and asking for what
you need when you feel shame? Silence, secrecy, and judgment fuel shame.

Shame in Culture One reason we get so confused about the term "shame"
and what it means is that we misuse it all the time. People throw around
the word "shameless" when they see someone make a self-serving or
unethical decision---they attribute unconscionable behavior to a lack of
shame. This is wrong and dangerous. As I write in Dare to Lead:

Shame isn't the cure, it's the cause. Don't let what looks like a
bloated ego and narcissism fool you into thinking there's a lack of
shame. Shame and fear are almost always driving that unethical behavior.
We're now seeing that shame often fuels narcissistic behavior. In fact,
I define narcissism as the shame-based fear of being ordinary.
Grandiosity and bluster are easy to assign to an overinflated ego. It's
tough to get a glimpse of the fear and lack of self-worth that are
actually behind the posturing and selfishness because posturing leads to
weaponizing hurt and turning it on other people. The last thing people
like that need is more shame. More accountability for their behavior and
lack of empathy? Yes. More shame just makes them more dangerous, gives
them the opportunity to redirect attention to the shaming behavior, and,
weirdly, can drum up support from others who are also looking for a way
to discharge their pain and an enemy to blame. Shame is not a compass
for moral behavior. It's much more likely to drive destructive, hurtful,
immoral, and self-aggrandizing behavior than it is to heal it. Why?
Because where shame exists, empathy is almost always absent. That's what
makes shame dangerous. The opposite of experiencing shame is
experiencing empathy. The behavior that many of us find so egregious
today is more about people being empathyless, not shameless. Ronda
Dearing, our senior director for research, has also studied shame for
decades and was one of my early heroes in the field. Her summary of how
empathy and shame work together (or, actually, do not work together) is
incredibly helpful:

Empathy is an other-focused emotion. It draws our attention outward,
toward the other person's experience. When we are truly practicing
empathy, our attention is fully focused on the other person and trying
to understand their experience. We only have thoughts of self in order
to draw on how our experience can help us understand what the other
person is going through. Shame is an egocentric, self-involved emotion.
It draws our focus inward. Our only concern with others when we are
feeling shame is to wonder how others are judging us. Shame and empathy
are incompatible. When feeling shame, our inward focus overrides our
ability to think about another person's experience. We become unable to
offer empathy. We are incapable of processing information about the
other person, unless that information specifically pertains to their
view of us.

Perfectionism Shame is the birthplace of perfectionism. Perfectionism is
not striving to be our best or working toward excellence. Healthy
striving is internally driven. Perfectionism is externally driven by a
simple but potentially allconsuming question: What will people think? It
may seem counterintuitive, but one of the biggest barriers to working
toward mastery is perfectionism. In our leadership research, we've
learned that achieving mastery requires curiosity and viewing mistakes
and failures as opportunities for learning. Perfectionism kills
curiosity by telling us that we have to know everything or we risk
looking "less than." Perfectionism tells us that our mistakes and
failures are personal defects, so we either avoid trying new things or
we barely recover every time we inevitably fall short.

Papers by Paul Hewitt and colleagues and Simon Sherry and colleagues
provide evidence that people with high levels of perfectionistic traits:
Are doomed to fail at meeting their own expectations and the
expectations that they assume are held by others Perceive themselves as
consistently falling short of others' expectations Behave in ways that
result in perceived and actual exclusion and rejection by others Feel
socially disconnected and have fewer social connections I write a lot
about perfectionism across my books. It's a healthy dose of "Researcher,
heal thyself." I often call myself a recovering perfectionist and an
aspiring "good-enoughist." In The Gifts of Imperfection, I explain how
perfectionism emerged from our research. The definition that best fit
the data is that perfectionism is a self-destructive and addictive
belief system that fuels this primary thought: If I look perfect, live
perfectly, work perfectly, and do everything perfectly, I can avoid or
minimize the painful feelings of shame, judgment, and blame.
Perfectionism is not self-improvement. Perfectionism is, at its core,
about trying to earn approval and acceptance. Most perfectionists were
raised being praised for achievement and performance (good grades, good
manners, nice appearance, sports prowess, rule following, people
pleasing). Somewhere along the way, we adopt this dangerous and
debilitating belief system: I am what I accomplish and how well I
accomplish it. Please. Perform. Perfect. Healthy striving is
self-focused---How can I improve? Perfectionism is other-focused---What
will they think?

Understanding the difference between healthy striving and perfectionism
is critical to laying down the shield and picking up your life. Research
shows that perfectionism hampers success. In fact, it often sets you on
the path to depression, anxiety, addiction, and life paralysis. "Life
paralysis" refers to all of the opportunities we miss because we're too
afraid to put anything out in the world that could be imperfect. It's
also all of the dreams that we don't follow because of our deep fear of
failing, making mistakes, and disappointing others. It's terrifying to
risk when you're a perfectionist; your self-worth is on the line. As
previously mentioned, perfectionism is a self-destructive and addictive
belief system that we use to try to protect ourselves from feelings of
shame, judgment, and blame. It is a twenty-ton shield that we lug around
thinking it will protect us when in fact it's the thing that's really
preventing us from taking flight. Let me explain why I describe
perfectionism as being both self-destructive and addictive.
Perfectionism is self-destructive simply because there is no such thing
as perfection. Perfection is an unattainable goal. Additionally,
perfectionism is more about perception---we want to be perceived as
perfect. Again, this is unattainable---there is no way to control
perception, regardless of how much time and energy we spend trying.
Perfectionism is addictive, because when we invariably do experience
shame, judgment, and blame, we often believe it's because we weren't
perfect enough. So rather than questioning the faulty logic of
perfectionism, we become even more entrenched in our quest to live,
look, and do everything just right. Feeling shamed, judged, and blamed
(and the fear of these feelings) are realities of the human experience.
Perfectionism actually increases the odds

that we'll experience these painful emotions and often leads to
self-blame: It's my fault. I'm feeling this way because I'm not good
enough.

Guilt Like shame, guilt is an emotion that we experience when we fall
short of our own expectations or standards. However, with guilt, our
focus is on having done something wrong and on doing something to set
things right, like apologizing or changing a behavior. Remorse, a subset
of guilt, is what we feel when we acknowledge that we have harmed
another person, we feel bad about it, and we want to atone for our
behavior. While shame is highly correlated with addiction, violence,
aggression, depression, eating disorders, and bullying, guilt is
negatively correlated with these outcomes. Empathy and guilt work
together to create a force that is adaptive and powerful. This is why
when we apologize for something we've done, make amends, or change a
behavior that doesn't align with our values, guilt---not shame---is most
often the driving force. We feel guilty when we hold up something we've
done or failed to do against our values and find they don't match up.
It's a psychologically uncomfortable feeling, but one that's helpful.
The discomfort of cognitive dissonance is what drives meaningful change.
Shame, however, corrodes the very part of us that believes we can change
and do better.

Humiliation

All the cruel and brutal things, even genocide, start with the
humiliation of one individual. --- KOFI ANNAN, Ghanaian diplomat and
Nobel Peace Prize recipient

Based on the research, we can define humiliation as the intensely
painful feeling that we've been unjustly degraded, ridiculed, or put
down and that our identity has been demeaned or devalued. Humiliation is
most similar to shame in that we feel fundamentally flawed. But the most
relevant distinction is that humiliation arises because someone else
pointed out our flaws, and we don't feel we deserved it. The entire key
to understanding humiliation is that when it happens to us, it feels
unjust. Linda Hartling is the director of a global transdisciplinary
group called Human Dignity and Humiliation Studies (they prefer to call
themselves nurturers of dignity). Hartling and her colleagues describe
humiliation as "unjustified mistreatment that violates one's dignity and
diminishes one's sense of worth as a human being." Until recently, I
held the belief that humiliation, though detrimental, was a less
dangerous emotional experience than shame. The reasoning behind that
thinking (and what emerged from our data) was that we hide our shame
because we think we deserve to feel that way. In other words, we buy
into the messaging that we're not enough. In contrast, when we feel
humiliated, we think that we didn't deserve whatever happened to make us
feel that way. In our interviews, participants seemed not to buy into
the messaging that they were flawed as much as they did with shame. A
collection of studies changed my mind. In 2003, Susan Harter and
colleagues issued a report that examined the media profiles of ten
prominent school shooters between 1996 and 1999. Harter and her
colleagues reported that "in every case, the shooters described how they
had been ridiculed, taunted, teased, harassed or bullied by peers
(because of

their inadequate appearance, social or athletic behavior), spurned by
someone in whom they were romantically interested, or put down, in front
of other students, by a teacher or school administrator, all events that
led to profound humiliation." That report prompted a series of studies
by Jeff Elison and Susan Harter that found links for peer rejection,
humiliation, depression, and anger with both suicidal and homicidal
ideation. Perhaps more important, their studies suggest that bullying
alone does not lead to aggression. Instead, individuals who are bullied
become violent specifically when feelings of humiliation accompany the
bullying. This finding has tremendous implications for how we think
about bullying and how we help bullying survivors heal. And, given that
humiliation is often an attack against a social identity (ethnicity,
race, sexual orientation), we must investigate what we are doing in
organizational, community, and school cultures to foster safety and what
we are doing consciously or unconsciously that gives people permission
to belittle others. And finally, the third article we discovered was by
Linda Hartling, who ties together research from several areas to propose
a model explaining how humiliation can lead to violence. Hartling
suggests that humiliation can trigger a series of reactions, including
social pain, decreased self-awareness, increased self-defeating
behavior, and decreased self-regulation, that ultimately lead to
violence. Hartling and colleagues state that "humiliation is not only
the most underappreciated force in international relations, it may be
the missing link in the search for root causes of political instability
and violent conflict... perhaps the most toxic social dynamic of our
age." This connection between humiliation and aggression/violence
explains much of what we're seeing today. Amplified by the reach of
social media,

dehumanizing and humiliating others are becoming increasingly
normalized, along with violence. Now, rather than humiliating someone in
front of a small group of people, we have the power to eviscerate
someone in front of a global audience of strangers. I know we all have
deeply passionate political and cultural beliefs, but shame and
humiliation will never be effective social justice tools. They are tools
of oppression. I remember reading this quote from Elie Wiesel years ago
and it's become a practice for me---even when I'm enraged or afraid:
"Never allow anyone to be humiliated in your presence."

Embarrassment Embarrassment is a fleeting feeling of self-conscious
discomfort in response to a minor incident that was witnessed by others.
When looking back on embarrassing incidents, we are usually able to see
them as kind of funny and something that could have happened to anyone.
Researcher Rowland Miller writes, "Embarrassment does not persist for
long periods of time, lasting only a few minutes instead of hours or
days---a point nicely illustrated by the unique physiological marker of
embarrassment, the blush." When we feel embarrassed, we can feel
exposed, flustered, and clumsy, but we tend to respond to our
embarrassment in nonthreatening ways like using humor, saying we're
sorry, or sometimes just moving on and not even acknowledging it. Those
of us who are more sensitive about social norms and being accepted are
more susceptible to embarrassment. Some research suggests that there are
three types of events that can trigger embarrassment:

1. Committing a faux pas or social mistake, 2. Being the center of
attention, and 3. Being in a sticky social situation. And, just in case
you're wondering, the secondhand embarrassment feeling is real. We
absolutely can feel vicarious embarrassment when we see others in
embarrassing situations, even complete strangers. If we know the person
in the embarrassing situation, it's even worse. I'll never forget the
first time I felt that sensation. I was watching I Love Lucy reruns
after school, and I'm not sure what crazy thing she was doing, but I
thought I was going to die. I remember jumping up from the sofa and
turning off the TV during the episode where Lucy and Ethel get jobs
working on a conveyor belt at a chocolate factory. They couldn't keep up
with the speed of the belt, so they started shoving chocolates in their
mouths and down their shirts. I couldn't take it. I went back to watch
it when I was writing this---it still gets me. Maybe that's what makes
scenes like this one iconic---we don't just watch them, we feel them.
Last, we know from the research that "Embarrassment takes years to
develop, and its emergence coincides with the self-conscious ability to
understand what others may be thinking of us." If you've raised tweens
or teens, or even been in their vicinity, you know that they often spend
more time being embarrassed than not. It's constant cringe when we first
start seeing ourselves through others' eyes, and it stays that way until
we get to midlife and fall apart before we realize it takes just too
much energy to try to manage perception. OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#9 Places We Go When We Search for Connection Belonging, Fitting In,
Connection, Disconnection, Insecurity, Invisibility, Loneliness

Belonging and Fitting In We have to belong to ourselves as much as we
need to belong to others. Any belonging that asks us to betray ourselves
is not true belonging. Any discussion of belonging has to start with
acknowledging that love and belonging are irreducible needs for all
people. In the absence of love and belonging, there is always suffering.
Expanding on Maslow's hierarchy of needs, recent research shows that
finding a sense of belonging in close social relationships and with our
community is essential to well-being. What makes belonging essential for
us is the fact that we are a social species. We can't survive without
one another.

Although I started my career studying connection, shame, and
vulnerability, the topic of belonging always emerged in the data. You
can't study the emotions and experiences that define what it means to be
human without constantly bumping into belonging---it's just too primal.
In 2017, I published Braving the Wilderness: The Quest for True
Belonging and the Courage to Stand Alone. It's a book about what it
means to belong

in this increasingly divisive and disconnected world. As a grounded
theory researcher, my job is to understand what we call "the main
concern" of study participants. For Braving the Wilderness, I approached
the research with these broad questions: When it comes to belonging,
what are people trying to achieve or feel? What are they concerned
about?

Below is how I explained the findings that emerged in Braving the
Wilderness: We want to be a part of something---to experience real
connection with others---but not at the cost of their authenticity,
freedom, or power. Participants further reported feeling surrounded by
"us versus them" cultures that create feelings of spiritual
disconnection. When I dug deeper into what they meant by "spiritually
disconnected," the research participants described a diminishing sense
of shared humanity. Over and over, participants talked about their
concern that the only thing that binds us together now is shared fear
and disdain, not common humanity, shared trust, respect, or love.
Reluctant to choose between being loyal to a group and being loyal to
themselves, but lacking that deeper spiritual connection to shared
humanity, they were far more aware of the pressure to "fit in" and
conform. What was counterintuitive for me, as I identified the main
concerns, is that a deeper sense of belonging and "connection to a
larger humanity gives people more freedom to express their individuality
without fear of jeopardizing belonging." I can be myself when I know
that I'm with people who recognize the inextricable, unnamable,
spiritual connection that is shared humanity, because belonging is not
in jeopardy. True belonging doesn't require us to change who we are; it
requires us to be who we are.

Our yearning for belonging is so hardwired that we often try to acquire
it by any means possible, including trying to fit in and hustling for
approval and acceptance. Not only are these efforts hollow substitutes
for belonging, but they are the greatest barriers to belonging. When we
work to fit in and be accepted, our "belonging" is tenuous. If we do or
say something that's true to who we are but outside the expectations or
rules of the group, we risk everything. If people don't really know who
we are and what we believe or think, there's no true belonging.

Because we can feel belonging only if we have the courage to share our
most authentic selves with people, our sense of belonging can never be
greater than our level of self-acceptance. We can never truly belong if
we are betraying ourselves, our ideals, or our values in the process.
That is why it's a mistake to think that belonging is passive and simply
about joining or "going along" with others. It's not. Belonging is a
practice that requires us to be vulnerable, get uncomfortable, and learn
how to be present with people without sacrificing who we are. When we
sacrifice who we are, we not only feel separate from others, but we even
feel disconnected from ourselves. Many years ago, I asked a large group
of eighth graders to break into small teams and come up with the
differences between "fitting in" and "belonging." I've shared these
findings in a couple of my books, and they still take my breath away.
For this book, I asked Gavin to draw the kids holding their poster-size
Post-its, the way I remembered it. It's one thing for me to bullet out
their responses; it's something altogether different to see them
standing there holding these signs on the stage of an empty auditorium.
(See illustration on the next page.) Clearly, they understand the
differences in their bones. For many tweens and teens, belonging or not
belonging feels like life or death.

As a child I never felt like I belonged in my family. I felt different
as an introvert in a family where introversion was mistaken for weakness
and extroversion for confidence. I also felt weird and alone in my small
world. Because nothing was normalized, and there were no conversations
or TikToks about the unsaid stuff---how emotions can be overwhelming,
how bodies work, how relationships can suck, how parents just don't
understand, how normal people are lonely---I thought something was wrong
with me. My feelings of not belonging are still something that I have to
work on--- they can still show up in weird ways when I'm not expecting
it. What's so powerful (and hard) is that the more my siblings and I
talk about and share our experiences, the more I think everyone in my
family felt the same way. A little on the outside of the myth of what we
were supposed to be. I have a lot of empathy and compassion for my
parents. They came from hardscrabble, working-class families where
addiction and mental health issues were rarely addressed and there
wasn't enough money to cover them up with shiny things. I can only
imagine the pictures of suburban perfection that drove their pain as
first generation "professionals." And their fury. As a parent, my goal
is to help my children believe in and belong to themselves, and to know
that, no matter what, they always belong at home. That we see them and
love them for who they are. The pressure to fit in is real and
unrelenting, but if we can create that sense of inextricable connection,
it's a fierce protector as they navigate belonging. Be here. Be you.
Belong.

Belonging Uncertainty In research, belonging uncertainty is the term
sometimes used to describe questioning one's social belongingness.
Belonging uncertainty can be high among members of marginalized groups,
and this can have real consequences. For example, among underrepresented
students at mainstream academic organizations, belonging uncertainty can
have a negative impact on motivation and achievement. As we think about
belonging uncertainty, it's important to remember that belonging is not
about the number of friends one has in a space. According to researchers
Gregory Walton and Shannon T. Brady, "It is a more general inference,
drawn from cues, events, experiences, and relationships, about the
quality of fit or potential fit between oneself and a setting. It is
experienced as a feeling of being accepted, included, respected in, and
contributing to a setting, or anticipating the likelihood of developing
this feeling." Paola Sánchez Valdez is our organization's first
postgraduate social work fellow. She joined us right after completing
her master's degree in social work from Columbia University. She's on
the research team for this book and is helping us develop a strategy to
bring Dare to Lead training to first generation college students at the
University of Texas at Austin. She has shared a lot with me and others
about her experiences of belonging uncertainty, and I asked her if she
would write something for the book. This is her story:

I was ten years old when my mother confirmed what I knew all along. We
were watching the 2006 immigration reform protests unfold on the news
when she turned to me and said, "You see those people? They're fighting
for us...for our dreams." That day I learned I was undocumented, and I
wanted nothing more than to be marching with those people and to feel
like I finally belonged somewhere. I always knew I was different. My
Ecuadorian features set me apart from the predominately white, rural
area which my family had settled in. But even then, I knew my feelings
of not belonging stemmed from a more precarious place. It was a place I
didn't know how to name or how to describe. I just knew that when my
parents kissed me goodbye, it always felt like it could be

the last time. I could be separated from them at any moment and be
forced to go to a country I didn't know. Once I got to high school, my
feelings of not belonging became even more inescapable. I realized that
I didn't have the same opportunities as my friends and peers, such as
getting a driver's license, applying to college, or even receiving
financial aid. After I lived through fifteen years of being
undocumented, the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program
allowed me to come out of the shadows and pursue my dreams. I was able
to apply to the University of Virginia, and I was accepted. Shortly
after, I became a U.S. permanent resident---a privilege I do not take
lightly, as it's not afforded to many of my family members, friends, and
community members. Even though I was no longer undocumented, the trauma
that came from living most of my life in limbo followed me into college.
I longed to share my story and to build meaningful connections with
others, but my fear of not belonging, coupled with the lack of diversity
at my university, prevented me from doing so. After several months of
contemplating dropping out, I told my story to one of my friends who
confided in me that her family was also undocumented. It was the first
time I had shared my experiences and identity with anyone other than my
own family. That night we recounted moments of injustice and bigotry we
endured within our conservative towns and drew similarities of feeling
that way at our university. We identified a lack of awareness and
support for

undocumented students and eventually invited others into the
conversation. Within a couple of weeks, we met several undocumented
students and together created a student advocacy organization to help
uplift their voices and concerns at UVA. Years later, this organization
has spearheaded actions that have cultivated political and cultural
systemic change, not only on campus but also in the surrounding
communities and the state of Virginia as a whole. In many Latin American
countries, we have a saying that goes "ni de aquí, ni de allá," meaning
"not from here, not from there." I still resonate with this saying even
though I've been documented for nearly eight years. I don't know if I'll
ever feel like I belong to this country or another, but what I do know
is that I belong to myself. The accepting, loving space my friend and I
provided each other that night sparked a fire inside me to connect with
and advocate alongside others facing structural inequities. It's been
the honor of my life to help create brave spaces of belonging for those
ready to share their stories. Together we fight to create change within
ourselves and our communities because, as my favorite quote says,
"Quisieron enterrarnos, pero no sabían que éramos semillas"..."They
wanted to bury us, but they didn't know we were seeds."

Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Belonging I don't believe your
antiracist work is complete or valid or useful if you haven't engaged
with Black humanity. --- TARANA BURKE, You Are Your Best Thing

In our Dare to Lead work, we talk a lot about belonging as a critical
component of diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) work. We actually
call it DEIB (to include belonging) in our work, and our organization's
position statement is called our Belonging Statement. Why? Because
people should feel a strong sense of belonging in an organization and
shape the culture through representation, co-creation, influence, and
that inextricable, unnamable, spiritual connection that is shared
humanity. Anything less is not enough. Aiko Bethea is a Dare to Lead
facilitator and expert in DEIB work. She's also a tremendous
thought-partner and teacher when it comes to bringing belonging to
organizational cultures. If you're interested in the intersection of
belonging, leadership, and culture, I recommend listening to the
two-part Dare to Lead podcast that we did together. It's a great
resource for a team to listen to then discuss.

Connection and Disconnection One of the interesting things about
Grounded Theory research is that, unlike the majority of other research
methodologies, we don't start with a review of the existing literature.
Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss developed Grounded Theory in 1967, and,
through a very strange turn of events, Barney served as the
methodologist on my dissertation committee. I remember him telling me,
"How do you know what literature to review before you start? You don't
get to decide what this research is about---your participants do. You'll
follow them where they go---not the other way around. This is based on
their lived experiences, not the researcher's academic pet interests.
Trust and follow what emerges from the data."

At first, I thought, "Awesome. Lit reviews are so time-consuming." Well,
it turns out that once your theory or hypothesis emerges from the data,
you're required to do an entire literature analysis, not just a review,
to understand how your theory fits with or pushes against what other
researchers have found. And because you didn't start by following
existing lines of inquiry, grounded theories often support, refute, and
challenge in equal measure. Insert anxious emoji face. After my first
study on shame and connection, I tiptoed into the literature to see
where existing work aligned with what I had found and where it didn't.
Early in that process, I found Relational-Cultural Theory (RCT) and the
group of researchers and clinicians behind it from the Stone Center at
Wellesley. It felt like home. Here was a theory that was also built from
lived experience and, as Maureen Walker described it, "depicted culture
as more than the scenic backdrop for the unfolding of development;
rather, culture is viewed as an active agent in relational processes
that shape human possibility." The RCT theorist Judith Jordan writes,
"The need for connection in which growth is a priority is the core
motivation in people's lives. In growthfostering relationships, people
are able to bring themselves most fully and authentically into
connection." From an evolution perspective connection was about
survival, today it's what gives purpose and meaning to our lives.
Research shows that "people who have strong connections with others are
happier, healthier, and better able to cope with the stresses of
everyday life." Across my research, I define connection as the energy
that exists between people when they feel seen, heard, and valued; when
they can give and receive without judgment; and when they derive
sustenance and strength from the relationship.

Connection is in our neurobiology. This is why our experiences of
disconnection are so painful and why chronic disconnection leads to
social isolation, loneliness, and feelings of powerlessness. Here's how
Judith Jordan explains disconnection:

RCT sees disconnections as normative and inevitable in relationships;
they occur when one person misunderstands, invalidates, excludes,
humiliates, or injures the other person in some way. Acutedisconnections
occur frequently in all relationships. If they can be addressed and
reworked, they are not problematic; in fact, they become places of
enormous growth. When an injured person, particularly one who has less
power, can represent \[their\] experience of disconnection or pain to
the more powerful person and be responded to, with interest or concern,
the less powerful, hurt person has a sense of "mattering," of having an
effect on the other. This strengthens connection as well as a sense of
relational competence. Jordan goes to explain that when disconnection is
not addressed, as frequently occurs in unequal power structures, chronic
disconnection and disempowerment arise, and the person "often loses
touch with \[their\] own feelings and inner experience." This is such a
powerful example of how disconnection from another person can create
disconnection within ourselves. One of the most important learnings to
come out of the research for this book is how to recognize, name, and
talk about my feelings of disconnection. I think we underestimate how
much disconnection hurts. And it hurts more than our feelings. It can
cause physical pain. Disconnection is often equated with social
rejection, social exclusion, and/or social isolation, and these feelings
of disconnection actually share the same neural pathways with feelings
of physical pain. Current

neuroscience research shows that the pain and feelings of disconnection
are often as real as physical pain. And just as healing physical pain
requires describing it, talking about it, and sometimes getting
professional help, we need to do the same thing with emotional pain. A
couple of serious watch-outs when it comes to disconnection. The first
comes from researcher Trisha Raque-Bogdan. She writes, "To avoid the
pain and vulnerability that may result when their efforts to achieve
connection are unsuccessful, individuals may enact their own
disconnection strategies, such as hiding parts of themselves or
discounting their need for others. They may learn that it is safer to
keep their feelings and thoughts to themselves, rather than sharing them
in their relationships." This means that rather than making a bid for
connection and having the bid ignored or rejected, we hide out or
pretend we don't need anyone. I think most of us have done this---I know
I have. And it's a recipe for loneliness and, for me, blame. I can
withhold a bid for connection, then blame someone for not responding.
It's a lot of scrambling to avoid being hurt. And it doesn't even work.
The second watch-out is about perfectionism. There's actually a
"perfectionism social disconnection model," and this research shows that
people who are high on the perfectionistic traits scale behave in ways
that cause perceived and actual exclusion/rejection by others. In other
words, my perfectionism drives me to show up in ways that lead people to
push me away. This doesn't surprise me, but it's still painful to think
about, because ultimately our perfectionism is about trying to avoid
being excluded or rejected. Even though I've studied some of these
topics for years, the process of writing this book led me to make
connections and see relationships that have escaped me, such as the
symmetry of these findings:

Authenticity is a requirement for belonging, and fitting in is a threat.
Authenticity is a requirement for connection, and perfectionism (a type
of fitting in) is a threat.

Insecurity We use the term insecure a lot. I'm feeling really insecure.
They're acting so insecure. He's super insecure. Do you think she just
feels insecure? We normally use it to refer to self-doubt or a lack of
confidence, but there's way more to it. There are three types of
insecurity: 1. Domain-specific insecurity occurs when we are insecure
about a specific domain or resource in life, for example, food
insecurity, financial insecurity, or a lack of physical safety.
Combating domain-specific insecurity is about access and resources.
Here's an example of how the term food insecurity is used in a report by
Feeding America: "In early 2020, the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) began
to spread across the United States, and one of the results was an
economic recession that ended years of declining rates of food

insecurity---the lack of access to sufficient food because of limited
financial resources." 2. Relationship or interpersonal insecurity occurs
when we don't feel we have a supportive and trusting relationship. It
can happen either in a specific relationship or as an overarching
feeling about all of our relationships. It makes us feel uncertain about
being loved, trusted, protected, and valued. This kind of insecurity
varies based on the relationship partner. I feel really insecure about
my relationship with Deepa. Sometimes she seems interested in me, and
other times I feel like I'm bugging her. 3. General or personal
insecurity occurs when we are overly critical of our weaknesses. This
may include being overly critical of our body image or our performance
at work. I feel really insecure when I have to present to my managers
and the leadership team. I'm a terrible speaker. According to
researchers Alice Huang and Howard Berenbaum, the opposite of personal
insecurity is self-security, which they define as "the open and
nonjudgmental acceptance of one's own weaknesses." What's really
interesting about their research findings is that we can have high
self-esteem but still be insecure if we're overly critical of our
imperfections. Because our self-esteem is an assessment of who we are
and what we've accomplished compared to our values and our goals, even
with high self-esteem we can still feel insecure if we're self-critical.
That is powerful. In initial studies, Huang and Berenbaum found that
self-security is positively correlated with self-compassion and
negatively correlated with

shame-proneness, neuroticism, fear of negative evaluation,
selfaggrandizement, and relationship conflict. They also found that
people who are more secure are more willing to be vulnerable with
others. Their findings suggest that if we are comfortable with our own
weaknesses (in other words, if we are self-secure), we are more
successful at being emotionally close to others and more likely to have
healthy relationships. What strikes me here is how feelings of both
personal and interpersonal insecurity might cause us to behave in ways
that push others away or to pull away from others, for fear of being
rejected. It's similar to what we learned about the relationship between
perfectionism and disconnection. Without awareness, our fear of being
hurt can push us to show up in ways that increase the certainty that
we'll be hurt.

Invisibility Given that we are all here to be seen, known, and loved,
invisibility is one of the most painful human experiences. I define
invisibility as a function of disconnection and dehumanization, where an
individual or group's humanity and relevance are unacknowledged,
ignored, and/or diminished in value or importance. Researchers Rebecca
Neel and Bethany Lassetter discuss findings across multiple fields,
including psychology and sociology, that addresses invisibility in terms
of stigma and stereotypes. They offer several examples, such as not
getting proper credit for spoken or written material, having limited or
negative cultural representations of the group you belong to,
experiencing outright discrimination, or being viewed as a symbol of
your overall group without being recognized as an individual.

Just as there are different types of insecurity, there are different
types of invisibility. There's interpersonal invisibility (between
people), group invisibility, and representational invisibility. Neel and
Lassetter explain, "When a group is invisible, instead of being actively
discriminated against and targeted with negative prejudices...members of
that group are ignored and overlooked. Invisibility may manifest as
being passed over for promotions and recognition; not being seen as a
viable friend, romantic partner, or teammate; or being passively
excluded from social situations." It's important to understand that
invisibility is its own form of stigmatization. Many individuals who are
members of marginalized groups find themselves caught in an
ever-tightening vise of two types of dehumanization---stereotyping and
invisibility.

Loneliness I researched loneliness for over a year when I was writing
Braving the Wilderness. I'm going to recap what I learned with you here,
and share some new data. Even before the COVID pandemic, government and
public health officials were calling loneliness a significant health
threat. John Cacioppo founded the field of social neuroscience, and he
fundamentally changed the way researchers and clinicians understand
loneliness. He dedicated his career to scientific inquiry and to helping
us understand what it means to be human. He died in 2018, and though I
didn't know him, his work has forever shaped my understanding of
loneliness. The information below is adapted from Braving the
Wilderness.

Cacioppo and his colleague William Patrick defined loneliness as
"perceived social isolation." We experience loneliness when we feel
disconnected. Maybe we've been pushed to the outside of a group that we
value, or maybe we're lacking a sense of true belonging. At the heart of
loneliness is the absence of meaningful social interaction---an intimate
relationship, friendships, family gatherings, or even community or work
group connections.

It's important to note that loneliness and being alone are very
different things. Being alone or inhabiting solitude can be a powerful
and healing thing. As an introvert, I deeply value alone time, and I
often feel the loneliest when I'm with other people. While there remains
deep alignment between what I've found in my research and what Cacioppo
has found, it wasn't until I processed his work that I fully understood
the important role loneliness plays in our lives. He explains that as
members of a social species, we don't derive strength from our rugged
individualism, but rather from our collective ability to plan,
communicate, and work together. Our neural, hormonal, and genetic makeup
support interdependence over independence. He explains, "To grow into an
adulthood for a social species, including humans, is not to become
autonomous and solitary, it's to become the one on whom others can
depend. Whether we know it or not, our brain and biology have been
shaped to favor this outcome." Of course we're a social species. That's
why connection matters. It's why shame is so painful and debilitating.
It's why we're wired for belonging. Cacioppo explains how the biological
machinery of our brains warns us when our ability to thrive and prosper
is threatened. Hunger is a warning that our blood sugar is low and we
need to eat. Thirst warns us that we need to drink to avoid dehydration.
Pain alerts us to potential tissue damage. And loneliness tells us that
we need social connection---something as critical to our well-being as
food and water. He explains, "Denying you feel lonely makes no more
sense than denying you feel hungry." Yet we do deny our loneliness. As
someone who studies shame, I find myself back in territory that I know
well. We feel shame around being lonely---as if feeling lonely means
there's something wrong with us. We feel shame even when our loneliness
is caused by grief, loss, or heartbreak.

Cacioppo believes much of the stigma around loneliness comes from how we
have defined it and talked about it for years. We used to define
loneliness as a "gnawing, chronic disease without redeeming features."
It was equated with shyness, depression, being a loner or antisocial, or
possessing bad social skills. He gives a great example of this by noting
how we often use the term "loner" to describe a criminal or bad guy.
Cacioppo explains that loneliness is not just a sad condition---it's a
dangerous one. The brains of social species have evolved to respond to
the feeling of being pushed to the social perimeter---being on the
outside---by going into self-preservation mode. When we feel isolated,
disconnected, and lonely, we try to protect ourselves. In that mode, we
want to connect, but our brain is attempting to override connection with
self-protection. That means less empathy, more defensiveness, more
numbing, and less sleeping. Unchecked loneliness fuels continued
loneliness by keeping us afraid to reach out. To combat loneliness, we
must first learn how to identify it and to have the courage to see that
experience as a warning sign. Our response to that warning sign should
be to find connection. That doesn't necessarily mean joining a bunch of
groups or checking in with dozens of friends. Numerous studies confirm
that it's not the quantity of friends but the quality of a few
relationships that actually matters. If you're anything like me, and you
find yourself questioning the idea that starvation and loneliness are
equally life-threatening, let me share the study that really brought all
of this together for me. In a meta-analysis of studies on loneliness,
researchers Julianne Holt-Lunstad, Timothy B. Smith, and J. Bradley
Layton found the following: Living with air pollution increases your
odds of dying early by 5 percent. Living with obesity, 20 percent.
Excessive drinking, 30 percent. And living with loneliness? It increases
our odds of dying early by 45 percent.

In early 2020, one of the first guests on Unlocking Us was Surgeon
General Dr. Vivek Murthy. We talked about his new book, Together: The
Healing Power of Human Connection in a Sometimes Lonely World. In a 2017
Harvard Business Review article, Dr. Murthy writes, "During my years
caring for patients, the most common pathology I saw was not heart
disease or diabetes; it was loneliness. The elderly man who came to our
hospital every few weeks seeking relief from chronic pain was also
looking for human connection: He was lonely. The middle-aged woman
battling advanced HIV who had no one to call to inform that she was
sick: She was lonely too. I found that loneliness was often in the
background of clinical illness, contributing to disease and making it
harder for patients to cope and heal." Dr. Murthy confirms the
connection between loneliness and our physical health, explaining that
loneliness is associated with a greater risk of cardiovascular disease,
dementia, depression, and anxiety. And at work, he states that
loneliness "reduces task performance, limits creativity, and impairs
other aspects of executive function such as reasoning and decision
making." OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#10 Places We Go When the Heart Is Open Love, Lovelessness, Heartbreak,
Trust, Self-Trust, Betrayal, Defensiveness, Flooding, Hurt

Love Everywhere we learn that love is important, and yet we are
bombarded by its failure. In the realm of the political, among the
religious, in our families, and in our romantic lives, we see little
indication that love informs decisions, strengthens our understanding of
community, or keeps us together. This bleak picture in no way alters the
nature of our longing. We still hope that love will prevail. We still
believe in love's promise. --- bell hooks, All About Love

Distinguished emotions researcher Barbara Fredrickson describes the
umbrella term love as including "the preoccupying and strong desire for
further connection, the powerful bonds people hold with a select few and

the intimacy that grows between them, the commitments to loyalty and
faithfulness." In Fredrickson's view, love permeates everyday
interactions with others (ranging from strangers and acquaintances to
friends and spouses), forming the emotional context from which to
strengthen relationships. Interestingly, there is debate among
researchers about whether love is an emotion. However, among everyone
else, love is clearly thought of as an emotion. In a study conducted by
Shaver and colleagues, undergraduates were asked to rate 213 emotion
words in terms of whether they would call the word an emotion: (1 = "I
definitely would not call this an emotion" to 4 "I definitely would call
this an emotion"). The word "love" received the highest average rating
(3.94) of all the words on the list, edging out the word "hate" (3.90).
As someone who is committed to research that reflects our lived
experiences, I find that Shaver's study and Fredrickson's description
both align with what my team heard: Love is an emotion that we're
capable of feeling in many different contexts---from intimate partner
relationships and family bonds to friends and pets.

It's always a risk to define a term like "love." I personally think it
might be best left to the poets, artists, and yacht rock songwriters.
However, a definition did emerge from our research, and it's withstood
the test of new data: We cultivate love when we allow our most
vulnerable and powerful selves to be deeply seen and known, and when we
honor the spiritual connection that grows from that offering with trust,
respect, kindness, and affection. Love is not something we give or get;
it is something that we nurture and grow, a connection that can be
cultivated between two people only when it exists within each one of
them---we can love others only as much as we love ourselves. Shame,
blame, disrespect, betrayal, and the withholding of affection damage the
roots from which love grows. Love can survive these injuries only if
they're acknowledged, healed, and rare. I'll confess that I don't think
we'll ever be able to fully unravel the mysteries of love, or, to be
honest, many of the other emotions we experience. At least I hope not. I
think attempting to better understand ourselves and each other is
essential. But so is mystery.

Lovelessness

The quote that opens this section on love is from bell hooks's book All
About Love. hooks is a professor, social critic, and writer whose work
has shaped my life. In fact, I often say that her work is responsible
for 90 percent of the stretch marks on my mind. As a first-time
university teacher, I carried her book Teaching to Transgress with me at
all times, and I slept with it next to me on my nightstand. She teaches
that the injustice and systemic oppression that we see in the world
today stem from a deep, collective lovelessness and calls for an ethic
of love. It sounds overly simplistic, but when you read her work you
understand that a love ethic is a rigorous calling. hooks writes,
Refusal to stand up for what you believe in weakens individual morality
and ethics as well as those of the culture. No wonder then that we are a
nation of people, the majority of whom, across race, class, and gender,
claim to be religious, claim to believe in the divine power of love, and
yet collectively remain unable to embrace a love ethic and allow it to
guide behavior, especially if doing so would mean supporting radical
change. Fear of radical changes leads many citizens of our nation to
betray their minds and hearts. I don't want to betray my mind or heart.
I want to live by a love ethic. We need more love between us, but also
among us. Not rainbow and unicorn love, or commercialized love. We need
more real love. Gritty, dangerous, wild-eyed, justice-seeking love.

Heartbreak

I researched heartbreak when I was writing Rising Strong. I learned that
heartbreak is more than just a painful type of disappointment or
failure. It hurts in a different way because heartbreak is always
connected to love and belonging. Joe Reynolds, a retired Episcopal
priest, has taught me the most about heartbreak. I shared his essay in
Rising Strong, but I want to share it here again. I truly don't think we
can read it enough. Heartbreak is an altogether different thing.
Disappointment doesn't grow into heartbreak, nor does failure.
Heartbreak comes from the loss of love or the perceived loss of love. My
heart can be broken only by someone (or something, like my dog, though a
part of me really believes my dog is a person) to whom I have given my
heart. There may be expectations, both met and unmet, in a relationship
that ends in heartbreak, but disappointment is not the cause of the
heartbreak. There may be failures within the relationship---indeed,
there certainly will be, for we are imperfect vessels to hold the love
of another person---but the failures didn't cause the heartbreak.
Heartbreak is what happens when love is lost. Heartbreak can come from
being rejected by the one you love. The pain is more intense when you
thought the other person loved you, but the expectation of returned love
isn't necessary for heartbreak. Unrequited love can be heartbreaking.
The death of a loved one is heartbreaking. I didn't expect them to live
forever, and death is nobody's fault regardless of smoking, bad diets,
no exercise, or whatever. But my heart is broken anyway. A related
heartbreak is the death of something unique, maybe even essential, in
someone I love. I didn't want my children to stay

children all their lives, but at times the loss of innocence was
heartbreaking."

The loss of love doesn't have to be permanent to be heartbreaking.
Moving away from a loved one can break your heart. Change in another
person I love may be a good thing. It may be significant personal
growth, and I may be happy about it and proud of it. It can also change
our relationship and break my heart.

The list goes on. There is a plethora of ways in which a heart can be
broken...The common denominator is the loss of love or the perceived
loss of love. To love with any level of intensity and honesty is to
become vulnerable. I used to tell couples getting married that the only
thing I could tell them with certainty was that they would hurt each
other. To love is to know the loss of love. Heartbreak is unavoidable
unless we choose not to love at all. A lot of people do just that. Every
time we love, we risk heartbreak. Despite how lonely heartbreak feels,
it's universal. I remember sitting next to a woman in an airport
terminal waiting for our plane to board, and she started weeping. She
was probably in her early sixties, and she was by herself. When I asked
her if she was okay and if I could get her anything, she didn't reply,
she just shook her head and looked away. I returned to reading my book
until, about twenty minutes later, the woman said, "We had to put our
dog down. My heart is broken." She wasn't looking at me when she said
it, she was looking straight ahead. I said, "I'm so sorry," and I
squeezed her forearm. We ended up talking until we boarded, and when we
deplaned in Houston, she gave me a hug. That happened about fifteen
years ago. I had never had a pet of my own at that point in my life, but
having experienced heartbreak in several other contexts, I could connect
with the sense of loss and longing that she was feeling. I didn't
question her grief, but I remember thinking to myself, Man, I'm glad I
don't have a dog. I don't think a dog would be worth heartbreak.

Fast-forward to two years ago, when my first dog, Daisy---a rescue
bichon ---got untreatable cancer after ten healthy and wonderful years
with us. The drive home from the vet's office without her was
unbearable. That night allfour of us were sobbing in a big heap on the
couch. I looked at my kids, who were inconsolable, and said, "We loved
Daisy so much. This is heartbreak." Then I looked over at Lucy, our
second bichon, who was also missing Daisy, and thought, God, this hurts.
And it's totally worth it. The brokenhearted are the bravest among
us---they dared to love.

Trust In The Thin Book of Trust: An Essential Primer for Building Trust
at Work, Charles Feltman defines trust as "choosing to risk making
something you value vulnerable to another person's actions." He defines
distrust as a general assessment that "what is important to me is not
safe with this person in this situation (or any situation)." These
definitions perfectly capture what emerged from our data on trust and
mistrust. Trust is more of a cognitive assessment than an emotion. But,
as we all know, conversations about trust can bring up a lot of
emotions, especially hurt and defensiveness. It's difficult to talk
about trust in our personal or professional relationships, because it's
such a big concept. If someone says "I don't trust you," it feels like a
general assault on our character. We've spent the past ten years trying
to figure out exactly what constitutes trust. What are the specific
behaviors we're talking about when we talk about trust? Seven elements
of trust emerged from our data, and we use the acronym BRAVING:
Boundaries: You respect my boundaries, and when you're not clear about
what's okay and not okay, you ask. You're willing to say no.
Reliability: You do what you say you'll do. At work, this means staying
aware of your competencies and limitations so you don't overpromise and
are able to deliver on commitments and balance competing priorities.
Accountability: You own your mistakes, apologize, and make amends.

Vault: You don't share information or experiences that are not yours to
share. I need to know that my confidences are kept, and that you're not
sharing with me any information about other people that should be
confidential. Integrity: You choose courage over comfort. You choose
what is right over what is fun, fast, or easy. And you choose to
practice your values rather than simply professing them. Nonjudgment: I
can ask for what I need, and you can ask for what you need. We can talk
about how we feel without judgment. We can ask each other for help
without judgment. Generosity: You extend the most generous
interpretation possible to the intentions, words, and actions of others.
When we bring Dare to Lead training into organizations, this is one of
the most adopted tools. It gives all of us a framework to get specific
about what's working in our trust building and what needs our attention.
I can say to someone, We're working hard on developing trust in our
relationship in these areas, and I feel we need to work more on these
areas. What's your experience? We most often think about trust between
people and groups, but we often forget about the importance of
self-trust. Self-trust is normally the first casualty of failure or
mistakes. We stop trusting ourselves when we hurt others, get hurt, feel
shame, or question our worth. I recently celebrated twenty-five years of
sobriety, and when I was reflecting on what that's meant in my life, I
couldn't stop thinking about self-trust. Returning to the definition
from Feltman, I realized that my sobriety has taught me that I can trust
myself and my actions when it comes to protecting what I value. There
are still occasions when I have to slow down and get intentional so I
don't end up distrusting or betraying myself,

but I know increased self-trust has been a huge gift of sobriety. Here's
how we use the BRAVING tool to think about self-trust: B---Did I respect
my own boundaries? Was I clear about what's okay and what's not okay?
R---Was I reliable? Did I do what I said I was going to do? A---Did I
hold myself accountable? V---Did I respect the vault and share
appropriately? I---Did I act from my integrity? N---Did I ask for what I
needed? Was I nonjudgmental about needing help? G---Was I generous
toward myself?

Betrayal For there to be betrayal, there would have to have been trust
first. --- SUZANNE COLLINS, The Hunger Games

Betrayal is so painful because, at its core, it is a violation of trust.
It happens in relationships in which trust is expected and assumed, so
when

it's violated, we're often shocked, and we can struggle to believe
what's happening. It can feel as if the ground beneath us has given way.
Most betrayals happen among spouses, romantic partners, friends,
coworkers, and occasionally family members. The most common types of
betrayals include extramarital affairs or cheating on a steady dating
partner, lying, betraying confidences, and rejecting or abandoning a
partner. When betrayal is the result of physical or sexual abuse
perpetrated by a trusted partner or family member (such as is the case
in domestic violence or child abuse perpetrated by a parent), it is
referred to as betrayal trauma. When we're injured by betrayal, we can
suffer high levels of anxiety, depression, anger, sadness, jealousy,
decreased self-worth, embarrassment, humiliation, shame, and even trauma
symptoms. When I read these symptoms, the first thing I thought about
was the times I betrayed myself. As we just covered, self-trust is
important, and when we violate that, often to make someone else happy or
in a bid for acceptance, I think we can feel self-betrayal too. There
have been times in my life when I've said something that I didn't
believe, or did something I didn't want to do, in order to avoid feeling
left out. The harshest consequence of that for me was dealing with my
own betrayal. I've been thinking a lot about Naomi Osaka and Simone
Biles pulling out of competitions to protect their mental and emotional
wellbeing. It's inspiring to watch these women choose to disappoint
others and endure cheap-seat criticism over their refusal to betray
their bodies, minds, and spirits. There's another type of betrayal
called institutional betrayal. Researchers explain that this type of
betrayal occurs when "an institution causes harm \[by action or
inaction\] to an individual who trusts or depends upon that
institution." Factors that contribute to institutional betrayal include
strict membership requirements (military training, elite sports); the
existence of

prestige or power differentials (caregivers versus patients, clergy
versus parishioners); and rigid priorities, such as extreme efforts to
protect the reputation of the organization. Perhaps the most devastating
organizational betrayal is a cover-up. In Dare to Lead, I explain,
Cover-ups are perpetrated not only by the original actors, but by a
culture of complicity and shame. Sometimes individuals are complicit
because staying quiet or hiding the truth benefits them and/or doesn't
jeopardize their influence or power. Other times, people are complicit
because it's the norm---they work in a cover-up culture that uses shame
to keep people quiet. Either way, when the culture of a corporation,
nonprofit, university, government, church, sports program, school, or
family mandates that it is more important to protect the reputation of
that system and those in power than it is to protect the basic human
dignity of individuals or communities, you can be certain of the
following problems: Shame is systemic. Complicity is part of the
culture. Money and power trump ethics. Accountability is dead. Control
and fear are management tools. And there's a trail of devastation and
pain.

It's possible to heal betrayal, but it's rare because it requires
significant courage and vulnerability to hear the pain we've caused
without becoming defensive. In our research, we found that the only way
back from betrayal is accountability, amends, and action. None of these
things are possible without acknowledging the pain and possibly trauma
that we have caused someone without rationalizing or making excuses.
We're also much better as individuals and as a culture at shaming and
blaming than we are at actual accountability.

Defensiveness At its core, defensiveness is a way to protect our ego and
a fragile selfesteem. Our research team member Ellen Alley explains that
our selfesteem is considered fragile when our failures, mistakes, and
imperfections decrease our self-worth. In our work, the opposite of a
fragile self-esteem is grounded confidence. With grounded confidence, we
accept our imperfections and they don't diminish our self-worth. It
makes sense that defensiveness occurs in areas of our lives where we
have fragile selfesteem, or across several areas of our lives if the
fragility is more general. Any perceived call-out of our weakness is
experienced as an attack on our worth, so we fight hard to defend
ourselves against it. In order to try to limit our exposure to
information that differs from how we think of ourselves, we get
defensive and overjustify, make excuses, minimize, blame, discredit,
discount, refute, and reinterpret. Defensiveness blocks us from hearing
feedback and evaluating if we want to make meaningful changes in our
thinking or behavior based on input from others. In our Dare to Lead
training, we work with participants to figure out what defensiveness
looks like for them, what it feels like, and whether there are

some situations that are more likely to trigger it than others. To
increase self-awareness, we ask folks to think back to a time when they
received difficult feedback and try to remember what their bodies were
doing, what thoughts were coming up, and what emotions they were
feeling. The vast majority of people struggle to remember the exact
thoughts and feelings, which makes sense, given that many of us go into
fight-or-flight mode in these situations. However, for the most part,
people can remember their physical responses: Folding their arms over
their chest, shoving their hands into their pockets, getting tunnel
vision, feeling their heart race, looking down, and getting dry mouth
are just a few. It's worth thinking about the physical cues that show up
for you when experiencing defensiveness and devising a strategy that can
help pull you back into the present moment. When I get defensive, I
often get tunnel vision and start planning what I'm going to say instead
of listening. But I have found some ways to disarm my defensiveness. My
strategy is to subtly open my palms, even if my hands are just hanging
by my side or on my lap, and actually say, "I'm sorry. Can you say that
again? I really want to understand." It's pretty effective. If I'm
having a really hard time, I might say, "I'm sorry. I'm feeling
overwhelmed. I'm going to get a glass of water. Can we sit down in ten
minutes and start again?"

Flooding This seems like the perfect place to talk about the concept of
flooding. The body can become overwhelmed when it senses danger, and for
a lot of us, a difficult conversation, hard feedback, or an argument is
enough to send our body into overdrive. We can feel overwhelmed,
attacked, and confused.

According to the Gottman Institute, flooding is "a sensation of feeling
psychologically and physically overwhelmed during conflict, making it
virtually impossible to have a productive, problem-solving discussion."
In his book Why Marriages Succeed or Fail: And How You Can Make Yours
Last, John Gottman explains, "We each have a sort of built-in meter that
measures how much negativity accumulates during such interactions. When
the level gets too high for you, the needle starts going haywire and
flooding begins. Just how readily people become flooded is individual."
He also shares that flooding is affected by how much stress you have
going on in your life. The more pressure we're under, the more likely we
are to be easily flooded. One of the worst patterns that I brought to my
marriage from my family was "Get back in here and fight with me!"
Growing up, we didn't take breaks during fights. No one ever said, "This
is no longer productive and we should take a time-out before someone
gets their feelings hurt." Our strategy was get louder and meaner until
you win or someone else is crying. When I first married Steve, in the
middle of a heated argument he would say, "Let's stop and take a break."
I was like, "What are you talking about?" At some point, I realized that
stopping scared me. Fighting together seemed less painful than hurting
alone. Looking back, I just didn't know how to do it. I had never been
taught or seen it modeled. Gottman's work helped me understand the
mechanics behind "Okay, can we circle back in twenty minutes?" or "Okay,
how much time do you need?" Knowing that we're coming back to finish the
discussion, and when, reassures me in some way. This research also
helped me realize that it wasn't just Steve who was getting overwhelmed.
I get overwhelmed too. The difference is our strategies. He shuts down;
I lash out. Disastrous.

Now when I feel flooded, I'm as likely to say "Time-out" as he is. This
is a good thing because, according to Gottman, chronic flooding sets us
up to dread communicating. Gottman discusses this effect in the context
of marriages and partnerships, but I've seen the same thing in
organizations. I've interviewed many research participants who
experience chronic flooding with their bosses, so much so that every
time they're called into the office, they're already on the path to
overwhelm. There's only so much our bodies and nervous systems can stand
before they flip the survival switch and stop communicating and start
protecting or attacking. Looking back, I've never once regretted calling
a time-out at home or work. Not once. I've never experienced a little
time and space being a bad thing, but I have plenty of regrets the other
way around.

Hurt I'm not sure there's a braver sentence in the human catalog of
brave sentences than "My feelings are hurt." It's simple, vulnerable,
and honest. But we don't say it very often. We get pissed off, or we
hurt back, or we internalize the hurt until we believe we deserve it and
that something is wrong with us. But rarely do we say "This really hurt
my feelings." The definition of hurt from a team of researchers led by
Anita Vangelisti goes a long way in explaining why acknowledging hurt is
so difficult. They write, "Individuals who are hurt experience a
combination of sadness at having been emotionally wounded and fear of
being vulnerable to harm. When people feel hurt, they have appraised
something that someone said or did as causing them emotional pain."

We all know that it's really scary to put our heart on the line and say,
"I feel wounded and sad about what happened yesterday, and I'm afraid to
get hurt again." It's deeply vulnerable, but it's also universal. All of
us have felt this way. Often. And a lot. It's impossible to be in
relationships and avoid ever feeling hurt, just as it's impossible to
know love without knowing what it feels like to have a broken heart.

Vangelisti and team explain that hurt happens through social
interaction. In fact, hurt feelings are most often caused by people with
whom we have close relationships when we feel devalued or rejected by
the other person. Most behaviors that result in hurt feelings are not
intended to be hurtful; they typically involve actions that are
thoughtless, careless, or insensitive. However, "the more intentional an
action is perceived \[as\], the more hurtful it feels." Our hurt
feelings are typically experienced simultaneously with other emotions,
such as sadness, anger, anxiety, jealousy, or loneliness. As a result,
they don't always feel the same way, as most other emotions do. However,
research indicates that even though hurt feelings are a mix of several
emotions, they are a distinct emotional experience, not just a
combination of other negative emotions. As I was explaining this to my
teenage son, all I could come up with is the rainbow snow cone analogy:
There's grape, cherry, lime, lemon, orange, and blueberry, but you don't
really taste all of those when you eat it. It just tastes like a rainbow
snow cone. Our reactions to hurt feelings can be self-blaming, or we
might cry, lash out, or retaliate by trying to hurt the other person,
and/or seek out other relationships to find comfort. When reparation
doesn't seem possible, hurt feelings can turn into anger or sadness.

One thing that motivates me to be a little braver in how I handle my
hurt feelings is research that shows that when we respond to hurt
feelings with anger, the other person tends to match our anger with more
anger. I can tell you this has happened in my kitchen about 1,365 times.
However, when repair seems possible and we share our hurt feelings and
try to reconnect without the anger, the other person tends to respond
with constructive actions including apologies and amends. I've tried
"I'm so pissed off right now because you're a jerk but I'm going to say
that my feelings are hurt so you apologize right this second." It's
clearly not what they had in mind. One last note about hurt feelings:
Researchers Mark Leary and Carrie Springer have interesting thoughts on
the language of hurt feelings. Unlike most other emotions, the
expression "hurt feelings" lacks obvious synonyms. The words "wounded"
and "pained" have similar connotations, but these words are typically
not used to describe emotional experience. Also, although many emotions
such as sadness or grief can be described as distressing or painful,
"hurt feelings" seems to have a more specific connotation than general
emotional pain. An example might be grief. If I'm grieving over the loss
of someone close to me, I might tell you, "I'm really hurting," but I
probably wouldn't say, "Her death hurt my feelings." It's a great
reminder of the power of language. When we're expressing emotion, it's
important to differentiate "experiencing hurt" from "having hurt
feelings." OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#11 Places We Go When Life Is Good Joy, Happiness, Calm, Contentment,
Gratitude, Foreboding Joy, Relief, Tranquility

And I wish you joy and happiness. But above all of this, I wish you
love. --- DOLLY PARTON, "I Will Always Love You"

When I hear that line I immediately think of Dolly Parton and I
immediately feel Whitney Houston. I had the great pleasure of talking to
Dolly on the Unlocking Us podcast. She was incredible. Can you believe
she wrote "I Will Always Love You" and "Jolene" in the same day? In
Dolly's gorgeous book Songteller, she tells the story of Kevin Costner's
office calling about using "I Will Always Love You" in a movie. Dolly
had worked with the person who was doing the music for the film, liked
him, and said yes. She writes, But that was the last I'd heard of it.
Then one day I was driving my Cadillac back home to Brentwood from my
office. I had the radio on, and all of a sudden I heard this spoken
voice say, "If I should stay..." It caught my ear, but I didn't
recognize it. Then, when it

went into the music, I thought I was going to wreck the car. I have
never had such an overwhelming feeling. I had to pull off to the side of
the road, because it just got bigger and bigger and better and better. I
have never experienced a greater feeling in my life than hearing Whitney
Houston sing that song for the first time. I don't think there's a
better wish for someone you care about than joy, happiness, and love.
Even in 1973, Dolly clearly knew that joy and happiness are two separate
emotions. We need both, but how we experience them and how they affect
us are different. Joy is sudden, unexpected, short-lasting, and
high-intensity. It's characterized by a connection with others, or with
God, nature, or the universe. Joy expands our thinking and attention,
and it fills us with a sense of freedom and abandon. Happiness is
stable, longer-lasting, and normally the result of effort. It's lower in
intensity than joy, and more self-focused. With happiness, we feel a
sense of being in control. Unlike joy, which is more internal, happiness
seems more external and circumstantial. In The Gifts of Imperfection, I
quote Anne Robertson, a theologian and writer, on the difference between
joy and happiness: She explains that the Greek word for happiness is
Makarios, which was used to describe the freedom of the rich from normal
cares and worries, or to describe a person who received some form of
good fortune, such as money or health. Robertson compares this to the
Greek word for joy, which is chairo. Chairo was described by the

ancient Greeks as the "culmination of being" and the "good mood of the
soul." Robertson writes, "Chairo is something, the ancient Greeks tell
us, that is found only in God and comes with virtue and wisdom. It isn't
a beginner's virtue; it comes as the culmination. They say its opposite
is not sadness, but fear."

Joy I love thinking of joy as "the good mood of the soul." There is
definitely something soulful about joy. Based on our research, I define
joy as an intense feeling of deep spiritual connection, pleasure, and
appreciation. Researcher Matthew Kuan Johnson explains that people find
experiences of joy difficult to articulate. He hypothesizes that the
very nature of joy pushes the boundaries of our ability to communicate
about lived experience via spoken language. He also suggests that
because language can shape lived experience, cultures that have more
words to describe the emotion of joy may also experience joy more
richly. Johnson shares that while experiencing joy, we don't lose
ourselves, we become more truly ourselves. He suggests that with joy,
colors seem brighter, physical movements feel freer and easier, and
smiling happens involuntarily. Some researchers even describe
spontaneous weeping as part of the overwhelming experience of joy. For
me personally, one of the greatest lessons I've learned from two decades
of research has been understanding the relationship between joy and
gratitude.

Researchers describe the relationship between joy and gratitude as an
"intriguing upward spiral." I also love this term---such a great
antidote to the downward spirals that we always hear about and,
unfortunately, sometimes experience. The intriguing upward spiral goes
like this: Trait gratitude predicts greater future experiences of
in-the-moment joy. Trait joy predicts greater future experiences of
in-the-moment gratitude. And dispositional or situational joy predicts
greater future subjective wellbeing. It all just spirals up. In Daring
Greatly, I tell a story about an outing with Ellen during which I had
the privilege of witnessing the expansive and incredible nature of joy
and gratitude at play. This seems like yesterday, but it happened
sixteen years ago, when Ellen was in the first grade. We played hooky
one afternoon and spent the day at Hermann Park. At one point we were on
a paddleboat in the middle of a pond when I realized she had stopped
pedaling and was sitting perfectly still in her seat. Her head was
tilted back, and her eyes were closed. The sun was shining on her
uplifted face, and she had a quiet smile on her face. I was so struck by
her beauty and her vulnerability and the joy on her face that I could
barely catch my breath. I watched for a full minute, but when she didn't
move, I got a little nervous. "Ellie? Is everything okay, sweetie?"

Her smile widened and she opened her eyes. She looked at me and said,
"I'm fine, Mama. I was just making a picture memory." I had never heard
of a picture memory, but I liked the sound of it. "What's that mean?"
"Oh, a picture memory is a picture I take in my mind when I'm really,
really happy. I close my eyes and take a picture, so when I'm feeling
sad or scared or lonely, I can look at my picture memories." She used
the word "happy," as we often do, but there's no question that I was
witnessing joy, that swirl of deep spiritual connection, pleasure, and
appreciation.

Happiness Let me tell you what does not make me happy: the fact that
there's really no consensus in the research when it comes to defining
happiness. I think this is the case for a couple of reasons. First, even
the most prominent happiness researchers describe happiness as an
ambiguous word that has been used historically as an overarching term to
describe an entire realm of positive emotions. Second, the vast majority
of research we have examines happiness as a trait (part of who we are),
not a state (something we experience). In fact, in our keyword
literature searches, out of approximately fifteen thousand articles on
happiness, we found only twelve articles that described their focus as
"state happiness." That comes to 0.08 percent of studies. Looking at
happiness as a trait, researchers found that people's "usual" level of
happiness is fairly stable and highly based on hereditary factors,

and that for most people, the level could be described as being on the
happy side of neutral. (Happy Side of Neutral is yet another great band
name.) Looking at the data we've collected, I would define the state of
happiness as feeling pleasure often related to the immediate environment
or current circumstances. We need happy moments and happiness in our
lives; however, I'm growing more convinced that the pursuit of happiness
may get in the way of deeper, more meaningful experiences like joy and
gratitude. I know, from the research and my experiences, that when it
comes to parenting, what makes children happy in the moment is not
always what leads them to developing deeper joy, grounded confidence,
and meaningful connection.

Calm I define calm as creating perspective and mindfulness while
managing emotional reactivity. When I think about calm people, I think
about people who can bring perspective to complicated situations and
experience their feelings without reacting to heightened emotions. For
the Gifts of Imperfection research, when people described themselves as
calm or talked about other people describing them as calm, I asked a lot
of questions. Did they think their calmness was a trait or a practice or
both? Did maintaining calm feel like work or like a default setting? Did
they see calm modeled growing up? Did they remember learning it?

For personal reasons, I've stayed curious about calm over the years, and
the themes and patterns I found in the original research continue to
emerge. First, whether calm is a practice or something more inherent,
there are behaviors specific to cultivating and maintaining calm that
include a lot of self-questioning. The process seems to be centered on
breath, perspective taking, and curiosity: 1. Calm is an intention. Do
we want to infect people with more anxiety, or heal ourselves and the
people around us with calm? As the psychologist and writer Harriet
Lerner says, "Anxiety is contagious. Intensity and reactivity only breed
more of the same. Calm is also contagious. Nothing is more important
than getting a grip on your own reactivity." 2. Do we match the pace of
anxiety, or do we slow things down with breath and tone? 3. Do we have
all the information we need to make a decision or form a response? What
do we need to ask or learn? As someone who has to work on calm as a
practice rather than a trait, I've shortened this to two quick questions
I ask myself when I feel fear, panic, or anxiety rising: Do I have
enough information to freak out? The answer is normally no. Will
freaking out help? The answer is always no.

Contentment

When you are discontent, you always want more, more, more. Your desire
can never be satisfied. But when you practice contentment, you can say
to yourself, "Oh yes---I already have everything that I really need."
--- The 14th DALAI LAMA

Contentment is about satisfaction, and that, ironically, is an
unsatisfying idea for a lot of people. It just doesn't seem like enough
in a world that tells us every minute should be big and life should be
OMG-level exciting at all times. We've somehow slipped into a way of
being where a text that reads: "I'll stop and get milk on the way home"
earns a four-emoji reply along with AWESOME!!!! YOU'RE #1! By these
standards, contentment feels a little meh. However, if you think about
it, we are surrounded by scarcity, and most of us are almost desperate
to feel satisfied and to experience the "enoughness" that contentment
brings. Based on a summary of data we collected and the existing
research, I define contentment as the feeling of completeness,
appreciation, and "enoughness" that we experience when our needs are
satisfied. Several researchers categorize all emotions into one of two
categories: low arousal and high arousal. Contentment is characterized
as a low-arousal positive emotion, along with peace, tranquility, and
satisfaction. These are comfy, old-pair-of-jeans emotions. I don't have
any data to back this up, but I bet if you asked people after 2020 how
they'd feel about a life that feels content and satisfying, you'd get a
lot of takers. Including me.

Contentment is positively correlated with greater life satisfaction and
wellbeing, and preliminary evidence shows that experiences of
contentment might reverse the cardiovascular effects of negative
emotion. One piece of research that grabbed me by the shoulders is that
on one of the instruments that measures contentment, 71 percent of the
variance in life satisfaction is measured by a single item: "All things
considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole these days?"
This always leads to the age-old question: If we're not satisfied with
our life as a whole, does this mean we need to go get and do the stuff
that will make us satisfied so we can be content, or does this mean we
stop taking for granted what we have so we can experience real
contentment and enoughness?

Gratitude Call me a qualitative researcher, but I'm starting to see a
trend here. It appears that many of the emotions that are good for
us---joy, contentment, and gratitude, to name a few---have appreciation
in common. There is overwhelming evidence that gratitude is good for us
physically, emotionally, and mentally. There's research that shows that
gratitude is correlated with better sleep, increased creativity,
decreased entitlement, decreased hostility and aggression, increased
decision-making skills, decreased blood pressure---the list goes on. The
research is persuasive, and I've read countless research articles and
books on gratitude, but I still

struggled to understand exactly why it helps so much. Until I read this
by Robert Emmons.

Emmons is the "world's leading scientific expert on gratitude." He is a
professor of psychology at the University of California, Davis, and the
founding editor in chief of The Journal of Positive Psychology. He
writes, Research on emotion shows that positive emotions wear off
quickly. Our emotional systems like newness. They like novelty. They
like change. We adapt to positive life circumstances so that before too
long, the new car, the new spouse, the new house---they don't feel so
new and exciting anymore. But gratitude makes us appreciate the value of
something, and when we appreciate the value of something, we extract
more benefits from it; we're less likely to take it for granted. In
effect, I think gratitude allows us to participate more in life. We
notice the positives more, and that magnifies the pleasures you get from
life. Instead of adapting to goodness, we celebrate goodness. We spend
so much time watching things---movies, computer screens, sports---but
with gratitude we become greater participants in our lives as opposed to
spectators. The two lines that resonate with my research are: "Instead
of adapting to goodness, we celebrate goodness." "We become greater
participants in our lives as opposed to spectators." The phrase
"adapting to goodness" reminds me of a quote I've seen all over social
media: "Remember the day you prayed for the things you have now." I
normally scroll right past the heavy inspirational quotes, but this one
got my attention. I think adapting to goodness without feeling gratitude
is a

function of scarcity. We either want things for the wrong reasons, then
feel disappointed when we acquire them, or we just can't accumulate
enough to feel whole, so we accumulate and adapt, never valuing or
appreciating. And the line about living our lives versus being
spectators simply reminds me of how many people I've interviewed over
the past two decades who talked about simply wanting to feel more alive.
Is part of the value of practicing gratitude extending the life of the
emotions that make us feel most alive? There are about as many
definitions of gratitude as there are researchers, poets, and writers
who examine the emotion in their work. Many of the existing research
definitions don't resonate with the way people described their
experiences of gratitude to me in interviews or in writing. Here's what
emerged from our work: Gratitude is an emotion that reflects our deep
appreciation for what we value, what brings meaning to our lives, and
what makes us feel connected to ourselves and others. While gratitude is
an emotion, if we want to experience its full power, we must also make
it a practice. Over the past two decades, the research has taught me
that, despite the catchy phrase "an attitude of gratitude," gratitude is
a practice. It's tangible. An attitude is a way of thinking; a practice
is a way of doing, trying, failing, and trying again. The research
participants that I interviewed over the years described keeping
gratitude journals, doing daily gratitude meditations or prayers,
creating gratitude art, using gratitude check-ins with their teams at
work, even stopping during their stressful, busy days to actually say
these words out loud: "I am grateful for..." In our house, we go around
the table at dinner and take turns sharing one gratitude. It's small,
but it's also big. It gives me a window into the lives of the people I
love the most. It's celebrating goodness.

Last, I want to share something that recently popped up on social media.
I posted something about the importance of gratitude and someone left a
comment that said they thought gratitude might be overrated as a cure
for depression, trauma, and anxiety. What I would say is that gratitude
is not a cure for anything and we need to be wary of any single practice
or approach that's sold as fixing or curing complex mental health
issues. Gratitude is a practice that can enrich our lives in meaningful
ways. In the world of mental health and social emotional learning, the
term "cure" feels like snake oil to me.

Foreboding Joy When I give talks, people always seem surprised by the
finding that joy is the most vulnerable human emotion. Given that I
study fear and shame, people are hesitant to believe that something as
positive as joy can make us squirm. Then I share what is almost
certainly the most surprising finding for most people: If you're afraid
to lean into good news, wonderful moments, and joy---if you find
yourself waiting for the other shoe to drop---you are not alone. It's
called "foreboding joy," and most of us experience it. This is when
things get really quiet. Foreboding joy is one of those practically
universal experiences that everyone thinks of as something only they do.
A few people don't experience it, but most of us do. And when it comes
to parents...95 percent of the parents we interviewed experience
foreboding joy with their children. When we lose our tolerance for
vulnerability, joy becomes foreboding. No emotion is more frightening
than joy, because we believe if we allow

ourselves to feel joy, we are inviting disaster. We start
dress-rehearsing tragedy in the best moments of our lives in order to
stop vulnerability from beating us to the punch. We are terrified of
being blindsided by pain, so we practice tragedy and trauma. But there's
a huge cost. When we push away joy, we squander the goodness that we
need to build resilience, strength, and courage. The good news? In our
research we found that everyone who showed a deep capacity for joy had
one thing in common: They practiced gratitude. In the midst of joy,
there's often a quiver, a shudder of vulnerability. Rather than using
that as a warning sign to practice imagining the worst-case scenario,
the people who lean into joy use the quiver as a reminder to practice
gratitude.

Relief The definition that best aligns with our findings is from
researchers Ira Roseman and Andreas Evdokas. They describe relief as
"feelings of tension leaving the body and being able to breathe more
easily, thoughts of the worst being over and being safe for the moment,
resting, and wanting to get on to something else." When most of us think
of how relief feels, we go immediately to a deep exhale and a long,
breathy "Whew." Well, it turns out that there's something to that "sigh
of relief." Sighing serves as a type of reset button for our body. It
not only signals relief to our body, but it enhances relief, and it
reduces muscle tension.

Tranquility Tranquility may be my new favorite emotion. Why? Check out
the research definition: "Tranquility is associated with the absence of
demand" and "no pressure to do anything." No demands? No pressures? Sign
me up. Or should I say "Take me away." "Tranquil environments" provide
many restorative elements that are needed to counter mental fatigue and
attention depletion. Researchers Rachel and Stephen Kaplan found that
there are four essential elements of a restorative environment: a sense
of getting away, a feeling of immersion, holding attention without
effort, and compatibility with one's preferences. Additional research
shows that there are auditory and visual components to tranquil
environments, including elements of nature and low levels of noise.
Settings that induce high tranquility include fields and forests and
large bodies of water; urban settings tend not to induce tranquility.
Like I said. Take me away. One thing to note: There's a difference
between feeling content and feeling tranquil. With contentment, we often
have the sense of having completed something; with tranquility, we
relish the feeling of doing nothing. OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#12 Places We Go When We Feel Wronged Anger, Contempt, Disgust,
Dehumanization, Hate, SelfRighteousness

Anger If you look across the research, you learn that anger is an
emotion that we feel when something gets in the way of a desired outcome
or when we believe there's a violation of the way things should be. When
we feel anger, we believe that someone or something else is to blame for
an unfair or unjust situation, and that something can be done to resolve
the problem. Anger is an action emotion---we want to do something when
we feel it and when we're on the receiving end of it. Additionally,
according to Charles Spielberger, an influential anger researcher, angry
feelings can vary in intensity, "from mild irritation or annoyance to
fury and rage." Anger is also a full-contact emotion. Because it
activates our nervous system and can hijack our thoughts and behaviors,
it can take a real toll on

our mental and physical health. Researchers explain that regulating and
coping with anger rather than holding on to or expressing chronic anger
is crucial for the health of our brain (it reduces psychiatric problems)
and other organs in the body. There is also an interesting biological
component to anger. A substantial amount of research indicates that our
propensity for anger and aggression is partially hereditary, but the
specific gene locations have not yet been identified.

What I've Learned, Unlearned, and Continue to Learn About Anger. Dammit.
I've spent a lot of my career saying that anger is a secondary or
"indicator" emotion that often conceals emotions that are harder to
recognize, name, or own. According to 91 percent of emotions experts,
I'm wrong. Yes, 91 percent of emotions experts believe that anger is a
primary emotion. Maybe it's semantics and our differences come down to
how we define "primary." Or maybe I've got it (and had it) all wrong.
Honestly, there are a lot of debates in the research that I don't think
are worth digging into because they don't teach us much, but this debate
is worth understanding. As I mentioned in the introduction, we asked
around seventy-five hundred people to identify all of the emotions that
they could recognize and name when they're experiencing them. The
average was three: glad, sad, and mad ---or, as they were more often
written, happy, sad, and pissed off. Couple this extremely limited
vocabulary with the importance of emotional literacy, and you basically
have a crisis. It's this crisis that I'm trying to help address in this
book. Over the past two decades, when research participants talked about
being angry, the story never stopped there. Their narratives of anger
unfolded into stories of betrayal, fear, grief, injustice, shame,
vulnerability, and other emotions. Ultimately the combination of data
showing how limited

emotional vocabularies can be with our experiences of interviewing
people about anger and watching them consistently reveal other emotions
behind the anger led me to challenge the idea that anger is a primary
emotion. The more data we collected, including interviews with more than
fifteen hundred therapists and counselors, the more certain I became
that anger is a secondary or "indicator" emotion that can mask or make
us unaware of other feelings that are out of reach in terms of language,
or that are much more difficult to talk about than anger. We live in a
world where it's much easier to say "I'm so pissed off" than "I feel so
betrayed and hurt." It's even easier to say "I'm angry with myself" than
"I'm disappointed with how I showed up." Clinicians and educators use
many tools to help clients and students uncover the emotions that show
up as anger. I think these are especially helpful: Even if you look at
the list of eighty-seven emotions and experiences in this book, more
than twenty of them are likely to present as anger or with anger.
Feeling increasingly confident that anger is a secondary or indicator
emotion, I was left with some big questions to answer: In the face of
injustice, can we just be enraged, furious, angry? Does it have to be
masking or indicating something, or can we just be mad? The answer to
both of these questions is yes, and...

©2000 Creative Therapy Associates, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio

As a former union organizer and lifelong activist, I think anger is
often the most compassionate response to experiencing or witnessing
injustice. It can be a powerful catalyst for change that doesn't need to
be explained or justified. And I still think that behind the anger is a
tempest of pain, grief, betrayal, disappointment, and other emotions.

In Braving the Wilderness, I write about pain, hate, and
anger---especially as they pertain to social justice issues. I'm going
to share an excerpt with you here: Sometimes owning our pain and bearing
witness to struggle means getting angry. When we deny ourselves the
right to be angry, we deny our pain. There are a lot of coded shame
messages in the rhetoric of "Why so hostile?" "Don't get hysterical,"
"I'm sensing so much anger!" and "Don't take it so personally." All of
these responses are normally code for Your emotion or opinion is making
me uncomfortable or Suck it up and stay quiet. One response to this is
"Get angry and stay angry!" I haven't seen that advice borne out in the
research. What I've found is that, yes, we all have the right and need
to feel and own our anger. It's an important human experience. And it's
critical to recognize that maintaining any level of rage, anger, or
contempt (that favorite concoction of a little anger and a little
disgust) over a long period of time is not sustainable. Anger is a
catalyst. Holding on to it will make us exhausted and sick.
Internalizing anger will take away our joy and spirit; externalizing
anger will make us less effective in our attempts to create change and
forge connection. It's an emotion that we need to transform into
something life-giving: courage, love, change, compassion, justice. Or
sometimes anger can mask a far more difficult emotion like grief,
regret, or shame, and we need to use it to dig into what we're really
feeling. Either way, anger is a powerful catalyst but a life-sucking
companion.

So, do I think anger is a primary emotion or not? I don't know. There
are so many competing lists of "primary emotions," I don't know if it
matters whether anger belongs on one of those lists. Here are the three
things I do know from the work I've done over the past twenty-plus
years: 1. Anger often masks emotions that are more difficult to name
and/or more difficult to own. 2. Just as an indicator light in our car
tells us to pull over and check things out, anger is a very effective
emotional indicator light that tells us to pull over and check things
out. 3. Anger, in response to experiencing or witnessing injustice,
pain, and struggle, can be a powerful catalyst for change. But, by
definition, a catalyst sparks change, it's not the change.

Contempt When someone is angry at you, you've still got traction with
them, but when they display contempt, you've been dismissed. --- PAMELA
MEYER

When I hear the word "contempt," I immediately think of two of my
favorite researchers, John and Julie Gottman. John is known across the
globe for more than forty years of research on marital stability and
divorce prediction. He is the author or co-author of more than two
hundred published academic articles and more than forty books. Julie is
a highly respected clinical psychologist and expert on marriage,
domestic violence, gay and lesbian adoption, same-sex marriage, and
parenting issues who codesigned the national clinical training program
in Gottman Method Couples Therapy.

Why do I think of them when I think of contempt? Because John describes
contempt as "perhaps the most corrosive force in marriage," and his
research on marriage has identified contemptuous communication as a
strong predictor of divorce. In fact, through a series of studies
conducted in their lab, where they observed thousands of couples, John
Gottman and his research partner were able to predict with over 90
percent accuracy which couples would eventually divorce. Contempt is one
of the most damaging of the four negative communication patterns that
predict divorce. The other three are criticism, defensiveness, and
stonewalling. These took on the name of the Four Horsemen of the
Apocalypse---a term that originates from Christian mythology. In his
book Why Marriages Succeed or Fail, John Gottman writes, "What separates
contempt from criticism is the intention to insult and psychologically
abuse your partner. With your words and body language, you're lobbing
insults right into the heart of your partner's sense of self. Fueling
these contemptuous actions are negative thoughts about the partner ---he
or she is stupid, disgusting, incompetent, a fool. In direct or subtle
fashion, that message gets across along with the criticism."

We can feel and show contempt toward individuals or groups. In either
instance, being on the receiving end of contempt is often painful
because it's shaming and belittling. Over the past five years, contempt
between political and ideological groups has been at an all-time high.
Think about the political climate today as you read this description
from an article on the Gottmans' website: When you communicate with
contempt, the results can be cruel. Treating others with disrespect and
mocking them with sarcasm and condescension are forms of contempt. So
are hostile humor, namecalling, mimicking, and body language such as
eye-rolling and sneering. In whatever form, contempt is poisonous to a
relationship because it conveys disgust and superiority, especially
moral, ethical, or characterological. Contempt, simply put, says, "I'm
better than you. And you are lesser than me." Contempt results in
distancing, ignoring, or excluding the contemptible person---they are
not considered worthy of one's time or energy. This attitude seems
partially attributable to the key distinguishing feature between
contempt and anger, namely that contempt results when there is the
perception that the contemptible person is incapable of change. But
also, a person feeling contempt often wants or needs to feel better
about themselves, and they do so by diminishing the person who is the
object of their contempt. It's no wonder that "research has shown that
the contemptuous person is likely to experience feelings of low
self-esteem, inadequacy, and shame." In a March 2019 New York Times
opinion piece entitled "Our Culture of Contempt," Arthur C. Brooks
writes,

Political scientists have found that our nation is more polarized than
it has been at any time since the Civil War. One in six Americans has
stopped talking to a family member or close friend because of the 2016
election. Millions of people organize their social lives and their news
exposure along ideological lines to avoid people with opposing
viewpoints. What's our problem? A 2014 article in The Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences on "motive attribution asymmetry"---the
assumption that your ideology is based in love, while your opponent's is
based in hate---suggests an answer. The researchers found that the
average Republican and the average Democrat today suffer from a level of
motive attribution asymmetry that is comparable with that of
Palestinians and Israelis. Each side thinks it is driven by benevolence,
while the other is evil and motivated by hatred---and is therefore an
enemy with whom one cannot negotiate or compromise. People often say
that our problem in America today is incivility or intolerance. This is
incorrect. Motive attribution asymmetry leads to something far worse:
contempt, which is a noxious brew of anger and disgust. And not just
contempt for other people's ideas, but also for other people. In the
words of the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, contempt is "the unsullied
conviction of the worthlessness of another." Brooks goes on to say,
Contempt makes political compromise and progress impossible. It also
makes us unhappy as people. According to the American Psychological
Association, the feeling of rejection, so often experienced after being
treated with contempt, increases anxiety,

depression and sadness. It also damages the contemptuous person by
stimulating two stress hormones, cortisol and adrenaline. In ways both
public and personal, contempt causes us deep harm. Brooks's solution is
not that we need to disagree less, but we need to learn how to disagree
better---without contempt or cruelty. It's really not far off from the
Gottmans' approach of teaching us how to replace negative communication
patterns with new skills that convey respect and appreciation.

Disgust ☐ I might be willing to try eating monkey meat, under some
circumstances. ☐ It bothers me to hear someone clear a throat full of
mucus. ☐ If I see someone vomit, it makes me sick to my stomach. ☐ It
would not upset me at all to watch a person with a glass eye take the
eye out of the socket. ☐ Even if I was hungry, I would not drink a bowl
of my favorite soup if it had been stirred by a used but thoroughly
washed flyswatter. Gross. I know. Welcome to disgust. These are five
items from the Disgust Scale---Revised (DS-R), a valid and reliable
measure of disgust developed by a team of researchers in the mid1990s
and revised in 2007. Jonathan Haidt, the lead researcher on the team

that created the scale, is a social psychologist and writer who is the
Thomas Cooley Professor of Ethical Leadership at the New York University
Stern School of Business. Haidt poses a critical question: Disgust is a
fascinating emotion. Its elicitors are a puzzle: it makes sense that we
are disgusted by things that can contaminate our food, but why does this
food-related emotion extend itself so deeply into our social world, so
that people feel disgusted by certain ethnic groups (or by racism), by
homosexuality (or by homophobia), and by a variety of social and moral
violations that don't involve anything physically contaminating?

Understanding Disgust With contempt, we look down on the other person
and we want to exclude or ignore them. With disgust, inferiority is not
the issue, the feeling is more physical---we want to avoid being
"poisoned" (either literally or figuratively). The poisoning thing is
real. Researchers believe that "The experience of disgust encourages
individuals to distance themselves from the emotion eliciting source,
thereby limiting contact and exposure to the potentially infectious or
toxic target." I love that Steven Pinker refers to disgust as "intuitive
microbiology." According to emotions research pioneer Paul Ekman,
disgust "arises as a feeling of aversion towards something offensive. We
can feel disgusted by something we perceive with our physical senses
(sight, smell, touch, sound, taste), by the actions or appearances of
people, and even by ideas." Ekman found that "disgust contains a range
of states with varying intensities" from mild dislike and aversion to
repugnance, revolution, and intense loathing. "All states of disgust are
triggered by the feeling that something is aversive, repulsive and/or
toxic."

Ekman, who has made invaluable contributions to the study of emotions,
especially in identifying the relationships between emotions and facial
expressions, explains that when we feel disgust, we often wrinkle our
nose, choke or gag, cover our mouth or nose while hunching over (as if
we might vomit), recoil or back away, and say "yuck" or "ew." Circling
back to the question posed by Jonathan Haidt: How does an emotion that
is hardwired to protect us from actual toxins and poisons become
something that we feel toward other people? Researchers explain that
core disgust is thought to protect the body from ingestion of
contaminants, while disgust in an interpersonal context is thought to
"protect" us from unseemly behavior or contamination of the soul. But
it's not just unseemly behavior that makes us feel disgust toward other
people. We've taken an emotion that keeps us safe from the stuff that
can make us sick and turned it into an emotion that can be weaponized
against people who make us sick, simply because we either disagree with
them or they are different from us. One example of this is the dangerous
relationship between disgust and dehumanization. Researchers Maria
Miceli and Cristiano Castelfranchi found that reactions of disgust can
rapidly lead to dehumanizing, othering, and marginalizing individuals or
groups of people. This element of dehumanization seems to be one of the
characteristics that distinguishes disgust from contempt. They write,
"The disrespect involved in disgust implies that human dignity is
perceived as alienable. The person is responsible for the bad action
\[they have\] done, but the very effect of that action is dehumanizing:
by performing it, one has responsibly degraded oneself to sub-human."
They go on to explain how "moral disgust is even more dangerous because
of its dehumanizing implications. Disgusting people, if no longer viewed
as persons, can suffer much more than 'othering' and marginalization."
Once we dehumanize people, violence and cruelty toward them become
easier to

perpetrate because the parts of us that are hardwired to not hurt other
people turn off---in our minds, we've stripped them of their humanity.
Another difference that makes disgust more dangerous is that once a
target is viewed with disgust, this judgment seems to be permanent;
evaluations of disgust seem to indicate a reprehensible moral character
that is immutable and unforgivable. At least with anger, an apology or
reparation has the potential to reverse the damage done.

Dehumanization Dehumanization continues to be one of the greatest
threats to humanity. If we're going to save ourselves and one another,
we need to understand what it is and how it works. I've adapted what I
wrote about the dehumanization process in Braving the Wilderness and am
including it here as a primer. After researching and writing on disgust,
I made connections that I've missed in the past. So, while adapted from
Braving the Wilderness, the section includes some new thoughts. David
Livingstone Smith, the author of Less Than Human, explains that
dehumanization is a response to conflicting motives. We want to harm a
group of people, but it goes against our wiring as members of a social
species to actually harm, kill, torture, or degrade other humans. Smith
explains that very deep and natural inhibitions prevent us from treating
other people like animals, game, or dangerous predators. He writes,
"Dehumanization is a way of subverting those inhibitions."
Dehumanization is a process. I think Michelle Maiese, a professor in the
philosophy department at Emmanuel College, lays it out in a way that
makes sense, so I'll use some of her work here to walk us through it.
Maiese defines dehumanization as "the psychological process of
demonizing the enemy, making them seem less than human and hence not
worthy of humane treatment." Dehumanizing often starts with creating an
enemy image. As we take sides, lose trust, and get angrier and angrier,
we not only solidify an idea of our enemy, but also start to lose our
ability to listen, communicate, and practice even a modicum of empathy.

Once we see people on "the other side" of a conflict as morally inferior
and even dangerous, the conflict starts being framed as good versus
evil. Maiese writes, "Once the parties have framed the conflict in this
way, their positions become more rigid. In some cases, zero-sum thinking
develops as parties come to believe that they must either secure their
own victory, or face defeat. New goals to punish or destroy the opponent
arise, and in some cases more militant leadership comes into power."
Dehumanization has fueled innumerable acts of violence, human rights
violations, war crimes, and genocides. It makes slavery, torture, and
human trafficking possible. Dehumanizing others is the process by which
we become accepting of violations against human nature, the human
spirit, and, for many of us, violations against the central tenets of
our faith.

How does this happen? Maiese explains that most of us believe that
people's basic human rights should not be violated---that crimes like
murder, rape, and torture are wrong. Successful dehumanizing, however,
creates moral exclusion. Groups targeted based on their
identity---gender, ideology, skin color, ethnicity, religion, age---are
depicted as "less than" or criminal or even evil. The targeted group
eventually falls out of the scope of who is naturally protected by our
moral code. This is moral exclusion, and dehumanization is at its core.
Dehumanizing always starts with language, often followed by images. We
see this throughout history. During the Holocaust, Nazis described Jews
as Untermenschen---subhuman. They called Jews rats and depicted them as
disease-carrying rodents in everything from military pamphlets to
children's books. Hutus involved in the Rwanda genocide called Tutsis
cockroaches. Indigenous people are often referred to as savages. Serbs
called Bosnians aliens. Slave owners throughout history considered
slaves subhuman animals. What really struck me as I was rereading this
and looking at new research on dehumanization is that the language we
use to dehumanize is effective because it actually taps into "core
disgust"---we reduce people to the types of things that make us
physically recoil as we do from cockroaches, rats, and "infestations."
We reduce people into the things that make us grossed out. One of the
arguments of this book is that language matters. It's the raw material
of story, it changes how we feel about ourselves and others, and it's a
portal to connection. With the same amount of power, language can also
be used to strip people of their dignity and humanity. With awareness
about

how dehumanization works comes the responsibility to call out dangerous
language when we recognize it.

Hate Hatred will always motivate people for destructive action. ---
AGNETA FISCHER, ERAN HALPERIN, DAPHNA CANETTI, AND ALBA JASINI, "Why We
Hate"

According to researcher Robert Sternberg, hate is a combination of
various negative emotions including repulsion, disgust, anger, fear, and
contempt. We feel hate toward individuals or groups that we believe are
intentionally malicious and unlikely to change. What's interesting is
that we can develop hate toward people we do not know personally simply
based on their affiliation with a group or ideology that doesn't align
with our beliefs. Research shows that a lack of direct contact with such
individuals can actually strengthen hate. This confirms my belief that
people are harder to hate close up, and easier to hate when we're behind
our ideological bunker and they're behind theirs. What's really
fascinating is that hate is actually fueled by our need for connection.
I call this common enemy intimacy. I may not know anything about you,
but we hate the same people and that creates a counterfeit bond and a
sense of belonging. I say "counterfeit" because the bond and belonging
are not real, they hinge on my agreeing with you and not challenging the
ideas that connect us. That's not true belonging. Sternberg found that
hate moves from place to place on a "current," and it needs this current
to grow and travel. He explains that "those currents are

provided by cynical leaders who capitalize on people's insecurities to
bolster their own power." He writes, "When instigators seek to gain
traction for their leadership by spreading hate, they often attract
observer(s) who do nothing or who, over time, move from being observers
to being participant/observers to being active participants." Sternberg
also states that "the more the leaders whip up powerful stories, even
ones of hate, the more people follow them." We know from the research
that hate crime victims "generally have not done anything specific: They
are terrorized for who they are, not for what they have done." For me,
this immediately brings to mind all of the innocent trans
people---particularly Black women---who have been targeted, beaten, and
killed, not because of anything they've done, but because of who they
are. In an interview with The Daily Beast, the actress and activist
Laverne Cox talks about the documentary Disclosure, which addresses the
dehumanization of trans people. She explains, "This is what our film
tries to grapple with, this paradox of visibility. That we're
potentially more targeted because we're more visible. And so then the
need for justice, the need for real justice and understanding and hearts
and minds to be changed so that the existence of a trans person doesn't
\[cause\] someone to react in a way that that trans person might lose
their life." The research that I found the most devastating explained
that the "goal of hate is not merely to hurt, but to ultimately
eliminate or destroy the target, either mentally (humiliating,
treasuring feelings of revenge), socially (excluding, ignoring), or
physically (killing, torturing), which may be accompanied by the goal to
let the wrongdoer suffer." If this isn't enough to make me return to the
days when I had toddlers and banned the word "hate" from my vocabulary,
I don't know what is.

Hate crimes are meant to terrorize more than a single person; the goal
is to embed fear so deeply in the heart of a community that fear becomes
a crushing way of life for everyone who shares that identity. There is
no simple way to stop hate, however, Sternberg explains: It is not clear
that there is any magic bullet for curing hate. But any mechanism that
helps one understand things from others' points of view---love, critical
thinking, wisdom, engagement with members of target groups---at least
makes hate less likely, because it is harder to hate people if you
understand that in many respects they are not all so different from you.

Self-Righteousness The self-righteous scream judgments against others to
hide the noise of skeletons dancing in their own closets. --- JOHN MARK
GREEN

I can tell you exactly what I was wearing and where I was sitting
twentyfive years ago when someone in an AA meeting said, "Part of my
sobriety is letting go of self-righteousness. It's really hard because
it feels so good. Like a pig rolling in shit." I remember thinking, Oh,
God. I'm not sure exactly what that means, but I think I roll around in
that shit too. From that day forward, I started thinking of
self-righteousness as a threat to my self-respect, my well-being, and my
sobriety. Unfortunately, it's virtually impossible to add it to the
abstinence list---it's not as binary as

having or not having a Bud Light or a cigarette---but I definitely see
it as a slippery behavior that necessitates some self-reflection. And
possibly amends. According to researchers, "Self-righteousness is the
conviction that one's beliefs and behaviors are the most correct."
People who exhibit self-righteousness see things as black and
white---they tend to be closedminded, inflexible, intolerant of
ambiguity, and less likely to consider others' opinions. It is important
to realize that self-righteousness is different from righteousness. In
the case of righteousness, we are appropriately reacting to a true
injustice, we are trying to do the right thing. When feeling
selfrighteous, we feel morally superior to others and are trying to
convince ourselves or others that we are doing the right thing. Moral
outrage in response to injustice can be classified as righteous anger
when motivated by a "true" concern about injustice, whereas when moral
outrage is selfenhancing, it is self-righteous anger. I wish I had
understood all this better back then---especially the difference between
self-righteousness and righteousness. I always thought about
selfrighteousness in terms of "terminal uniqueness"---a term from the
recovery movement that means you think you're different from everyone
else. You're the exception, your addiction struggle is the exception,
your story is the exception, and so on. I didn't know what I know now, I
just told myself that I needed more humility and less thinking I was
better than, more right, and always the exception. I had to stop
assuming that people who disagreed with me didn't care about people or
issues as much as I did. It's funny how thinking "I'm better than" can
slip into "I'm worthless" in mere seconds. Letting go of the first
slowly releases us from the second. Given the political climate today,
it's important to understand that moral outrage is self-enhancing and
related to self-righteous anger. I've had to be

super conscientious about the moral outrage and instead focus on doing
the next right thing. If there's anything that looks and feels like a
pig rolling in shit these days, it's performative moral outrage,
especially on social media. OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

#13 Places We Go to Self-Assess Pride, Hubris, Humility

Unless you want to be swept away in a sea of inspirational Pinterest
quotes, don't google "pride and humility." From Bible verses to the
worst 1980s corporate motivational posters, everyone seems to have an
opinion about the importance of humility and the dangerous nature of
pride. You don't see too many inspirational quotes about hubris, but if
you search political news articles from 2016 to 2020, you'll be
swallowed whole. But here's the thing. Most of the quotes have it wrong.
Let's break it down. Pride is a feeling of pleasure or celebration
related to our accomplishments or efforts. Hubris is an inflated sense
of one's own innate abilities that is tied more to the need for
dominance than to actual accomplishments. Humility is openness to new
learning combined with a balanced and accurate assessment of our
contributions, including our strengths, imperfections, and opportunities
for growth. We really get this wrong. More to come.

Pride Pride is a feeling of pleasure or celebration related to our
accomplishments or efforts. Many researchers distinguish hubris from
pride by referring to the pride we experience when we've accomplished
something as authentic pride. Authentic pride typically has a positive
connotation and descriptors that include words like "accomplishment,"
"mastery," "triumph," "confidence," and "self-worth." It is positively
associated with self-esteem and negatively associated with
shame-proneness. Researchers Lisa Williams and Joel Davies explain that
we don't just feel pride about our own accomplishments, there is a
"family of pride experiences." I can feel proud of myself, proud of you,
proud of us. If you take in the research across the board, authentic
pride, or feeling good about what we accomplish, is a healthy thing.
However, Ronda Dearing from our research team points out, "There's
another common way that we sometimes use the word 'pride' that doesn't
quite fit with the research or with my experience. People commonly say
things like 'Pride got in the way,' for example when someone fresh out
of college turns down a job that they feel overqualified for. Or we
might say 'He was too proud to accept help,' for example when a single
dad is struggling financially and turns down his parents' offer of a
temporary loan." After rumbling on this use, we agreed that context and
story are necessary to figure out what's driving these behaviors. It
could be anything---hubris, fear, shame, defensiveness. The learning
here is to stay curious when we see or experience these behaviors. They
don't fit with authentic pride and there's probably more to the story.

Hubris Hubris is an inflated sense of one's own innate abilities that is
tied more to the need for dominance than to actual accomplishments. It
is negatively correlated with self-esteem and positively correlated with
narcissism and shame-proneness. In simpler terms, the higher the hubris,
the lower the self-esteem, and the higher the hubris, the higher the
narcissism and shame-proneness. Dominance, which is a type of status
that is coerced through aggression or intimidation, plays a significant
role in hubris. Researchers write, "Hubristic pride may have evolved to
motivate behaviors, thoughts, and feelings oriented toward attaining
dominance, whereas authentic pride may have evolved to motivate
behaviors, thoughts, and feelings oriented toward attaining prestige."
I'm not crazy about the word "prestige"---it sounds arrogant. But it's
helpful to know that in the research, prestige status is
earned---prestige-based leaders are admired for their skills or
knowledge, as distinct from dominance status, which is obtained by
force. To those of us observing hubris, it looks and feels terrible.
However, to the person experiencing hubris, it feels good. They puff up
and feel blustery and superior. Furthermore, the person experiencing
hubris doesn't really care what we think. Researchers found that hubris
can increase levels of dominance, and, interestingly, dominance "does
not require respect or social acceptance." So when you watch someone do
something out of sheer hubris and you think to yourself, Don't they see
how badly this is being received?---remember, it doesn't need to be
received well for them to feel good about it. As I mentioned earlier,
hubris is positively correlated with narcissism. In Daring Greatly, I
write about how everything from Facebook and influencer culture to the
increasingly insane behavior of politicians has

pushed the term "narcissism" into the zeitgeist. While it's penetrated
social consciousness enough that most people correctly associate it with
a pattern of behaviors that include grandiosity, a pervasive need for
admiration, and a lack of empathy, almost no one understands how every
level of severity in this diagnosis is underpinned by shame. Narcissism
is shame-based. In fact, I define narcissism as the shamebased fear of
being ordinary.

Read this next paragraph slowly. Then reread it. It's mind-blowing.
Research led by Jessica Tracy found that "For the narcissist, positive
views of the self are too essential to leave to the whim of actual
accomplishments, for they are what prevent the individual from
succumbing to shame and low

self-esteem. Instead, narcissists come to experience a globalized
'hubristic' pride, characterized by feelings of arrogance and egotism,
which is distinct from the more achievement-based and pro-social
'authentic' pride." Hubris sounds like an almost foolproof way to assert
yourself in the world ---no accomplishments, no respect, no social
acceptance needed. You would, however, have to hone your bullying skills
and be open to being seen as an asshole. The price (in addition to the
aforementioned downsides) is that folks with trait hubristic pride are
more likely to experience chronic anxiety, engage in aggression and
hostility, and struggle with intimate partner relationships and general
social support. What does hubris actually look like? Researchers say
that it mirrors the physical patterns of dominance display---the head
has a downward (rather than upward) tilt, with a widened stance, and
less smiling. Not hard to picture.

Humility I'm ending this section with humility to give you something
more uplifting. While the origin of the word "hubris" is Greek and was
used to describe a pride and ambition so great that they offend the gods
and lead to one's downfall, "humility" comes from the Latin word
humilitas, meaning groundedness. Humility is quieter but more genuine
and ultimately more powerful than hubris. And---as with pride---we've
got a lot of it wrong. Humility is openness to new learning combined
with a balanced and accurate assessment of our contributions, including
our strengths, imperfections, and opportunities for growth.

I can sum up humility with one sentence that emerged from the research
that informed Dare to Lead: I'm here to get it right, not to be right.
What humility isn't: downplaying yourself or your accomplishments, which
according to researchers is modesty, not humility. It's also not low
selfesteem or meekness or letting people walk all over you. The emotion
of humility involves understanding our contributions in context, in
relation to both the contributions of others and our own place in the
universe. It's different from pride in that when we feel pride, we focus
entirely on the positive aspects of a specific accomplishment (which can
still be healthy and productive). The term "intellectual humility"
refers specifically to a willingness to consider information that
doesn't fit with our current thinking. People who demonstrate
intellectual humility don't lack confidence or conviction. They may hold
strong views, but they are also open to hearing other points of view.
They are curious and willing to adjust their beliefs when faced with new
or conflicting information. Humility allows us to admit when we are
wrong---we realize that getting it right is more important than needing
to "prove" that we are right. As we leave this section, hopefully we can
also leave behind the ideas that hubris is just a benign form of
supersized pride, that pride is bad for us, and that humility is
weakness. Pride can be good for us, hubris is dangerous, and humility is
key to grounded confidence and healthy relationships.

OceanofPDF.com

Cultivating Meaningful Connection Theory It is a capital mistake to
theorize before one has data. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to
suit theories, instead of theories to suit facts. --- ARTHUR CONAN
DOYLE, "A Scandal in Bohemia"

I'll never forget the day when Dr. Paul Raffoul, my epistemology
professor, drew the circle of science on the board. It was my first
class in the social work doctoral program at the University of Houston,
and seeing that circle on the board felt like a moment from a Dan Brown
book. It was the PhD student's first clue to finding the inner sanctum.
Dr. Raffoul was one of the

few faculty members that I continued to address as "Dr." even after I
was hired as a tenure-track assistant professor and we became
colleagues. He always wore a suit and tie with a coordinating U of H
baseball cap, and he always had a twinkle in his eye when he talked
about that circle. It's like he was thinking, You have no idea what I'm
talking about right now, oh, but you will. All will be revealed. As a
grounded theory researcher, I work up from the bottom of that circle,
following an inductive approach and generating theories from mostly
qualitative data. I'll occasionally use quantitative methods for
something, but I love language, words, and story. The theories that I
develop are then often tested using deductive and quantitative methods.
Some old-school deductive folks argue that their approach is the most
valuable, but today there's a widely held belief that we need both. We
should not test and build on theories that are just
conjecture---especially when it comes to hypothesizing about
underrepresented groups while knowing very little about their stories
and lived experiences. Having an empirically based theory adds to the
rigor of science. The value is in the full circle. (PS: I think the
circle of science would be way more popular if we had an Elton John song
like "The Circle of Life.") The word "theory" is not as complicated as
it sounds. We all have theories. For example, you probably have a theory
about the traffic patterns by your house, or the reason one team at work
is always late delivering projects, or why your parents get to the
airport six hours before their flight departs. We theorize all day long.
I think the best definition is from behavioral scientist Fred Kerlinger
(another great teaching from Dr. Raffoul's course). Kerlinger defines
theory as: "A set of interrelated constructs (concepts), definitions,
and propositions that present a systematic view of phenomena specifying
relations among variables, with the purpose of explaining and predicting
the phenomena."

If you break down your theory about the traffic patterns in your
neighborhood, it will more than likely include propositions and concepts
that come together to paint a picture of what's going on (for example,
the number of cars at the high rise down the street, the line getting
out of the grocery store, the need for a light at a busy intersection,
the new school zone, etc.). Theorizing is part of meaning-making---it's
how we explain the relationships between different variables. The only
difference between our everyday theories about how things work and the
inductive research I do is that my theories are based on observations or
data that we methodically collect and analyze. We observe the traffic,
count the cars, pull data from the city, time the lights, review
accident reports, interview neighbors, and generate a theory or a
hypothesis: If we do this, then...Or, these changes will have a positive
effect on... Once the theory is out in the world, my research colleagues
may come behind me and test that theory deductively by temporarily
setting up stop signs or traffic lights and analyzing the outcome. Part
of the beauty of the circle of science is its iterative
nature---researchers test and retest, from the bottom up and from the
top down. The findings evolve and our level of understanding keeps
getting closer and closer to "truth." It may seem as if the findings are
changing or the initial findings were wrong. But often it is the case
that new data has given us a more accurate understanding of the data
that came before. This, my friends, is the circle of science. (By the
way, I'm totally asking Elton John and Brandi Carlile to do a duet on
this. TikTok, we're coming for you.)

Near Enemies Now that I've forced you through a primer on theory
building, I'm going to share a new theory with you that's the
culmination of my work since the beginning---and I do mean the very
start. My dissertation is actually on

connection. This new work is a theory on cultivating meaningful
connection. While this new theory draws heavily on all my previous work,
there was something missing---a piece that I couldn't quite figure out
until I started this research. That elusive piece was rediscovering the
Buddhist concept of near enemies. Studying near enemies took me down the
research rabbit hole, and the more I read, the more I realized that for
years I've underestimated this concept's power and contribution to
explaining human behavior. I explained it in Chapter Seven where we talk
about pity being the near enemy of compassion, but before we get to the
new theory, I want to dig deeper. Several writers and researchers whose
work I admire and turn to often, including Kristin Neff, Chris Germer,
and Jack Kornfield, write about near enemies. To get our heads and
hearts around this concept, I thought I'd share a different definition
and a couple of examples. In an incredibly timely and powerful article,
"The Near and Far Enemies of Fierce Compassion," Chris Germer writes,
"Near enemies are states that appear similar to the desired quality but
actually undermine it. Far enemies are the opposite of what we are
trying to achieve. For example, a near enemy of loving-kindness is
sentimentality---similar but different. A far enemy of loving-kindness
is ill will---the opposite of loving-kindness. Similarly, a near enemy
of compassion is pity and a far enemy is cruelty." Without the language
of near and far enemies, and without the tools of emotional granularity
and self-awareness, the difference between how we want to show up and
the near enemies of these practices feels nuanced. But this type of
nuance predicts the difference between wholeheartedness and
brokenheartedness.

Jack Kornfield explains that near enemies may seem like the qualities
that we believe are important, and may even be mistaken for them, but
they are different and often undermine our practices. He writes, "The
near enemies depict how spirituality can be misunderstood or misused to
separate us from life." When I read that last sentence, I had to break
it down and reread it about twenty times: "The near enemies depict how
spirituality can be misunderstood or misused to separate us from life."
I define spirituality as the deeply held belief that we are inextricably
connected to each other by something greater than ourselves. I have
friends who are atheists who every day practice inextricable
connection---they hurt when others hurt and they know that none of us
are free until all of us are free. I have friends who talk endlessly
about their religion and wear scripture on their T-shirts, yet
demonstrate no connection to anyone's suffering but their own and maybe
that of the people in their immediate circle. I make this point because
we're not talking about religion here. We're talking about the
irrepressible human spirit. When I look at Kornfield's sentence and
think about my twenty-plus years of research on connection, my
translation is: On the surface, the near enemies of emotions or
experiences might look and even feel like connection, but ultimately
they drive us to be disconnected from ourselves and from each other.
Without awareness, near enemies become the practices that fuel
separation, rather than practices that reinforce the inextricable
connection of all people. This is huge.

To really get this concept in our bones, I want to share two more
examples with you from Jack Kornfield. On love, he writes; The near
enemy of love is attachment. Attachment masquerades as love. It says, "I
will love this person (because I need something from them)." Or, "I'll
love you if you'll love me back. I'll love you, but only if you will be
the way I want." This isn't the fullness of love. Instead there is
attachment---there is clinging and fear. True love allows, honors, and
appreciates; attachment grasps, demands, needs, and aims to possess. On
equanimity, he writes: The near enemy of equanimity is indifference or
callousness. We may appear serene if we say, "I'm not attached. It
doesn't matter what happens anyway, because it's all transitory." We
feel a certain peaceful relief because we withdraw from experience and
from the energies of life. But indifference is based on fear. True
equanimity is not a withdrawal; it is a balanced engagement with all
aspects of life. It is opening to the whole of life with composure and
ease of mind, accepting the beautiful and terrifying nature of all
things. I needed the concept of near enemies because when it comes to
cultivating meaningful connection, the far enemies---the real
opposites---are not what get in the way most of the time. They're easy
to recognize---we don't get tricked into believing that everything is
okay; they are up front with their disconnection. It's the near enemies
of connection---the imposters that can look and feel like cultivating
closeness---that sabotage relationships and

leave us feeling alone and in pain. And because they're so stealthy, we
often internalize the pain and think that something is wrong with us.
Near enemies can feel like manipulation and even gaslighting. Of course
the far enemies destroy connection too---but you see them coming.

A Grounded Theory on Cultivating Meaningful Connection Cultivating
meaningful connection is a daring and vulnerable practice that requires
grounded confidence, the courage to walk alongside others, and story
stewardship. I'm not going to walk you through every element of the
theory---most are self-explanatory now that we have the language---but I
do want to give you an overview and introduce you to some new concepts.
As we talk about the theory, you'll see that each of the three major
categories that support cultivating meaningful connection has its own
near and far enemies, as does each of the skill sets that support those
categories.

Developing Grounded Confidence I first introduced the term grounded
confidence in Dare to Lead. The core learning in Dare to Lead is that
it's not fear that gets in the way of courage, it's armor---how we
self-protect when we feel uncertain or fearful. Our armoring behaviors
keep us from showing up in ways that are aligned with our values. As we
learn to recognize and remove our armor, we replace it with grounded
confidence. The concept was in its infancy when I wrote about it several
years ago. It only included three properties: the abilities to rumble
with vulnerability, stay curious, and practice new skills. What you see
now is a much fuller concept with more properties. And my guess is that
we'll continue to work on this for years to come.

Click here to view this table as text

Click here to view this table as text

Click here to view this table as text

Developing grounded confidence is driven by a commitment to learning and
improving. Its near enemy is knowing and proving. In our culture, we're
quick to mistake knowing and proving for confidence, when they're
actually a function of low self-worth. Fragile self-worth is the far
enemy of

grounded confidence. A fragile self-worth drives us to self-protect at
all costs. The last skill under this category is feeling embodied and
connected to self. We don't talk enough about the importance of
embodiment and what happens to us when we're disconnected from our
physical selves. In his book The Body Keeps the Score, trauma researcher
Bessel van der Kolk writes, "Trauma victims cannot recover until they
become familiar with and befriend the sensations in their bodies. Being
frightened means that you live in a body that is always on guard. Angry
people live in angry bodies. The bodies of child-abuse victims are tense
and defensive until they find a way to relax and feel safe. In order to
change, people need to become aware of their sensations and the way that
their bodies interact with the world around them. Physical
self-awareness is the first step in releasing the tyranny of the past."
Van der Kolk goes on to explain that, "The mind needs to be reeducated
to feel physical sensations, and the body needs to be helped to tolerate
and enjoy the comforts of touch. Individuals who lack emotional
awareness are able, with practice, to connect their physical sensations
to psychological events. Then they can slowly reconnect with
themselves." Grounded confidence is driven by learning and
curiosity---even about our own bodies. For many of us, myself included,
it's easier to live in our heads and be completely disconnected from our
bodies. But there's a cost. Insomnia, injuries, exhaustion, depression,
anxiety---the body has powerful ways to get our attention. Prentis
Hemphill is a writer, an embodiment facilitator, a political organizer,
and a therapist. They are the founder and director of the Embodiment
Institute and the Black Embodiment Initiative. I've learned so much from
Prentis about embodiment---I think their definitions will breathe some
life into these words that you see on the model:

Prentis defines embodiment as "the awareness of our body's sensations,
habits, and the beliefs that inform them. Embodiment requires the
ability to feel and allow the body's emotions. This embodied awareness
is necessary to realign what we do with what we believe." They define
disembodiment as "an unawareness, repression or denial of our sensations
and emotions, and/or privileging our thinking over our feeling.
Disembodiment often leads to an incongruence between the actions we take
in the world and the beliefs that we hold." This piece about values
misalignment makes sense because for me, the best indicator light around
being out of values is my body. I can't quite describe it, but I feel
out of sorts---like you feel when you catch every red light on a long
downtown street. My body is out of flow. Prentis writes, "The habits
that become embodied in us are the ones that we practice the most often.
And, whether we are aware of it or not, we are always practicing
something. When we are disembodied or disconnected from our own feelings
and sensations, it's easy to become habituated to practices that we
don't believe in or value." We become what we do---even when those
things are outside of who we want to be. Our bodies are our teachers and
the messengers who call our attention to what we're absorbing and
becoming. This is why we have to learn how to listen, and this is why
grounded confidence requires embodiment.

Practicing the Courage to Walk Alongside The second major category is
practicing the courage to walk alongside. One of the great challenges in
grounded theory is naming categories and properties in a way that
accurately reflects the data and resonates with

people's lived experiences. For this category, I found myself asking:
What does it mean to be other-focused, to use language in the service of
connecting, to be compassionate, empathic, and nonjudgmental? As soon as
I started thinking about this question, I was transported back to my
dissertation. The name of the theory that emerged from my dissertation
is "Acompañar," which means "to accompany" in Spanish. My dissertation
is a study on how helping professionals build and maintain connection
with the people they serve. The approach that best reflected what I
learned from that data was the "accompaniment" movement---an organizing
and social justice approach that comes out of liberation theology
activism in Latin America. The work is a commitment to be with
people---not pushing them from behind or leading from the front, but
walking with them in solidarity. Being other-focused, using language in
the service of connecting, practicing compassion, empathy, and
nonjudgment, aren't fully in line with all of the tenets of
accompaniment, but are fully consistent with practicing the courage to
walk alongside. The near enemy of walking alongside is controlling the
path. Sometimes it can look and feel like someone is with us, but really
they're trying to control either us or the outcome. I think most of us
do this more than we'd like to admit. For example, my child comes home
and is upset because they got in trouble at school. They were talking
while the teacher was talking and they were told that their behavior was
disrespectful. I'm trying to be with them in this experience, but I
quickly find myself worried about what the teacher will think of my
child and, worse, what will they think of me as a parent. So, now,
rather than being with my child, I'm trying to control how this is going
to go. Forget about asking what happened or checking in to see what
they're feeling. I want to be with you in this turns into, You need to
email your teacher and apologize right this minute. What were you
thinking?

I once heard Anne Lamott say, "Help is the sunny side of control." Yes
and yikes. All of us who were raised taking care of other people and
trying to manage environments can default to wanting to control the
path, regardless of our great intentions. Especially when "it's in
everyone's best interest." The question is always, Whose best interest
are you protecting? Walking alongside is other-focused. Control is
self-focused. Insert stressed emoji with flat, panicked grin. We also
see controlling the path in larger cultural contexts. For example,
politicians who see people suffering and rather than actually walking
alongside them, make people feel like they're understood and they're not
alone, while actually leveraging and exploiting their emotion for
political gain and influence. I see your struggles and your pain. You
don't deserve it. Here's who's to blame and here's how I can help you
and make them pay. This near enemy is so seductive that it is often as
dangerous as the far enemy: walking away. Power is another element of
walking alongside, and it's not one we talk about often enough. I think
it's because we have a weird, negative reaction to the word "power,"
even though everyone will tell you that powerlessness is one of the most
painful human experiences. My favorite definition of power comes from
Martin Luther King, Jr. In a 1968 speech given to striking sanitation
workers in Memphis, Reverend King defined power as the ability to
achieve purpose and effect change. The definition does not make the
nature of power inherently good or bad, which aligns with what I've
learned in my work. What makes power dangerous is how it's used. Power
over is dangerous because it's using disproportional influence to
achieve gain, even when that diminishes the agency and/or dignity of
others.

In their publication Making Change Happen: Power, Just Associates, a
global interdisciplinary network of activists, organizers, educators,
and scholars, defines three variations of power within the context of
social justice and activism. They are equally helpful when we think
about walking alongside people. Power with is "based on mutual support,
solidarity, collaboration and recognition and respect for differences."
Power to is "based on the belief that each individual has the power to
make a difference." Power within is defined by an ability to recognize
differences and respect others, grounded in a strong foundation of
self-worth and selfknowledge. When we operate from a place of power
within, we feel comfortable challenging assumptions and long-held
beliefs, pushing against the status quo, and asking if there aren't
other ways to achieve the highest common good. Walking away, the far
enemy of walking alongside, includes both discounting and dominating
behaviors such as ignoring, dismissing, power over, and building walls
(literally and figurately). If you combine the entire column of near
enemy and far enemy from this category, you'll get an interesting tool
for assessing politics. The combination of control and power-over
masquerading as connection is especially destructive.

Practicing Story Stewardship I'm going to start this section by
acknowledging that I've been wrong about something for years. For two
decades, I've said, "We need to understand emotion so we can recognize
it in ourselves and others." Without exaggeration, I've said this
thousands of times and I've heard it from other

researchers at least that much. Well, let me go on the record right now:
I no longer believe that we can recognize emotion in other people,
regardless of how well we understand human emotion and experience or how
much language we have. Why have I stopped believing that we can
recognize emotion in other people? Two reasons: 1. Too many emotions and
experiences present the exact same way. There's no way to know through
observation if your tears come from grief, despair, hopelessness, or
resentment, just to name a few. Absolutely no way. 2. While research
shows that there are some universal facial expressions for a small
number of emotions, how we express what we're feeling and experiencing
can be as unique as we are. So how do we know what other people are
feeling? We ask them. It's only then that we are able to connect with
the grounded confidence to engage and the courage to walk alongside.
When they tell us what they're feeling, what happened, what they fear or
desire, we listen and we become trusted stewards of their stories. Story
stewardship means honoring the sacred nature of story---the ones we
share and the ones we hear---and knowing that we've been entrusted with
something valuable or that we have something valuable that we should
treat with respect and care. We are good stewards of the stories we tell
by trusting them to people who have earned the right to hear them, and
telling them only when we are ready. We are good stewards of the stories
we hear by listening, being curious, affirming, and believing people
when they tell us how they experienced something.

The near enemy of practicing story stewardship is performing connection
while driving disconnection. Performative connection means that we're
acting interested or invested, but there's more going on under the
surface that's really driving disconnection and separation. The issues
that most of us struggle with are being the knower, advice-giving, and
problem-solving. Problem-solving is tough because some people do want
help. The best story stewardship in these moments is just to say, "I'm
grateful that you're sharing this with me. What does support look like?
I can listen and be with you, I can help problem-solve, or whatever else
you need. You tell me." The greatest threat to story stewardship is the
two near enemies of building narrative trust: narrative takeover and
narrative tap-out. Rather than building trust by acknowledging,
affirming, and believing, we shut people down when we experience
discomfort or disinterest, or when we take over the narrative and make
it about us or our perception of what happened. There are examples of
both of these in the graphic comic strip that Gavin developed for us,
which you'll find in a few pages. Narrative tap-outs can range from
subtle disinterest to complete shutdowns. If we had thought bubbles
they'd say "This is too uncomfortable" or "I don't care enough about you
to care about this" or "I can't take this on right now." If the reason
we're tapping out is the latter, it's so much better to say that than to
diminish someone's story. It sounds weird, but we can tap out of sharing
our own stories too. Often this is about a lack of grounded confidence
that our stories matter or a lack of self-trust about when and how we
share them. Tapping out of stewarding someone's story can feel like
betrayal, and tapping out of sharing our own story feels like betraying
ourselves. Narrative takeover is a huge problem in our world. It impacts
one-on-one conversations and cultural conversations. Rather than being
good stewards of a story, we hijack the story and center ourselves. That
centering takes

many different shapes, including shifting the focus to us, questioning
or not believing what someone is sharing because it's different than our
lived experience, or diminishing the importance of an experience because
it makes us feel uncomfortable or, worse, complicit. When we reject the
truth of someone's story---the ultimate failure of story
stewardship---it's often because we've stealthily centered ourselves in
their story, and the narrative takeover is about protecting our ego,
behavior, or privilege. The less diverse our lived experiences, the more
likely we are to find ourselves struggling with narrative takeover or
narrative tap-out. A cultural example of narrative takeover is the Black
Lives Matter movement. This is a life-affirming accountability movement
to call attention to the violence being perpetrated against Black
people. But rather than listening, learning, and believing the stories
of injustice, systemic racism, and pain, groups of white people centered
themselves with "all lives matter" and "blue lives matter." There was
never a narrative of "white lives and police lives don't matter" in this
movement. This was an attempt to, once again, decenter Black lives and
take over the narrative. Like empathy, story stewardship is not walking
in someone else's shoes, it's being curious and building narrative trust
as they tell you about the experience of being in their own shoes. It's
about believing people when they tell you what an experience meant to
them. The far enemy of narrative trust is fueling narrative distrust and
diminishing the humanity of others and ourselves. Why ourselves? Because
when we are reckless with people's stories, we diminish our own
humanity. The following comic is based on a role play that Aiko Bethea
and I did on the Dare to Lead podcast.

Language and Meaningful Connection As you review the model, you'll see
that knowing and applying the language of human experience and emotion
is a key property of all of the major categories that support meaningful
connection. That's how we ended up here, together, sharing this book.
When this emerged from the data, I thought, "Damn. I can't write a book
on meaningful connection without including some kind of glossary or
compendium of emotion and experience words." It was and remains weirdly
shocking to me that access to and application of language are central to
grounded confidence, walking alongside one another, and story
stewardship. I wouldn't have been surprised to see language emerge as
core to one of these, but that it's central to all three speaks to its
power. As you can see in the graphic, the near enemy of knowing and
applying language is shaping emotion and experience to fit what we know.
We take nuanced experiences like despair or hopelessness and force them
into whatever language we have---maybe sadness or anger. But this leaves
us far less capable of sharing what we're experiencing, getting help, or
moving through our experiences productively. It's a near enemy because
we may be talking about our feelings or sharing them, but we can't get
to healing because we're limited by our language. The far enemy is
acting out, shutting down, or giving up. No access to language means
we're in pain, we feel alone, and we can't articulate what's happening.
In the introduction, I gave an example of trying to tell a doctor about
an excruciating pain in your shoulder while your mouth is taped and your
hands are tied behind your back. The limits of not being able to explain
result in an unbearable level of frustration.

Atlas of the Heart While I experienced a lot of tough moments growing
up, there were also countless gifts. It sometimes feels like it has to
be one or the other, but as

we learned in this work, both things can be true and often are true. One
of the most valuable gifts in my life was from my mom. She taught us to
never look away from pain. The lesson was simple and clear: Don't look
away. Don't look down. Don't pretend not to see hurt. Look people in the
eye. Even when their pain is overwhelming. And when you're hurting and
in pain, find the people who can look you in the eye. We need to know
we're not alone---especially when we're hurting. Even in my fifties, I
find myself wrestling with the same questions that left me confused as a
kid: Why do we cause each other so much pain, and why do we turn away
from hurt when the only way to the other side of struggle is through it?
I don't know why it's so hard to understand---I've been known to run
from vulnerability like someone is chasing me. Granted, not very often
anymore. It just takes so much more energy and creates so much more
emotional churn than having a seat and asking hurt or uncertainty to
pull up a chair. Doing this research and writing this book has taught me
that our emotions and experiences are layers of biology, biography,
behavior, and backstory. Every single day, our feelings and experiences
show up in our bodies, they're shaped by where we come from and how we
were raised, they drive how we show up, and each feeling has its own
unique backstory. Understanding these emotions and experiences is our
life's work. The more we learn, the deeper we can continue to explore.
I've also learned something that has changed how I move through my life
on a daily basis: Our connection with others can only be as deep as our
connection with ourselves. If I don't know and understand who I am and

what I need, want, and believe, I can't share myself with you. I need to
be connected to myself, in my own body, and learning what makes me work.
This is how I start to develop the grounded confidence I need to move
through the world and cultivate meaningful connection with others.
Before this work, I didn't give enough importance to spending time and
energy connecting to myself. I made that optional if I had anything left
after connecting with others. It wasn't working---and now I know why. In
this life, we will know and bear witness to incredible sorrow and
anguish, and we will experience breathless love and joy. There will be
boring days and exciting moments, low-grade disappointment and seething
anger, wonder and confusion. The wild and ever-changing nature of
emotions and experiences leaves our hearts stretch-marked and strong,
worn and willing. My hope is that we find that solid ground within us,
that shore that offers safe harbor when we're feeling untethered and
adrift. The more confident we are about being able to navigate to that
place, the more daring our adventures, and the more connected we are to
ourselves and each other. The real gift of learning language, practicing
this work, and cultivating meaningful connection is being able to go
anywhere without the fear of getting lost. Even when we have no idea
where we are or where we're going, with the right map, we can find our
way back to our heart and to our truest self. OceanofPDF.com

to PC and BT, You don't know me. love, TJ

OceanofPDF.com

Gratitude There is absolutely no way you'd be holding this book in your
hands if it weren't for a huge team of people who worked tirelessly to
make it happen. The research, the art and design, the planning, the new
website, the editing and production, the launch plans, the
contracts---it's a miracle and I'm grateful beyond words. The Brené
Brown Education and Research Group Team: To Ellen Alley, Suzanne
Barrall, Bethany Bloomer, Cookie Boeker, Ronda Dearing, Lauren Emmerson,
Kristin Enyart, Margarita Flores, Lauren Smith Ford, Barrett Guillen,
Stacy Hollister, Zehra Javed, Charles Kiley, Bryan Longoria, Murdoch
Mackinnon, Laura Mayes, Elizabeth Newell, Tati Reznick, Gabi Rodriguez,
Ashley Brown Ruiz, Teresa Sample, Nayda Sanchez, Paola Sánchez Valdez,
Kathryn Schultz, Tara Seetharam, Anne Stoeber, Donna Van Worthe, Karen
Walrond, and Genia Williams. You are the OG awkward, brave, and kind
army! I couldn't do it without you and I wouldn't want to. Thank you for
making this work possible. To the research team of Ronda, Ellen, and
Paola: Thank you for the greatness and the grind. Ronda, thank you for
always having my back. And my eighty-seven emotions and experiences. The
Random House Team: To my editor, Ben Greenberg: It's a really good thing
that you're so funny and smart and cuss a lot and have great taste in
music and eat tacos. Otherwise we'd spend all of our time together
crying. You are the very best.

To the Random House team of Barbara Bachman, Maria Braeckel, Catherine
Bucaria, Gina Centrello, Susan Corcoran, Nancy Delia, Benjamin Dreyer,
Karen Dziekonski, Lisa Feuer, Barbara Fillon, Melissa Folds, Ayelet
Gruenspecht, Loren Noveck, Joe Perez, Tom Perry, Sandra Sjursen, Kaeli
Subberwal, Andy Ward, Stacey Witcraft, and Theresa Zoro: Thank you for
making Random House feel like home. I know how much work it takes to
make a book like this happen---I'm grateful. The William Morris Endeavor
Team: To Suzanne Gluck, Tracy Fisher, Caitlin Mahony, and the entire
team at William Morris Endeavor: Thank you and let's keep changing the
world! After we rest. The Global Prairie Team: To Mike and Wendy
Hauser---you're family. Thank you for always showing up, being brave,
and believing in beauty and excellence in all things. To Jennifer Barr,
Heather Davis, Erica Gonzales, Ashley Lane, and Gina Lanzalaco: You put
your heart into this work and I'm grateful. It looks like love. To Gavin
Aung Than: I sent you an email that said, "I love your art, will you
please help me with this book?" You said YES! and I've been blown away
ever since. Thank you so much for breathing life into these words. The
Home Team: Love and thanks to Deanne Rogers and David Robinson; Chuck
Brown; Jacobina Alley; Corky and Jack Crisci; Ashley and Amaya Ruiz;
Barrett, Frankie, and Gabi Guillen; Jason and Layla Brown; Jen, David,
Larkin, and Pierce Alley; Shif and Negash Berhanu; Margarita Flores; and
Lucy Verni. To Ashley and Barrett: #youdontknowme #doyourwork #STFD

To Steve, Ellen, and Charlie: You are the breathless love and joy that I
write about. To Lucy: You are the weird Ewok who fills me with wonder.
And love. OceanofPDF.com

Notes

INTRODUCTION Leave it to Beaver Joe Connelly and Bob Mosher (creators
and producers). Leave It to Beaver, aired 1957--63. The Exorcist William
Friedkin (director), The Exorcist (Burbank, CA: Warner Bros., 1973).
Sybil Daniel Petrie (director), Sybil (New York: National Broadcasting
Company, 1976). Carrie Brian De Palma (director), Carrie (Beverly Hills,
CA: United Artists, 1976). "The limits of my language" Ludwig
Wittgenstein. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (London: Kegan Paul,
Trench, Trubner & Co., 1922), 74 (page number from 2010 Project
Gutenberg eBook version). we have compelling research Kristen A.
Lindquist, Ajay B. Satpute, and Maria Gendron, "Does Language Do More
than Communicate Emotion?" Current Directions in Psychological Science
24, no. 2 (2015):99--108. doi: 10.1177/​0963721414553440. Language speeds
and strengthens Ibid. "Learning to label emotions" Susan David,
Emotional Agility: Get Unstuck, Embrace Change, and Thrive in Work and
Life (New York: Avery, 2016), 85. "do much, much better at managing"
Ibid. greater emotion regulation Lisa Feldman Barrett, James Gross,
Tamlin Conner Christensen, and Michael Benvenuto, "Knowing What You're
Feeling and Knowing What to Do About It: Mapping the Relation between
Emotion Differentiation and Emotion Regulation," Cognition and Emotion
15, no. 6 (2001):713--24. doi: 10.1080/​02699930143000239. psychosocial
well-being Yasemin Erbas, Eva Ceulemans, Madeline Lee Pe, Peter Koval,
and Peter Kuppens, "Negative Emotion Differentiation: Its Personality
and Well-being Correlates and a Comparison of Different Assessment
Methods," Cognition and Emotion 28, no. 7 (2014):1196-- 1213. doi:
10.1080/​02699931.2013.875890. emotions "signal rewards and dangers"
David, Emotional Agility, 85. our emotions help us make sense As
summarized by Yasemin Erbas, Eva Ceulemans, Elisabeth S. Blanke, Laura
Sels, Agneta Fischer, and Peter Kuppens, "Emotion Differentiation
Dissected: Between-Category, Within-Category, and Integral Emotion
Differentiation, and Their Relation to Well-being," Cognition and
Emotion 33, no. 2 (2019):258--71. doi: 10.1080/​ 02699931.2018.1465894;
Yasemin Erbas, Laura Sels, Eva Ceulemans, and Peter Kuppens, "Feeling
Me, Feeling You: The Relation between Emotion Differentiation and
Empathic

Accuracy," Social Psychological and Personality Science 7, no. 3
(2016):240--47. doi: 10.1177/​ 1948550616633504. "As human beings"
Eduardo Bericat, "The Sociology of Emotions: Four Decades of Progress,"
Current Sociology 64, no. 3 (2016):491--513, 491. doi:
10.1177/​0011392115588355. "It's been said that there are" As related to
interviewer Julie Beck in Julie Beck, "Hard Feelings: Science's Struggle
to Define Emotions," Atlantic, February 24, 2015. Some researchers place
all emotions As described in Lisa A. Cavanaugh, Deborah J. MacInnis, and
Allen M. Weiss, "Perceptual Dimensions Differentiate Emotions,"
Cognition and Emotion 30, no. 8 (2016):1430--45. doi:
10.1080/​02699931.2015.1070119. Individual-specific reactions Beck, "Hard
Feelings." "The only thing certain" Ibid. "broad areas of agreement"
Paul Ekman, "What Scientists Who Study Emotion Agree About,"
Perspectives on Psychological Science 11, no. 1 (2016):31--34, 33. doi:
10.1177/​ 1745691615596992. universal voice and facial expression signals
Ekman, "What Scientists Who Study Emotion Agree About." Ekman believes
there is clear evidence Paul Ekman and Daniel Cordaro, "What Is Meant by
Calling Emotions Basic," Emotion Review 3, no. 4 (2011):364--70. doi:
10.1177/​ 1754073911410740. at least twenty-seven or twenty-eight
emotions Alan S. Cowen and Dacher Keltner, "Self-Report Captures 27
Distinct Categories of Emotion Bridged by Continuous Gradients," PNAS,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 114, no. 38 (2017):E7900--E7909. doi: 10.1073/​pnas.1702247114;
Alan S. Cowen and Dacher Keltner, "What the Face Displays: Mapping 28
Emotions Conveyed by Naturalistic Expression," American Psychologist 75,
no. 3 (2020):349--64. doi: 10.1037/amp0000488 10.1037/​ amp0000488.supp.
including his book Sprawlball Kirk Goldsberry, Sprawlball: A Visual Tour
of the New Era of the NBA (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2019).

#1 PLACES WE GO WHEN THINGS ARE UNCERTAIN OR TOO MUCH We feel stressed
when Sheldon Cohen, Tom Kamarck, and Robin Mermelstein, "A Global
Measure of Perceived Stress," Journal of Health and Social Behavior 24,
no. 4 (1983):385--96. Stressful situations cause both Nida Ali, Jonas P.
Nitschke, Cory Cooperman, and Jens C. Pruessner, "Suppressing the
Endocrine and Autonomic Stress Systems Does Not Impact the Emotional
Stress Experience after Psychosocial Stress," Psychoneuroendocrinology
78 (2017):125--30. doi: 10.1016/​j.psyneuen.2017.01.015. In fact, chronic
exposure Bruce S. McEwen, "Stressed or Stressed Out: What Is the
Difference?," Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience 30, no. 5
(2005):315--18. High levels of perceived stress Sheldon Cohen and Denise
Janicki-Deverts, "Who's Stressed? Distributions of Psychological Stress
in the United States in Probability Samples from 1983, 2006, and 2009,"
Journal of Applied Social Psychology 42, no. 6 (2012):1320--34. doi:
10.1111/​ j.1559-1816.2012.00900.x.

"that our lives are somehow" Jon Kabat-Zinn, "Overwhelmed," Mindfulness
10, no. 6 (2019):1188--89, 1188. doi: 10.1007/​s12671-019-01150-6. When I
read that Kabat-Zinn Ibid. In fact, researcher Carol Gohm Carol L. Gohm,
"Mood Regulation and Emotional Intelligence: Individual Differences,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84, no. 3 (2003):594-- 607.
doi: 10.1037/​0022-3514.84.3.594. There's a frightening scene Mel Stuart
(director), Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (Burbank, CA: Wolper
Productions, 1971). "There's no earthly way" Lyrics were modified from
the original book version for the movie. Ibid. and Roald Dahl, Charlie
and the Chocolate Factory (New York: Puffin Books, 1964). "you are
afraid of surrender" Elizabeth Gilbert (@Elizabeth_gilbert_writer),
Instagram post, July 12, 2020. "an emotion characterized by feelings"
American Psychological Association, "Anxiety," Psychology Topics. "A
trait is considered" The Oxford Review, "The Difference between a State
and a Trait," The Oxford Review of Encyclopaedia of Terms. "However,
working out" Ibid. "generalized anxiety disorder is a condition" Johns
Hopkins Medicine, "What Is Generalized Anxiety Disorder?," Health.
Approximately one-third Borwin Bandelow and Sophie Michaelis,
"Epidemiology of Anxiety Disorders in the 21st Century," Dialogues in
Clinical Neuroscience 17, no. 3 (2015):327--35; Ronald C. Kessler, Maria
Petukhova, Nancy A. Sampson, Alan M. Zaslavsky, and Hans-Ullrich
Wittchen, "Twelve-Month and Lifetime Prevalence and Lifetime Morbid Risk
of Anxiety and Mood Disorders in the United States," International
Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 21, no. 3 (2012):169--84.
doi: 10.1002/mpr.1359; Ayelet Meron Ruscio, Lauren S. Hallion, Carmen C.
W. Lim, Sergio Aguilar-Gaxiola, Ali Al-Hamzawi, Jordi Alonso, Laura
Helena Andrade, et al., "Cross-Sectional Comparison of the Epidemiology
of DSM-5 Generalized Anxiety Disorder across the Globe," JAMA Psychiatry
74, no. 5 (2017):465--75. doi: 10.1001/​jamapsychiatry.2017.0056. An
intolerance for uncertainty Siqi Chen, Nisha Yao, and Mingyi Qian, "The
Influence of Uncertainty and Intolerance of Uncertainty on Anxiety,"
Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry 61
(2018):60--65. doi: 10.1016/​j.jbtep.2018.06.005; Kevin S. LaBar, "Fear
and Anxiety," in Handbook of Emotions, edited by Lisa Feldman Barrett,
Michael Lewis, and Jeannette M. Haviland-Jones (New York: Guilford
Press, 2016), 751--73. Our anxiety often leads to David H. Barlow,
"Unraveling the Mysteries of Anxiety and Its Disorders from the
Perspective of Emotion Theory," American Psychologist 55, no. 11
(2000):1247--1263. doi: 10.1037/​0003-066X.55.11.1247. What really got me
Sam Cartwright-Hatton and Adrian Wells, "Beliefs About Worry and
Intrusions: The Meta-Cognitions Questionnaire and Its Correlates,"
Journal of Anxiety Disorders 11, no. 3 (1997):279--96. doi:
10.1016/​S0887-6185(97)00011-X. "It is not fear that stops" Harriet
Lerner, The Dance of Fear: Rising Above Anxiety, Fear, and Shame to Be
Your Best and Bravest Self (New York: HarperCollins, 2004), 206--07.
Even though excitement Chan Jean Lee and Eduardo B. Andrade, "Fear,
Excitement, and Financial Risk-Taking," Cognition and Emotion 29, no. 1
(2014):178--87. doi: 10.1080/​ 02699931.2014.898611.

Researchers found that labeling Alison Wood Brooks, "Get Excited:
Reappraising PrePerformance Anxiety as Excitement," Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General 143, no. 3 (2014):1144--58. doi:
10.1037/a0035325. Dread occurs frequently Christine R. Harris, "Feelings
of Dread and Intertemporal Choice," Journal of Behavioral Decision
Making 25, no. 1 (2012):13--28. doi: 10.1002/bdm.709. Because dread
makes an anticipated Giles W. Story, Ivaylo Vlaev, Ben Seymour, Joel S.
Winston, Ara Darzi, and Raymond J. Dolan, "Dread and the Disvalue of
Future Pain," PLOS Computational Biology 9, no. 11 (2013.):1--18. doi:
10.1371/​journal.pcbi.1003335. For anxiety and dread, the threat Sean
Wake, Jolie Wormwood, and Ajay B. Satpute,"The Influence of Fear on Risk
Taking: A Meta-Analysis," Cognition and Emotion 34, no. 6
(2020):1143--59. doi: 10.1080/​02699931.2020.1731428. Fear arises when we
need Barlow, "Unraveling the Mysteries." social pain and physical pain
Naomi I. Eisenberger, "The Pain of Social Disconnection: Examining the
Shared Neural Underpinnings of Physical and Social Pain," Nature Reviews
Neuroscience 13, no. 6 (2012):421--34. doi: 10.1038/nrn3231. "Throughout
evolutionary history, anxiety" Lerner, Dance of Fear, 49--50.

#2 PLACES WE GO WHEN WE COMPARE "comparing the self with others" Jerry
Suls, René Martin, and Ladd Wheeler, "Social Comparison: Why, with Whom,
and with What Effect?" Current Directions in Psychological Science 1,
no. 5 (2002):159--63, 159. I've collected data Brené Brown, The Gifts of
Imperfection: Let Go of Who You Think You're Supposed to Be and Embrace
Who You Are (Center City, MN: Hazelden Publishing, 2010). "When we
engage in upward social comparison" Alicia Nortje, "Social Comparison:
An Unavoidable Upward or Downward Spiral," PositivePsychology.com, March
31, 2021. "Social comparisons can make us" Frank Fujita, "The Frequency
of Social Comparison and Its Relation to Subjective Well-Being," in The
Science of Subjective Well-Being, edited by Michael Eid and Randy J.
Larsen (New York: Guilford Press, 2008), 254. "From this perspective,
when" Ibid., 241. Whenever I find myself in comparison Brené Brown
(host), "Brené with Scott Sonenshein on Stretching and Chasing,"
September 9, 2020, Unlocking Us, podcast. Scott Sonenshein about his
wonderful book Scott Sonenshein, Stretch: Unlock the Power of Less---
and Achieve More Than You Ever Imagined (New York: HarperCollins, 2017).
"Reverence is a cardinal virtue" Amy L. Ai, Paul Wink, Terry Lynn Gall,
Michele Dillon, and Terrence N. Tice, "Assessing Reverence in Contexts:
A Positive Emotion Related to Psychological Functioning," Journal of
Humanistic Psychology 57, no. 1 (2017):64--97, 65. doi:
10.1177/​0022167815586657. "Envy typically involves two people" Richard
H. Smith and Sung Hee Kim, "Comprehending Envy," Psychological Bulletin
133, no. 1 (2007):46--64, 47, emphasis added. doi: 10.1037/​
0033-2909.133.1.46. recalled episodes of envy Katrin Rentzsch and James
J. Gross, "Who Turns Green with Envy? Conceptual and Empirical
Perspectives on Dispositional Envy," European Journal of Personality 29,
no. 5 (2015):530--47.

"The core form of jealousy" Mingi Chung and Christine R. Harris,
"Jealousy as a Specific Emotion: The Dynamic Functional Model," Emotion
Review 10, no. 4 (2018):272--87, 273. doi: 10.1177/​1754073918795257. We
mostly think of jealousy David DeSteno, Piercarlo Valdesolo, and Monica
Y. Bartlett, "Jealousy and the Threatened Self: Getting to the Heart of
the Green-Eyed Monster," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
91, no. 4 (2006):626--41. doi: 10.1037/​0022-3514.91.4.626. In children,
jealousy most often Meghan K. Loeser, Shawn D. Whiteman, and Susan M.
McHale, "Siblings' Perceptions of Differential Treatment, Fairness, and
Jealousy and Adolescent Adjustment: A Moderated Indirect Effects Model,"
Journal of Child and Family Studies 25, no. 8 (2016):2405--14. doi:
10.1007/​s10826-016-0429-2. While jealousy is frequently Laura K.
Guerrero and Peter A. Andersen, "The Dark Side of Jealousy and Envy:
Desire, Delusion, Desperation, and Destructive Communication," in The
Dark Side of Close Relationships, edited by Brian H. Spitzberg and
William R. Cupach (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers,
1998), 33--70. high levels of jealousy are directly related Heather M.
Foran and K. Daniel O'Leary, "Problem Drinking, Jealousy, and Anger
Control: Variables Predicting Physical Aggression against a Partner,"
Journal of Family Violence 23, no. 3 (2008):141--48. doi:
10.1007/​s10896-007-91365. frequent experiences of jealousy Meagan J.
Brem, Ryan C. Shorey, Emily F. Rothman, Jeff R. Temple, and Gregory L.
Stuart, "Trait Jealousy Moderates the Relationship between Alcohol
Problems and Intimate Partner Violence among Men in Batterer
Intervention Programs," Violence Against Women 24, no. 10
(2018):1132--48. doi: 10.1177/​1077801218781948. It's normal to feel
Laura K. Guerrero, Annegret F. Hannawa, and Elizabeth A. Babin, "The
Communicative Responses to Jealousy Scale: Revision, Empirical
Validation, and Associations with Relational Satisfaction,"
Communication Methods and Measures 5, no. 3 (2011):223--49. doi:
10.1080/​19312458.2011.596993; Laura K. Guerrero, "Jealousy and
Relational Satisfaction: Actor Effects, Partner Effects, and the
Mediating Role of Destructive Communicative Responses to Jealousy,"
Western Journal of Communication 78, no. 5 (2014):586--611. doi:
10.1080/​10570314.2014.935468; Peter Salovey and Judith Rodin, "The Heart
of Jealousy," Psychology Today (September 1995), 22--29. "Jealousy in
romance is" Maya Angelou, Wouldn't Take Nothing for My Journey Now (New
York: Random House, 1993), 129. more satisfied in their romantic
relationships D.P.H. Barelds and P. Barelds-Dijkstra, "Relations between
Different Types of Jealousy and Self and Partner Perceptions of
Relationship Quality," Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy 14, no. 3
(2007):176--88. doi: 10.1002/cpp.532. unwanted identity is the most
powerful elicitor Tamara J. Ferguson, Heidi L. Eyre, and Michael
Ashbaker, "Unwanted Identities: A Key Variable in Shame-Anger Links and
Gender Differences in Shame," Sex Roles 42, no. 3--4 (2000), 133--157.
"I've got a personal question" Brené Brown (host), "Dr. Marc Brackett
and Brené on 'Permission to Feel' " April 14, 2020, Unlocking Us,
podcast. I was alone at the movie theater Jodie Foster (director), Home
for the Holidays (New York: Egg Pictures, 1995). "epicaricacy" captures
the same meaning Ciaran J. Breen, "Another Word for Schadenfreude," The
Irish Times, January 4, 2010.

"It is an old German word" Ben Cohen, "Schadenfreude Is in the
Zeitgeist, but Is There an Opposite Term? Word for Taking Pain in
Another's Pleasure Is 'Gluckschmerz,' or Is It?" Wall Street Journal,
June 12, 2015. "schadenfreude-free zone" Bill Wrubel (writer) and Bill
Lawrence, Jason Sudeikis, Brendan Hunt, and Joe Kelly (creators), Ted
Lasso, Season 1, Episode 6, "Two Aces," September 4, 2020, Apple TV+.
Schadenfreude involves counter-empathy Kathryn F. Jankowski and Hidehiko
Takahashi, "Cognitive Neuroscience of Social Emotions and Implications
for Psychopathology: Examining Embarrassment, Guilt, Envy, and
Schadenfreude," Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 68, no. 5
(2014):319--36. doi: 10.1111/pcn.12182. Schadenfreude has trait-like
properties Laura C. Crysel and Gregory D. Webster, "Schadenfreude and
the Spread of Political Misfortune," PLoS ONE 13, no. 9 (2018). "an
emotion typically born out of inferiority" Richard H. Smith and Wilco W.
van Dijk, "Schadenfreude and Gluckschmerz," Emotion Review 10, no. 4
(2018):293--304, 294. doi: 10.1177/​1754073918765657. "When others report
success to us" Catherine Chambliss, "The Role of Freudenfreude and
Schadenfreude in Depression," World Journal of Psychiatry and Mental
Health Research 2, no. 1 (2018):1--2, 1. 1. Shoy: intentionally Ibid.,
2. a leadership lesson I learned Abby Wambach, Wolfpack: How to Come
Together, Unleash Our Power, and Change the Game (New York: Celadon
Books, 2019). "You will not always be the goal scorer" Ibid., 56.

#3 PLACES WE GO WHEN THINGS DON'T GO AS PLANNED Boredom is the
uncomfortable state John D. Eastwood, Alexandra Frischen, Mark J.
Fenske, and Daniel Smilek, "The Unengaged Mind: Defining Boredom in
Terms of Attention," Perspectives on Psychological Science 7, no. 5
(2012):482--95. doi: 10.1177/​1745691612456044. What's unique about
boredom Edwin A. J. van Hooft and Madelon L. M. van Hooff, "The State of
Boredom: Frustrating or Depressing?" Motivation and Emotion 42, no. 6
(2018):931--46. doi: 10.1007/​s11031-018-9710-6. simple, boring tasks or
mundane activities Sandi Mann and Rebekah Cadman, "Does Being Bored Make
Us More Creative?" Creativity Research Journal 26, no. 2 (2014):165--73.
Wicked soundtrack Stephen Schwartz, Wicked: A New Musical (cast album)
(New York: Decca Broadway, 2003). "Boredom is your imagination" Sherry
Turkle (@Sturkle), "Boredom Is Your Imagination Calling to You," Twitter
post, October 31, 2015. For Rising Strong Brené Brown, Rising Strong:
The Reckoning. The Rumble. The Revolution (New York: Random House,
2015). disappointment is one of the most frequently Ulrich Schimmack and
Ed Diener, "Affect Intensity: Separating Intensity and Frequency in
Repeatedly Measured Affect," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 73, no. 6 (1997):1313--29. doi: 10.1037/​0022-3514.73.6.1313.
we come away from the experience of disappointment Eliane Sommerfeld,
"The Experience of Disappointment in the Context of Interpersonal
Relations: An Exploration Using a Mixed

Method Approach," Current Psychology: A Journal for Diverse Perspectives
on Diverse Psychological Issues 38, no. 6 (2019):1476--89. doi:
10.1007/​s12144-017-9703-8. Here's a story that I shared Brown, Rising
Strong. the power of "painting done" Brené Brown, Dare to Lead: Brave
Work. Tough Conversations. Whole Hearts. (New York: Random House, 2018).
unchecked and unexpressed expectations Brown, Rising Strong. one way to
minimize disappointment Kate Sweeny and James A. Shepperd, "The Costs of
Optimism and the Benefits of Pessimism," Emotion 10, no. 5
(2010):750--53. doi: 10.1037/a0019016. When I was researching Daring
Greatly Brené Brown, Daring Greatly: How the Courage to Be Vulnerable
Transforms the Way We Live, Love, Parent, and Lead (New York: Gotham
Books, 2012). Japanese animated film Spirited Away Hayao Miyazaki
(director), Spirited Away (Tokyo: Studio Ghibli, 2001). we tend to
regret bad outcomes Marcel Zeelenberg, Wilco W. van Dijk, Antony S. R.
Manstead, and Joop van der Pligt, "On Bad Decisions and Disconfirmed
Expectancies: The Psychology of Regret and Disappointment," Cognition
and Emotion 14, no. 4 (2000):521--41. doi: 10.1080/​ 026999300402781. one
of the most powerful lines about regret Brown, Rising Strong. "So here's
something I know" Joel Lovell, "George Saunders's Advice to Graduates,"
New York Times, July 31, 2013. a meta-analysis (a study of studies) Neal
J. Roese and Amy Summerville, "What We Regret Most, and Why,"
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 31, no. 9 (2005):1273--85.
doi: 10.1177/​ 0146167205274693. One reason we may avoid regret Hannah
Faye Chua, Richard Gonzalez, Stephan F. Taylor, Robert C. Welsh, and
Israel Liberzon, "Decision-Related Loss: Regret and Disappointment,"
NeuroImage 47, no. 4 (2009):2031--40. doi:
10.1016/​j.neuroimage.2009.06.006. When I was writing Brown, Rising
Strong. the image was from the film Rawson Marshall Thurber (director),
We're the Millers (Burbank, CA: New Line Cinema through Warner
Bros. Pictures, 2013).

#4 PLACES WE GO WHEN IT'S BEYOND US "If I had influence" Rachel Carson,
The Sense of Wonder: A Celebration of Nature for Parents and Children
(New York: HarperCollins, 1956). "Wonder inspires the wish to
understand" Ulrich Weger and Johannes Wagemann, "Towards a Conceptual
Clarification of Awe and Wonder: A First Person Phenomenological
Enquiry," Current Psychology: A Journal for Diverse Perspectives on
Diverse Psychological Issues 40, no. 3 (2021):1386--1401, 1393. doi:
10.1007/​s12144-018-0057-7. "to provide a stage" Ibid., 1387. "leads
people to cooperate" Dacher Keltner, "Why Do We Feel Awe?" Greater Good
Magazine: Science-Based Insights for a Meaningful Life, May 10, 2016.
causes them "to fully appreciate" Jennifer E. Stellar, Amie Gordon,
Craig L. Anderson, Paul K. Piff, Galen D. McNeil, and Dacher Keltner,
"Awe and Humility," Journal of Personality and

Social Psychology 114, no. 2 (2018):258--69. doi: 10.1037/pspi0000109,
266. "awe-inducing events may be" Dacher Keltner and Jonathan Haidt,
"Approaching Awe, a Moral, Spiritual, and Aesthetic Emotion," Cognition
and Emotion 17, no. 2 (2003):297--314, 312. doi: 10.1080/​02699930302297.
"I need time for my confusion" Adam Grant, Think Again: The Power of
Knowing What You Don't Know. (New York: Viking, 2021), 199. optimal
confusion This term was coined by D'Mello and colleagues in the
following article: Sidney D'Mello, Blair Lehman, Reinhard Pekrun, and
Art Graesser, "Confusion Can Be Beneficial for Learning," Learning and
Instruction 29 (2014): 153--70. doi: 10.1016/​
j.learninstruc.2012.05.003. it's categorized as an epistemic emotion
Elisabeth Vogl, Reinhard Pekrun, Kou Murayama, and Kristina Loderer,
"Surprised--Curious--Confused: Epistemic Emotions and Knowledge
Exploration," Emotion 20, no. 4 (2020):625--41. doi: 10.1037/emo0000578
10.1037/​ emo0000578.supp. we need to stop and think D'Mello, "Confusion
Can Be Beneficial." "To be effective, learning needs" Mary Slaughter and
David Rock, "No Pain, No Brain Gain: Why Learning Demands (a Little)
Discomfort," Fast Company, April 30, 2018 (emphasis added). too much
confusion can lead to frustration Sidney D'Mello and Art Graesser,
"Confusion and Its Dynamics During Device Comprehension with Breakdown
Scenarios," Acta Psychologica 151 (2014):106--16. doi:
10.1016/​j.actpsy.2014.06.005. Learning strategies most often used Ivana
Di Leo, Krista R. Muis, Cara A. Singh, and Cynthia Psaradellis,
"Curiosity...Confusion? Frustration! The Role and Sequencing of Emotions
During Mathematics Problem Solving," Contemporary Educational Psychology
58 (2019):121--37. doi: 10.1016/​j.cedpsych.2019.03.001. research on
curiosity Brené Brown, Rising Strong: The Reckoning. The Rumble. The
Revolution (New York: Random House, 2015); Brené Brown, Dare to Lead:
Brave Work. Tough Conversations. Whole Hearts. (New York: Random House,
2018). the "information gap" perspective George Loewenstein, "The
Psychology of Curiosity: A Review and Reinterpretation," Psychological
Bulletin 116, no. 1 (1994):75--98. doi: 10.1037/​00332909.116.1.75. "To
induce curiosity" Ibid., 94. "The important thing is not to stop
questioning" William Miller, "Death of a Genius: His Fourth Dimension,
Time, Overtakes Einstein," Life, May 2, 1955, 61--64, 64. my team and I
define surprise Sascha Topolinski and Fritz Strack, "Corrugator Activity
Confirms Immediate Negative Affect in Surprise," Frontiers in Psychology
6 February 6, 2015:134. "a bridge between cognition and emotion" Barbara
Mellers, Katrina Fincher, Caitlin Drummond, and Michelle Bigony,
"Surprise: A Belief or an Emotion?" in Progress in Brain Research,
edited by V. S. Chandrasekhar Pammi and Narayanan Srinivasan (Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 2013), 3--19, 3. In addition to being a short bridge Ibid.
surprising news is more likely to be shared Jeffrey Loewenstein,
"Surprise, Recipes for Surprise, and Social Influence," Topics in
Cognitive Science 11, no. 1 (2019):178--93. doi: 10.1111/tops.12312.

#5 PLACES WE GO WHEN THINGS AREN'T WHAT THEY SEEM his latest book, Think
Again Adam Grant, Think Again: The Power of Knowing What You Don't Know.
(New York: Viking, 2021). "As consumers of information" Ibid., 171.
amusement is connected to humor Belinda Campos, Michelle N. Shiota,
Dacher Keltner, Gian C. Gonzaga, and Jennifer L. Goetz, "What Is Shared,
What Is Different? Core Relational Themes and Expressive Displays of
Eight Positive Emotions," Cognition and Emotion 27, no. 1 (2013):37--52.
doi: 10.1080/​02699931.2012.683852. "pleasurable, relaxed excitation"
Willibald Ruch, "Amusement," in The Oxford Companion to Emotion and the
Affective Sciences, edited by David Sander and Klaus R. Scherer (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2009), 27. When we feel amusement Campos, "What
Is Shared, What Is Different?" breaks involving amusement David Cheng
and Lu Wang, "Examining the Energizing Effects of Humor: The Influence
of Humor on Persistence Behavior," Journal of Business and Psychology
30, no. 4 (2015):759--72. doi: 10.1007/​s10869-014-9396-z. "The
bittersweet side of appreciating" Marc Parent, Believing It All: What My
Children Taught Me About Trout Fishing, Jelly Toast, and Life (Boston,
MA: Little, Brown and Company, 2002). It's not the same as ambivalence
Jeff T. Larsen, "Holes in the Case for Mixed Emotions," Emotion Review
9, no. 2 (2017):118--23. doi: 10.1177/​1754073916639662. multiple
emotions...may be rapidly vacillating Anthony G. Vaccaro, Jonas T.
Kaplan, and Antonio Damasio, "Bittersweet: The Neuroscience of
Ambivalent Affect," Perspectives on Psychological Science 15, no. 5
(2020):1187--99. doi: 10.1177/​1745691620927708. It's possible that
feeling bittersweet Ibid. mixed emotion is not present in very young
children Ibid. "There's nothing wrong with celebrating" Stephanie
Coontz, "Beware Social Nostalgia," New York Times, May 18, 2013. "In the
late 1600s," Adrienne Matei,"Nostalgia's Unexpected Etymology Explains
Why It Can Feel So Painful," Quartz, October 22, 2017. cures for
nostalgia Ibid. Article can be accessed at
qz.com/​1108120/​nostalgias-unexpectedetymology-explains-why-it-can-feel-so-painful/.
Nostalgia was considered a medical disease Tim Wildschut, Constantine
Sedikides, Jamie Arndt, and Clay Routledge, "Nostalgia: Content,
Triggers, Functions," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 91,
no. 5 (2006):975--93. doi: 10.1037/​0022-3514.91.5.975. Today,
researchers describe nostalgia Constantine Sedikides, Tim Wildschut,
Jamie Arndt, and Clay Routledge, "Nostalgia: Past, Present, and Future,"
Current Directions in Psychological Science 17, no. 5 (2008):304--07.
doi: 10.1111/​j.1467-8721.2008.00595.x. putting ourselves at the center
of a story Wildschut, "Nostalgia: Content, Triggers, Functions."
"navigate successfully the vicissitudes" Sedikides, "Nostalgia: Past,
Present, and Future," 307. fascinating research from Sandra Garrido
Sandra Garrido, "The Influence of Personality and Coping Style on the
Affective Outcomes of Nostalgia: Is Nostalgia a Healthy Coping Mechanism
or Rumination?" Personality and Individual Differences 120
(2018):259--64. doi: 10.1016/​j.paid.2016.07.021. "involuntary focus on
negative and pessimistic thoughts" Ibid., 260. "highly adaptive" Ibid.

worry is focused on the future Colette R. Hirsch and Andrew Mathews, "A
Cognitive Model of Pathological Worry," Behaviour Research and Therapy
50, no. 10 (2012):636--46. doi: 10.1016/​ j.brat.2012.06.007. rumination
is a strong predictor of depression Mark A. Whisman, Alta du Pont, and
Peter Butterworth, "Longitudinal Associations between Rumination and
Depressive Symptoms in a Probability Sample of Adults," Journal of
Affective Disorders 260 (2020):680--86. doi: 10.1016/​j.jad.2019.09.035.
more likely to pay attention to negative things Kelly Yu-Hsin Liao and
Meifen Wei, "Intolerance of Uncertainty, Depression, and Anxiety: The
Moderating and Mediating Roles of Rumination," Journal of Clinical
Psychology 67, no. 12 (2011):1220--39. doi: 10.1002/jclp.20846. it's
important to reality-check Coontz, "Beware Social Nostalgia." My
favorite book on cognitive dissonance Carol Tavris and Elliot Aronson,
Mistakes Were Made (but Not by Me): Why We Justify Foolish Beliefs, Bad
Decisions, and Hurtful Acts, 3rd ed. (New York: Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2020). "engage in all kinds of cognitive gymnastics" Elliot
Aronson, "Dissonance, Hypocrisy, and the Self-Concept," in Cognitive
Dissonance: Reexamining a Pivotal Theory in Psychology, 2nd ed., edited
by Eddie Harmon-Jones (Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association, 2019), 144. "For Leon Festinger" Tavris, Mistakes Were
Made, v. "Many of her followers quit their jobs" Ibid., 16. "the
believers who had not made" Ibid., 16--17. "those who had given away
their possessions" Ibid., 17. "whatever they could to get others" Ibid.
"The engine that drives self-justification" Ibid., 17--18. "The greater
the magnitude" Eddie Harmon-Jones and Judson Mills, "An Introduction to
Cognitive Dissonance Theory and an Overview of Current Perspectives on
the Theory," in Cognitive Dissonance: Reexamining a Pivotal Theory in
Psychology, 2nd ed., edited by Eddie Harmon-Jones (Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association, 2019), 3. "Intelligence is
traditionally viewed as" Grant, Think Again, 2. "The paradox is one of
our most valuable" Carl G. Jung, "Psychology and Alchemy," in The
Collected Works of C. G. Jung, edited and translated by Gerhard Adler
and R.F.C. Hull. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1980),
15--16. "False dichotomies" Jim Collins and Bill Lazier, BE (Beyond
Entrepreneurship) 2.0: Turning Your Business into an Enduring Great
Company. 2nd Kindle ed. (New York: Portfolio, 2020), 158. rejecting
paradox can result in conflict Chris Changwha Chung and Paul W. Beamish,
"The Trap of Continual Ownership Change in International Equity Joint
Ventures," Organization Science 21, no. 5 (2010):995--1015. doi:
10.1287/​orsc.1090.0489; Diether Gebert, Sabine Boerner, and Eric
Kearney, "Fostering Team Innovation: Why Is It Important to Combine
Opposing Action Strategies?" Organization Science 21, no. 3
(2010):593--608. doi: 10.1287/​orsc.1090.0485; Jonathan Schad, Marianne
W. Lewis, Sebastian Raisch, and Wendy K. Smith, "Paradox Research in
Management Science: Looking Back to Move Forward," The Academy of
Management Annals 10, no. 1 (2016):5--64. doi:
10.1080/​19416520.2016.1162422. Irony and sarcasm are forms of
communication Ruth Filik, Alexandra Ţurcan, Christina RalphNearman, and
Alain Pitiot, "What Is the Difference between Irony and Sarcasm? An fMRI

Study," Cortex: A Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and
Behavior 115 (2019):112--22, 113. doi: 10.1016/​j.cortex.2019.01.025;
Melanie Glenwright and Penny M. Pexman, "Development of Children's
Ability to Distinguish Sarcasm and Verbal Irony," Journal of Child
Language 37, no. 2 (2010):429--51. doi: 10.1017/​S0305000909009520.
talking to someone you don't know well Ruth Filik, Alexandra Țurcan,
Dominic Thompson, Nicole Harvey, Harriet Davies, and Amelia Turner,
"Sarcasm and Emoticons: Comprehension and Emotional Impact," Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology 69, no. 11 (2016):2130--46. doi:
10.1080/​17470218.2015.1106566; Glenwright, "Development of Children's
Ability"; Penny M. Pexman and Meghan T. Zvaigzne, "Does Irony Go Better
with Friends?" Metaphor and Symbol 19, no. 2 (2004):143--63. doi:
10.1207/​s15327868ms1902_3. "the successful comprehension of irony"
Filik, "What Is the Difference," 113. Research on intent behind delivery
Maggie Toplak and Albert N. Katz, "On the Uses of Sarcastic Irony,"
Journal of Pragmatics 32, no. 10 (2000):1467--88. doi:
10.1016/​S0378-2166(99)001010. "children do not seem to distinguish"
Filik, "What Is the Difference," 114. "Although middle-school-age
children" Melanie Glenwright, Brent Tapley, Jacqueline K. S. Rano, and
Penny M. Pexman, "Developing Appreciation for Sarcasm and Sarcastic
Gossip: It Depends on Perspective," Journal of Speech, Language, and
Hearing Research 60, no. 11 (2017):3295--3309, 3307. doi:
10.1044/​2017_JSLHR-L-17-0058. When I read that these behaviors Julia
Jorgensen, "The Functions of Sarcastic Irony in Speech," Journal of
Pragmatics 26, no. 5 (1996):613--34. doi: 10.1016/​0378-2166(95)00067-4.

#6 PLACES WE GO WHEN WE'RE HURTING "Anguish...It's one of those words"
Ranata Suzuki, "Anguish," A Life Half Lived, December 13, 2014. This
painting by August August Friedrich Albrecht Schenck, Anguish, 1876/1880
(Melbourne, Australia: National Gallery of Victoria). one of the NGV's
most popular works Google Arts & Culture, "Anguish: August Friedrich
Schenck 1876/1880." Dark Elegy Suse Ellen Lowenstein, Dark Elegy, 1989
(Montauk, NY). "On December 21, 1988" Suse Ellen Lowenstein, email
message to author, June 2021. "trilogy of goals, pathways, and agency"
C. R. Snyder, ed., Handbook of Hope: Theory, Measures, and Applications
(San Diego: Academic Press, 2000.) According to Snyder Ibid.
Hopelessness arises Richard T. Liu, Evan M. Kleiman, Bridget A. Nestor,
and Shayna M. Cheek, "The Hopelessness Theory of Depression: A
Quarter-Century in Review," Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice
22, no. 4 (2015):345--65. doi: 10.1111/cpsp.12125. Let's look back at C.
R. Snyder's work Snyder, Handbook of Hope. In more than thirty years of
research Aaron T. Beck, Robert A. Steer, Maria Kovacs, and Betsy
Garrison, "Hopelessness and Eventual Suicide: A 10-Year Prospective
Study of Patients Hospitalized with Suicidal Ideation," The American
Journal of Psychiatry 142, no. 5 (1985):559--563. doi:
10.1176/​ajp.142.5.559; Sören Kliem, Anna Lohmann, Thomas Mößle, and
Elmar Brähler, "Psychometric Properties and Measurement Invariance of
the Beck

Hopelessness Scale (BHS: Results from a German Representative Population
Sample," BMC Psychiatry 18 no. 110 (2018): 1--11.
doi.org/​10.1186/​s12888-018-1646-6. "the belief that tomorrow will be
just like today" Rob Bell, "Despair Is a Spiritual Condition," part of
Oprah Winfrey's "The Life You Want" Weekend Tour, 2014. We all fear pain
and struggle Alexis M. May and E. David Klonsky, "Assessing Motivations
for Suicide Attempts: Development and Psychometric Properties of the
Inventory of Motivations for Suicide Attempts," Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behavior 43, no. 5 (2013):532--46; Jessica D. Ribeiro,
Xieyining Huang, Kathryn R. Fox, and Joseph C. Franklin, "Depression and
Hopelessness as Risk Factors for Suicide Ideation, Attempts and Death:
Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies," The British Journal of
Psychiatry 212, no. 5 (2018):279--86. doi: 10.1192/bjp.2018.27. Martin
Seligman's research Martin E. P. Seligman, Learned Optimism (New York:
Knopf, 1991). I posted a question on Instagram Brené Brown, "Thanks So
Much . . ," post on Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, June 28,
2021. The films that came up Roberto Benigni (director), Life Is
Beautiful (La Vita È Bella) (Rome, Italy: Melampo Cinematografica,
Cecchi Gori Group, 1997); James L. Brooks (director), Terms of
Endearment (Los Angeles: Paramount Pictures, 1983); Garry Marshall
(director), Beaches (United States: All Girl Productions, Silver Screen
Partners IV, Touchstone Pictures, 1988); Wayne Wang (director), The Joy
Luck Club (Burbank, CA: Hollywood Pictures, 1993); Steven Spielberg
(director), The Color Purple (United States: Amblin Entertainment, The
Guber-Peters Company, Warner Bros., 1985); Herbert Ross (director),
Steel Magnolias (United States: TriStar Pictures, Rastar Films, 1989);
Ang Lee (director), Brokeback Mountain (United States, Canada: Focus
Features, River Road Entertainment, Alberta Film Entertainment, Good
Machine, 2005); Richard LaGravenese (director), P.S. I Love You (United
States: Alcon Entertainment, Grosvenor Park Productions, Wendy Finerman
Productions, 2007); Pete Docter and Ronnie Del Carmen (directors),
Inside Out (Burbank, CA: Pixar Animation Studios, Walt Disney Pictures,
2015); Pete Docter and Bob Peterson (directors), Up (Burbank, CA: Pixar
Animation Studios, Walt Disney Pictures, 2009). I was caught off guard
in fourth grade Norman Tokar (director), Where the Red Fern Grows
(United States: Doty-Dayton Productions, 1974); Robert Stevenson
(director), Old Yeller (Burbank, CA: Walt Disney Productions, 1957).
Sadness and depression are not the same thing American Psychiatric
Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th
ed. (Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 2013). "Though
much has been made" Joseph P. Forgas,"Four Ways Sadness May Be Good for
You," Greater Good Science Center, June 4, 2014. "Evolutionary theory
suggests that" Ibid. Additionally, some scholars have speculated Matthew
C. Keller and Randolph M. Nesse, "The Evolutionary Significance of
Depressive Symptoms: Different Adverse Situations Lead to Different
Depressive Symptom Patterns," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 91, no. 2 (2006):316--30. doi: 10.1037/​0022-3514.91.2.316.
investigated the sad-film paradox Julian Hanich, Valentin Wagner, Mira
Shah, Thomas Jacobsen, and Winfried Menninghaus, "Why We Like to Watch
Sad Films. The Pleasure of Being Moved in Aesthetic Experiences,"
Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts 8, no. 2
(2014):130--43. doi: 10.1037/a0035690 10.1037/​a0035690.supp.

"highly significant positive correlation" Ibid., 130. Sadness leads to
feeling moved Jonna K. Vuoskoski and Tuomas Eerola, "The Pleasure Evoked
by Sad Music Is Mediated by Feelings of Being Moved," Frontiers in
Psychology 8 (2017). "Hence sadness primarily functions as a
contributor" Hanich, "Why We Like to Watch Sad Films," 130. "Grief does
not obey your plans" Elizabeth Gilbert (@Elizabeth_gilbert_writer),
"Grief Does Not Obey," Instagram post, June 6, 2018. "A central process
in grieving" Robert A. Neimeyer, "Meaning Reconstruction in Bereavement:
Development of a Research Program," Death Studies 43, no. 2
(2019):79--91, 80. doi: 10.1080/​ 07481187.2018.1456620. "When a person
adapts to a loss" The Center for Complicated Grief, "Complicated Grief
Public Overview." "Each person's grief is as unique as their
fingerprint" Brené Brown (host), "David Kessler and Brené on Grief and
Finding Meaning," March 31, 2020, Unlocking Us, podcast. "Most people
who struggle with complicating loss" Neimeyer, "Meaning Reconstruction
in Bereavement," 84. Acute grief occurs The Center for Complicated
Grief, "Complicated Grief Public Overview." "is not openly acknowledged"
Tashel Bordere, "Disenfranchisement and Ambiguity in the Face of Loss:
The Suffocated Grief of Sexual Assault Survivors," Family Relations: An
Interdisciplinary Journal of Applied Family Studies 66, no. 1
(2017):29--45, 31. doi: 10.1111/fare.12231. As an illustrative example
Ibid.

#7 PLACES WE GO WITH OTHERS "virtuous response" Shane Sinclair, Susan
McClement, Shelley Raffin-Bouchal, Tom Hack, Neil Hagen, Shelagh
McConnell, and Harvey Chochinov, "Compassion in Health Care: An
Empirical Model," Journal of Pain and Symptom Management 51
(2016):193--203, 195. doi: 10.1016/​j.jpainsymman.2015.10.009. "When we
practice" Pima Chödrön, The Places That Scare You: A Guide to
Fearlessness in Difficult Times (Boston: Shambhala Publications, 2001).
" 'Near enemy' is a useful Buddhist concept" Kristin Neff, Fierce
Self-Compassion: How Women Can Harness Kindness to Speak up, Claim Their
Power and Thrive. (New York: HarperCollins, 2021), 38. "The near enemy
of compassion" Jack Kornfield, Bringing Home the Dharma: Awakening Right
Where You Are (Boston: Shambhala Publications, 2011), 103. Pity involves
four elements Victor Florian, Mario Mikulincer, and Gilad Hirschberger,
"The Anatomy of a Problematic Emotion---the Conceptualization and
Measurement of the Experience of Pity," Imagination, Cognition and
Personality 19, no. 1 (1999.):3--25. doi: 10.2190/​4JG9-M79P-HJYK-AQNE.
"Another enemy of compassion" Kornfield, Bringing Home the Dharma, 103.
empathy helps interpersonal decision making Peter Paul Zurek and Herbert
Scheithauer, "Towards a More Precise Conceptualization of Empathy: An
Integrative Review of Literature on

Definitions, Associated Functions, and Developmental Trajectories,"
International Journal of Developmental Science 11, no. 3-4
(2017):57--68. doi: 10.3233/DEV-16224. at least two elements to empathy
Ibid. Theresa Wiseman's Attributes of Empathy Theresa Wiseman, "A
Concept Analysis of Empathy," Journal of Advanced Nursing 23, no. 6
(1996):1162--67. doi: 10.1046/​j.13652648.1996.12213.x. Practicing
mindfulness Kristin Neff, "Self-Compassion: An Alternative
Conceptualization of a Healthy Attitude toward Oneself," Self & Identity
2, no. 2 (2003):85--101.
https://www.tandfonline.com/​doi/​abs/​10.1080/​15298860309032. empathy is a
skill set Jamil Zaki, "Using Empathy to Use People: Emotional
Intelligence and Manipulation," Scientific American, November 7, 2013.
cancer patients on the receiving end Shane Sinclair, Kate Beamer, Thomas
F. Hack, Susan McClement, Shelley Raffin Bouchal, Harvey M. Chochinov,
and Neil A. Hagen, "Sympathy, Empathy, and Compassion: A Grounded Theory
Study of Palliative Care Patients' Understandings, Experiences, and
Preferences," Palliative Medicine 31, no. 5 (2017):437--47. doi:
10.1177/​0269216316663499. one of my favorite films Lulu Wang (director),
The Farewell (New York: A24, 2019). tweeted, "Let's be clear" Lulu Wang
(@thumbelulu), "Let's Be Clear," Twitter post, March 1, 2019. compassion
fatigue occurs Olga Klimecki and Tania Singer, "Empathic Distress
Fatigue Rather Than Compassion Fatigue? Integrating Findings from
Empathy Research in Psychology and Social Neuroscience," in Pathological
Altruism, edited by Barbara Oakley, Ariel Knafo, Guruprasad Madhavan,
and David Sloan Wilson (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012),
369--83. Empathy Misses Brené Brown, The Gifts of Imperfection: Let Go
of Who You Think You're Supposed to Be and Embrace Who You Are (Center
City, MN: Hazelden Publishing, 2010), 15-- 18. "The heart of compassion"
Ibid., 16--17 "Boundaries are the distance at which I can love" Prentis
Hemphill, "Boundaries Are the Distance," Instagram post, April 5, 2021.
a very straightforward blog post Kelly Rae Roberts. "What Is and Is Not
Okay," Kelly Rae Roberts: Welcome to My Blog, March 22, 2009.

#8 PLACES WE GO WHEN WE FALL SHORT "Science is not the truth" Original
source of quote unknown. the connection between humiliation and violence
J. Elison and S. Harter, "Humiliation: Causes, Correlates, and
Consequences," in The Self-Conscious Emotions: Theory and Research,
edited by Jessica L. Tracy, Richard W. Robins, and June P. Tangney (New
York: Guilford Press, 2007), 310--29; Susan Harter, Sabina M. Low, and
Nancy R. Whitesell, "What Have We Learned from Columbine," Journal of
School Violence 2, no. 3 (2003):3--26. doi: 10.1300/​J202v02n03_02; L. M.
Hartling, E. Lindner, U. Spalthoff, and M. Britton, "Humiliation: A
Nuclear Bomb of Emotions?" Psicología Política 46 (2013):55--67, 62. "I
hated the internal wounds" Antwone Quenton Fisher, Finding Fish: A
Memoir (New York: HarperCollins, 2001), 11--12.

Reading Antwone Fisher's book Ibid. was a Sliding Doors moment Peter
Howitt (director), Sliding Doors (United States/United Kingdom: Miramax
Films/Paramount Pictures, 1998). The first one I found warned Thomas J.
Scheff, "Shame in Self and Society," Symbolic Interaction 26, no. 2
(2003):239--62. doi: 10.1525/​si.2003.26.2.239. "Self-compassion entails
being warm" Kristin Neff, "What is Self-Compassion?," SelfCompassion
(website). "Self-compassion involves recognizing" Ibid. "Mindfulness is
a non-judgmental" Ibid. "Shame isn't the cure, it's the cause" Brené
Brown, Dare to Lead: Brave Work. Tough Conversations. Whole Hearts. (New
York: Random House, 2018), 129. people with high levels of
perfectionistic traits Paul L. Hewitt, Gordon L. Flett, Samuel F.
Mikail, David Kealy, and Lisa C. Zhang, "Perfectionism in the
Therapeutic Context: The Perfectionism Social Disconnection Model," in
The Psychology of Perfectionism: Theory, Research, Applications, edited
by Joachim Stoeber (New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group, 2018),
306--29; Simon B. Sherry, Anna L. MacKinnon, Kristin-Lee Fossum, Martin
M. Antony, Sherry H. Stewart, Dayna L. Sherry, Logan J. Nealis, and
Aislin R. Mushquash, "Perfectionism, Discrepancies, and Depression:
Testing the Perfectionism Social Disconnection Model in a Short-Term,
Four-Wave Longitudinal Study," Personality and Individual Differences
54, no. 6 (2013):692--97. doi: 10.1016/​j.paid.2012.11.017. perfectionism
is a self-destructive Brené Brown, The Gifts of Imperfection: Let Go of
Who You Think You're Supposed to Be and Embrace Who You Are (Center
City, MN: Hazelden Publishing, 2010), 76. with guilt, our focus Michael
Lewis, "Self-Conscious Emotions: Embarrassment, Pride, Shame, Guilt, and
Hubris," in Handbook of Emotions, edited by Lisa Feldman Barrett,
Michael Lewis, and J. M. Haviland-Jones (New York: Guilford Press,
2016), 792--814. Remorse, a subset of guilt June P. Tangney, Jeff
Stuewig, and Logaina Hafez, "Shame, Guilt, and Remorse: Implications for
Offender Populations," Journal of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology 22,
no. 5 (2011):706--23. doi: 10.1080/​14789949.2011.617541. shame is highly
correlated Kerry Nicole Beduna and Kristin Marie Perrone-McGovern,
"Recalled Childhood Bullying Victimization and Shame in Adulthood: The
Influence of Attachment Security, Self-Compassion, and Emotion
Regulation," Traumatology 25, no. 1 (2019):21--32. doi:
10.1037/trm0000162; Ronda L. Dearing, Jeff Stuewig, and June P. Tangney,
"On the Importance of Distinguishing Shame from Guilt: Relations to
Problematic Alcohol and Drug Use," Addictive Behaviors 30, no. 7
(2005):1392--1404. doi: 10.1016/​j.addbeh.2005.02.002; June Price
Tangney, Jeff Stuewig, and Debra J. Mashek, "Moral Emotions and Moral
Behavior," Annual Review of Psychology 58 (2007):345--72. doi: 10.1146/​
annurev.psych.56.091103.070145. Empathy and guilt work together June P.
Tangney and Ronda L. Dearing, Shame and Guilt (New York: Guilford Press,
2002). "All the cruel and brutal things" Rita Coburn Whack (executive
producer), "Kofi Annan," Maya Angelou's Black History Month Special
2013: "Telling Our Stories," September 9, 2013. Linda Hartling is the
director Human Dignity and Humiliation Studies, Who We Are (website).
"unjustified mistreatment" Hartling,"Humiliation: A Nuclear Bomb of
Emotions?," 62. "in every case" Harter, "What Have We Learned from
Columbine," 13, emphasis added.

That report prompted a series of studies Elison, "Humiliation: Causes,
Correlates, and Consequences." "humiliation is not only" Hartling,
"Humiliation: A Nuclear Bomb of Emotions?," 56. "Never allow anyone to
be humiliated" Ariel Burger, Witness: Lessons from Elie Wiesel's
Classroom (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2018), 26.
"Embarrassment does not persist" Rowland S. Miller, "Embarrassment and
Social Anxiety Disorder: Fraternal Twins or Distant Cousins?" in Social
Anxiety: Clinical, Developmental, and Social Perspectives., 3rd ed.,
edited by Stefan G. Hofmann and Patricia M. DiBartolo (San Diego, CA:
Elsevier Academic Press, 2014), 118. When we feel embarrassed Rowland S.
Miller, "Is Embarrassment a Blessing or a Curse?" in The Self-Conscious
Emotions: Theory and Research, edited by Jessica L. Tracy, Richard W.
Robins, and June P. Tangney (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007);
Miller, "Embarrassment and Social Anxiety Disorder." three types of
events John Sabini, Michael Siepmann, Julia Stein, and Marcia
Meyerowitz, "Who Is Embarrassed by What?" Cognition and Emotion 14, no.
2 (2000):213--40. doi: 10.1080/​ 026999300378941. We absolutely can feel
vicarious embarrassment Martin Melchers, Sebastian Markett, Christian
Montag, Peter Trautner, Bernd Weber, Bernd Lachmann, Pauline Buss, et
al., "Reality TV and Vicarious Embarrassment: An fMRI Study," NeuroImage
109 (2015):109--17. doi: 10.1016/​ j.neuroimage.2015.01.022; Laura
Müller-Pinzler, Lena Rademacher, Frieder M. Paulus, and Sören Krach,
"When Your Friends Make You Cringe: Social Closeness Modulates Vicarious
Embarrassment-Related Neural Activity," Social Cognitive & Affective
Neuroscience 11, no. 3 (2015):466--75. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsv130. I was
watching I Love Lucy reruns Jess Oppenheimer, Madelyn Davis, and Bob
Carroll, Jr. (writers), I Love Lucy, aired 1951--57. during the episode
where Lucy and Ethel Jess Oppenheimer, Madelyn Davis, and Bob Carroll,
Jr. (writers), I Love Lucy, Season 2, Episode 1, "Job Switching,"
directed by William Asher, September 15, 1952. "Embarrassment takes
years to develop" Miller, "Embarrassment and Social Anxiety Disorder,"
128.

#9 PLACES WE GO WHEN WE SEARCH FOR CONNECTION Maslow's hierarchy of
needs Abraham H. Maslow, "A Theory of Human Motivation," Psychological
Review 50, no. 4 (1943):370--96. doi: 10.1037/h0054346. finding a sense
of belonging Brooke Massey, Alice Vo Edwards, and Laura Musikanski,
"Life Satisfaction, Affect, and Belonging in Older Adults," Applied
Research in Quality of Life 16 (2021): 1205--19. doi:
10.1007/​s11482-019-09804-2. I published Braving the Wilderness Brené
Brown, Braving the Wilderness: The Quest for True Belonging and the
Courage to Stand Alone (New York: Random House, 2017). "We want to be a
part" Modified slightly from original version. Ibid., 33. "connection to
a larger humanity" Ibid. among underrepresented students Gregory M.
Walton and Geoffrey L. Cohen, "A Question of Belonging: Race, Social
Fit, and Achievement," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology

92, no. 1 (2007):82--96. doi: 10.1037/​0022-3514.92.1.82. "It is a more
general inference" Gregory M. Walton and Shannon T. Brady, "The Many
Questions of Belonging," in Handbook of Competence and Motivation:
Theory and Application., 2nd ed., edited by Andrew J. Elliot, Carol S.
Dweck, and David S. Yeager (New York: Guilford Press, 2017), 272. "I
don't believe your antiracist work is complete" Tarana Burke and Brené
Brown, eds. You Are Your Best Thing: Vulnerability, Shame Resilience,
and the Black Experience (New York: Random House, 2021), xviii. two-part
Dare to Lead podcast Brené Brown (host), "Brené with Aiko Bethea on
Inclusivity at Work: The Heart of Hard Conversations (Part 1)," November
9, 2020, Dare to Lead, podcast; Brené Brown (host), "Brené with Aiko
Bethea on Creating Transformative Cultures (Part 2)," February 8, 2021,
Dare to Lead, podcast. developed Grounded Theory in 1967 Barney G.
Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss, The Discovery of Grounded Theory:
Strategies for Qualitative Research (Chicago: Aldine, 1967). "depicted
culture as more than the scenic backdrop" Maureen Walker, "Critical
Thinking: Challenging Developmental Myths, Stigmas, and Stereotypes," in
Diversity and Development: Critical Contexts That Shape Our Lives and
Relationships, edited by Dana Comstock (Belmont, CA: Brooks Cole, 2005),
48. "The need for connection" Judith V. Jordan, Relational--Cultural
Therapy, 2nd ed. (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association,
2018), 30. "people who have strong connections" Roy F. Baumeister and
Mark R. Leary, "The Need to Belong: Desire for Interpersonal Attachments
as a Fundamental Human Motivation," Psychological Bulletin 117, no. 3
(1995):497--529, 510. doi: 10.1037/​0033-2909.117.3.497. "RCT sees
disconnections" Judith V. Jordan, "Theory," in Relational--Cultural
Therapy, 2nd ed. (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association,
2018), 30--31. "often loses touch" Ibid., 31. the pain and feelings of
disconnection Naomi I. Eisenberger, "The Pain of Social Disconnection:
Examining the Shared Neural Underpinnings of Physical and Social Pain,"
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 13, no. 6 (2012):421--34. doi:
10.1038/nrn3231. "To avoid the pain and vulnerability" Trisha L.
Raque-Bogdan, "Relational Cultural Theory and Cancer: Addressing the
Social Well-Being of a Growing Population," Practice Innovations 4, no.
2 (2019):99--111, 102. doi: 10.1037/pri0000087. a "perfectionism social
disconnection model" Paul L. Hewitt, Gordon L. Flett, Samuel F. Mikail,
David Kealy, and Lisa C. Zhang, "Perfectionism in the Therapeutic
Context: The Perfectionism Social Disconnection Model," in The
Psychology of Perfectionism: Theory, Research, Applications, edited by
Joachim Stoeber (New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group, 2018).
Domain-specific insecurity Wenjie Yuan and Lei Wang, "Optimism and
Attributional Style Impact on the Relationship between General
Insecurity and Mental Health," Personality and Individual Differences
101 (2016):312--17. doi: 10.1016/​j.paid.2016.06.005. "In early 2020, the
novel coronavirus" Monica Hake, Adam Dewey, Emily Engelhard, Mark
Strayer, Sena Dawes, Tom Summerfelt, and Craig Gunderson, The Impact of
the Coronavirus on Food Insecurity in 2020 & 2021 (Chicago, IL: Feeding
America, 2021), italics added. Relationship or interpersonal insecurity
Edward P. Lemay, Jr., and Margaret S. Clark, " 'Walking on Eggshells':
How Expressing Relationship Insecurities Perpetuates Them," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 95, no. 2 (2008):420--41. doi:
10.1037/​0022-3514.95.2.420;

Jingyi Lu, Yi Zhang, and Jiayi Liu, "Interpersonal Insecurity and
Risk-Taking Propensity Across Domains and Around the Globe,"
Evolutionary Psychology 16, no. 3 (2018). doi: 10.1177/​1474704918795520;
Hong Zhang, Darius K. S. Chan, Fei Teng, and Denghao Zhang, "Sense of
Interpersonal Security and Preference for Harsh Actions against Others:
The Role of Dehumanization," Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
56 (2015):165--71. doi: 10.1016/​ j.jesp.2014.09.014. General or personal
insecurity Nathaniel S. Eckland, Alice B. Huang, and Howard Berenbaum,
"Empathic Accuracy: Associations with Prosocial Behavior and
Self-Insecurity," Emotion 20, no. 7 (2020): 1306--10. doi:
10.1037/emo0000622 10.1037/​emo0000622.supp. "the open and nonjudgmental"
Alice B. Huang and Howard Berenbaum, "Accepting Our Weaknesses and
Enjoying Better Relationships: An Initial Examination of Self-Security,"
Personality and Individual Differences 106 (2017):64--70, 64. doi:
10.1016/​j.paid.2016.10.031. In initial studies, Huang Huang, "Accepting
Our Weaknesses." Rebecca Neel and Bethany Lassetter Rebecca Neel and
Bethany Lassetter, "The Stigma of Perceived Irrelevance: An
Affordance-Management Theory of Interpersonal Invisibility,"
Psychological Review 126, no. 5 (2019):634--59. doi: 10.1037/rev0000143.
"When a group is invisible," Ibid., 634. I researched loneliness Brown,
Braving the Wilderness. The information below Ibid., 52--55. "perceived
social isolation" John T. Cacioppo and William Patrick, Loneliness:
Human Nature and the Need for Social Connection (New York: Norton,
2008). "To grow into an adulthood" John T. Cacioppo, "The Lethality of
Loneliness," TEDxDesMoines, September 9, 2013. Cacioppo explains how the
biological machinery Ibid. "Denying you feel lonely" Hafner quotes
Cacioppo in her article. Katie Hafner, "Researchers Confront an Epidemic
of Loneliness," New York Times, September 5, 2016. "gnawing, chronic
disease" Cacioppo attributes this definition to a 1973 book by Robert
Weiss entitled Loneliness: The Experience of Emotional and Social
Isolation. John T. Cacioppo, Stephanie Cacioppo, and Dorret I. Boomsma,
"Evolutionary Mechanisms for Loneliness," Cognition and Emotion 28, no.
1 (2014):3--21, 3. doi: 10.1080/​02699931.2013.837379. loneliness is not
just a sad condition Cacioppo, "Evolutionary Mechanisms for Loneliness."
In a meta-analysis of studies on loneliness Julianne Holt-Lunstad,
Timothy B. Smith, and J. Bradley Layton, "Social Relationships and
Mortality Risk: A Meta-Analytic Review," PLoS Medicine 7, no. 7
(2010):1--20. doi: 10.1371/​journal.pmed.1000316. one of the first guests
Brené Brown (host), "Dr. Vivek Murthy and Brené on Loneliness and
Connection," April 21, 2020, Unlocking Us, podcast. We talked about his
new book Vivek Murthy, Together: The Healing Power of Human Connection
in a Sometimes Lonely World (HarperCollins: New York, 2020). "During my
years caring for patients" Vivek Murthy, "Work and the Loneliness
Epidemic: Reducing Isolation at Work Is Good for Business," Harvard
Business Review, September 26, 2017, 2--3 (reprint version). "reduces
task performance" Murthy, "Work and the Loneliness Epidemic," 3.

#10 PLACES WE GO WHEN THE HEART IS OPEN

"Everywhere we learn that love" bell hooks, All About Love: New Visions
(New York: Harper Perennial, 2000), xxvii. "the preoccupying and strong
desire" Barbara L. Fredrickson, "Love: Positivity Resonance as a Fresh,
Evidence-Based Perspective on an Age-Old Topic," in Handbook of
Emotions, edited by Lisa Feldman Barrett, Michael Lewis, and Jeannette
M. Haviland-Jones (New York: Guilford Press, 2016), 847. whether love is
an emotion Lubomir Lamy, "Beyond Emotion: Love as an Encounter of Myth
and Drive," Emotion Review 8, no. 2 (2016):97--107. doi:
10.1177/​1754073915594431. undergraduates were asked to rate Phillip
Shaver, Judith Schwartz, Donald Kirson, and Cary O'Connor, "Emotion
Knowledge: Further Exploration of a Prototype Approach," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 52, no. 6 (1987):1061--86. doi:
10.1037/​00223514.52.6.1061. "We cultivate love when we allow" Brené
Brown, The Gifts of Imperfection: Let Go of Who You Think You're
Supposed to Be and Embrace Who You Are (Center City, MN: Hazelden
Publishing, 2010), 26. The quote that opens this section hooks, All
About Love. her book Teaching to Transgress bell hooks, Teaching to
Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom (New York: Routledge,
1994). "Refusal to stand up" hooks, All About Love, 90--91. I shared his
essay Joe Reynolds, personal communication. "Heartbreak is an altogether
different thing" Brené Brown, Rising Strong: The Reckoning. The Rumble.
The Revolution (New York: Random House, 2015), 143--44. In The Thin Book
of Trust Charles Feltman, The Thin Book of Trust: An Essential Primer
for Building Trust at Work, Kindle edition (Thin Book Publishing, 2008),
9--11. "For there to be betrayal" Suzanne Collins, The Hunger Games (New
York: Scholastic Press, 2008), 114. Betrayal is so painful S. Rachman,
"Betrayal: A Psychological Analysis," Behaviour Research and Therapy 48,
no. 4 (2010):304--11. doi: 10.1016/​j.brat.2009.12.002. Most betrayals
happen among spouses Warren H. Jones and Marsha Parsons Burdette,
"Betrayal in Relationships," in Perspectives on Close Relationships,
edited by Ann L. Weber and John H. Harvey (Needham Heights, MA: Allyn &
Bacon, 1994), 243--62. When betrayal is the result Jennifer J. Freyd,
"Memory and Dimensions of Trauma: Terror May Be 'All-Too-Well
Remembered' and Betrayal Buried," in Critical Issues in Child Sexual
Abuse: Historical, Legal, and Psychological Perspectives, edited by J.
R. Conte (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2001); Jennifer J. Freyd, Anne P.
DePrince, and David H. Gleaves, "The State of Betrayal Trauma Theory:
Reply to McNally---Conceptual Issues and Future Directions," Memory 15,
no. 3 (2007):295--311. doi: 10.1080/​09658210701256514. When we're
injured by betrayal Laurie L. Couch, Kiersten R. Baughman, and Melissa
R. Derow, "The Aftermath of Romantic Betrayal: What's Love Got to Do
with It?" Current Psychology: A Journal for Diverse Perspectives on
Diverse Psychological Issues 36, no. 3 (2017):504--15. doi:
10.1007/​s12144-016-9438-y. "an institution causes harm" Carly Parnitzke
Smith and Jennifer J. Freyd, "Institutional Betrayal," American
Psychologist 69, no. 6 (2014):575--87, 578. doi: 10.1037/a0037564.
Factors that contribute to institutional betrayal Smith, "Institutional
Betrayal."

"Cover-ups are perpetrated" Emphasis modified from original. Brené
Brown, Dare to Lead: Brave Work. Tough Conversations. Whole Hearts. (New
York: Random House, 2018), 135. In order to try to limit our exposure
Lisa Feldman Barrett, Nathan L. Williams, and Geoffrey T. Fong,
"Defensive Verbal Behavior Assessment," Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 28, no. 6 (2002):776--88. doi:
10.1177/​0146167202289007; Michael H. Kernis, Chad E. Lakey, and Whitney
L. Heppner, "Secure Versus Fragile High Self-Esteem as a Predictor of
Verbal Defensiveness: Converging Findings across Three Different
Markers," Journal of Personality 76, no. 3 (2008):477--512. doi:
10.1111/​j.1467-6494.2008.00493.x; David K. Sherman and Geoffrey L.
Cohen, "Accepting Threatening Information: Self-Affirmation and the
Reduction of Defensive Biases," Current Directions in Psychological
Science 11, no. 4 (2002):119-123. doi: 10.1111/​1467-8721.00182.
Defensiveness blocks us Sherman, "Accepting Threatening Information." "a
sensation of feeling...overwhelmed" The Gottman Institute, "How Does
Flooding Impact Relationship Conflict?" Gottman Institute Facebook page.
"We each have a sort of built-in meter" John Gottman, Why Marriages
Succeed or Fail: And How You Can Make Yours Last (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1994), 110. chronic flooding sets us up Gottman, Why Marriages
Succeed or Fail. "Individuals who are hurt" Anita L. Vangelisti, Stacy
L. Young, Katy E. Carpenter-Theune, and Alicia L. Alexander, "Why Does
It Hurt? The Perceived Causes of Hurt Feelings," Communication Research
32, no. 4 (2005):443--77, 446. doi: 10.1177/​0093650205277319. Vangelisti
and team explain Vangelisti, "Why Does It Hurt?" In fact, hurt feelings
Mark R. Leary and Carrie A. Springer, "Hurt Feelings: The Neglected
Emotion," in Behaving Badly: Aversive Behaviors in Interpersonal
Relationships, edited by Robin M. Kowalski (Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association, 2001). "the more intentional an action" David
J. K. Hardecker, "The Distinctive Constitution of Feeling Hurt: A Review
and a Lazarian Theory," European Psychologist 25, no. 4 (2020):
293--305, 295. doi: 10.1027/​1016-9040/​a000390. Our hurt feelings are
typically experienced Mark R. Leary and Sadie Leder, "The Nature of Hurt
Feelings: Emotional Experience and Cognitive Appraisals," in Feeling
Hurt in Close Relationships, edited by Anita L. Vangelisti (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2009); Leary, "Hurt Feelings." Our reactions
to hurt feelings Laura N. May and Warren H. Jones, "Differential
Reactions to Hurt," Journal of Worry & Affective Experience 1, no. 2
(2005):54--59; Laura N. May and Warren H. Jones, "Does Hurt Linger?
Exploring the Nature of Hurt Feelings over Time," Current Psychology: A
Journal for Diverse Perspectives on Diverse Psychological Issues 25, no.
4 (2007):245--56; Keith Sanford and Wade C. Rowatt, "When Is Negative
Emotion Positive for Relationships? An Investigation of Married Couples
and Roommates," Personal Relationships 11, no. 3 (2004):329--54. doi:
10.1111/​j.1475-6811.2004.00086.x. When reparation doesn't seem possible
Hardecker, "The Distinctive Constitution"; Edward P. Lemay, Jr., Nickola
C. Overall, and Margaret S. Clark, "Experiences and Interpersonal
Consequences of Hurt Feelings and Anger," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 103, no. 6 (2012):982--1006. doi: 10.1037/a0030064.
One thing that motivates me David S. Chester, C. Nathan DeWall, and
Richard S. Pond, Jr., "The Push of Social Pain: Does Rejection's Sting
Motivate Subsequent Social Reconnection?"

Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience 16, no. 3 (2016):541--50.
doi: 10.3758/​s13415016-0412-9; Lemay, "Experiences and Interpersonal
Consequences." the language of hurt feelings Leary, "Hurt Feelings."

#11 PLACES WE GO WHEN LIFE IS GOOD "And I wish you joy" Dolly Parton, "I
Will Always Love You" (1974), recorded by Dolly Parton (RCA Victor,
1974). talking to Dolly on the Unlocking Us podcast Brené Brown (host),
"Brené with Dolly Parton on Songtelling, Empathy and Shining Our
Lights," November 18, 2020, Unlocking Us, podcast. Can you believe she
wrote Parton, "I Will Always Love You," Dolly Parton, "Jolene" (1974),
recorded by Dolly Parton on the album Jolene (RCA Victor, 1974). In
Dolly's gorgeous book Songteller Dolly Parton and Robert K. Oermann,
Songteller: My Life in Lyrics (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2020).
"that was the last I'd heard of it" Ibid., 105; Dolly Parton, "I Will
Always Love You" (1974), recorded by Whitney Houston on the album The
Bodyguard: Original Soundtrack Album (Arista BMG, 1992); Parton,
Songteller, 105. Joy is sudden, unexpected Laura Cottrell, "Joy and
Happiness: A Simultaneous and Evolutionary Concept Analysis," Journal of
Advanced Nursing 72, no. 7 (2016):1506--17. doi: 10.1111/jan.12980;
Barbara L. Fredrickson, "What Good Are Positive Emotions?" Review of
General Psychology 2, no. 3 (1998):300--319. doi:
10.1037/​1089-2680.2.3.300. Happiness is stable, longer-lasting Cottrell,
"Joy and Happiness"; David G. Myers and Ed Diener, "The Scientific
Pursuit of Happiness," Perspectives on Psychological Science 13, no. 2
(2018):218--25. doi: 10.1177/​1745691618765171. In The Gifts of
Imperfection, I quote Anne Robertson Brené Brown,The Gifts of
Imperfection: Let Go of Who You Think You're Supposed to Be and Embrace
Who You Are (Center City, MN: Hazelden Publishing, 2010). "She explains
that the Greek word for happiness" Ibid., 80. "Chairo is something, the
ancient Greeks tell us" Anne Robertson, "Joy or Happiness?," 1999.
Previously posed at stjohnsdover.org; link no longer active. people find
experiences of joy difficult to articulate Matthew Kuan Johnson, "Joy: A
Review of the Literature and Suggestions for Future Directions," The
Journal of Positive Psychology 15, no. 1 (2020):5--24. doi:
10.1080/​17439760.2019.1685581. while experiencing joy Ibid. spontaneous
weeping Jack Barbalet, "Weeping and Transformations of Self," Journal
for the Theory of Social Behaviour 35, no. 2 (2005):125--41. doi:
10.1111/​j.1468-5914.2005.00267.x. "intriguing upward spiral" Philip C.
Watkins, Robert A. Emmons, Madeline R. Greaves, and Joshua Bell, "Joy Is
a Distinct Positive Emotion: Assessment of Joy and Relationship to
Gratitude and Well-Being," The Journal of Positive Psychology 13, no. 5
(2018):522--39, 534. doi: 10.1080/​17439760.2017.1414298. The intriguing
upward spiral goes like this Ibid. a story about an outing with Ellen
Brené Brown, Daring Greatly: How the Courage to Be Vulnerable Transforms
the Way We Live, Love, Parent, and Lead (New York: Gotham Books, 2012).

even the most prominent happiness researchers Belinda Campos, Michelle
N. Shiota, Dacher Keltner, Gian C. Gonzaga, and Jennifer L. Goetz, "What
Is Shared, What Is Different? Core Relational Themes and Expressive
Displays of Eight Positive Emotions," Cognition and Emotion 27, no. 1
(2013):37--52. doi: 10.1080/​02699931.2012.683852; Ed Diener, Martin E.
P. Seligman, Hyewon Choi, and Shigehiro Oishi, "Happiest People
Revisited," Perspectives on Psychological Science 13, no. 2
(2018):176--84. doi: 10.1177/​1745691617697077; Michelle N. Shiota,
Belinda Campos, Christopher Oveis, Matthew J. Hertenstein, Emiliana
Simon-Thomas, and Dacher Keltner, "Beyond Happiness: Building a Science
of Discrete Positive Emotions," American Psychologist 72, no. 7
(2017):617--43. doi: 10.1037/a0040456. Looking at happiness as a trait
Ed Diener, Richard E. Lucas, and Christie Napa Scollon, "Beyond the
Hedonic Treadmill: Revising the Adaptation Theory of Well-Being,"
American Psychologist 61, no. 4 (2006):305--14. doi:
10.1037/​0003-066X.61.4.305; Ragnhild Bang Nes and Espen Røysamb,
"Happiness in Behaviour Genetics: An Update on Heritability and
Changeability," Journal of Happiness Studies: An Interdisciplinary Forum
on Subjective WellBeing 18. no. 5 (2017):1533--52. doi:
10.1007/​s10902-016-9781-6. when people described themselves as calm
Brown, The Gifts of Imperfection. "Anxiety is contagious" Harriet
Lerner, The Dance of Fear: Rising above Anxiety, Fear, and Shame to Be
Your Best and Bravest Self (New York: HarperCollins, 2004), 113. "When
you are discontent" "Oprah Talks to the Dalai Lama," O: The Oprah
Magazine, August 2001. Several researchers categorize all Daniel T.
Cordaro, Marc Brackett, Lauren Glass, and Craig L. Anderson,
"Contentment: Perceived Completeness across Cultures and Traditions,"
Review of General Psychology 20, no. 3 (2016):221--35. doi:
10.1037/gpr0000082. Contentment is positively correlated Howard
Berenbaum, Philip I. Chow, Michelle Schoenleber, and Luis E. Flores,
Jr., "Pleasurable Emotions, Age, and Life Satisfaction," The Journal of
Positive Psychology 8, no. 2 (2013):140--43. doi:
10.1080/​17439760.2013.772221; Melanie T. Davern, Robert A. Cummins, and
Mark A. Stokes, "Subjective Wellbeing as an AffectiveCognitive
Construct," Journal of Happiness Studies: An Interdisciplinary Forum on
Subjective Well-Being 8, no. 4 (2007):429--49. doi:
10.1007/​s10902-007-9066-1; Barbara L. Fredrickson, "The Role of Positive
Emotions in Positive Psychology: The Broaden-and-Build Theory of
Positive Emotions," American Psychologist 56, no. 3 (2001):218--26. doi:
10.1037/​0003066X.56.3.218; Sylvia D. Kreibig, "Autonomic Nervous System
Activity in Emotion: A Review," Biological Psychology 84, no. 3
(2010):394--421. doi: 10.1016/​ j.biopsycho.2010.03.010. "All things
considered, how satisfied are you" Mariano Rojas and Ruut Veenhoven,
"Contentment and Affect in the Estimation of Happiness," Social
Indicators Research 110, no. 2 (2013):415-- 31, 422. doi:
10.1007/​s11205-011-9952-0. gratitude is good for us Courtney E.
Ackerman, "28 Benefits of Gratitude & Most Significant Research
Findings," PositivePsychology.com, June 22, 2021. "world's leading
scientific expert on gratitude" Robert Emmons, "Why Gratitude Is Good,"
Greater Good Magazine: Science-Based Insights for a Meaningful Life,
November 16, 2010. "positive emotions wear off quickly" Ibid. "feelings
of tension leaving the body" Ira J. Roseman and Andreas Evdokas,
"Appraisals Cause Experienced Emotions: Experimental Evidence,"
Cognition and Emotion 18, no. 1 (2004):1-- 28, 3. doi:
10.1080/​02699930244000390.

Sighing serves as a type of reset button Elke Vlemincx, Michel Meulders,
and James L. Abelson, "Sigh Rate During Emotional Transitions: More
Evidence for a Sigh of Relief," Biological Psychology 125
(2017):163--72. doi: 10.1016/​j.biopsycho.2017.03.005. "Tranquility is
associated with the absence of demand" Howard Berenbaum, Alice B. Huang,
and Luis E. Flores, "Contentment and Tranquility: Exploring Their
Similarities and Differences," The Journal of Positive Psychology 14,
no. 2 (2019):252--59, 258. doi: 10.1080/​ 17439760.2018.1484938.
"Tranquil environments" provide This description refers to the original
work of Kaplan and Kaplan as described by Kim and colleagues. Rachel
Kaplan and Stephen Kaplan, The Experience of Nature: A Psychological
Perspective (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1989); Jun Kim,
Namyun Kil, Stephen Holland, and Wendi K. Middleton, "The Effect of
Visual and Auditory Coherence on Perceptions of Tranquility after
Simulated Nature Experiences," Ecopsychology 9, no. 3 (2017):182--189.
doi: 10.1089/​eco.2016.0046. auditory and visual components Robert
Pheasant, Kirill Horoshenkov, Greg Watts, and Brendan Barrett, "The
Acoustic and Visual Factors Influencing the Construction of Tranquil
Space in Urban and Rural Environments Tranquil Spaces-Quiet Places?" The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 123 (2008):1446--57. doi:
10.1121/1.2831735; Robert J. Pheasant, Mark N. Fisher, Greg R. Watts,
David J. Whitaker, and Kirill V. Horoshenkov, "The Importance of
Auditory-Visual Interaction in the Construction of 'Tranquil Space,' "
Journal of Environmental Psychology 30, no. 4 (2010):501--509. doi:
10.1016/​j.jenvp.2010.03.006; Robert J. Pheasant, Kirill V. Horoshenkov,
and Greg R. Watts, "Tranquillity Rating Prediction Tool (Trapt),"
Acoustics Bulletin 35 (2010):18--24. Settings that induce high
tranquility Thomas R. Herzog and Gregory J. Barnes, "Tranquility and
Preference Revisited," Journal of Environmental Psychology 19, no. 2
(1999):171--81. doi: 10.1006/​jevp.1998.0109; Thomas R. Herzog and Kristi
K. Chernick, "Tranquility and Danger in Urban and Natural Settings,"
Journal of Environmental Psychology 20, no. 1 (2000):29--39. doi:
10.1006/​jevp.1999.0151.

#12 PLACES WE GO WHEN WE FEEL WRONGED anger is an emotion that we feel
Eddie Harmon-Jones and Cindy Harmon-Jones, "Anger," in Handbook of
Emotions, edited by Lisa Feldman Barrett, Michael Lewis, and Jeannette
M. Haviland-Jones (New York: Guilford Press, 2016). Anger is an action
emotion Ibid.; Janice R. Kelly, Nicole E. Iannone, and Megan K. McCarty,
"Emotional Contagion of Anger Is Automatic: An Evolutionary
Explanation," British Journal of Social Psychology 55, no. 1
(2016):182--91. doi: 10.1111/bjso.12134. "from mild irritation or
annoyance" Charles D. Spielberger and Eric C. Reheiser, "Assessment of
Emotions: Anxiety, Anger, Depression, and Curiosity," Applied
Psychology: Health & WellBeing 1, no. 3 (209):271--302, 281. doi:
10.1111/​j.1758-0854.2009.01017.x. Anger is also a full-contact emotion
Nelly Alia-Klein, Gabriela Gan, Gadi Gilam, Jessica Bezek, Antonio
Bruno, Thomas F. Denson, Talma Hendler, Leroy Lowe, et al., "The Feeling
of Anger: From Brain Networks to Linguistic Expressions," Neuroscience
and Biobehavioral Reviews 108 (2020):480--97. doi:
10.1016/​j.neubiorev.2019.12.002.

our propensity for anger and aggression Evangelos Vassos, David A.
Collier, and Seena Fazel, "Systematic Meta-Analyses and Field Synopsis
of Genetic Association Studies of Violence and Aggression," Molecular
Psychiatry 19, no. 4 (2013):471--77. doi: 10.1038/mp.2013.31. believe
that anger is a primary emotion Paul Ekman, "What Scientists Who Study
Emotion Agree About," Perspectives on Psychological Science 11, no. 1
(2016):31--34. doi: 10.1177/​ 1745691615596992. "Sometimes owning our
pain" Brené Brown, Braving the Wilderness: The Quest for True Belonging
and the Courage to Stand Alone (New York: Random House, 2017), 67--68.
"When someone is angry at you" Pamela Meyer, "How to Avoid Being Lied
To," Forbes, August 26, 2010. known across the globe The Gottman
Institute, "John & Julie Gottman" (website). "perhaps the most corrosive
force" John Gottman, Why Marriages Succeed or Fail: And How You Can Make
Yours Last (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1994), 62. which couples would
eventually divorce John Mordechai Gottman, What Predicts Divorce? The
Relationship between Marital Processes and Marital Outcomes (Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1994); John M. Gottman, James Coan,
Sybil Carrere, and Catherine Swanson, "Predicting Marital Happiness and
Stability from Newlywed Interactions," Journal of Marriage and the
Family 60, no. 1 (1998):5--22. doi: 10.2307/353438. Contempt is one of
the most damaging Gottman, Why Marriages Succeed or Fail. "What
separates contempt from criticism" Ibid., 79. "When you communicate with
contempt" Ellie Lisitsa, "The Four Horsemen: Contempt," The Gottman
Institute, May 13, 2013 (emphasis added). Contempt results in distancing
Agneta Fischer and Roger Giner-Sorolla, "Contempt: Derogating Others
While Keeping Calm," Emotion Review 8, no. 4 (2016):346--57. doi:
10.1177/​ 1754073915610439. "the contemptuous person is likely to
experience" Carlo Garofalo, Craig S. Neumann, Virgil Zeigler-Hill, and
J. Reid Meloy, "Spiteful and Contemptuous: A New Look at the Emotional
Experiences Related to Psychopathy," Personality Disorders: Theory,
Research, and Treatment 10, no. 2 (2019):173--84, 181. doi:
10.1037/per0000310 10.1037/​per0000310.supp. "our nation is more
polarized" Arthur C. Brooks, "Our Culture of Contempt," New York Times,
March 2, 2019. "Contempt makes political compromise and progress
impossible" Ibid. not that we need to disagree less Ibid. to replace
negative communication patterns Gottman, Why Marriages Succeed or Fail.
"I might be willing to try" These are a few representative items from
Haidt et al.'s Disgust Scale. Jonathan Haidt, Clark McCauley, and Paul
Rozin, "Individual Differences in Sensitivity to Disgust: A Scale
Sampling Seven Domains of Disgust Elicitors," Personality and Individual
Differences 16, no. 5 (1994):701--13, 707. doi:
10.1016/​0191-8869(94)90212-7. These are five items from the Disgust
Scale The original Haidt et al. Disgust Scale was modified by Olatunji
et al. Haidt, "Individual Differences in Sensitivity to Disgust"; Bunmi
O. Olatunji, Nathan L. Williams, David F. Tolin, Jonathan S. Abramowitz,
Craig N. Sawchuk, Jeffrey M. Lohr, and Lisa S. Elwood, "The Disgust
Scale: Item Analysis, Factor Structure, and Suggestions for Refinement,"
Psychological Assessment 19, no. 3 (2007):281--97. doi: 10.1037/​
1040-3590.19.3.281. "Disgust is a fascinating emotion" Jonathan Haidt,
"The Disgust Scale Home Page."

With disgust, inferiority is not the issue Rachel S. Herz and Alden
Hinds, "Stealing Is Not Gross: Language Distinguishes Visceral Disgust
from Moral Violations," The American Journal of Psychology 126, no. 3
(2013):275--86. doi: 10.5406/​amerjpsyc.126.3.0275. "The experience of
disgust" Natalie J. Shook, Ronald Thomas, and Cameron G. Ford, "Testing
the Relation between Disgust and General Avoidance Behavior,"
Personality and Individual Differences 150 (November 1, 2019), 2. doi:
10.1016/​j.paid.2019.05.063. "intuitive microbiology" Steven Pinker, How
the Mind Works (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2009), 383. "arises as
a feeling of aversion" Paul Ekman, "What Is Disgust," Paul Ekman Group
(website). "disgust contains a range" Ibid. "All states of disgust"
Ibid. we often wrinkle our nose Ibid. core disgust is thought to protect
the body Spike W. S. Lee and Phoebe C. Ellsworth, "Maggots and Morals:
Physical Disgust Is to Fear as Moral Disgust Is to Anger," in Components
of Emotional Meaning: A Sourcebook, edited by Johnny J. R. Fontaine,
Klaus R. Scherer, and Cristina Soriano (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2013). disgust in an interpersonal context Paul Rozin, Laura
Lowery, Sumio Imada, and Jonathan Haidt, "The CAD Triad Hypothesis: A
Mapping between Three Moral Emotions (Contempt, Anger, Disgust) and
Three Moral Codes (Community, Autonomy, Divinity)," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 76, no. 4 (1999):574--86. doi:
10.1037/​0022-3514.76.4.574. can rapidly lead to dehumanizing Maria
Miceli and Cristiano Castelfranchi, "Contempt and Disgust: The Emotions
of Disrespect," Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 48, no. 2
(2018):205--29. doi: 10.1111/jtsb.12159. "The disrespect involved in
disgust" Ibid., 221. "moral disgust is even more dangerous" Ibid.,
221--22. Another difference that makes disgust more dangerous Cendri A.
Hutcherson and James J. Gross, "The Moral Emotions: A
Social--Functionalist Account of Anger, Disgust, and Contempt," Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 100, no. 4 (2011):719--37. doi:
10.1037/a0022408; Miceli, "Contempt and Disgust." "dehumanization is a
response to conflicting motives" Brown, Braving the Wilderness, 71--73.
"Dehumanization is a way of subverting those inhibitions" David L.
Smith, Less Than Human: Why We Demean, Enslave, and Exterminate Others
(New York: St. Martin's Press, 2011), 264. "the psychological process of
demonizing" Michelle Maiese, "Dehumanization," Beyond Intractability
(website), July 2003. Modified by Heidi Burgess, June 2020 (emphasis
added). "Once the parties have framed the conflict" Ibid. "most of us
believe that people's basic human rights" Ibid. "Hatred will always
motivate people" Agneta Fischer, Eran Halperin, Daphna Canetti, and Alba
Jasini, "Why We Hate," Emotion Review 10, no. 4 (2018):309--20, 314.
doi: 10.1177/​ 1754073917751229. hate is a combination of various
negative emotions Robert J. Sternberg, "A Duplex Theory of Hate:
Development and Application to Terrorism, Massacres, and Genocide,"
Review of General Psychology 7, no. 3 (2003):299--328. doi:
10.1037/​1089-2680.7.3.299. We feel hate toward individuals or groups
Fischer, "Why We Hate." lack of direct contact Ibid.

"those currents are provided" Robert J. Sternberg, "FLOTSAM: A Model for
the Development and Transmission of Hate," Journal of Theoretical Social
Psychology 2, no. 4 (2018):97--106, 102. doi: 10.1002/jts5.25. "When
instigators seek to gain traction" Ibid., 98. "the more the leaders whip
up powerful stories" Ibid., 102. "generally have not done anything"
Fischer, "Why We Hate," 315. "This is what our film tries to grapple
with" Kevin Fallon, "Laverne Cox Is Fighting for Trans People's Lives:
We Need Justice 'Right Fucking Now.' " Daily Beast, June 15, 2020. "goal
of hate is not merely to hurt" Fischer, "Why We Hate," 311. "It is not
clear that there is any magic bullet" Sternberg, "FLOTSAM," 103. "The
self-righteous scream" John Mark Green (@JohnGreenpoetry), "The
Self-Righteous Scream," Twitter post, April 30, 2018.
"Self-righteousness is the conviction" Cynthia Nordstrom and Susan L.
Thomas, "To Change or Not to Change: Examining the Perception of
Political 'Waffling.' " North American Journal of Psychology 9, no. 2
(2007):359--76, 362. People who exhibit self-righteousness Toni Falbo
and Sharyn S. Belk, "A Short Scale to Measure Self-Righteousness,"
Journal of Personality Assessment 49, no. 2 (1985):172--77. doi:
10.1207/​ s15327752jpa4902_13; Nordstrom, "To Change or Not to Change."
self-righteousness is different from righteousness Zachary K. Rothschild
and Lucas A. Keefer, "Righteous or Self-Righteous Anger? Justice
Sensitivity Moderates Defensive Outrage at a Third-Party Harm-Doer,"
European Journal of Social Psychology 48, no. 4 (2018):507--22. doi:
10.1002/ejsp.2349.

#13 PLACES WE GO TO SELF-ASSESS Pride is a feeling Joey T. Cheng,
Jessica L. Tracy, and Joseph Henrich, "Pride, Personality, and the
Evolutionary Foundations of Human Social Status," Evolution and Human
Behavior 31, no. 5 (2010):334--47. doi:
10.1016/​j.evolhumbehav.2010.02.004; Jessica L. Tracy and Richard W.
Robins, "The Psychological Structure of Pride: A Tale of Two Facets,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92, no. 3 (2007):506--25.
doi: 10.1037/​0022-3514.92.3.506. Hubris is an inflated sense Michael
Lewis, "Self-Conscious Emotions: Embarrassment, Pride, Shame, Guilt, and
Hubris," in Handbook of Emotions, edited by Lisa Feldman Barrett,
Michael Lewis, and J. M. Haviland-Jones (New York: Guilford Press,
2016); Tracy, "The Psychological Structure of Pride"; Jessica L. Tracy
and Richard W. Robins, "The Nature of Pride," in The Self-Conscious
Emotions: Theory and Research, edited by Jessica L. Tracy, Richard W.
Robins, and June Price Tangney (New York: Guilford Press, 2007).
Humility is openness Christopher Peterson and Martin E. P. Seligman,
"Humility and Modesty," in Character Strengths and Virtues: A Handbook
and Classification (Washington, DC/New York: American Psychological
Association/Oxford University Press, 2004); June Price Tangney,
"Humility," in Handbook of Positive Psychology, edited by C. R. Snyder
and Shane J. Lopez (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002).
distinguish hubris from pride Tracy, "The Psychological Structure of
Pride." "family of pride experiences" Lisa A. Williams and Joel Davies,
"Beyond the Self: Pride Felt in Relation to Others," in The Moral
Psychology of Pride, edited by J. Adam Carter and Emma C.

Gordon (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2017), 43. "Hubristic pride
may have" Cheng, "Pride, Personality," 336. prestige status is earned
Joseph Henrich and Francisco J. Gil-White, "The Evolution of Prestige:
Freely Conferred Deference as a Mechanism for Enhancing the Benefits of
Cultural Transmission," Evolution and Human Behavior 22, no. 3
(2001):165--96. doi: 10.1016/​S10905138(00)00071-4. the person
experiencing hubris Lewis, "Self-Conscious Emotions." "does not require
respect" Cheng, "Pride, Personality," 343. pushed the term "narcissism"
into the zeitgeist Brené Brown, Daring Greatly: How the Courage to Be
Vulnerable Transforms the Way We Live, Love, Parent, and Lead (New York:
Gotham Books, 2012). "For the narcissist" Jessica L. Tracy, Joey T.
Cheng, Jason P. Martens, and Richard W. Robins, "The Emotional Dynamics
of Narcissism: Inflated by Pride, Deflated by Shame," in The Handbook of
Narcissism and Narcissistic Personality Disorder: Theoretical
Approaches, Empirical Findings, and Treatments, edited by W. Keith
Campbell and Joshua D. Miller (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc.,
2011), 333. folks with trait hubristic pride Jessica L. Tracy, Azim F.
Shariff, and Joey T. Cheng, "A Naturalist's View of Pride," Emotion
Review 2, no. 2 (2010):163--77. doi: 10.1177/​ 1754073909354627. it
mirrors the physical patterns of dominance display Zachary Witkower,
Jessica L. Tracy, Joey T. Cheng, and Joseph Henrich, "Two Signals of
Social Rank: Prestige and Dominance Are Associated with Distinct
Nonverbal Displays," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 118,
no. 1 (2020):89--120. doi: 10.1037/pspi0000181 10.1037/​pspi0000181.supp.
Humility is openness Peterson, "Humility and Modesty"; Tangney,
"Humility." I can sum up humility with one sentence Brené Brown, Dare to
Lead: Brave Work. Tough Conversations. Whole Hearts. (New York: Random
House, 2018). What humility isn't: downplaying yourself Peterson,
"Humility and Modesty"; Tangney, "Humility." The term "intellectual
humility" Daryl R. Van Tongeren, Don E. Davis, Joshua N. Hook, and
Charlotte van Oyen Witvliet, "Humility," Current Directions in
Psychological Science 28, no. 5 (2019):463--68. doi:
10.1177/​0963721419850153.

CULTIVATING MEANINGFUL CONNECTION "It is a capital mistake" Arthur Conan
Doyle, "A Scandal in Bohemia" in The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes
(London: George Newnes Ltd., 1892), 4. if we had an Elton John song
Elton John (composer) and Tim Rice (lyrics), "Circle of Life," recorded
by Elton John, on the album The Lion King: Original Motion Picture
Soundtrack (Walt Disney/Hollywood/Mercury, 1994). "A set of interrelated
constructs" Fred N. Kerlinger, Foundations of Behavioral Research, 2nd
ed. (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1973), 9. "Near enemies are
states that appear similar" Chris Germer, "The Near and Far Enemies of
Fierce Compassion," Center for Mindful Self-Compassion (website).

"The near enemies depict how spirituality" Jack Kornfield, Bringing Home
the Dharma: Awakening Right Where You Are (Boston: Shambhala
Publications, 2011), 102. "The near enemy of love" Jack Kornfield, "Love
vs. Attachment" jackkornfield.com. "The near enemy of equanimity"
Kornfield, Bringing Home the Dharma, 104. introduced the term grounded
confidence Brené Brown, Dare to Lead: Brave Work. Tough Conversation.
Whole Hearts. (New York: Random House, 2018). "Trauma victims cannot
recover" Bessel van der Kolk, The Body Keeps the Score (New York:
Penguin Books, 2014), 102. "The mind needs to be reeducated" Ibid., 103.
"the awareness of our body's sensations" Prentis Hemphill, personal
communication with author, September 2021. "an unawareness, repression,
or denial" Prentis Hemphill, Ibid. "The habits that become embodied"
Prentis Hemphill, Ibid. the theory that emerged from my dissertation
Brené Brown, Acompañar: A Grounded Theory of Developing, Maintaining and
Assessing Relevance in Professional Helping (doctoral dissertation,
2002). "Help is the sunny side of control" Anne Lamott, "12 Truths I
Learned from Life and Writing," TED Talk, April 2017. in a 1968 speech
Martin Luther King Jr., "All Labor Has Dignity," in All Labor Has
Dignity, edited by Michael K. Honey (Boston: Beacon Press, 1968/2012),
167--79. In their publication Making Change Happen Just Associates,
"Making Change Happen 3: Power. Concepts for Revisioning Power for
Justice, Equality and Peace," 2006. "based on mutual support" Ibid.
"based on the belief that each individual has the power" Ibid. defined
by an ability to recognize Ibid. there are some universal facial
expressions Paul Ekman, Wallace V. Friesen, Maureen O'Sullivan, Anthony
Chan, Irene Diacoyanni-Tarlatzis, Karl Heider, Rainer Krause, et al.,
"Universals and Cultural Differences in the Judgments of Facial
Expressions of Emotion." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
53, no. 4 (1987):712--17. doi: 10.1037/​0022-3514.53.4.712. based on a
role play that I did Brené Brown (host), "Brené with Aiko Bethea on
Inclusivity at Work: The Heart of Hard Conversations (Part 1)," November
9, 2020, Dare to Lead, podcast.

OceanofPDF.com

ILLUSTRATION CREDITS

1

Collage based on original art by PRRINT!, using illustrations by Gavin
Aung Than 2 Kyle Glenn 3 Elizabeth Gilbert 4 Alessio Bogani 5 Álvaro
Mendoza 6 Annie Sprat 7 Gavin Aung Than 8 Gavin Aung Than 9 Gavin Aung
Than 10 Kenzie Kraft 11 Janine Robinson 12 August Friedrich Albrecht
Schenck, Anguish (Angoisse) (c. 1878), National Gallery of Victoria,
Melbourne, purchased 1880. 13 Dark Elegy, copyright © 1991 Suse
Lowenstein, photo by Karen Walrond 14 Aedrian 15 Gavin Aung Than 16
Steve Cicero 17 Katie Chang 18 Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, redrawn by
Gavin Aung Than 19 Gavin Aung Than 20 Gavin Aung Than 21 Elle Lappan
Photography 22 Warren Sammut 23 Eddie Pearson 24 Laura Vinck

25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38

WholeHearted School Counseling © 2000 Creative Therapy Associates, Inc.,
Cincinnati, Ohio Dr. John Gottman and Dr. Julie Schwartz Gottman. The
Gottman Institute Zoran Milich Gavin Aung Than Gavin Aung Than Gavin
Aung Than Gavin Aung Than Gavin Aung Than Gavin Aung Than Gavin Aung
Than Gavin Aung Than Gavin Aung Than Gavin Aung Than OceanofPDF.com

BY

PhD, MSW

Atlas of the Heart You Are Your Best Thing (co-edited with Tarana Burke)
Dare to Lead Braving the Wilderness Rising Strong Daring Greatly The
Gifts of Imperfection I Thought It Was Just Me

OceanofPDF.com

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

brené brown is a research professor at the University of Houston, where
she

holds the Huffington Foundation Endowed Chair at the Graduate College of
Social Work. She is also a visiting professor in management at the
University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business. Brown has
spent the past two decades studying courage, vulnerability, shame, and
empathy and is the author of five #1 New York Times bestsellers: The
Gifts of Imperfection, Daring Greatly, Rising Strong, Braving the
Wilderness, and Dare to Lead, which is the culmination of a seven-year
study on courage and leadership. With Tarana Burke, she co-edited the
bestselling anthology You Are Your Best Thing: Vulnerability, Shame
Resilience, and the Black Experience. She hosts the Unlocking Us and
Dare to Lead podcasts, and her TEDx talk, "The Power of Vulnerability,"
is one of the top five most-viewed TED talks in the world with more than
50 million views. Her Netflix special, The Call to Courage, is the first
filmed lecture by a researcher on the streaming service. Brown lives in
Houston, Texas, with her husband, Steve. They have two children, Ellen
and Charlie. brenebrown.com Facebook.com/​brenebrown Twitter: @brenebrown
Instagram: @brenebrown

OceanofPDF.com

ABOUT THE ILLUSTRATOR

gavin aung than is a New York Times bestselling cartoonist and the
creator of

Zen Pencils, a cartoon blog that adapts inspirational quotes into
comics. He is currently working on the middle-grade graphic novel series
Super Sidekicks. After working in the corporate graphic design industry
for eight years, he quit his unfulfilling job and sold his house to
follow his true passion: drawing comics. He hasn't looked back since.
Twitter: @zenpencils Instagram: @zenpencils

OceanofPDF.com

W hat's next on your reading list? Discover your next great read! Get
personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author. Sign up
now.

OceanofPDF.com

SKILL SET 1 FOR CULTIVATING MEANINGFUL CONNECTION SKILL SETS FOR
CULTIVATING MEANINGFUL CONNECTION Developing GROUNDED CONFIDENCE
(LEARNING & IMPROVING) Knowing and applying the language of human
experience and emotion Practicing courage Rumbling with vulnerability
Staying curious Practicing humility Committing to mastery and practice
Feeling embodied and connected to self NEAR ENEMIES KNOWING AND PROVING
Shaping emotion and experience to fit what we know Not owning our hurt,
pain, and fear. "Everything is fine." Performing and/or avoiding
vulnerability Challenging & criticizing more than exploring and
contributing Confusing modesty and insecurity with humility
Self-protecting with perfectionism Thinking and acting our emotions
without feeling them FAR ENEMIES PROTECTING FRAGILE SELF-WORTH Acting
out, shutting down, or giving up Choosing armor or comfort over courage
Shutting down or acting out in vulnerability Showing indifference,
disinterest, defensiveness Hustling and hubris Getting stuck in fear and
shame

Feeling disembodied and disconnected from ourselves Click here to return
to image OceanofPDF.com

SKILL SET 2 FOR CULTIVATING MEANINGFUL CONNECTION SKILL SETS FOR
CULTIVATING MEANINGFUL CONNECTION Practicing THE COURAGE TO WALK
ALONGSIDE Knowing and applying the language of human experience and
emotion Committing to be other-focused Practicing compassion Practicing
empathy Practicing non-judgment Sharing "power with" and "power to"
Being relational Setting and respecting boundaries NEAR ENEMIES
CONTROLLING THE PATH Shaping emotion and experience to fit what we know
Performing concern while trying to control or distance Showing pity and
comparing suffering Defaulting to sympathy and other empathy misses
Performing non-judgment but judging, comparing, blaming, and distancing
"Helping" by trying to control people, perceptions, or outcomes Being
transactional, connecting for gain, fitting in, or control Becoming
enmeshed or creating distance FAR ENEMIES WALKING AWAY Acting out,
shutting down, or giving up Defaulting to self-protecting and
self-focused

Cruelty and/or creating distance, separation, disconnection, and
treating others like they're invisible Creating distance, separation,
disconnection, and treating others like they're invisible Judging
Leveraging power over Disengaging and disconnecting Being enmeshed or
building walls Click here to return to image OceanofPDF.com

SKILL SET 3 FOR CULTIVATING MEANINGFUL CONNECTION SKILL SETS FOR
CULTIVATING MEANINGFUL CONNECTION Practicing STORY STEWARDSHIP (HONORING
STORY AS SACRED) Knowing and applying the language of human experience
and emotion Rumbling with story - listening, discovering, and staying
curious Building narrative trust - believing, acknowledging, and
affirming NEAR ENEMIES PERFORMING CONNECTION WHILE DRIVING DISCONNECTION
Shaping emotion and experience to fit what we know Creating separation
by knowing, advice-giving, and problem solving Disconnecting through
narrative takeover or narrative tapout (including performative
affirmation) FAR ENEMIES NOT VALUING STORY DAMAGING TRUST & SELF-TRUST
Acting out, shutting down, or giving up Showing indifference,
disintrest, dismissing, or diminishing Fueling narrative distrust
wDiminishing the humanity of others and ourselves Click here to return
to image OceanofPDF.com


