OceanofPDF.com

Titles in This Series Be Happy Be Angry Be Here Be Kind OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

Copyright © The Dalai Lama Trust 2022 Foreword copyright © Renuka Singh
2022 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from Hampton Roads
Publishing, Inc. Reviewers may quote brief passages. First published in
2021 as The Little Book of Encouragement by Penguin Books, Penguin
Random House India. ISBN 9780670094943 Hampton Roads Publishing Company,
Inc. Charlottesville, VA 22906 Distributed by Red Wheel/Weiser, LLC
www.redwheelweiser.com Cover and text design by Kathryn Sky-Peck Graphic
image of the Dalai Lama from www.vectorportal.com ISBN:
978-1-64297-044-9 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
available on request. Printed in the United States of America IBI 10 9 8
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 www.redwheelweiser.com/newsletter

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

Foreword

OceanofPDF.com

Foreword The spread of Covid-19 has shaken up our world within a very
short period. It has given rise to uncertainties, unknown fears,
anxieties, loneliness, and depression. As societies and nations struggle
to come to terms with and contain it, economic breakdown, migration,
environmental crises, and a dwindling spirit stare us in our face.
Nevertheless, it has indeed presented an opportune moment to explore
one's interiority. His Holiness the Dalai Lama rightly points to our
"emotional hygiene" that helps the mind and heart to gain inner
strength, peace, clarity, and happiness. I am grateful to His Holiness
the Fourteenth Dalai Lama for being in my life and being a reliable
object of refuge for millions in this ever-changing world. His Holiness
has always advocated the principle of interdependence and maintained
that we are deeply connected by the humaneness that unites us all. I am
indebted to Mr Tseten Samdup Chhoekyapa from the private office of His
Holiness, who generously and promptly provided sources and relevant
material for this book and gave valuable suggestions and comments. Also,
my gratitude to Venerable Geshe Ngawang Sonam for his philosophical
input and insights. My editor Premanka Goswami encouraged and inspired
me at every step to put this collection together. I would like to thank
him, as well as editor Ms Shreya Pandey, and the team at Penguin Random
House for their hard and meticulous work. For their patience and
unfailing support, I thank my family members---Jyotsna, Sumeet, Supriti,
Lisl, Sam,

Harry, and the Mehtas. I hope and pray that the 21st century will be
peaceful and that this book of quotations will benefit and inspire all
the readers to never give up hope. Renuka Singh 1 January 2021

OceanofPDF.com

With his characteristic down-to-earth approach to the Buddhist path, His
Holiness the Dalai Lama has often observed of himself that his informal
speaking style "complements my broken English." This volume has been
edited to keep alive his voice and its unique flavor.

OceanofPDF.com

A

s one among the more than seven billion human beings alive today, I have
made a commitment to promoting human happiness. We tend to think that
happiness comes from money and power, without acknowledging the role of
the mind or that the key to happiness is inner peace. When we are
mentally distressed and physical comfort brings little relief, whereas
we can often withstand physical pain if we are mentally at peace. Our
modern lifestyle is focused on material goals, which are not sufficient
in and of themselves to bring about inner peace. We all want to live a
happy life and to do so is our right. What we need to do is to cultivate
inner values such as warm-heartedness and compassion. Similarly,
whenever we face conflicts of interest, we have to think on a global
level. We are interdependent. We need each other. In the globalized
world in which we now live, clinging to notions of "my nation, my faith,
my community" is out of date. We need, instead, to be much more aware of
the oneness of humanity, to acknowledge others' rights and interests;
and when we do so, meaningful dialogue can come about. Dr Renuka Singh,
who I have known for many years, has chosen quotations concerning these
topics from talks I have given in recent years and gathered them
together in this book. I am very happy to have this opportunity to share
some of my thoughts and experiences with you. Please take time to think
more about these ideas. Discuss them with your friends and, if you can,
put them into practice in your day-to-day life.

The Dalai Lama 1 January 2021

OceanofPDF.com

For me, the best introduction is the human face. When I see two eyes,
one mouth, one nose, I know I am dealing with another human being. I am
like those young children who don't care about their companion's

background, so long as they are smiling and willing to play.

Tragic situations reveal the deeper human values of compassion in us.
Usually, people don't think about these deeper human values, but when
they see their human brothers and sisters suffering, the response comes
automatically. We need a revolution of compassion that is based on
warm-heartedness. This will contribute to a more compassionate world
that has a sense of oneness of humanity.

Scientists have evidence to prove that basic human nature is
compassionate. They have also found that constant anger and hatred
weaken our immune system. Therefore, just as we teach people physical
hygiene to help preserve their physical health, for a happy and peaceful
mind, we need to teach people about emotional hygiene---how to tackle
their destructive emotions.

When you find that all human beings are just like you, a spirit of
friendship is fostered. You find that there is less need to hide things
and as a result, feelings of fear, self-doubt, and insecurity are
automatically dispelled. What's more, you earn the trust of other
people!

We must recognize that we are not individuals who are alone. We depend
on our community and we are a part of it. No matter how rich your family
is, without the community you cannot survive. In the past, there has
been too much emphasis on one's race, ethnicity, nation, and religion.
We are slowly learning that that sort of thinking is outdated. What we
really need is a sense of oneness shared among seven billion human
beings. This could be one of the positive outcomes of the coronavirus
disease crisis.

When we face problems, we are sometimes shortsighted and narrowminded.
Therefore, our problems appear unbearable and very big. But if we see
them from a wider perspective, our problems seem very small and
insignificant.

There are worse places to endure a lockdown than a palace. My home, with
its sweeping views of icy mountain peaks, has fresh water and pure air.
I stay here peacefully. But my thoughts are with all those who are
suffering and are afraid during this terrible pandemic. However, there
has been much to inspire and celebrate: many people have not cared about
their safety and are helping others.

The Buddhist perspective posits every sentient being is acquainted with
suffering and the truths of sickness, old age, and death. But as human
beings, we have the capacity to use our minds to conquer anger, panic,
and greed. In recent years, I have stressed "emotional disarmament":
seeing things realistically and clearly, without the confusion of fear
or rage. If a problem has a solution, we must work to find it; if it
does not, we need not waste time worrying about it.

As a Buddhist, I believe in the principle of impermanence. Eventually,
this virus will pass, just as I have seen wars and other terrible
threats pass in my lifetime. We will then have the opportunity to
rebuild our global community as we have done many times before. I
sincerely hope that everyone can stay safe and stay calm. At this time
of uncertainty, it is important that we do not lose hope and confidence
in the constructive efforts so many are making.

Our life depends so much on others that at the root of our existence
lies a fundamental need for love. This is why it is good to cultivate an
authentic sense of responsibility and concern for the welfare of others.

Sadly, the mere availability of clean drinking water is a major problem
today. To prevent the uncontrolled spread of disease, we must ensure
that throughout the world, the valiant health-care providers and the
sick have access to the fundamental necessities of clean water and
proper sanitation. Hygiene is one of the bases of effective health care.

Cultivating peace of mind should be part of our approach to health care;
doctors and nurses need it too. It is important to put the patient at
ease. Whenever I've gone for a medical check-up, I've noticed that I
feel much more comfortable when the doctors and nurses looking after me
treat me with warmth and a smile on their face. The compassionate face
of a doctor is very healing.

If you would like to make me a birthday gift, the best you can do is to
help fulfill my three commitments---1) promoting deeper human values
based on the sense of oneness of humanity, 2) encouraging harmony and
understanding among the world's major religious traditions, and 3)
preserving Tibetan language and culture and heritage, while also working
for the protection of Tibet's natural environment.

I don't remember my birth or my existence in the womb; I cannot recall
if I remember my infancy either. However, there is one telling external
sign perhaps. Children are usually born with their eyes closed; I was
born with my eyes open. This may be a slight indication that I possessed
a clear state of mind even in the womb.

On being recognized as the Dalai Lama, I was very happy. Even before I
was recognized, I often told my mother that I was going to Lhasa. I used
to straddle a windowsill in our house, pretending that I was riding a
horse to Lhasa. I was a very small child at that time but I remember
this clearly. I had a strong desire to go there.

Despite my advanced age, there's nothing wrong with my physical
condition. This is mainly because my mind is at peace. I have no
anxiety, and I'm inspired by these verses from Shantideva:

For as long as space endures And as long as living beings remain May I
too abide To dispel the misery of the world. In order to be of service
to others, not only on a physical level but also mentally, I am
determined to live another fifteen to twenty years.

I am eighty-seven years old. At the age of fourteen or fifteen, I lost
my freedom. When I was twenty-four, I lost my country. Since 1959, Tibet
has been full of suffering. When difficult situations arise, I think
carefully about Tibetans before deciding what to do, so that I have no
regrets. Tibet and India have always been close, and today, India is a
democratic country. So, for sixty years, I have enjoyed the freedom I
have found here.

I've always considered myself to be a simple Buddhist monk; I feel that
is the real me. Deep down inside, even in my dreams, I see myself as a
monk. So naturally, I feel myself to be a religious person. Even in my
daily life, I can say that I spend 80 per cent of my time on spiritual
activities and 20 per cent on Tibet as a whole.

I switch off the light when I leave my room, take a shower instead of a
bath, and eat very little meat; I encourage other people to do the same.
We must think globally but act locally.

Whether weakness is a part of greatness is quite a philosophical
question. It is important to know your weakness; then you can improve.
If some Tibetan and Hindu Lamas consider themselves great, it is
important to test, criticize, and tease them. If they remain completely
calm, it shows that they truly practice what they teach.

We really need a sense of oneness of humanity. Thinking only of one's
country, people, or religion is dangerous. Problems arise when our
thinking is restricted to one narrow identity or another. It can lead to
conflict; wars stem from that feudal attitude. In the past, kings,
queens, rulers, and even religious leaders would go to war out of
concern for their own power. They would evoke a sense of "us" and "them"
and conscript men to fight on their behalf.

Buddhists disapprove of killing for sport. I support groups and people
who work for animal rights and animal welfare around the world. Sadly,
millions and billions of animals are killed for human consumption. What
we are doing to animals today can also happen to us. In contrast, I
think of Tibetan butchers and Japanese fishermen; some of them ask the
animals they kill for forgiveness and pray for them.

Material values do matter but deeper inner values are more important.
During the last century, we have made great material progress. But it is
precisely this material progress that is now leading to our destruction.
Material progress alone cannot reduce our psychological stress, anxiety,
anger, and frustration. Scientists who once paid attention to material
things are now focusing on training the mind.

Living in India, a free country, we can take advantage of the
opportunity to study and integrate what we learn into our practice.
There's no point in paying lip-service to learning. Trulshik Rinpoché
used to tease me, saying that the geshés may be learned but their
knowledge just amounts to empty words with no fruit. Learn through
listening and reading, come to an understanding through reflection, and
turn that into experience through meditation.

You must have the determination to achieve enlightenment and serve all
sentient beings; we call this Bodhichitta. It is also known as "infinite
altruism." To develop this determination, we must study the four noble
truths. To end suffering, you first have to know what is suffering, what
is its cause? Then the cessation, and finally the path---the true path!

It is of no use to think, "I am too old and irrelevant." Young people
are physically stronger, their minds are fresh; they can contribute to a
better world but they get over-excited. Older people have more
experience; they can help by teaching and training the young. We can
tell them to remain calm.

Time is always moving and is everchanging; no force can stop that. Now
the question is whether we use this time properly or not. The past
cannot be changed but our future depends upon our present. We can take
the opportunity to make the future happier, more peaceful, and
different. So, the present generation is the key to creating a more
compassionate future century. They have the opportunity---as well as the
responsibility---to do so.

I think competition is good. Striving to be at the top is not
necessarily negative. If you're not trying to create problems for others
and are making an effort to show them the right way, then it's good.
Then, the sense of competition is positive. But if to reach the top, you
create problems for others, that's negative.

To the young people who are protesting and are desirous of change, to
those who are struggling against systems that they see as oppressive,
remember---the world is always changing. Today's world is so different
from what it was 100 years ago. The 20th century was a period of great
violence. People readily resorted to the use of force to resolve
conflict. These days, when disagreements occur, it's better to talk them
through. Let's make this an era of dialogue.

Resting our hopes on the younger generation is not sufficient;
politicians, too, must act urgently. It is not enough to hold meetings
and conferences; we must set a timetable for change. Only if we start to
act now will we have a reason to hope. We must not sacrifice our
civilization for the greed of a few. Journalists have an equally
important role. I tell them that, in these modern times, they have a
special responsibility to bring awareness to the people; to not just
report bad news but bring people hope.

From the very core of our being, we simply desire contentment. I don't
know whether the universe, with its countless galaxies, stars, and
planets, has a deeper meaning or not, but at the very least, it is clear
that we humans, who live on this earth, face the task of making a happy
life for ourselves.

I feel that there is some connection between our mental state and
self-confidence and the virus. Maybe fear gives the virus an opportunity
to multiply. What we can control is our mental hygiene---if the positive
particles of our bodies are strong, we can better fight what infects us.

Until the late 20th century, not much attention was paid to the mind, to
our mental consciousness. But toward the end of the 20th century, we
began to acknowledge that there was something else that affected our
brain; meditation and breathing exercises impacted our mental
consciousness. These things can help us focus on the mind itself. Begin
with a few seconds at first, and then increase your practice to a few
minutes. I have some friends who can focus for several hours. Combining
analysis with meditation enables us to achieve insight.

It's not enough to pray for one's peace of mind; one must examine what
disturbs their mind and eliminate it. Likewise, just wishing to be well
won't cure our physical illness; one must take the prescribed medicine.

We are confronted with the growth of technology and artificial
intelligence. They have many helpful applications. However, since
artificial intelligence is ultimately created by human intelligence, I
don't envisage it taking over, as some people fear. Consciousness is not
limited to sensory functions; mental consciousness is sophisticated,
subtle, and powerful.

Our day-to-day existence is very much alive with hope even though our
future isn't guaranteed. There is no guarantee that we will be here
tomorrow. But still, we are working towards it purely on the basis of
hope. So, we need to make the best use of our time.

Harmony among major faiths has become an essential ingredient of
co-existence in our world. Mutual understanding among traditions is not
merely the business of religious believers; it concerns the welfare of
humanity as a whole.

Jesus knew about the spiritual law called "karma" in Buddhism and talked
about it without using the word explicitly. It is a spiritual law that
states you reap what you sow. Thus, everything depends entirely upon
your efforts and your actions. Things change through actions and not
through prayers. We must act to create positive karma; positive karma
means positive action.

I once met a physicist who told me how much he valued his field of
study, but he'd also learned that he couldn't let himself become
attached to it. I realized then, that although I am a Buddhist, I cannot
afford to be attached to Buddhism because that attachment can create
bias and an inability to appreciate the goodness in others.

The notion of there being one truth and one religion contradicts the
reality of the many truths and many religions that exist. This is
clarified when we see that, as far as an individual is concerned, it's
right to think of one truth and one faith; but for the larger human
community, we have to acknowledge the reality that there are many truths
and many faiths. This is why I always advise: keep to your religion but
learn from others.

We must listen to scientists and specialists; their voices and knowledge
are very important. Even religious people should pay attention to
scientists instead of just praying, praying, and praying. In the ancient
Nalanda Buddhist tradition, which we Tibetans follow, everything is
investigated; nothing is accepted by faith alone. If, through reasoning,
we find some contradiction, even in Buddha's own words, we then have the
right to reject them.

Religion should not just be limited to praying. Ethical action is more
important than prayers. What can Buddha, Allah, or Christ do if we human
beings destroy our earth, fill the oceans with plastic so that fish,
seals and whales perish, and cause rapid desertification and vast
amounts of greenhouse gases to be released into the atmosphere?

Whether one is a believer or a nonbeliever, one wants to live a happy
life. We want friends, and friends who are smiling. If one meets angry
people, one somehow wants to avoid them. A smiling person makes one feel
happy. For instance, dogs sleep peacefully with their companions but
avoid those dogs that are always barking. So, if one is a compassionate
human being, one finds a lot of friends around.

Look at the diversity of India! All the world's major religions flourish
here, unhindered. People in the south, north, east, and west of the
country speak different languages, have different modes of writing, yet
they all live together as part of the Indian Union.

Good motivation and honesty bring self-confidence, which attracts the
trust and respect of others. Therefore, the real source of blessings is
in our own mind.

To be kind, honest, and positive, to forgive those who harm us, and to
treat everyone as a friend; to help those who are suffering and to never
consider ourselves superior to anyone else---even if this advice seems
simplistic, make the effort to see for yourself if, by following it, you
can find greater happiness.

Joy and happiness are mental events. In our day-to-day experiences,
mental satisfaction is superior to physical pleasure. We need material
development but it is a mistake to depend on material things alone to
find happiness; we also need to be warm-hearted.

Stop grasping at some kind of independently existing self; you have to
get rid of this fundamental ignorance. An understanding of the
non-inherent existence of the self, coupled with compassion, can destroy
the fundamental ignorance of clinging to an independent existence.
Exchanging your happiness with the suffering of others can help you
attain Buddhahood.

I've been thinking about emptiness for sixty years and Bodhichitta for
about fifty years. Understanding takes time but you have to keep
analyzing them. It is possible to reduce afflictive emotions. It's not
easy, but if you make the effort you can, gradually, bring about a
change that will give rise to peace of mind. We all have the seed of
Buddhahood within us. The emptiness of Buddha's mind and that of
sentient beings is the same.

Careful study based on logic and reason yields the understanding that
things come about because of causes and conditions. Cultivating reason
and logic enables the development of vast, great, profound, and swift
intelligence.

Ignorance about interdependence has harmed both our natural environment
and human society. We have misplaced much of our energy in self-centered
material consumption. We have neglected to foster the most basic and
human needs of love, kindness, and cooperation. This is very sad. We
have to consider what we human beings are; we are not machine-made
objects. It is a mistake to seek fulfilment solely through external
development.

The air we breathe, the water we drink, the forests and oceans that
sustain millions of different life forms, and the climate that governs
our weather systems---all transcend national boundaries. When this blue
planet is viewed from space, there are no national boundaries to be
seen. It is a sobering thought that the air we breathe contains more
carbon dioxide than at any time in the past 650,000 years. No country,
whether rich and powerful or poor and weak, can afford to ignore global
warming.

Our environmental recklessness has brought the planet to a stage where
it can no longer accept our behavior in silence. The sheer size and
frequency of environmental disasters---hurricanes, wildfires,
desertification, glacial retreat, and melting of the polar ice
caps---can be seen as Earth's response to our irresponsible behavior.

I came to Dharamsala in 1960. That winter we had a lot of snow. With
each passing year, the snow has become less and less. We must take
global warming very seriously now; I urge the world to invest more in
wind and solar energy and to move away from the dependence on fossil
fuels.

Our Mother Earth is teaching us a critical and evolutionary lesson
now---a lesson in universal responsibility. The survival of millions of
species, including our own, depends on our learning this lesson. The
destruction of nature and natural resources stems from ignorance, greed,
and a lack of respect for the earth. Future generations will inherit a
vastly degraded planet if destruction of the natural environment
continues at the present rate.

Let us adopt a lifestyle that emphasizes contentment because the cost of
the ever-increasing standards of living is simply too great for
humanity. Sometimes, we think that human beings can control nature with
the help of technology; the growing emergency that rapid climate change
represents now proves otherwise. We must restore the balance of nature.
If we ignore this, we may soon find that all living things on this
planet--- including human beings---are doomed.

We are a part of nature. Nature will always be more powerful than us
despite our knowledge, technology, and super-weapons. If the earth's
average temperature increases by even two to three degrees, we will
trigger a hostile climate breakdown. Morally, as beings of higher
intelligence, we must care for this world and its inhabitants. Members
of the animal and plant kingdoms do not have the means to save or
protect this world; it is our responsibility to undo the serious
environmental degradation caused by thoughtless and inappropriate human
behavior.

The young will be at the forefront of tackling what is now one of the
most pressing concerns: the need to tackle environmental challenges. I
have seen the effects of climate change in my lifetime. When I was in
Tibet, I did not know about the environment; we took it for granted. We
could drink water from any of the streams. It is only after I arrived in
India, and later began to travel the world, that I realized how much
damage was being done.

During the last century, several countries have been at war with each
other. I have great admiration for the spirit of the European Union
though; the countries within the European Union have not waged war
against another. Eighty years of peace! The European Union was rightly
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2012. Politics can change just as
people can. The European Union is a wonderful peace project that gives
me hope.

It is heartening to see the leaders of the European Union succeeding in
meeting one of the toughest challenges in history, the pandemic, by
agreeing to measures to rescue their economies from the disruption
caused by it. Once again, the European Union has shown the importance of
taking the common interests of all members into account. Through
persistent negotiation and compromise, leaders have reached agreement,
showing wisdom and maturity in a world often unsettled by emotional
crises; they have been an inspiring model for others to follow.

Despite all the suffering that China has inflicted on Tibetans for over
six decades, I remain convinced that most human conflicts can be
resolved through sincere dialogue held in the spirit of openness and
reconciliation. We have learned that even enemies can become friends; I
am a strong believer of non-violence.

A nuclear war between countries would probably be the last one in human
history because nobody would be left to wage another war. As to whether
the world is getting better or worse, there is growing opposition to the
existence of nuclear weapons.

Globally, and within individual nations, there is a huge gap between the
rich and the poor. Pay more attention to the poor and try to reduce this
gap. The other day, I publicly expressed the dire situation of refugees
in Africa and Latin America who continue to face difficulties in their
daily lives. The rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer is a
very serious matter; it goes totally against our sense of compassion.

Letting go of the surplus is at the heart of spiritual growth. Just
imagine what we could achieve if the USA cut its military budget in
half! That would be over \$300 billion every year that could be used for
environmental projects such as transitioning to solar energy, and to
help overcome hunger in poor countries. It would mean defending the
future instead of dangerous military upgrading in the present---the
beginning of an ecological age. "Letting go" would mean liberation.

India and China have developed a sense of competition in recent times.
Both countries have populations of over a billion. Both of them are
powerful nations yet neither can destroy the other; so, they have to
live side-by-side.

When you are being nationalistic, check whether the feeling is a
narrow-minded, short-sighted one---which isn't so good and leads to
division---or whether it is a broadminded concern for all.

In the 21st century, I think India should show its ageold tradition of
inter-religious harmony that flourishes here to the rest of the world.
All the major religious traditions have lived here together in harmony
for hundreds of years. Moreover, India's secular tradition of showing
respect to not only all spiritual traditions but also to those who have
no faith is relevant to the one billion people of the world who are
agnostic.

I am just one of the seven billion human beings alive today, and as
such, I try to promote human compassion based on the sense that all
human beings are one. This way of thinking is of immense benefit to me.
When I meet someone---with two eyes, one nose, and so forth ---I
recognize them as physically, mentally, and emotionally the same as me.
I feel they are my sister or brother.

Many of the problems we face are created by us as a result of our
narrow-mindedness and emotions. Emotions are a natural part of life, but
negative emotions have no sound foundation. On the other hand, positive
emotions, like compassion, are based on reason.

Many of the serious problems we face today have been created by
ourselves. Our problems depend on our mental attitude. In America,
protests against racial injustice are taking place. We must promote a
sense of oneness of humanity, which is my life's commitment. Among the
seven billion human beings alive today, we're all born the same way and
will all die the same way. In between these two events, while we're
alive, there may be minor differences between us. But essentially, we
are all the same.

Each individual must take responsibility for fighting systemic racism in
modern society. Ultimately, the people, the public, have the power to
decide. Firstly, people should think more wisely, with more
openmindedness. Further, governments should take into account the
public's view in our present democratic era.

Mental bullying on the internet can lead young people to self-harm and
suicide---as human beings, we are intelligent and can evaluate and
choose what to take seriously. Even Buddha advised his followers:

"As the wise test gold by burning, cutting and rubbing it, so bhikshus,
should you accept my words only after testing them, and not merely out
of respect for me." As a Buddhist and a follower of the Nalanda
tradition, I find it very useful to always ask, "Why?"

We Tibetans consider India our sacred neighbor because the Buddhadharma
came to us from India. I jovially tell people that, for thousands of
years, we considered Indians our gurus, and thought of ourselves as
their very reliable "chelas" or disciples. In the guru's own land, the
Nalanda tradition has seen many ups and downs. During these periods, we,
as reliable chelas, have kept the Nalanda tradition intact.

Education is another preoccupation I have. The whole world should pay
more attention to how they can transform their emotions. This should be
part of one's formal education and not just relegated to religious
teaching. Children need to be educated about the inner world; we must
teach them how to develop peace of mind.

We are not like plants, we have emotions. We need to learn how to manage
our emotions. Our education should include an understanding of how to
achieve peace of mind, it should teach us how to live properly, how to
balance our desire for physical comfort with that of mental comfort. We
are still focusing far too much on our differences instead of our
commonalities.

In our education system, we need to include lessons that focus on mental
and emotional hygiene that teach people how to develop a healthy mind.
This is the core of what I call secular ethics.

The heritage of India's rich civilization is rooted in the long-standing
traditions of karuna and ahimsa: compassion and non-violence. I believe
India is the only country with the potential to combine its ancient
knowledge with its modern education. We must, therefore, endeavour to
integrate India's ancient wisdom with contemporary approaches to
schooling, with the aim of promoting positive human values.

It is my wish that more attention is paid to educating the
heart---teaching love, kindness, peace, compassion, forgiveness,
mindfulness, self-discipline, generosity, and tolerance. This education
is necessary from kindergarten to secondary schools, and even in
universities. I am alluding to social-emotional and ethical learning. We
need a worldwide initiative for educating the heart and training the
mind in this modern age.

We in Tibet have preserved the knowledge and cultural heritage that has
come to us from India over a period of thousand years. Being a student
of logic, I find it very useful. Even Buddha himself expressed, "Oh! My
follower, you should not accept my teaching out of faith or devotion but
rather through thorough investigation and experiment." If we find
something unconvincing, we must reject it. This is quite unique to the
Tibetan knowledge-system.

Hours, minutes, and seconds---time never stands still. We, too, are a
part of nature. The past is important but already past. The future is
still in our hands, so we must think about ecology at the global level.

I am an ardent supporter of environmental protection. We humans are the
only species with the power to destroy the earth. Yet, if we have the
capacity to destroy the earth, so too do we have the capacity to protect
it. We must ethically re-examine what we have inherited, what we are
responsible for, and what we will pass on to the coming generations.

Environmental education about the consequences of the destruction of our
ecosystem and the dramatic decrease in biodiversity must be given top
priority. However, creating awareness is not sufficient; we must find
ways to bring about changes in the way we live. I call on the younger
generation---be rebels! Demand climate protection and justice because it
is your future that is at stake.

Today, the Covid pandemic is only one threat we face. Another very
serious issue is that of climate change and global warming. Scientists
have predicted that if we don't act to stop it now, in the coming
decades, water sources like rivers and lakes may dry up. An additional
problem that needs to be addressed is that of the growing gap between
the rich and the poor. Tackling these difficult circumstances will
require that we work together.

Buddha would be green, and I am green too. Buddha was born as his mother
leaned against a tree for support. He attained enlightenment seated
beneath a tree and passed away as trees stood witness overhead.
Therefore, should Buddha return to our world, he would certainly be
connected to the campaign to protect the environment.

If we compare the damage done to the environment due to war and
violence, it becomes clear that the violence has had an immediate impact
on us. The trouble is that the damage done to the environment takes
place more stealthily, so we don't see it until it is too late. We have
reached a tipping point when it comes to global warming.

Any human activity should be carried out with a sense of responsibility,
commitment, and discipline. But if our activities are carried out with
short-sightedness and for short-term gains of money or power, then they
all become negative and destructive activities.

Human beings are physically, mentally, and emotionally the same.
Everybody wants to live a happy life, free of problems. Even insects,
birds, and animals want to be happy. To ensure a more peaceful world and
a healthier environment, we sometimes point a finger at others and say
they should do this or that; but change must start with each of us,
individually.

According to scientists, basic human nature is compassionate. Those who
grow up in a more compassionate atmosphere tend to be happier and more
successful. On the other hand, scientists suggest that living with
constant anger or fear undermines our immune system. Hence, compassion
and warmheartedness are not only important at the beginning of our life
but also toward the middle and at the end of it.

The Tibetan plateau happens to be the largest watershed in the world.
All the major rivers of Asia--- including the Ganges, Karnali,
Brahmaputra, Indus, Sutlej, Irrawaddy, Salween, Yellow River, Yangtse,
and the Mekong---originate in the Tibetan plateau. Over 1.5 billion
people live by these waters: one-fifth of the world's population.
Without water, there is no life. If Tibet's 46,000 glaciers continue to
melt, we will face unimaginable water problems, and water will become a
key cause for conflict in the future.

New technology has always taken a relatively long time to make a
complete breakthrough. More and more companies are making electric cars.
But if the cost of the car is too expensive, then only the rich will be
able to buy them. So, these cars must be made more affordable.
Similarly, other forms of renewable energy must be made more affordable,
especially to the poorer sections of the global community who are the
most vulnerable.

One of my dreams, perhaps an impossible dream, is to harness the solar
potential of places like the Sahara Desert and to use the power to run
desalination plants. The sweet water thus produced could nurture the
desert and produce food crops. It is a project that would have
widespread benefits and would function on a scale that requires global
cooperation.

As a Buddhist monk who believes in rebirth, I say--- even for selfish
reasons---we must pay more attention to our planet. Because we will come
back. And all of us would like to live on a healthy earth. The belief in
rebirth calls for more protection of our environment and climate.

In keeping with the Tibetan Buddhist tradition: all sentient beings have
been our mothers. The entirety of Buddhist spirituality is characterized
by this realization. All sentient beings are connected by a maternal
bond. This is the basic truth of awakening, enlightenment, and
realization. We are all interconnected in the universe, and from this,
universal responsibility arises.

Being too self-centered can give rise to anxiety and depression. An
effective antidote is to cultivate a sense of altruism, taking the whole
of humanity into account.

Only when we understand that the earth is like our mother---mother
earth---will we take care of her. We Tibetans, like the ancient people
of India, understand this interdependence. A healthy earth means healthy
animals, healthy plants, healthy forests, healthy water, and healthy
people. Mother earth admonishes us today, "My children are behaving
badly." She is warning us that there are limits to our actions.

When you spend time in the forest and hear birds singing, you feel good
inside. The healing power of forests is becoming increasingly important.
When we are surrounded by artificial things, it is harder to be at
peace. It's as if we become artificial ourselves; we develop hypocrisy,
suspicion, and distrust. In that state, it's hard to develop a genuine,
warm-hearted friendship. We all feel the need to be surrounded by life.
We need life around us that grows, flourishes, and thrives.

What I find particularly worrying is intensive animal husbandry. We
humans can, largely, live with little to no meat, and above all, without
animals suffering. Particularly in the modern world, we have many
alternatives---especially fruits and vegetables. There are even meat
substitutes being made from vegetables like peas, beetroot, potatoes,
and coconuts. Intensive animal husbandry has serious consequences, not
only for animals but also for own health, the soil, the insects, and the
air.

It is my vision to make my home country, Tibet, into the world's largest
nature preserve. Following the ancient Tibetan Buddhist tradition, Tibet
must and can become a demilitarized sanctuary of peace and nature.

Look at bees. They have no constitution, police force, or moral
training, but they work together to survive. Though they may
occasionally squabble, the colony survives due to cooperation. Human
beings, on the other hand, have constitutions, complex legal systems,
and police forces. We have remarkable intelligence and a great capacity
for love and affection; yet, despite our many extraordinary qualities,
we seem less able to cooperate.

Fear and anxiety easily give way to anger and violence. The opposite of
fear is trust, which is related to warmheartedness and boosts our
self-confidence. Compassion also reduces fear, reflecting as it does a
concern for others' well-being. When we are under the sway of anger or
attachment, we are limited in our ability to take a full and realistic
view of the situation. When the mind is compassionate, it is calm and we
are able to use our sense of reason practically, realistically, and with
determination.

Time passes, things change; so, we need to find new ways of thinking.
You young people are the ones who will contribute to the making of a new
world. Don't fall into the old ways of thinking! Accept the new reality
about the oneness of all human beings and face up to the challenge of
global warming. Open your eyes and open your minds.

In the Tibetan tradition, when coping with adversity, victims are
encouraged to cultivate forbearance. The first stage of that is to
develop a sense of equanimity. Forbearance builds up resilience and
protects you from giving in to disturbing emotional impulses.

We human beings have these marvellous, brilliant minds. But we are also
the biggest troublemakers on the planet. We should utilize our brains
with compassion and a sense of concern.

What is important is not how long you live but whether you live a
meaningful life. This doesn't mean accumulating money and fame but being
of service to your fellow human beings. It means helping others if you
can; but even if you can't, at least do not harm them. The very purpose
of my life is to serve as much as I can.

Even though I was the Dalai Lama, I had thirteen years of study as an
ordinary student before becoming a refugee. I continuously studied these
300 volumes of translations from India. Even these days, I am always
going through these books. Today we have preserved this knowledge in
monastic institutions in South India. There are around 10,000 monks who
attend the course for at least twenty years. Along with this, in the
nunnery, the nuns can also obtain a PhD. Initially, some people had
reservations about this. But you see, Buddha gave virtually the same
rank to nuns and monks, so I felt they should also have an equal
opportunity to study.

I've always believed that one's mother is one's first teacher, and she
teaches compassion. The day after my birth, I experienced my mother's
compassion. This is, I think, the most important part of building a
healthy family, which in turn leads to a healthy humanity. My village
was very small, and of course, there were no toys; so my mother always
carried me wherever she went, especially to the farm for work.
Eventually, I felt very comfortable being on my mother's shoulder. Then
I became a little bolder and instructed my mother to take me to see some
gorgeous sights. She was a bit too kind, and I was the boy who was a
little bit spoiled. The mother is a symbol of love and kindness. So, a
woman should not only be concerned about the family but society as well.

No matter how difficult the situation may be, we should employ science
and human ingenuity with determination and courage to overcome the
problems that confront us. Faced with threats to our health and
well-being, it is natural to feel anxious and afraid. Everyone, at
present, is doing their best to contain the spread of the coronavirus. I
applaud the concerted efforts of nations to limit the threat.

Suffering caused by diseases, aging, hunger, or loneliness, can be found
throughout the world. We encounter life's difficulties daily. There is
also much to appreciate---the kindness and mutual support shown by so
many members of our human family. And then, there are the opportunities
life provides to serve and act in a selfless, generous, and patient
manner toward our brothers and sisters.

At the root of human suffering is our excessive selfcenteredness, a
fixation on our own needs rather than the greater good. In contrast,
feelings of compassion, empathy, love, and kindness shift our focus
outward--- restoring us to happiness.

Individuals who cultivate peace of mind lead to creating a more peaceful
society, and that in turn contributes to a more peaceful world. All
beings want to find joy; we depend on hope, which is the pursuit of
something good. But to do that we need to use our brains properly. Real
happiness depends not on sensory awareness, but on the mind itself; the
key is to establish peace of mind. Doing that requires that we
understand the mind's system and our emotions, something that was
thoroughly examined in ancient India.

Buddhist teachers remind us that each of us is a student and everyone
else in the world is our teacher; that those who cause us the most
difficulty can be the best teachers, and it is toward them we should
feel a sense of gratitude. We must learn to appreciate the opportunity
they provide and develop compassion toward them. Our compassion must
contain the ability to listen with an open mind.

I have always been fascinated by the experimental and empirical pursuit
of knowledge known as science. When I was young, I enjoyed taking apart
mechanical toys and putting them back together. Had I not been chosen at
a young age to be the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet, I would have probably
become an engineer or electrician. For more than thirty years, I have
spent much time with Western scientists. When I think about myself now,
I sometimes think I am only one-half a Buddhist monk---the other half a
scientist.

It is encouraging to see so many ordinary people across the world
displaying great compassion toward the plight of refugees---from those
who have rescued them from the sea to those who have taken them in and
provided friendship and support. As a refugee myself, I feel a strong
empathy toward fellow refugees. When we see their anguish, we should do
all we can to help them.

These days I watch one to two hours of television, read, and then
meditate for four to five hours. It is very helpful. Watching videos of
animals is very relaxing. When you look at animals, you can really
appreciate your human life. Early morning meditation is useful for
people who are isolated, anxious, and adjusting to life in a global
pandemic and its restrictions. Even if you start with one-second
meditations, work your way up to one minute, then five, ten . . . and be
compassionate.

Every morning when I wake up I try to reflect on the question of, "Who
am I?" When you search for the identity of the "I" you cannot find
anything that you can point your finger at. The "I" or the self does
exist. We tend to develop this inappropriate thinking of an independent
"I," based on which all the destructive emotions arise. This is a
fundamental ignorance, a belief in an independently existing, concrete
"I," which is non-existent.

I have always opposed the objectification of women, have supported women
and their rights, and celebrated the growing international consensus in
support of gender equality and respect for women. I have encouraged
Tibetan nuns in exile to pursue a high level of scholarship, previously
reserved only for male monks. I have frequently suggested that if we had
more women leaders, the world would be a more peaceful place.

I always tell Tibetans: it is much better to consider the Chinese as
brothers and sisters than to think of them as our enemy---no use in
that. For the time being, there is a problem with our Chinese neighbors
but only with a few individuals in the Communist Party. A number of
Chinese leaders now realize that their seventy-year-old policy regarding
Tibet is unrealistic. There was too much emphasis on the use of force
then. So now they are in a dilemma: how to deal with the Tibetan
problem? Things seem to be changing.

I cannot say I am the incarnation of the bodhisattva of infinite
compassion, Avalokiteshvara, unless I am engaged in a meditative effort,
such as that of following my life back, breath by breath. There are four
types of rebirth. First, the common type, wherein a being is helpless to
determine his or her rebirth and depends on the nature of his past
actions. Second is the opposite---the birth of an entirely enlightened
Buddha, who simply manifests a physical form to help others. Third, the
birth of one who, due to past spiritual attainments, can choose, or at
least influence, the place and situation of his rebirth. And the fourth
is known as the "blessed manifestation." In this, the person is blessed
beyond his normal capacity to perform helpful functions. To attain this
last type of birth, the person's desire to help people in his previous
lives must have been very strong.

I have the karmic relationship to be in the role of the Dalai Lama. I am
at home with it. You may consider that, under the circumstances, I am
very lucky. However, behind the word "luck," there are actual causes or
reasons. There is the karmic force of my ability to assume this role as
well as the force of my wish to do so. Part of my daily prayer is this:

"As long as space exists, and as long as there are migrators in cyclic
existence, may I remain to remove their sufferings." I have wished for
it in this lifetime, and I know I've wished for this in my previous
lifetimes.

My death may well mark the end of the great tradition of Dalai Lamas;
the word means "great leader" in Tibetan. It may end with this great
Lama. The Himalayan Buddhists of Tibet and Mongolia will decide what
happens next. They will determine whether the 14th Dalai Lama has been
reincarnated in another tulku. What my followers decide is not an issue
for me; I have no interest. My only hope is that when my last days come,
I will still have my good name and will feel that I have made some
contribution to humanity.

In this time of serious crisis, we face threats to our health, and feel
sadness for the family and friends we have lost. Economic disruption is
posing a major challenge to governments and undermining the ability of
so many people to make a living. The crisis and its consequences serve
as a warning---only by coming together in a coordinated global response
will we meet the unprecedented magnitude of the challenges we face. I
pray we all heed the call to unite.

OceanofPDF.com

TENZIN GYATSO, His Holiness the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet, is the
spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhists and a Nobel laureate. In 1950, at
the age of fifteen, he was called upon to assume full responsibility as
Head of State and Government. His efforts to bring about a peaceful
solution to the Sino-Tibetan problem were thwarted and, following the
suppression of the Tibetan national uprising of March 10, 1959, His
Holiness escaped to India where he was given political asylum. In exile,
he has successfully led his people in the field of education,
rehabilitation, and preservation of the ancient and unique Tibetan
culture. He is also recognized as an advocate of world peace and
interreligious understanding. His Holiness has written several books on
Buddhism, philosophy, human nature, and universal responsibility. He has
received many international awards, including the 1989 Nobel Peace
Prize.

OceanofPDF.com

RENUKA SINGH, former professor and sociologist from the Centre for the
Study of Social Systems, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, has
been working in the field of Gender Studies, Diaspora, and Buddhist
Studies for over four decades. She has been associated with Women's
Studies Centre, Delhi University, Centre for Social Research, and was a
research fellow at Centre for CrossCultural Research on Women at Oxford
University, UK. She was also a senior UGC fellow and is currently the
director of Tushita Mahayana Meditation Centre, New Delhi. She has
authored and edited numerous articles and books that have been
translated into several languages of the world.

OceanofPDF.com

Hampton Roads Publishing Company . . . for the evolving human spirit
Hampton Roads Publishing Company publishes books on a variety of
subjects, including spirituality, health, and other related topics. For
a copy of our latest trade catalog, call (978) 465-0504 or visit our
distributor's website at www.redwheelweiser.com. You can also sign up
for our newsletter and special offers by going to
www.redwheelweiser.com/newsletter.

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com


