Expanded Atlas of Core Emotions Anger Anger is a universal emotional
response to perceived obstruction, injustice, or threat. Theories of
emotion (such as James-Lange and appraisal theories) describe anger as
arising when we interpret an event as unfair or goal-blocking. For
instance, one may feel anger after appraising a situation as insulting
or preventing a desired outcome. Paul Ekman's research identifies anger
as a basic emotion with a distinct, cross-culturally recognized facial
expression (frown, glaring eyes) 1 . Neurophysiologically, anger
activates the amygdala and related limbic circuits, triggering the
hypothalamus to initiate a sympathetic "fight-or-flight" response. This
produces physiological arousal -- heart rate accelerates, breathing
becomes faster and shallower, and stress hormones (adrenaline, cortisol)
surge 2 3 . Bodily tension and a flushed face often accompany these
changes. Anger can vary from mild irritation (annoyance, resentment) to
extreme rage (fury, vengefulness). At low intensity it might feel like
impatience or frustration; at high intensity it is overwhelming and
consuming. These escalating states are conceptually on a continuum from
annoyance to bitter fury. Psychologically, anger signals that a personal
boundary or goal has been violated. Evolutionarily, anger likely evolved
to overcome obstacles and deter exploitation. For example, anger can
mobilize energy to confront a problem or establish limits. Williams et
al. note a "double role" of anger: an inward-directed urge to overcome
adversity, and an outward-directed communication that asserts boundaries
and signals conflict to others 4 . In daily life, anger may manifest in
tense body language (clenched fists, stiff posture), raised voice, or
bitter sarcasm when standards are violated or frustrations build.
Communication-wise, showing anger clearly signals disapproval or a need
for change; frowning or shouting can warn others to back off or attend
to one's grievances. When managed constructively, anger can clarify
personal needs and motivate problem-solving. Although intense anger can
strain relationships, appropriately expressed anger can prevent
injustice and even strengthen bonds (for instance, a group uniting to
protest a shared grievance). In social bonding, anger's warning signals
help negotiate conflicts and renegotiate unfair situations, serving as a
catalyst for change when expressed in controlled, intentional ways 4 .

Fear Fear is the emotion triggered by perceived danger or threat. It is
a core survival mechanism: according to evolutionary perspectives, fear
evolved to protect organisms by prompting avoidance or defensive action
5 . Ekman identified fear as one of the basic emotions with a universal
expression (wide eyes, raised eyebrows) 1 . In cognitive theories, fear
arises when an event is appraised as harmful or frightening. In
physiological terms, the amygdala evaluates sensory inputs for danger
and activates the hypothalamus to initiate the autonomic stress
response. This causes an acute surge of adrenaline: the heart races,
pupils dilate, muscles tense, and breathing quickens. These changes
prepare the body to either freeze, flee, or fight. The brain's "alarm
system" (amygdala-centered circuits) links directly to these bodily
responses, ensuring rapid reaction to threat 5 . Fear spans a spectrum
of intensity. Mild fear may appear as trepidation or anxiety -- a sense
of unease or worry about a potential threat. Moderate fear includes
feeling tense, nervous, or alarmed about something specific. Intense
fear manifests as panic or terror. For example, anxiety involves
persistent

1

worry (often without immediate threat), while dread is a deep fear about
a looming event. At the extreme, panic is an overwhelming,
uncontrollable fear response with irrational reactions, and terror is
the highest intensity where one feels completely overwhelmed 6 7 . In
daily life, fear might appear as discomfort before public speaking or
alarm at hearing a loud noise. Behaviorally, it often causes withdrawal
or avoidance (hesitation to act) and vigilance to the environment.
Socially, fear expressions serve communicative and bonding roles. The
widened eyes and startled vocal tones that accompany fear rapidly signal
danger to others. These signals prompt observers to respond (e.g.,
offering comfort, warning them of the threat). In human groups and
animals alike, shared fear can reinforce bonds through group vigilance
or collective avoidance of danger. For example, recognizing fear in
another often elicits protective or empathetic reactions, strengthening
social cohesion in the face of threat 5 . Thus, while fear may isolate
an individual (urge to flee alone), it also has the adaptive role of
synchronizing group responses to danger.

Disgust Disgust is a basic emotion that evolved primarily as a
disease-avoidance mechanism. Ekman identified disgust with a distinctive
expression (nose wrinkled, upper lip raised) linked to rejection of
noxious stimuli 8 . Evolutionary theory views disgust as part of a
"behavioral immune system" 9 : it motivates organisms to avoid pathogens
and toxins. When confronted with foul odors, spoiled food, or bodily
wastes, disgust triggers immediate avoidance behaviors. At its core,
disgust causes strong visceral sensations: stomach contraction, nausea,
and often the urge to vomit. The characteristic facial reaction
(e.g. curling the upper lip, wrinkling the nose) may function to close
nasal passages and protect from inhaling harmful agents 8 . Disgust can
range from mild distaste (slight aversion) to revulsion or abhorrence
(intense repugnance). For instance, tasting something bitter might
provoke distaste, whereas seeing something gross can provoke revulsion.
Psychologically, any cue associated with contamination (rotten food,
foul smells, or moral violations like cruelty) can elicit disgust.
Neurologically, the anterior insula plays a central role in the disgust
response. Neuroimaging and lesion studies show that the insula -- which
integrates taste and visceral cues -- is critically involved in
generating the feeling of disgust 10 . Smaller insula volume is linked
to reduced disgust experience, underscoring its importance 10 . In
everyday life, disgust keeps us from ingesting or touching harmful
substances and from disease exposure. It causes quick reflexes (spitting
out tainted food, recoiling from a pungent smell). Communicatively,
expressing disgust (grimacing, moving away) warns others about danger.
For example, one person's repulsion at spoiled food teaches others to
avoid it. In social bonding, disgust helps maintain group health and
norms by signaling what is unacceptable. Moral disgust (contempt) can
reinforce social rules, though it can also divide. Overall, disgust's
primary adaptive function is to preserve the individual and the group
from harm through avoidance and warning signals 9 8 .

Sadness Sadness is the emotion associated with loss, disappointment, or
helplessness. It is universally recognized (Ekman) in a facial
expression often featuring downturned mouth and drooping posture.
Psychologically, sadness arises when events are appraised as significant
losses or failures that cannot be remedied. Intensity varies from mild
disappointment or discouragement to profound grief or despair. Mild
sadness might involve feeling let down or gloomy, while intense sadness
can lead to tears and a sense of meaninglessness.

2

Physiologically, sadness often triggers the parasympathetic nervous
system: heart rate may slow, breathing deepens, and energy decreases.
The most notable feature is crying. Emotional tears appear to be
uniquely human and serve important social functions. Evolutionarily,
crying likely evolved as a distress signal to solicit support. Gračanin
et al. argue that tears "evolved as an emotional expression that signals
distress and promotes prosocial behaviors in conspecifics" 11 . Indeed,
observers often perceive someone who is sad and crying as sincere and in
need of help. Empirical studies show that crying individuals are judged
as warmer and more deserving of assistance; people become more willing
to provide comfort and aid to someone who is tearful 12 . In daily life,
sadness may manifest as subdued tone of voice, reduced social
engagement, and seeking comfort (withdrawal or seeking solitude). It can
follow personal losses, failures, or isolation. Sadness causes one to
reflect and conserve resources. Importantly, expressing sadness in
social contexts can strengthen bonds. Shared grief, for instance, unites
communities through collective mourning rituals. In personal
interactions, a friend's visible sadness often prompts empathy and
support, deepening mutual trust. Thus, sadness functions both to help
the individual cope (by signaling vulnerability) and to elicit care from
others 11 12 .

Joy Joy (happiness) is the positive emotion reflecting pleasure,
contentment, or excitement. Ekman includes joy (often called happiness
or enjoyment) as a basic emotion with a universally recognized smile.
Psychologically, joy arises when we appraise a situation as good or
satisfying. The broaden-and-build theory highlights that joy sparks
playful and exploratory behaviors: joy "sparks the urge to play" and
"broadens" our thought--action repertoire 13 . This broadened mindset
(e.g. creativity, curiosity) leads us to build lasting personal and
social resources (skills, knowledge, friendships) 14 . Evolutionarily,
joy likely reinforced behaviors that enhanced survival and cooperation.
For example, rewarding group play or successful hunts would encourage
repetition of beneficial activities. The intensity of joy spans a
spectrum: from calm contentment and relaxation, through amusement and
exuberance (laughing with friends), to ecstatic elation.
Neurobiologically, joy and reward activate the brain's dopamine-based
reward circuitry. Dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area
project to the nucleus accumbens (ventral striatum), which is critical
for experiencing pleasure and motivation 15 . Neurochemically, joy
involves increases in so-called "feel-good" neurotransmitters and
hormones -- dopamine, serotonin, endorphins, and oxytocin among them 16
-- producing a sense of well-being. Physically, joy is often expressed
by smiling and laughter. Laughter in particular has special social
effects: it triggers endorphin release in the brain regions involved in
emotion, which promotes feelings of togetherness. Studies show that
social laughter releases endorphins and "supports formation,
reinforcement, and maintenance of social bonds between humans" 17 . In
daily life, joy might occur during shared play, the accomplishment of
goals, or moments of beauty. Communication of joy (smiling broadly,
upbeat tone) is highly affiliative: it signals friendliness,
trustworthiness, and openness. Smiles and laughter draw others in and
help form connections. Groups that laugh or celebrate together
strengthen their social bonds -- shared joy literally synchronizes
brains. Thus, the role of joy in communication is to attract and unify
others, reinforcing social cohesion and collective resilience through
positive emotional exchange 13 17 . Sources: Psychological and
neuroscientific research on emotion theories, evolutionary function, and
physiology (including Ekman's work on universal expressions 1 and
Williams et al. on anger's role 4 ; neuroscientific studies of fear and
disgust 5 9 8 10 ; studies of crying and social bonding in

3

sadness 11 12 ; and Fredrickson's broaden-and-build theory and studies
of laughter in joy 13 Each emotion's description is informed by these
foundational sources.

1

Science of Emotion: The Basics of Emotional Psychology \| UWA

https://online.uwa.edu/news/emotional-psychology/ 2

3

What Happens in Your Brain When You're Angry

https://www.verywellmind.com/what-happens-in-your-brain-when-youre-angry-8753372

Riccardo Williams, Anger as a Basic Emotion and Its Role in Personality
Building and Pathological Growth: The Neuroscientific, Developmental and
Clinical Perspectives - PhilPapers 4

https://philpapers.org/rec/WILAAA-17 5

Amygdala: What It Is and What It Controls

https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/body/24894-amygdala 6

7

Here - Emotions Explained - Ekman's Atlas of Emotion.csv

file://file-9De4WYdSHccqedaAdL6pSP 8

10

Insular Atrophy and Diminished Disgust Reactivity - PMC

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5009015/ 9

The evolution of disgust for pathogen detection and avoidance \|
Scientific Reports

https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-91712-3?error=cookies_not_supported&code=2ff5ade4-a436-4b54-bd05f54160adf69d
11

Why Only Humans Shed Emotional Tears : Evolutionary and Cultural
Perspectives - PubMed

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29556968/ 12

The neurobiology of human crying - PMC

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6201288/ 13

14

The broaden-and-build theory of positive emotions - PMC

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1693418/ 15

The Brain Reward Circuitry in Mood Disorders - PMC

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3867253/ 16

Feel-good hormones: How they affect your mind, mood, and body - Harvard
Health

https://www.health.harvard.edu/mind-and-mood/feel-good-hormones-how-they-affect-your-mind-mood-and-body
17

Laughter releases 'feel good hormones' to promote social bonding

https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/317756

4

17 ).


