Thich Naht Hanh

HOW TO SEE 'The Father of Mindfulness' Irish Times

Contents Notes on Seeing WATER REFLECTING RIVER OF PERCEPTIONS SIGN OR
REALITY? THE SNAKE SEEING THE TRUE NATURE OF THINGS THE SOURCE OF OUR
PERCEPTIONS GOOD OR BAD LUCK? THE CLOUD IN YOUR TEA LOOKING INTO THE
ROSE TRANSCENDING SIGNS THE THING IN ITSELF EVERYTHING IS POSSIBLE THE
BOAT IT'S ALL IN THE MIND INTERCONNECTION CONFUSING SIGNS WITH REALITY I
AM FROM THE CENTER TOUCHING PEACE BEYOND VIEWS MINDFULNESS AND
CONCENTRATION STOPPING AND LOOKING DEEPLY APPLE JUICE MEDITATION WAKING
FROM THE DREAM TAKING OUR TIME TOUCHING IMPERMANENCE OBSERVING
TRANSFORMATION LETTING GO RIGHT VIEW IDENTIFYING SEEDS ALL THE SEEDS ARE
WITHIN US WATERING WHOLESOME SEEDS THE SEED OF INSIGHT

BELIEF IN OUR PERCEPTIONS SEEDS OF SUFFERING ARE YOU SURE? SEEING OUR
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES LET OTHERS BE YOUR MIRROR UNDERSTANDING
ILL-BEING OUR OWN CONTRIBUTION NO BLAMING MAKING PEACE UNILATERAL
RECONCILIATION THE INTERVENTION OF INSIGHT FORGIVENESS THIS IS BECAUSE
THAT IS DOUBT OUR IDEA OF HAPPINESS SEEING OUR BELOVED ONE KEEPING LOVE
ALIVE MIND AND BODY ARE ONE THE NATURE OF CRAVING AND HAPPINESS
MINDFULNESS PROTECTS US INDIVIDUAL AND COLLECTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS SEEING
BEYOND LABELS ACCESS TO REALITY IN TOUCH WITH THINGS AS THEY ARE FIVE
UNIVERSALS HABIT ENERGY CHECKING PERCEPTIONS A NEW NEURAL PATHWAY NO
DISCRIMINATION THE PRICE OF A WRONG PERCEPTION UNITY AND DIVERSITY THE
WISDOM OF NONDISCRIMINATION LOOKING WITHOUT SEEING CONTRIBUTING TO THE
COLLECTIVE INSIGHT UNITY OF MIND AND WORLD NO ENEMIES DIFFERENT
PERCEPTIONS OF THE SAME REALITY SEEING REALITY AS A WHOLE EMBRACING EACH
OTHER A PEACEFUL HEART STREAM OF BEING REMOVING WRONG VIEWS

HEALING THE WOUNDS IN OUR HEART LOVE IS THE NECTAR THAT HEALS CREATING A
BETTER ENVIRONMENT ALL OUR ANCESTORS THE STREAM OF LIFE ULTIMATE REALITY
NOTHING IS LOST SEEING NATURE'S INTELLIGENCE TAKING CARE OF THE
ENVIRONMENT TANGERINE MEDITATION AWARE OF OUR FOOD TRULY SEEING
Practices for Looking Deeply 1. THE NOURISHMENT OF MEDITATION 2. SITTING
MEDITATION 3. RELEASING TENSION TO BRING CLARITY 4. RESTORING CALM 5.
MINDFULNESS IN DAILY LIFE 6. WALKING MEDITATION 7. LOOKING WITH THE EYES
OF COMPASSION 8. TRUTH IS FOUND IN LIFE

About the Author Thich Nhat Hanh is a Vietnamese Buddhist Zen Master,
poet, scholar and peace activist. During the Vietnam War his work for
peace and reconciliation moved Martin Luther King to nominate him for
the Nobel Peace Prize in 1967. He founded the Van Hanh Buddhist
University in Saigon and the School of Youth for Social Service. He was
exiled as a result of his work for peace but continued his activism,
rescuing boat people and helping to resettle Vietnamese refugees. He has
written many, very popular books, which have sold millions of copies
around the world. He now lives in France where he founded a Buddhist
community and meditation centre.

NOTES ON SEEING If you are a poet, you will see clearly that there is a
cloud floating in this sheet of paper. Without the cloud there can be no
rain; without water, the trees cannot grow; and without trees, you
cannot make paper. So the cloud is in here. The existence of this page
is dependent upon the existence of a cloud. Paper and cloud are so
close.

WATER REFLECTING The clear still water of a mountain lake reflects the
mountain and the sky with pristine clarity. You can do the same. If you
are calm and still enough, you can reflect the mountain, the blue sky,
and the moon exactly as they are. You reflect whatever you see just as
it is, without distorting anything.

RIVER OF PERCEPTIONS In each of us there is a river of perceptions.
Perceptions arise, stay for a period of time, and cease to be. When our
mind is not calm, we do not see clearly. Like the surface of a lake on a
windy day, the image we see is distorted. Our perceptions are often
erroneous, and cause us to suffer and cause others to suffer. It is very
helpful to look deeply into the nature of our perceptions, without being
too sure of anything. When we are too sure, we suffer. When we ask
ourselves, "Are you sure?" we have a chance to look again and see if our
perception is correct or not.

SIGN OR REALITY? We are convinced that our perceptions are correct and
complete, yet often they are not. In the Chinese character for
perception, the upper part is "sign" or "appearance," and the lower part
is "mind." When we perceive something, an image of that thing---a
sign---is created in our mind, and in many cases that sign is illusory.
It is very easy to confuse our mental image of something with its
reality. It is important not to be too sure of our perceptions.

THE SNAKE Imagine you are walking in the twilight and you see a snake.
You scream and run into the house to get your friends, and all of you
rush outside with a flashlight. But when you shine your light on the
snake, you discover it isn't a snake at all, it's just a piece of rope.
Mistaking the rope for a snake is a wrong perception. Mindfulness helps
us avoid being caught by our wrong perceptions.

SEEING THE TRUE NATURE OF THINGS The practice of full awareness is to
look deeply in order to see the true nature of things and go beyond our
inaccurate perceptions. Seeing a rope as a snake, we may cry out in
fear. Fear is a feeling brought about as a result of our wrong
perception. Our perceptions are often inaccurate and can bring about
strong feelings and reactions and cause much unnecessary suffering. Once
we have seen the true nature of the object of our fear, our fear will
vanish.

THE SOURCE OF OUR PERCEPTIONS The source of perception, our way of
seeing, lies in our unconscious mind. Most of our perceptions are
erroneous. They carry with them all the errors of subjectivity. We
praise or blame, are happy or complain depending on our perceptions. Our
perceptions are made of many things, including our afflictions, such as
craving, anger, and ignorance, as well as our habit energies and past
experiences. Whether we are happy or whether we suffer depends largely
on our perceptions. It is important to look deeply into our perceptions
and recognize their source.

GOOD OR BAD LUCK? One day a farmer went to the field and found that his
horse had run away. The people in the village said, "Oh, what bad luck!"
The next day the horse returned with two other horses and the village
people said, "What good fortune!" Then the farmer's son was thrown from
one of the horses and broke his leg. The villagers expressed their
sympathy, "How unfortunate." Soon after, a war broke out and young men
from the village were being drafted. But because the farmer's son had a
broken leg, he was the only one not drafted. Now the village people told
the farmer that his son's broken leg was really "good luck." It is not
possible to judge any event as simply fortunate or unfortunate, good or
bad, as this age-old story shows. You must travel throughout all of time
and space to know the true impact of any event. Every success contains
some difficulties, and every failure contributes to increased wisdom or
future success. Every event is both fortunate and unfortunate. Fortunate
and unfortunate, good and bad, these concepts exist only in our
perceptions.

THE CLOUD IN YOUR TEA Imagine a cloud transforming herself into rain.
The rain will nourish many trees and plants. We should be able to
recognize the cloud in its new forms as trees and plants of many kinds.
Looking deeply into the rain, ice, or snow, we can recognize the cloud.
Looking deeply into your tea, you can recognize the cloud. When you
drink your tea mindfully, you know you are drinking a cloud ---how
wonderful! When children eat an ice cream, they are also eating a cloud.
This is the way we train ourselves to look at reality, with the eye of
formlessness, signlessness; it means transcending the appearance, the
sign, to touch the ultimate reality. If you don't have the eyes of
signlessness you cannot recognize the cloud in your tea, in your ice
cream, in the rain, or in the vegetables. We can all train ourselves to
look with the eyes of signlessness.

LOOKING INTO THE ROSE Suppose we look deeply at a rose. With some
concentration and mindfulness, we can see that the rose is made of only
non-rose elements. What do we see in the rose? We see a cloud, because
we know that without the cloud, there would be no rain, and without the
rain, the rose couldn't grow. So a cloud is a non-rose element that we
can recognize if we look deeply into the rose. Next, we can see
sunshine, which is also crucial for the rose to grow. The sunshine is
another non-rose element present in the rose. If you took the sunshine
and the cloud out of the rose, there would be no rose left. If we
continue like this, we see many other non-rose elements within the rose,
including the minerals, the soil, the farmer, the gardener, and so on.
The whole cosmos has come together to produce the wonder we call a rose.
A rose cannot be by herself alone. A rose has to inter-be with the whole
cosmos. This is the insight we call interbeing. When looking at a rose,
if we can see all the non-rose elements that make up the rose, then we
can truly touch the reality of the rose. No matter what we look at, if
we can see that it is made up of everything in the universe that is not
itself, then we touch the true reality of that thing, its nonself
nature. There is a Zen proverb: Before I began to look deeply, mountains
were mountains and rivers were rivers. Once I began to look deeply,
mountains were no longer mountains and rivers were no longer rivers.
Now, as I have practiced looking deeply for some time, mountains are
again mountains and rivers are again rivers. When we see the signless
nature of phenomena, we see things as they are.

TRANSCENDING SIGNS Everything is born from our mind, from our way of
looking. Deception is born from signs, external appearances. According
to the Diamond Sutra, "In a place where something can be distinguished
by signs, in that place there is deception." In other words, where there
is perception, there is deception. Our practice is to transcend signs to
see more clearly. Until we look deeply into reality and discover its
true nature of impermanence and interconnectedness, we will continue to
be fooled by signs. When we transcend signs, notions, and ideas, we are
in touch with the ultimate reality. We need to see through the outer
form to be in touch with the substance. When we're no longer deceived by
signs, our perceptions become insight.

THE THING IN ITSELF When we think of a table, we see an image of that
table in our mind. But we must remember that our concept is not the
thing itself. It's just our perception, which might in fact be very
different from the table. A termite may perceive a table as a feast, and
a physicist may perceive it as a mass of rapidly moving particles. The
more we practice looking deeply, the more accurate our perceptions can
be. But they are still perceptions.

EVERYTHING IS POSSIBLE Nagarjuna, the second century Buddhist teacher,
said, "Thanks to emptiness, everything is possible." Emptiness is
another term for nonself; when we say things are empty, it means they
are without a separate self. Nonself and impermanence are two sides of
reality; impermanence is looking at reality in terms of time, and
nonself is looking at reality in terms of space. When we look deeply
into our fears, we can see our desire for permanence and our fear of
change. But impermanence and nonself are not something negative.
Impermanence means transformation at every moment. Therefore we can say,
"Thanks to impermanence, everything is possible."

THE BOAT A man was rowing his boat upstream when suddenly he saw another
boat coming downstream toward him. He shouted, "Watch out!" but the boat
ran right into him, nearly sinking his boat. The man became angry and
began to shout, but when he looked closely, he saw that there was no one
in the other boat. The boat had drifted downstream by itself. When our
perceptions are incorrect, they can cause us a lot of unnecessary
suffering. We look at things deeply in order to understand their true
nature, so that we will not be misled or suffer unnecessarily.

IT'S ALL IN THE MIND All phenomena are objects of mind, they're not
objective realities. When we perceive something, that thing is the
object of our consciousness. There needs to be both a perceiver and an
object of mind for a perception to be obtained. The world is just an
object of mind. When you see a mountain, that mountain is the object of
your mind, the object of your perception; it's not something separate
from your consciousness. Usually we think that there's a subjective
consciousness inside us that's reaching out to the world of reality
outside. But this is a wrong view. We have to see that both subject and
object of perception rely on each other and manifest at the same time.
The object can never be separated from the mind that observes or
meditates upon it.

INTERCONNECTION One day, when I was doing Qi Gong exercises in front of
a tree, it occurred to me that the tree had a lot to offer me, and I had
a lot to offer the tree. The tree offers me beauty, shade, and oxygen. I
offer the tree my breath, my appreciation, and my joy. The tree and I
are interconnected. When we look at a human being, we can look in
exactly the same way, without exaggerating what is there or imagining
what is not there. Sometimes we expect too much, we want to idealize
what we see. If we can acknowledge reality as it is without exaggerating
or imagining, we will suffer less.

CONFUSING SIGNS WITH REALITY It is very easy to confuse our mental image
of something with its reality. The process of mistaking our perceptions
for reality is so subtle that it is very difficult to know that it is
going on. Practicing mindfulness is the way we can avoid this confusion.

I AM FROM THE CENTER At a peace rally in Philadelphia in 1966, a
reporter asked me, "Are you from North or South Vietnam?" If I had said
I was from the North, he would have seen me as pro-communist, and if I
had said I was from the South, he would have seen me as pro-American. So
I told him, "I am from the Center." I wanted to help him let go of his
notions, his perceptions, and encounter the reality that was right in
front of him. This is the language of Zen.

TOUCHING PEACE The practice of mindfulness of breathing, of sitting and
walking in mindfulness, trains us to generate an energy that can help us
be stable and calm. When we touch peace within ourselves, everything
becomes real. We become fully ourselves, fully alive in the present
moment, and the tree, the flower, our child, our loved ones, and
everything else reveal themselves to us in their full splendor.

BEYOND VIEWS Relatively speaking, there are right views and wrong views.
But if we look more deeply, we see that all views are wrong views. Any
view is just from one point; that's why it's called a point of view. If
we go to another point, we have a different perspective, we see things
differently, and we realize that our first view was not entirely
accurate. We need to continue expanding the boundaries of our
understanding or we will be imprisoned by our views. For example, if we
are able to remove the notion of permanence, we may still get caught in
the notion of impermanence; we have to be free from both notions. This
is why we say that Right View means removing all kinds of views,
including the views of impermanence, nonself, and interbeing.

MINDFULNESS AND CONCENTRATION Mindfulness is the capacity of being
aware. It is a nonjudgmental awareness of all that is happening inside
us and around us. It helps us be fully present in the here and now,
which is the foundation of happiness. With mindfulness we can enjoy the
present moment, the only moment of life available to us. Mindfulness
increases concentration, which allows us to see things more deeply and
clearly, and we stop being victims of wrong perceptions. We create less
suffering for ourselves and for other people. We begin to taste the joy
of living and know how to help others to enjoy their daily lives, too.
We cannot force people to practice mindfulness, but if we practice
mindfulness ourselves and become happier people, we can inspire others
to practice.

STOPPING AND LOOKING DEEPLY The way to look deeply is to stop whatever
we're doing and truly concentrate on what we're observing. Meditation is
not to avoid problems or run away from difficulties. We practice to have
enough strength to confront problems effectively. To do this, we must be
calm, fresh, and solid. This is why we need to practice the art of
stopping. When we learn to stop, we become calmer and our mind becomes
clearer. Sitting and following our breathing, even for a few minutes, is
already good. Stopping brings body and mind together, back to the here
and now. Stop what you are doing and quiet your restless thinking. You
will naturally become more solid and concentrated, and you will see
everything more clearly.

APPLE JUICE MEDITATION One day four children were playing outside at my
Sweet Potato hermitage in France. Thanh Thuy, a four-year-old girl I was
looking after, was among them. The children were thirsty so I offered
them each a glass of homemade apple juice which contained some pulp.
Thanh Thuy did not like the look of the cloudy juice and refused to
drink it. She ran off to play but came back after a while and asked for
water. I showed her the apple juice and urged her to drink it. She saw
the pulp had settled, and the juice now looked clear and delicious. "Is
this the same glass or a different one?" she asked. "Was it meditating
like you?" I laughed, "Let's say I am imitating the apple juice when I
sit; that is closer to the truth." If you know how to sit stably and
follow your in- and out-breath, then after some time you become peaceful
and clear, like the apple juice. When we focus our mind on our
breathing, our mind can settle. Our habitual thinking and worrying
subside, and we can see people and situations more clearly. When we are
still, it gives insight a chance to arise.

WAKING FROM THE DREAM It's easy to see that a dream isn't real. But when
we're awake, it's not so easy to see what's real. What we believe to be
external reality may only be a construction of our mind. We think we're
awake but in fact we continue to dream. Most of the time we are
sleepwalking. For example, although we know intellectually that things
are impermanent and subject to change, we live as though our body is
permanent; we think we will never die. Even if we understand that a
separate "self" is a misperception, most of our thinking is based on
seeing things as having a self, which lends us a certain sense of
security. But in fact this is based on wrong perception. Many
philosophers, scientists, and spiritual teachers search for an absolute
truth because they don't trust their own perceptions. They have the
impression that although they are awake they are living in a dream. We
all have the ability to wake up from that dream, because we all have the
seed of mindfulness.

TAKING OUR TIME To meditate is not to run away from life but to take the
time to look deeply into ourselves or into a situation to see what is
truly going on. Meditation is an opportunity to take care of our body
and our mind; this is very important. We allow ourselves the time to
calm our thinking, to sit, to walk, to breathe--- not doing anything,
just going back to ourselves and to what is around us. We allow
ourselves time to release the tension in our body and our mind. Then,
when we are peaceful and calm, we can take time to look deeply into
ourselves and into the situation we are in. When our mind and body are
calm we can see the situation more clearly. Our view is not obscured or
distorted.

TOUCHING IMPERMANENCE We have all had the experience at some time of
reading something and fooling ourselves into believing we have
understood what we have read. But upon rereading or referring back to
it, we see that we haven't really absorbed or understood it at all. The
same is true of looking deeply. We may think it's easy to see that a
flower is impermanent, that its beauty will soon fade, and its flowers
wither and die. Intellectually, we accept the flower's impermanence. But
it's not by using our intellect that we truly touch impermanence. We
have to touch the nature of impermanence deeply in order to go beyond
our notion of impermanence. Mindfulness and concentration are the powers
that allow us to go deeply into the true nature of things and bring
forth insight.

OBSERVING TRANSFORMATION A child may believe she is a totally different
person from her mother, but in fact she is the continuation of her
mother, she is her mother. We can train ourselves to recognize reality
beyond the forms we're used to perceiving. Looking at a young cornstalk,
at first you cannot see the seed of corn that gave life to the plant.
But looking closer, you can see the seed in her new form: the cornstalk.
Transcending the notions of sameness and otherness we see the truth.
Observing in this way is a deep practice.

LETTING GO Most of our feelings and emotions arise from narrow
perceptions and incomplete understanding. Our ways of looking,
listening, reacting, and judging make us and our loved ones suffer. We
have ideas about happiness and suffering that we can't let go of, though
we know that by letting go of them we'll be happier and more peaceful in
body and mind, and the painful feelings and emotions would no longer
have a basis to arise. We tend to think that if we let go, we'll lose
the things that make us happy. But the opposite is true. The more we let
go, the happier we become. Letting go doesn't mean we let go of
everything. We don't let go of reality. But we let go of our wrong ideas
and perceptions about reality.

RIGHT VIEW Our "view" is our way of understanding the world; it is based
on our perceptions. Right View is a view that transcends dualistic
thinking, a living insight into the reality of life. Right View is the
first element of the Noble Eightfold Path and the foundation of all
right thinking, speech, and actions. If we don't have Right View, our
thoughts, speech, and actions will not be skillful and will lead to more
suffering. The eight elements of the Path nourish and depend on each
other. For example, Right Thinking and Right Speech are based on Right
View and at the same time they nourish Right View. Our happiness, and
the happiness of those around us, depends on our degree of Right View.
With our daily practice of mindfulness we nourish the seed of Right
View.

IDENTIFYING SEEDS All our potential states of mind exist as seeds in our
unconscious mind (store consciousness). Practicing mindfulness helps us
identify all the seeds and water those that are most wholesome. When one
person approaches us, we may feel aversion. But when another walks by,
we may feel drawn to her right away. Something in each of them touches a
seed in us. If we love our mother deeply but feel tense when we think of
our father, that naturally affects how we respond to others. In this
way, we can recognize the seeds that are in us--- seeds of love for our
mother and seeds of hurt vis-à-vis our father. When we become aware of
the seeds in our store consciousness, we will not be surprised by our
own behavior or the behavior of others.

ALL THE SEEDS ARE WITHIN US We all have the ability to distinguish the
wholesome from the unwholesome seeds that exist in the depths of our
consciousness. We all have all the possible seeds within us; they
contain all the different feelings, thoughts, and perceptions we may
have. If you are loyal, it is because you have the seed of loyalty in
you. But don't think that the seed of betrayal isn't in you as well. If
you live in an environment where your seed of loyalty is sufficiently
watered, you will become a loyal person. But if your seed of betrayal is
watered, you may betray even those you love.

WATERING WHOLESOME SEEDS Sometimes we see our children doing things that
we know will cause them to suffer in the future, but when we try to tell
them, they won't listen. All we can do is to water the seeds of Right
View in them, and then later, in a difficult moment, they may benefit
from our guidance. We cannot explain a mango to someone who has never
tasted one. No matter how well we describe it, we cannot give someone
else the direct experience. They have to taste it for themselves. As
soon as we say a single word, they are already caught. Right View cannot
be described. We can only point in the correct direction. Right View
cannot even be transmitted by a teacher. A teacher can help us identify
the seed of Right View that is already in our garden, and help us have
the confidence to practice, to entrust that seed to the soil of our
daily life. But we are the gardener. We have to learn how to water the
wholesome seeds that are in us so they will bloom into the flowers of
Right View. The instrument for watering wholesome seeds is mindful
living---mindful breathing, mindful walking, living each moment of our
day in mindfulness.

THE SEED OF INSIGHT The seed of insight is in us, but it's obscured by
layers of ignorance, sorrow, and disappointment. When we practice
mindfulness, we see the seed of awakening in everyone, including
ourselves. In the process of learning, reflecting, and looking deeply,
our view becomes increasingly wise. When we practice mindful living,
Right View will blossom. With Right View, we see the way to go, and our
seeing gives us faith and energy, based on our real experience. If we
feel better after walking meditation, we'll have the determination to
continue the practice. When we see walking meditation bringing peace to
others, we'll have more faith in the practice. With patience, we can
discover the joy of life that is around us.

BELIEF IN OUR PERCEPTIONS A young widower returned home one day to find
his house burned down and his five-year-old son missing. Nearby was the
charred corpse of a child he believed to be his son; he wept bitterly.
After the child's cremation, he kept the ashes in a bag around his neck
and carried them with him day and night. But his son hadn't perished;
he'd been taken off by bandits. One day he escaped and returned to his
father's new house. Arriving late at night, he knocked at the door.
Who's there?" asked the father. "It's me, your son." "That's impossible.
My son is dead." The father persisted in his belief and would not open
the door. In the end the boy had to leave, and the father lost his son
forever. When we believe something to be the absolute truth, we cannot
be open to new ideas. Even if the truth comes knocking at our door, we
will not let it in. We need to remain open so that truth has a chance to
enter. Our wrong perceptions can be very costly. They bring about
suspicion, fear, anger, hatred, and despair, which can give rise to
actions based on that wrong perception. When the wrong perception is
removed, suspicion, fear, anger, hatred, and despair are also removed,
and happiness is possible again. When conflicts arise between two
people, we need to stop and question our perceptions. With the practice
of good communication, deep listening, and loving speech, we can help
each other remove wrong perceptions. This is also true for conflicts
between groups of people and nations.

SEEDS OF SUFFERING When we look deeply at a flower, we can see the
non-flower elements that help it to manifest---the clouds, the earth,
the gardener, and the soil. When we look deeply at our pain, we see that
our suffering is not ours alone. It is also made of many non-self
elements. Many seeds of suffering have been handed down to us by our
ancestors, our parents, and our society. Being aware of the seeds of our
suffering is the first step in their transformation.

ARE YOU SURE? We are quite sure that our perception of reality is
correct. We may think someone hates us or wants to hurt us but this may
be nothing more than a creation of our mind. Believing that our
perception is reality, we act on that belief; this can be very
dangerous. A wrong perception can create countless problems. All our
suffering arises from our failure to recognize things as they are. We
should be humble and ask, "Am I sure?" and then allow space and time for
our perceptions to grow deeper and clearer. In medical practice these
days, physicians and caregivers remind each other not to be too sure of
anything. Even if you think you are certain, "Check it again," they urge
each other. We, too, can do the same.

SEEING OUR STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES Looking deeply into yourself you may
notice some strengths that you have inherited from your parents and
ancestors. You are their continuation; they've passed these things on to
you. They're not yours alone. We don't need to be too proud. Your fear,
anger, and discrimination have also been transmitted to you by parents,
ancestors, and society. We don't need to judge. Your parents and
ancestors weren't able to transform all their shortcomings, so they have
passed their difficulties on to you. Now you have a chance to transform
so that you will not transmit them to your children. This way of looking
at yourself and others will give rise to understanding, compassion, and
a desire to transform.

LET OTHERS BE YOUR MIRROR Our family members and friends are like
mirrors. Practicing with humility and openness, we can make great
progress by making use of the mirrors that are held up to us. In
confronting our weaknesses and finding ways to overcome them, we will
feel light. When we observe a particular behavior in ourselves, we can
ask others for support: "Dear friend, dear brother, dear sister, please
help me. When you see that my behavior is not kind or skillful, please
let me know." When we ask for support like this, our family members and
friends will have great respect and love for us and they will be
encouraged to do the same.

UNDERSTANDING ILL-BEING We shouldn't try to run away from our suffering.
Embrace your suffering and look deeply into it. With deep looking,
understanding will arise, and compassion will be born. If we have
already understood our own pain, it will be much easier to understand
the pain of another person. If we understand the nature of the ill-being
inside us, it will be much easier to understand the nature of the
ill-being around us. In a civilization where we are so focused on
technology and material wealth, there is little room for compassion. Yet
understanding and compassion are what makes happiness possible.

OUR OWN CONTRIBUTION Looking deeply into our suffering, we can ask
ourselves how we have contributed to it. This doesn't mean our suffering
isn't real, just that we have the capacity to lessen it instead of
adding to it, and that we can even transform it. When we have a conflict
with someone else, we also need to look deeply to see how we have
contributed to the difficulty that has arisen. We have our part to play.
We can ask ourselves, "In what ways have I contributed to this
situation?" This is the kind of deep looking that can bring healing and
reconciliation.

NO BLAMING When we grow a lemon tree, we want it to be vigorous and
beautiful. But if it doesn't thrive, we don't blame the tree. We observe
it in order to understand why it isn't growing well. Perhaps we have not
taken care of it well enough. We know it would be odd to blame a lemon
tree and yet we blame human beings when they are not growing well. But
human beings are not very different than lemon trees. If we take good
care of them, they will grow well. Blaming never helps.

MAKING PEACE When we're angry with someone, it's because we feel hurt.
We're unable to see the many elements that make up that person. We don't
realize they may be acting out of habit energy transmitted to them from
their ancestors. Once we see this, we can accept the person more easily.
This is true concerning ourselves as well. When we can see within us all
the elements that have been handed down to us from our parents,
ancestors, and our environment, we can let go of much of our
self-judgment and criticism, and also stop judging and criticizing
others. We see, "Ah, that is my father in me who is judging my friend."
Our ancestors continue in us each day. With this understanding, we can
find a way to undo the difficulties we have with others and make peace.

UNILATERAL RECONCILIATION We're often caught in images of our past
suffering, so we easily develop wrong perceptions and react in ways that
bring more suffering. We may be angry with someone because we believe
they want to make us suffer. This perception brings about anger and we
may act in a way that will lead to more suffering for all involved.
Instead, we can use mindful breathing and walking to calm ourselves and
generate awareness and insight. Breathing in and out, we recognize there
is suffering and wrong perceptions within us and in the other person.
With this insight, healing begins. Reconciliation can be unilateral.
Your understanding will affect the other person even if they don't yet
know how to recognize and handle their suffering.

THE INTERVENTION OF INSIGHT Anger is an organic, living thing, and so is
love. If we know how to handle our anger it can turn into love, just as
when we know how to take care of our compost, we can transform it into a
beautiful rose. Is garbage negative or positive? It can be positive, if
we know how to handle it. Anger is the same. We do not need to get rid
of it. When we're able to see someone's suffering and understand their
situation, we have another way of looking at them, and compassion
arises. Compassion transforms our anger and we no longer want to punish
the other person. Thanks to our insight, we can correct our wrong
perceptions. Instead of anger, fear, and despair, we have compassion and
the willingness to help the other person.

FORGIVENESS When you can see all the causes that led to another person's
actions, forgiveness arises naturally. You can't force yourself to
forgive. Only when you truly understand the causes and conditions that
have made someone act the way they did, can you have compassion and
forgive them. Then, forgiveness and release arise naturally. Forgiveness
is the fruit of awareness and insight, the result of really seeing
someone and understanding their suffering. Understanding someone else's
challenges and suffering, you can accept and even love that person just
as they are.

THIS IS BECAUSE THAT IS Understanding the essential nature of interbeing
is to see that this is like this because that is like that. Everything
comes to be because of causes and conditions. This arises because that
arises. For there to be a mother, there has to be a child; and if there
is a child, there has to be a mother. We only exist in this
interconnected way. With this insight, we see clearly and we can be more
effective. This is because that is; this is not because that is not.
This is the insight of interbeing. Nothing can exist on its own.
Everything in the world is interrelated.

DOUBT Doubt can be helpful. If you don't doubt, you have no chance to
discover the true nature of what is. According to Zen Buddhism, the
greater your doubt, the greater will be your enlightenment. So doubt can
be a good thing. If you are too sure, if you always have conviction,
then you may be caught in your wrong perception for a long time.

OUR IDEA OF HAPPINESS We have an idea of happiness. We may believe that
only certain conditions will make us happy. But it is often our very
idea of happiness that prevents us from being happy. The conditions for
happiness are already there, available inside and around us. We have
eyes that can see, legs that can walk, lungs that can breathe. All the
wonders of life are available in the present moment---the sunshine, the
fresh air, the trees, the multitude of colors and forms all around us.
The essential thing is to be aware. If we open our eyes, we will see.

SEEING OUR BELOVED ONE We are all victims of wrong perception. When we
are in love with someone we are full of wrong perceptions about that
person. We are in love with the image of our beloved rather than the
actual person. Once we begin to discover the reality of the other
person, which doesn't quite correspond with the image we have of them,
we're often disappointed. We need to come home to ourselves, to look
deeply and compassionately to understand ourselves and accept our own
shortcomings. Only when we can embrace ourself with understanding and
compassion, can we accept and be patient and compassionate with the one
we love. This is when the practice of true love begins, when we learn to
understand and accept the other person as they are.

KEEPING LOVE ALIVE Looking deeply at each other we can see each other's
deepest concerns and aspirations, but we can also see each other's
fears, suffering, and loneliness. When we see and understand the pain
and suffering in ourselves and in the other, understanding and
compassion begin to grow. These two energies have the power to heal and
transform us. This is the secret to nourishing our love. We see that in
the world nothing can survive without food. The same is true with love.
However beautiful our love is, it is impermanent, so we need to learn
how to feed our love with the energy of understanding and compassion.
Only when we know how to look deeply at each other, and how to look
deeply at ourselves, can we generate these two precious energies.

MIND AND BODY ARE ONE Whatever happens to the body also happens to the
mind. When we look at the body as an item of consumption, an object of
desire, we haven't truly seen the body. Our own body, and the body of
another, should be treated with utmost respect. The body is as sacred as
the mind. When we touch someone else's body, we touch their mind and
their soul.

THE NATURE OF CRAVING AND HAPPINESS Much of our suffering depends on our
perceptions and desire. Whenever we don't get what we want, we suffer.
But the truth is that sometimes we do get what we want and yet we suffer
even more. Maybe it's not what we thought it was, it doesn't have the
desired effect, or it changes something else in our lives for the worse.
Sometimes, after we get the thing we thought we wanted, we don't
treasure it anymore, and we want something else instead. People tend to
think of happiness in terms of having plenty of fame, power, wealth, and
sensual pleasures. But we know that craving these objects can bring a
lot of suffering. So we need to have a very different understanding of
happiness. If we cultivate peace in ourselves, then clarity, compassion,
and courage will arise. We have to look deeply in order to see the true
nature of the object of our craving. When we recognize it clearly, it
will lose its appeal, and we will be free.

MINDFULNESS PROTECTS US When we drive through the city, we are
constantly consuming things, whether we want to or not. Advertising
penetrates our consciousness and the consciousness of our children, who
are even less able than us to filter these sources of toxic consumption.
In modern life, we are exposed to many violent or exciting images,
sounds, films, TV programs, and articles that either give rise to fear
and despair or incite craving. Without mindfulness, we don't have a skin
to shield us, and what we see and hear assaults us and penetrates our
consciousness. With mindfulness, we have a means to protect ourselves
and to be aware of what we are consuming through our senses.

INDIVIDUAL AND COLLECTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS We are influenced by ways of
thinking and we consume the views of other people in many ways.
Individual consciousness is made of collective consciousness, and
collective consciousness is made of individual consciousness. It is our
consciousness that designs our world.

SEEING BEYOND LABELS Sometimes people have a certain idea or way of
looking at things, and they want to put you in a box. But what happens
if you don't belong in any of their categories? It's the reality of the
thing that matters, and not the word we use to describe it. A name is
merely a conventional designation, it's not the reality in itself. We
must train ourselves to look at each other beyond labels to see each
other's true nature.

ACCESS TO REALITY Within store consciousness, we have direct access to
reality, to suchness, to things as they are. In every one of us lies the
basic wisdom that can directly touch reality itself. Nevertheless, we
often feel attachment or aversion based on prior experience. We classify
what we perceive according to the boxes we already have in our store
consciousness. We compare the present with what we have experienced in
the past and we seem to recognize it. We paint the new information with
the old colors we already have inside us. This is why most of the time
we don't have direct access to reality, to things as they are.

IN TOUCH WITH THINGS AS THEY ARE We know that having a crush on someone
is not the same as really loving that person. First we create an image,
and then we fall in love with that image. The object of our love is not
the thing in itself. It's merely a mental construct, a representation of
reality, but not reality itself. This is true whether we are looking at
a mountain, at a star, or at other people. Usually, we are just dealing
with representations and living in the realm of illusion. But we have
the capacity to touch reality itself. This takes some training, because
many of us have lost this capacity. The good news is that, with the
practice of mindfulness, we can restore our capacity for touching
suchness. We have the capacity to see our loved ones as they truly are.

FIVE UNIVERSALS Contact between a subject and object of perception,
between the observer and the thing being observed, always waters a seed
in store consciousness and brings about a reaction. Contact is one of
five mental formations, or states of mind, called "universal," because
they are always functioning, always present in our consciousness. The
other four are feelings, attention, perception, and volition. Together
they form a neural pathway. For example, when our eyes detect something
that looks like a snake, our attention is drawn to it. Perceiving it to
be a snake, we may feel afraid and want to run away. All this happens so
quickly we are not aware of it.

HABIT ENERGY In our brain are many neural pathways along which we
frequently travel, habitual responses we have to an object of
perception. With the practice of mindfulness, concentration, and
insight, we can intervene in the sequence of steps between contact and
volition, and open up a new neural pathway that replaces our habitual,
automatic response, a new pathway that takes us down a different route,
leading to more understanding and well-being.

CHECKING PERCEPTIONS When someone says or does something that gives you
a painful feeling, you may have the perception that this person is
trying to make you suffer. But maybe the truth isn't like that. Maybe
that person was simply not mindful or they didn't sleep well the night
before. Their words or actions may give you the impression that they are
being unkind to you, that they are indeed unkind, and this perception
may make you want to say something unkind back. If we think the other
person is cruel, we often want to say something even more cruel to
punish them because we think we will suffer less that way. This isn't
wise but it's how most of us respond. So we need to check our
perceptions. We can ask the other person for help.

A NEW NEURAL PATHWAY Suppose you are reaching for something sweet to
eat. But because you've learned mindfulness, you suddenly become aware
of what you are doing, and you ask, "Why am I reaching for a cookie? I'm
not hungry." We take the time to breathe. One in-breath can make all the
difference. You may discover that there is some worry, loneliness, or
irritation in you, so you're automatically reaching for something to eat
to cover up the unpleasant feeling. This has become a habit and has
created a neural pathway in your brain that often leads to suffering.
Bringing mindfulness, concentration, and insight into the process of
perception, you can create a new neural pathway that leads to insight
and more happiness.

NO DISCRIMINATION My right hand has the wisdom of nondiscrimination. It
has a name, "right hand," and it has five fingers. My left hand has a
name, "left hand," and it also has five fingers. My right hand can
practice calligraphy, invite the bell, and it has written all my poems,
except one, when I didn't have a pen so I borrowed a typewriter, put an
old envelope in it, and typed with both hands. My right hand has no
complex of superiority. It never says, "Dear left hand, I see you're not
very useful. All those poems---it's me who has written them." It doesn't
discriminate. It's at peace with my left hand. They never fight. My left
hand has no inferiority complex and no equality complex either. She
doesn't compare; she doesn't suffer at all.

THE PRICE OF A WRONG PERCEPTION I know a young man who suffered terribly
because of a wrong perception. His father, upon returning home from a
trip, learned that his wife was pregnant. He suspected the child had
been fathered by a neighbor who had been very helpful to his wife while
he had been away. He became icy and distant from his wife. She had no
idea why, and she suffered a lot. The child grew up in that atmosphere
of suspicion and wrong perception. When he was twelve, his uncle visited
and commented that the boy looked just like his father. Only then did
the father accept him as his son. But much damage had been done in all
those years to the whole family, and the extent of the damage continues
to reveal itself. A wrong perception can be very costly. We have to
learn to see things more clearly in our daily life and avoid wrong
perceptions as much as possible. We must always go to the other person
and ask if our perception is correct. The father was caught in his pride
and didn't have the courage to go to his wife. Pride has no place in
true love. If you suspect something, go to the other person and say, "I
suffer. Please help. Please tell me why you did (or said) that." Don't
be like this father and cause suffering to yourself, to the ones you
love, and to many others. Ask, "Are you sure?" Are you sure of your
perceptions? Be willing to release your present view. You will avoid
much suffering if you're open to reexamining and exploring your views.

UNITY AND DIVERSITY All phenomena are interdependent. Yet when we think
of a speck of dust, a flower, or a human being, our mind sees these
things as individual phenomena. If we truly realize the interdependent
nature of the dust, the flower, and the human being, we see that unity
cannot exist without diversity. Unity and diversity interpenetrate each
other freely. Unity is diversity, and diversity is unity.

THE WISDOM OF NONDISCRIMINATION We normally have a dualistic way of
looking at the world. We categorize things as good or bad, right or
wrong. The wisdom of nondiscrimination is an understanding of the deeper
nondualistic nature of things. This way of seeing goes beyond concepts.
Classical science is based on the belief that there is an objective
reality that exists independently of the mind. In Buddhism, however,
there is mind and there are objects of mind, and they manifest at the
same time; we can't separate them. In quantum physics, scientists have
begun to see that their mind affects the particle they are observing.
Objects of mind are created by the mind itself. The way we perceive the
world around us depends entirely on our way of looking at it.

LOOKING WITHOUT SEEING A tree reveals itself to an artist only when the
artist can establish a relationship with the tree. If we are not fully
ourselves, fully human, we may look at our fellow humans without truly
seeing them, just as we may look at a tree and not truly see it. When we
are in touch with ourselves, we know how to live in such a way that a
beautiful future for the world is possible. The question "Is a human
future possible?" is meaningless if we can't see the millions of fellow
human beings who are suffering, living, loving and dying around us. Only
when we come home to ourselves and get in touch with ourselves can we
really see ourselves and others and be in touch with the world around
us.

CONTRIBUTING TO THE COLLECTIVE INSIGHT Mindfulness brings concentration,
which in turn brings us insight about how to speak and act. Mindfulness
and concentration help us to look deeply into the nature of reality and
arrive at the insights of nondiscrimination and interbeing. The best
thing we can offer the world is our insight. To live our life in
mindfulness and with concentration is to continue to produce insight---
for our own liberation, healing, and nourishment, and for the
liberation, healing, and nourishment of the world.

UNITY OF MIND AND WORLD Too often we distinguish between the inner world
of our mind and the world outside. But these worlds are not separate.
They belong to the same reality. The ideas of inside and outside are
helpful in everyday life, but they can become an obstacle that prevents
us from experiencing the ultimate reality, which transcends all notions
of opposites---inside and outside, birth and death, being and nonbeing.
If we look deeply into our mind, we see the world deeply at the same
time. If we understand the world, we understand our mind. Neuroscience
calls this the unity of mind and world.

NO ENEMIES When we have been a victim of injustice, we need to look
deeply into the ones who have made us suffer to see that they too are
victims--- of their own suffering, delusion, anger, and fear. We should
also look deeply to see how our own beliefs, words, or actions may have
contributed to the perceptions others have of us, and to their anger or
fear. This kind of understanding brings about transformation. We see the
other no longer as our enemy, but as someone who needs help. When we
begin to understand them, we suffer less. Sometimes even just a small
action can bring a great result. If we respond to hatred and violence
with hatred and violence, then hatred and violence will never end. But
with compassion and inclusiveness, we can put an end to this vicious
cycle.

DIFFERENT PERCEPTIONS OF THE SAME REALITY Each of our life experiences
becomes a seed in our store consciousness. From these seeds prejudices
can develop on which we base our perceptions. People can even kill one
another due to their different perceptions of the same reality. When we
have a wrong perception and persist in maintaining it, we continue to
hurt ourselves and others.

SEEING REALITY AS A WHOLE We distinguish between blossoms, leaves, and
the tree that is the basis of their existence; but in reality, they are
one. The same is true of humanity and nature. In Chinese ink paintings,
much space is always given to nature, and human beings are included as a
part of nature. There are many traditions of humankind that encourage us
to look at reality as a whole rather than to cut it into separate
entities.

EMBRACING EACH OTHER During the war in Vietnam, everyone was a victim of
unintelligent policies, and in our suffering, we condemned each other
and looked on each other as enemies. But in fact, we were all the
victims of a government that wasn't acting with wisdom or clarity.
Southerners and Northerners alike were victims. If we had been able to
see that, we wouldn't have been so angry and we would have been able to
embrace everyone. Northerners and Southerners, Vietnamese and North
Americans, would have been able to embrace each other. Our enemy is not
man, but it is our inability to see the situation as it really is. It is
our ignorance, the darkness of our mind that cannot see the real
situation clearly and so gives rise to wrong perception. This brought
about a senseless war in which we killed each other and created such
unspeakable suffering for everyone.

A PEACEFUL HEART Acts of terrorism come from wrong perceptions, which
have bred fear, anger, and hatred. Terrorism cannot be destroyed with
guns or bombs, for it lies in the hearts of human beings. To uproot
terror, we need to begin by looking in our hearts. By calming our minds
and looking deeply inside ourselves we develop the insight to identify
the roots of terrorism. With insight and compassionate communication,
terrorism can be uprooted and transformed into love. Our current way of
dealing with terrorism is taking us down a dangerous path of increasing
distrust and fear. It is time to stop. Let us pause. It is time to seek
true strength and true security. What would it take for us to be able to
reach out to those who have terrorized us and say: "You must have
suffered deeply. You must have a lot of hatred and anger toward us to
have done such a thing. You have tried to destroy us, and you have
caused us so much suffering. What misunderstanding has led you to take
such an action?" We cannot escape our interdependence with other people
and other nations in the world. Let us look deeply and find a path of
liberation. It is possible to look at each other again with the eyes of
trust, fellowship, and love.

STREAM OF BEING If you look with the eyes of compassion, you will see
all your ancestors within you, with all their strengths and weaknesses,
and you will treat your body and consciousness with respect. But as long
as you're caught in the idea that this body is you, this mind is you,
you underestimate and undervalue yourself. All your ancestors are in
you, including their strengths and weaknesses, and the sum of all their
beliefs and experiences. When you are free from the notion of self, when
you can see yourself, body and mind, as a continuous stream of being,
continuing your ancestors in you, including the most brilliant and
compassionate ones, then you'll begin to treat your body and mind with
respect and it won't be difficult for you to show respect to others.

REMOVING WRONG VIEWS People thought of Jesus, Mahatma Gandhi, and Martin
Luther King, Jr. as dangerous people. This was based on wrong
perceptions which gave rise to fear and anger. When people are full of
misunderstanding and fear, they can do violent things. Great spiritual
leaders like Jesus, Gandhi, and Dr. King were not angry when they died.
They felt compassion even toward the people who killed them, because
they knew their actions were guided by wrong perception, anger, and
fear. Our world needs compassion and understanding, and the practice of
mindfulness is the key to bringing about more understanding and
compassion. Looking deeply, we remove our wrong views, and from there
understanding and compassion arise.

HEALING THE WOUNDS IN OUR HEART When conflicts arise, whether between
two people, two groups of people, or nations, we need to stop and
question our perceptions. With the practice of good communication,
loving speech, and deep listening, we can help each other remove wrong
perceptions so that people are no longer afraid and angry. This is what
we can do to stop wars, prevent terrorism, end violence, and make peace.
We can't prevent terrorism with bombs and guns. This only produces more
terrorists and makes terrorism stronger. Each of us has seeds of
understanding and compassion. Touching the wholesome seeds, you help
them to grow every day. With understanding and compassion, you will be
able to heal the wounds in your heart and in the world.

LOVE IS THE NECTAR THAT HEALS Love enables us to see things that cannot
be seen without love. The eyes of compassion are also the eyes of
understanding. Compassion is the sweet water that springs forth from the
source of understanding. To practice looking deeply is the basic
medicine for anger, hatred, and fear.

CREATING A BETTER ENVIRONMENT Looking deeply at a human being, we see
that an individual is made of many more elements than what we normally
see. These include the person's parents, ancestors, education, society,
and culture. If we don't see all these elements, we haven't fully seen
that person. If someone has the tendency to behave in a negative manner,
it doesn't mean that they like behaving that way, but that they may be
the victim of transmission. These negative seeds may have been
transmitted to them by their parents, their culture, or their society.
Realizing this, we don't judge them. Instead we feel inspired to change
the environment, education, and culture so that the next generation will
not be a victim of the same transmission.

ALL OUR ANCESTORS We know very well that we have ancestors. But our
ancestors are not only human. We have animal ancestors, we have plant
ancestors, and we have mineral ancestors. Our human ancestors are still
very young. We appeared on Earth very late in the history of life. Our
animal ancestors are still there in us. The reptile, the fish, and the
ape are still in us. Not only were they part of us in the past, but we
continue to have them within us in the present moment. Just look deeply
into our cells; we see that we are the whole history of life.

THE STREAM OF LIFE Looking into your body, you will discover that you
are not a separate self, cut off from everything else, but that you are
a continuously flowing stream---the stream of life itself. The one
contains the all. Your body can tell you everything there is to know
about the cosmos, boundless space, and time without end. You will see
that the here is also the there, and that the now carries within itself
the span of eternity, including the past and the future. Eternity is
there to be touched in each moment. Both sun and moon, all the stars and
all the black holes, can nestle comfortably inside a tiny grain of sand.

ULTIMATE REALITY Everything we see in terms of being and nonbeing, birth
and death is a mental construct. When we look into a cloud with
mindfulness and concentration, we touch the nature of no-birth and
no-death of the cloud. We can see the cloud as it is, no longer as a
fabrication of our mind. The ultimate reality is free from mental
constructs and from all notions such as birth and death, being and
nonbeing, coming and going, the same and different.

NOTHING IS LOST Looking with the eyes of signlessness will help you to
transcend a person's outer form. If you're capable of seeing him or her
with the eyes of signlessness, you won't grieve when that appearance is
no longer there. Because even when that appearance is gone, your beloved
is still there somewhere. Nothing is lost. If we don't have this form,
we have another form. If we don't have the cloud, we have the rain. If
we don't have the rain, we have the tea. Your body, your presence, and
your consciousness occupy all of time and space. In that sense there is
no "before" and "after" we die. Generating enough of the energy of
mindfulness and concentration, we are able to have this awareness and
transcend the notion of birth and death.

SEEING NATURE'S INTELLIGENCE When we look deeply at a blade of grass, we
can see that it's not mere matter. It has its own intelligence. A seed
knows how to grow a plant with leaves, flowers, and fruit. A pine tree
is not just matter; it possesses a sense of knowing. Each atom in a
particle of dust has intelligence and is a living reality. Like each of
the cells in our body, everything has its innate wisdom. Mother Earth
creates, nourishes, and sustains life, and has infinite wisdom and
intelligence.

TAKING CARE OF THE ENVIRONMENT We usually discriminate between humans
and nonhumans, thinking that we are more important than other species.
We humans are made entirely of nonhuman elements, such as plants,
minerals, earth, clouds, and sunshine. When we see that humans have no
self, we see that to take care of the environment (the non-human
elements) is to take care of humanity. For our practice to be deep and
true, we must include the ecosystem. If the environment is destroyed,
humans will be destroyed, too. The best way to take good care of human
beings so that they can be truly healthy and happy is to take care of
the environment. Protecting human life is not possible without also
protecting the lives of animals, plants, and minerals---the rocks, the
soil, the rivers, and the oceans.

TANGERINE MEDITATION The next time you have a snack like a tangerine,
please put it in the palm of your hand and look at it in a way that
makes the tangerine real. You don't need a lot of time, just a few
seconds. Looking at it, you can see a beautiful tree, a blossom, the
sun, the rain, and the tiny fruit forming. You can see the continuation
of the sunshine and the rain, and the transformation of the baby fruit
into the fully developed tangerine. You can see the color changing from
green to orange and the tangerine ripening and sweetening. Looking at a
tangerine in this way, you will see that everything in the cosmos is in
it. Peeling the tangerine, smelling it, and tasting it, you can be very
happy. You can taste the sweetness of the sun.

AWARE OF OUR FOOD Before eating, we can look at the dishes on the table
and breathe in and out to see if this food and drink is good for us and
whether eating it will harm or help develop our compassion. Each of us
can look to see if we can recognize our deepest desire. Is it healthy or
not? Is it bringing us suffering or happiness? Because our deepest
aspiration is the food that nourishes our consciousness and our life. We
have to look deeply to see how we grow our food, so we can eat in ways
that preserve our collective well-being, minimize our suffering and the
suffering of other species, and allow the Earth to continue to be a
source of life for all of us.

TRULY SEEING The practice of looking deeply helps us and the people
around us to wake up to the fact that we have a beautiful planet that
needs our protection. That is why enlightenment, awakening, is very
important. If we live mindfully in everyday life, walk mindfully, are
full of love and caring, then we create a miracle and transform the
world into a wonderful place. Every one of us has the seed of awakening
in us, and that is why we are hopeful. Everything we do should be aimed
at bringing about collective awakening.

PRACTICES FOR LOOKING DEEPLY

1. THE NOURISHMENT OF MEDITATION The basic practice of meditation is
awareness of breathing. Conscious breathing is the bridge between body
and mind. By focusing on our breathing we bring our mind back to our
body, and we become truly present, truly alive. Practicing mindfulness
of breathing brings calm and peace to body and mind. When body and mind
are calm we can see more clearly. We can be in touch with the miracles
inside and around us and be nourished by the joy of meditation.

2. SITTING MEDITATION Find a quiet place to sit comfortably, on a
cushion or a chair, with your back upright but not rigid. Bring your
awareness to your body. Smiling gently can help relax the muscles in
your face, your shoulders, your whole body. Bring your awareness to your
breathing. Feel your abdomen gently rising and falling with each in- and
out-breath. If your mind wanders off, gently invite it back to your
breathing again. Here are some guided meditations you can practice with.
The first line accompanies your in-breath, and the second line
accompanies your out-breath. Breathing in, I know I am breathing in.
Breathing out, I know I am breathing out. Breathing in, I follow my
in-breath all the way through. Breathing out, I follow my out-breath all
the way through. Breathing in, my breath becomes deeper. Breathing out,
my breath becomes slower. Breathing in, I relax my whole body. Breathing
out, I smile to every cell in my body.

3. RELEASING TENSION TO BRING CLARITY We can see and act with clarity
when we know how to release the tension and pain in our body. With
mindful breathing, body and mind come together, we're established in the
here and now, and can more easily handle the situations in our lives.
Mindful breathing brings well-being. In one breath we can recognize and
release the tension within us. Breathing in, I am aware of my whole
body. Breathing out, I release all the tension in my body. Breathing in,
I am aware of my mind. Breathing out, I calm my mind.

4. RESTORING CALM When our mind is disturbed by strong emotions, we're
no longer lucid and peaceful, and our perceptions are distorted. When
our mind is calm like a peaceful lake, we reflect things as they are.
Breathing in, I know I am breathing in. Breathing out, I know I am
breathing out. Breathing in, I calm my body. Breathing out, I calm my
mind. Breathing in, I see myself as still water. Breathing out, I
reflect things as they are.

5. MINDFULNESS IN DAILY LIFE Mindfulness is an important agent for our
transformation and healing. Mindfulness is always mindfulness of
something. We can be mindful of our breath, our footsteps, our thoughts,
and our actions. Mindfulness requires that we bring all our attention to
whatever we're doing, whether walking or breathing, brushing our teeth,
or eating a snack. When we concentrate on our breath and the steps we're
making, we can see the beauty of the Earth around us more clearly. We
can take each breath and each step with awareness and gratitude.

6. WALKING MEDITATION Mindful breathing and mindful walking can bring a
lot of happiness. Walking in a relaxed, peaceful way is healing for body
and mind. Let your breathing and your steps nourish you. When you walk,
know that you're walking. Don't think about arriving anywhere. Know that
you're putting your feet on the Earth. If an irritation arises, simply
recognize it and say "Hello, my irritation, I know you are there." Say
"hello" and "goodbye," and come back to your steps. Wherever we walk we
can practice walking meditation. Many times a day we have to walk from
one room to another, from the car to the office, or from the bus stop to
the house. Each time is an opportunity to use mindful walking to stop,
relax, and be peaceful. Each step can nourish, heal, and bring insight.

7. LOOKING WITH THE EYES OF COMPASSION Learning to look at others with
the eyes of compassion is a wonderful practice. You don't suffer
anymore, and your way of looking at others makes them feel better. Each
day you can celebrate your twenty-four brand new hours and make the vow
to look at all beings with the eyes of compassion. Waking up this
morning, I smile. Twenty-four brand new hours are before me. I vow to
live fully in each moment and to look at all beings with the eyes of
compassion.

8. TRUTH IS FOUND IN LIFE In our community we live by a number of
guidelines that help us live happily and in harmony with ourselves, each
other, and the planet. They are trainings that help us to be aware of
the effects of our actions and words. We read them regularly to help our
understanding deepen and insight to arise, so that we know what to do
and what not to do to increase happiness and reduce suffering in
ourselves and in the world. They are not rules or commandments, but
insights born from directly observing suffering and its causes. The
first three trainings concern the mind and our way of seeing. They come
first because the mind is the root of everything else: our thoughts,
perceptions, speech, and actions.

Openness The First Mindfulness Training Aware of the suffering created
by fanaticism and intolerance, we are determined not to be idolatrous
about or bound to any doctrine, theory, or ideology, even Buddhist ones.
We are committed to seeing the Buddhist teachings as a guiding means
that help us learn to look deeply and develop understanding and
compassion. They are not doctrines to fight, kill, or die for. We
understand that fanaticism in its many forms is the result of perceiving
things in a dualistic or discriminative manner. We will train ourselves
to look at everything with openness and the insight of interbeing in
order to transform dogmatism and violence in ourselves and the world.

Nonattachment to Views The Second Mindfulness Training

Aware of the suffering created by attachment to views and wrong
perceptions, we are determined to avoid being narrow-minded and bound to
present views. We are committed to learning and practicing nonattachment
from views and being open to others' experiences and insights in order
to benefit from the collective wisdom. Insight is revealed through the
practice of compassionate listening, deep looking, and letting go of
notions rather than through the accumulation of intellectual knowledge.
We are aware that the knowledge we presently possess is not changeless,
absolute truth. Truth is found in life, and we will observe life within
and around us in every moment, ready to learn throughout our lives.

Freedom of Thought The Third Mindfulness Training Aware of the suffering
brought about when we impose our view on others, we are determined not
to force others, even our children, by any means whatsoever---such as
authority, threat, money, propaganda, or indoctrination ---to adopt our
views. We are committed to respecting the rights of others to be
different, to choose what to believe and how to decide. We will,
however, learn to help others let go of and transform narrowness through
loving speech and compassionate dialogue.

From the Fourteen Mindfulness Trainings of the Order of Interbeing.

OTHER TITLES IN THE SERIES How to Eat How to Fight How to Love How to
Relax How to Sit How to Walk

RELATED TITLES BY THICH NHAT HANH Be Free Where You Are Being Peace
Happiness Interbeing The Long Road Turns to Joy Making Space The
Mindfulness Survival Kit No Mud, No Lotus Reconciliation The Sun My
Heart Touching Peace Understanding Our Mind

Monastics and visitors practice the art of mindful living in the
tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh at our ten mindfulness practice centers
around the world. For a full listing of practice centers, or for
information about retreats, visit plumvillage.org or contact: Plum
Village 33580 Dieulivol, France plumvillage.org

Deer Park Monastery Escondido, CA 92026, USA deerparkmonastery.org

Magnolia Grove Monastery Batesville, MS 38606, USA
magnoliagrovemonastery.org

Blue Cliff Monastery Pine Bush, NY 12566, USA bluecliffmonastery.org

European Institute of Applied Buddhism D-51545 Waldbröl, Germany eiab.eu

Thailand Plum Village Nakhon Ratchasima, 30130 Thailand phfhk.org

The Mindfulness Bell, a journal of the art of mindful living in the
tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh, is published three times a year by our
community. To subscribe or to see the worldwide directory of Sanghas, or
local mindfulness groups, visit mindfulnessbell.org. The Thich Nhat Hanh
Foundation supports Thich Nhat Hanh's peace work and mindfulness
teachings around the world. For more information on how you can help or
on how to nourish your mindfulness practice, visit the foundation at
tnhf.org.

THE BEGINNING Let the conversation begin... Follow the Penguin
twitter.com/penguinukbooks Keep up-to-date with all our stories
youtube.com/penguinbooks Pin 'Penguin Books' to your
pinterest.com/penguinukbooks Like 'Penguin Books' on
facebook.com/penguinbooks Listen to Penguin at
soundcloud.com/penguin-books Find out more about the author and discover
more stories like this at penguin.co.uk

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the
publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was
purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any
unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct
infringement of the author's and publisher's rights and those
responsible may be liable in law accordingly.

Rider, an imprint of Ebury Publishing, 20 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London
SW1V 2SA Rider is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies
whose addresses can be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com.

Copyright © 2019 Plum Village Community of Engaged Buddhism, Inc. Cover
design: Two Associates Thich Naht Hanh has asserted his right to be
identified as the author of this Work in accordance with the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988 First published in Great Britain by Rider
in 2019 Published in the United States by Parallex press in 2019
Illustrations by Jason DeAntonis penguin.co.uk A CIP catalogue record
for this book is available from the British Library ISBN 9781473566385


