PRACTICING THE POWER OF

NOW

OceanofPDF.com

PRACTICING THE POWER OF

NOW ESSENTIAL TEACHINGS, MEDITATIONS, AND EXERCISES FROM THE POWER OF
NOW

Eckhart Tolle

NEW WORLD LIBRARY NOVATO, CALIFORNIA WWW.NEWWORLDLIBRARY.COM

OceanofPDF.com

New World Library 14 Pamaron Way Novato, CA 94949 ©1999 Eckhart Tolle
Most of the material in this book is excerpted from The Power of Now ©
1997 Eckhart Tolle Cover design: Mary Ann Casler with Jacqueline Verkley
Text design: Mary Ann Casler Typography: Tona Pearce Myers Editing:
Victoria Ritchie and Marc Allen All rights reserved. This book may not
be reproduced in whole or in part, or transmitted in any form, without
written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may
quote brief passages in a review; nor may any part of this book be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or
by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or other,
without written permission of the publisher. Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data Tolle, Eckhart, 1948-- Practicing the
power of now : essential teachings, meditations, and exercises from the
power of now / Eckhart Tolle. p. cm. ISBN 1-57731-195-7 (hardcover. :
alk. paper) 1. Spiritual life. I. Tolle, Eckhart, 1948-- Power of now.
II. Title. BL624 .T645 2001 291.4'4--dc21 2001003028 First printing,
September 2001 Printed in Canada on acid-free, 100% post-consumer waste,
recycled paper ISBN 1-57731-195-7 Distributed to the trade by Publishers
Group West 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10

OceanofPDF.com

The beginning of freedom is the realization that you are not "the
thinker." The moment you start watching the thinker, a higher level of
consciousness becomes activated. You then begin to realize that there is
a vast realm of intelligence beyond thought, that thought is only a tiny
aspect of that intelligence. You also realize that all the things that
truly matter --- beauty, love, creativity, joy, inner peace --- arise
from beyond the mind. You begin to awaken.

OceanofPDF.com

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION by Eckhart Tolle PART ONE ACCESSING THE POWER OF NOW
CHAPTER ONE Being and Enlightenment CHAPTER TWO The Origin of Fear
CHAPTER THREE Entering the Now CHAPTER FOUR Dissolving Unconsciousness
CHAPTER FIVE Beauty Arises in the Stillness of Your Presence PART TWO
RELATIONSHIP AS SPIRITUAL PRACTICE CHAPTER SIX Dissolving the Pain-Body
CHAPTER SEVEN From Addictive to Enlightened Relationships

PART THREE ACCEPTANCE AND SURRENDER CHAPTER EIGHT Acceptance of the Now
CHAPTER NINE Transforming Illness and Suffering ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION

BY ECKHART TOLLE

Since it was first published in 1997, The Power of Now has already had
an impact on the collective consciousness of the planet far beyond
anything I could have imagined. It has been translated into fifteen
languages, and I receive mail from around the globe every day from
readers who tell me that their lives have been changed through coming
into contact with the teaching embodied in the book. Although the
effects of the insanity of the egoic mind are still visible everywhere,
something new is emerging. Never before have so many people been ready
to break out of collective mind-patterns that have kept humanity in
bondage to suffering since time immemorial. A new state of consciousness
is emerging. We have suffered enough! Even at this moment it is emerging
from within you, as you hold this book in your hands and read these
lines that speak of the possibility of living the liberated life, in
which you no longer inflict suffering on yourself or others. Many of the
readers who wrote to me expressed a wish to have the practical aspects
of the teachings contained in The Power of Now presented in a more
readily accessible format, to be used in their daily practice. That
request became the impetus for this book. In addition to the exercises
and practices, however, this book also contains some shorter passages
from the original work that can serve as a reminder of some of the ideas
and concepts and can become a primer for incorporating those concepts
daily. Many of those passages are particularly suitable for meditative
reading. When you practice meditative reading, you do not read primarily
to gather

new information, but to enter a different state of consciousness as you
read. This is why you can re-read the same passage many times, and every
time it feels fresh and new. Only words that were written or spoken in a
state of presence have this transformative power, which is the power to
awaken presence in the reader. These passages are best read slowly. Many
times you may want to pause and allow for a moment of quiet reflection,
or stillness. At other times, you may just open the book at random and
read a few lines. For those readers who felt daunted or overwhelmed by
The Power of Now, this book can also serve as an introduction. ---
Eckhart Tolle July 9, 2001

OceanofPDF.com

PART ONE ACCESSING THE POWER OF NOW

OceanofPDF.com

When your consciousness is directed outward, mind and world arise. When
it is directed inward, it realizes its own Source and returns home into
the Unmanifested.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER ONE

BEING AND ENLIGHTENMENT There is an eternal, ever-present One Life
beyond the myriad forms of life that are subject to birth and death.
Many people use the word God to describe it; I often call it Being. The
word Being explains nothing, but nor does God. Being, however, has the
advantage that it is an open concept. It does not reduce the infinite
invisible to a finite entity. It is impossible to form a mental image of
it. Nobody can claim exclusive possession of Being. It is your very
presence, and it is immediately accessible to you as the feeling of your
own presence. So it is only a small step from the word Being to the
experience of Being. BEING IS NOT ONLY BEYOND BUT ALSO DEEP WITHIN every
form as its innermost invisible and indestructible essence. This means
that it is accessible to you now as your own deepest self, your true
nature. But don't seek to grasp it with your mind. Don't try to
understand it. You can know it only when the mind is still. When you are
present, when your attention is fully and intensely in the Now, Being
can be felt, but it can never be understood mentally. To regain
awareness of Being and to abide in that state of "feelingrealization" is
enlightenment. The word enlightenment conjures up the idea of some
superhuman accomplishment, and the ego likes to keep it that way, but it
is simply your natural state of felt oneness with Being. It is a state
of connectedness with something immeasurable and indestructible,
something that, almost paradoxically, is essentially you and yet is much
greater than you. It is finding your true nature beyond name and form.
The inability to feel this connectedness gives rise to the illusion of
separation, from yourself and from the world around you. You then
perceive yourself, consciously or unconsciously, as an isolated
fragment. Fear arises, and conflicts within and without become the norm.

The greatest obstacle to experiencing the reality of your connectedness
is identification with your mind, which causes thought to become
compulsive. Not to be able to stop thinking is a dreadful affliction,
but we don't realize this because almost everybody is suffering from it,
so it is considered normal. This incessant mental noise prevents you
from finding that realm of inner stillness that is inseparable from
Being. It also creates a false mindmade self that casts a shadow of fear
and suffering. Identification with your mind creates an opaque screen of
concepts, labels, images, words, judgments, and definitions that blocks
all true relationship. It comes between you and yourself, between you
and your fellow man and woman, between you and nature, between you and
God. It is this screen of thought that creates the illusion of
separateness, the illusion that there is you and a totally separate
"other." You then forget the essential fact that, underneath the level
of physical appearances and separate forms, you are one with all that
is. The mind is a superb instrument if used rightly. Used wrongly,
however, it becomes very destructive. To put it more accurately, it is
not so much that you use your mind wrongly --- you usually don't use it
at all. It uses you. This is the disease. You believe that you are your
mind. This is the delusion. The instrument has taken you over. It's
almost as if you were possessed without knowing it, and so you take the
possessing entity to be yourself. THE BEGINNING OF FREEDOM is the
realization that you are not the possessing entity --- the thinker.
Knowing this enables you to observe the entity. The moment you start
watching the thinker, a higher level of consciousness becomes activated.
You then begin to realize that there is a vast realm of intelligence
beyond thought, that thought is only a tiny aspect of that intelligence.
You also realize that all the things that truly matter --- beauty, love,
creativity, joy, inner peace --- arise from beyond the mind. You begin
to awaken.

FREEING YOURSELF FROM YOUR MIND

The good news is that you can free yourself from your mind. This is the
only true liberation. You can take the first step right now. START
LISTENING TO THE VOICE IN YOUR HEAD as often as you can. Pay particular
attention to any repetitive thought patterns, those old audiotapes that
have been playing in your head perhaps for many years. This is what I
mean by "watching the thinker," which is another way of saying: Listen
to the voice in your head, be there as the witnessing presence. When you
listen to that voice, listen to it impartially. That is to say, do not
judge. Do not judge or condemn what you hear, for doing so would mean
that the same voice has come in again through the back door. You'll soon
realize: There is the voice, and here I am listening to it, watching it.
This I am realization, this sense of your own presence, is not a
thought. It arises from beyond the mind. So when you listen to a
thought, you are aware not only of the thought but also of yourself as
the witness of the thought. A new dimension of consciousness has come
in. AS YOU LISTEN TO THE THOUGHT, you feel a conscious presence --- your
deeper self --- behind or underneath the thought, as it were. The
thought then loses its power over you and quickly subsides, because you
are no longer energizing the mind through identification with it. This
is the beginning of the end of involuntary and compulsive thinking. When
a thought subsides, you experience a discontinuity in the mental stream
--- a gap of "no-mind." At first, the gaps will be short, a few seconds
perhaps, but gradually they will become longer. When these gaps occur,
you feel a certain stillness and peace inside you. This is the beginning
of your natural state of felt oneness with Being, which is usually
obscured by the mind. With practice, the sense of stillness and peace
will deepen. In fact, there is no end to its depth. You will also feel a
subtle emanation of joy arising from deep within: the joy of Being.

In this state of inner connectedness, you are much more alert, more
awake than in the mind-identified state. You are fully present. It also
raises the vibrational frequency of the energy field that gives life to
the physical body. As you go more deeply into this realm of no-mind, as
it is sometimes called in the East, you realize the state of pure
consciousness. In that state, you feel your own presence with such
intensity and such joy that all thinking, all emotions, your physical
body, as well as the whole external world become relatively
insignificant in comparison to it. And yet this is not a selfish but a
selfless state. It takes you beyond what you previously thought of as
"your self." That presence is essentially you and at the same time
inconceivably greater than you. INSTEAD OF "WATCHING THE THINKER," you
can also create a gap in the mind stream simply by directing the focus
of your attention into the Now. Just become intensely conscious of the
present moment. This is a deeply satisfying thing to do. In this way,
you draw consciousness away from mind activity and create a gap of
no-mind in which you are highly alert and aware but not thinking. This
is the essence of meditation. IN YOUR EVERYDAY LIFE, you can practice
this by taking any routine activity that normally is only a means to an
end and giving it your fullest attention, so that it becomes an end in
itself. For example, every time you walk up and down the stairs in your
house or place of work, pay close attention to every step, every
movement, even your breathing. Be totally present. Or when you wash your
hands, pay attention to all the sense perceptions associated with the
activity: the sound and feel of the water, the movement of your hands,
the scent of the soap, and so on. Or when you get into your car, after
you close the door, pause for a few seconds and observe the flow of your
breath. Become aware of a silent but powerful sense of presence. There
is one certain criterion by which you can measure your success in this
practice: the degree of peace that you feel within.

The single most vital step on your journey toward enlightenment is this:
Learn to disidentify from your mind. Every time you create a gap in the
stream of mind, the light of your consciousness grows stronger. One day
you may catch yourself smiling at the voice in your head, as you would
smile at the antics of a child. This means that you no longer take the
content of your mind all that seriously, as your sense of self does not
depend on it.

ENLIGHTENMENT: RISING ABOVE THOUGHT As you grow up, you form a mental
image of who you are, based on your personal and cultural conditioning.
We may call this phantom self the ego. It consists of mind activity and
can only be kept going through constant thinking. The term ego means
different things to different people, but when I use it here it means a
false self, created by unconscious identification with the mind. To the
ego, the present moment hardly exists. Only past and future are
considered important. This total reversal of the truth accounts for the
fact that in the ego mode the mind is so dysfunctional. It is always
concerned with keeping the past alive, because without it --- who are
you? It constantly projects itself into the future to ensure its
continued survival and to seek some kind of release or fulfillment
there. It says: "One day, when this, that, or the other happens, I am
going to be okay, happy, at peace." Even when the ego seems to be
concerned with the present, it is not the present that it sees: It
misperceives it completely because it looks at it through the eyes of
the past. Or it reduces the present to a means to an end, an end that
always lies in the mind-projected future. Observe your mind and you'll
see that this is how it works. The present moment holds the key to
liberation. But you cannot find the present moment as long as you are
your mind. Enlightenment means rising above thought. In the enlightened
state, you still use your thinking mind when needed, but in a much more
focused and

effective way than before. You use it mostly for practical purposes, but
you are free of the involuntary internal dialogue, and there is inner
stillness. When you do use your mind, and particularly when a creative
solution is needed, you oscillate every few minutes or so between
thought and stillness, between mind and no-mind. No-mind is
consciousness without thought. Only in that way is it possible to think
creatively, because only in that way does thought have any real power.
Thought alone, when it is no longer connected with the much vaster realm
of consciousness quickly becomes barren, insane, destructive.

EMOTION: THE BODY'S REACTION TO YOUR MIND Mind, in the way I use the
word, is not just thought. It includes your emotions as well as all
unconscious mental-emotional reactive patterns. Emotion arises at the
place where mind and body meet. It is the body's reaction to your mind
--- or you might say a reflection of your mind in the body. The more you
are identified with your thinking, your likes and dislikes, judgments
and interpretations, which is to say the less present you are as the
watching consciousness, the stronger the emotional energy charge will
be, whether you are aware of it or not. If you cannot feel your
emotions, if you are cut off from them, you will eventually experience
them on a purely physical level, as a physical problem or symptom. IF
YOU HAVE DIFFICULTY FEELING YOUR EMOTIONS, start by focusing attention
on the inner energy field of your body. Feel the body from within. This
will also put you in touch with your emotions. If you really want to
know your mind, the body will always give you a truthful reflection, so
look at the emotion, or rather feel it in your body. If there is an
apparent conflict between them, the thought will be the lie, the emotion
will be the truth. Not the

ultimate truth of who you are, but the relative truth of your state of
mind at that time. You may not yet be able to bring your unconscious
mind activity into awareness as thoughts, but it will always be
reflected in the body as an emotion, and of this you can become aware.
To watch an emotion in this way is basically the same as listening to or
watching a thought, which I described earlier. The only difference is
that, while a thought is in your head, an emotion has a strong physical
component and so is primarily felt in the body. You can then allow the
emotion to be there without being controlled by it. You no longer are
the emotion; you are the watcher, the observing presence. If you
practice this, all that is unconscious in you will be brought into the
light of consciousness. MAKE IT A HABIT TO ASK YOURSELF: What's going on
inside me at this moment? That question will point you in the right
direction. But don't analyze, just watch. Focus your attention within.
Feel the energy of the emotion. If there is no emotion present, take
your attention more deeply into the inner energy field of your body. It
is the doorway into Being.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER TWO THE ORIGIN OF FEAR The psychological condition of fear is
divorced from any concrete and true immediate danger. It comes in many
forms: unease, worry, anxiety, nervousness, tension, dread, phobia, and
so on. This kind of psychological fear is always of something that might
happen, not of something that is happening now. You are in the here and
now, while your mind is in the future. This creates an anxiety gap. And
if you are identified with your mind and have lost touch with the power
and simplicity of the Now, that anxiety gap will be your constant
companion. You can always cope with the present moment, but you cannot
cope with something that is only a mind projection --- you cannot cope
with the future. Moreover, as long as you are identified with your mind,
the ego runs your life. Because of its phantom nature, and despite
elaborate defense mechanisms, the ego is very vulnerable and insecure,
and it sees itself as constantly under threat. This, by the way, is the
case even if the ego is outwardly very confident. Now remember that an
emotion is the body's reaction to your mind. What message is the body
receiving continuously from the ego, the false, mind-made self? Danger,
I am under threat. And what is the emotion generated by this continuous
message? Fear, of course. Fear seems to have many causes. Fear of loss,
fear of failure, fear of being hurt, and so on, but ultimately all fear
is the ego's fear of death, of annihilation. To the ego, death is always
just around the corner. In this mind-identified state, fear of death
affects every aspect of your life. For example, even such a seemingly
trivial and "normal" thing as the compulsive need to be right in an
argument and make the other person wrong --- defending the mental
position with which you have identified --- is due to the fear of death.
If you identify with a mental position, then if you are wrong, your
mind-based sense of self is seriously threatened with annihilation. So
you as the ego cannot afford to be wrong. To be wrong is to die. Wars
have been fought over this, and countless relationships have broken
down.

Once you have disidentified from your mind, whether you are right or
wrong makes no difference to your sense of self at all, so the
forcefully compulsive and deeply unconscious need to be right, which is
a form of violence, will no longer be there. You can state clearly and
firmly how you feel or what you think, but there will be no
aggressiveness or defensiveness about it. Your sense of self is then
derived from a deeper and truer place within yourself, not from the
mind. WATCH OUT FOR ANY KIND OF DEFENSIVENESS within yourself. What are
you defending? An illusory identity, an image in your mind, a fictitious
entity. By making this pattern conscious, by witnessing it, you
disidentify from it. In the light of your consciousness, the unconscious
pattern will then quickly dissolve. This is the end of all arguments and
power games, which are so corrosive to relationships. Power over others
is weakness disguised as strength. True power is within, and it is
available to you now. The mind always seeks to deny the Now and to
escape from it. In other words, the more you are identified with your
mind, the more you suffer. Or you may put it like this: The more you are
able to honor and accept the Now, the more you are free of pain, of
suffering --- and free of the egoic mind. If you no longer want to
create pain for yourself and others, if you no longer want to add to the
residue of past pain that still lives on in you, then don't create any
more time, or at least no more than is necessary to deal with the
practical aspects of your life. How to stop creating time? REALIZE
DEEPLY THAT THE PRESENT MOMENT is all you ever have. Make the Now the
primary focus of your life. Whereas before you dwelt in time and paid
brief visits to the Now, have your dwelling place in the Now and pay
brief visits to past and future when required to deal with the practical
aspects of your life situation. Always say "yes" to the present moment.

END THE DELUSION OF TIME Here is the key: End the delusion of time. Time
and mind are inseparable. Remove time from the mind and it stops ---
unless you choose to use it. To be identified with your mind is to be
trapped in time: the compulsion to live almost exclusively through
memory and anticipation. This creates an endless preoccupation with past
and future and an unwillingness to honor and acknowledge the present
moment and allow it to be. The compulsion arises because the past gives
you an identity and the future holds the promise of salvation, of
fulfillment in whatever form. Both are illusions. The more you are
focused on time --- past and future --- the more you miss the Now, the
most precious thing there is. Why is it the most precious thing?
Firstly, because it is the only thing. It's all there is. The eternal
present is the space within which your whole life unfolds, the one
factor that remains constant. Life is now. There was never a time when
your life was not now, nor will there ever be. Secondly, the Now is the
only point that can take you beyond the limited confines of the mind. It
is your only point of access into the timeless and formless realm of
Being. Have you ever experienced, done, thought, or felt anything
outside the Now? Do you think you ever will? Is it possible for anything
to happen or be outside the Now? The answer is obvious, is it not?
Nothing ever happened in the past; it happened in the Now. Nothing will
ever happen in the future; it will happen in the Now. The essence of
what I am saying here cannot be understood by the mind. The moment you
grasp it, there is a shift in consciousness from mind to Being, from
time to presence. Suddenly, everything feels alive, radiates energy,
emanates Being.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER THREE

ENTERING THE NOW With the timeless dimension comes a different kind of
knowing, one that does not "kill" the spirit that lives within every
creature and every thing. A knowing that does not destroy the sacredness
and mystery of life but contains a deep love and reverence for all that
is. A knowing of which the mind knows nothing. BREAK THE OLD PATTERN of
present-moment denial and present-moment resistance. Make it your
practice to withdraw attention from past and future whenever they are
not needed. Step out of the time dimension as much as possible in
everyday life. If you find it hard to enter the Now directly, start by
observing the habitual tendency of your mind to want to escape from the
Now. You will observe that the future is usually imagined as either
better or worse than the present. If the imagined future is better, it
gives you hope or pleasurable anticipation. If it is worse, it creates
anxiety. Both are illusory. Through self-observation, more presence
comes into your life automatically. The moment you realize you are not
present, you are present. Whenever you are able to observe your mind,
you are no longer trapped in it. Another factor has come in, something
that is not of the mind: the witnessing presence. Be present as the
watcher of your mind --- of your thoughts and emotions as well as your
reactions in various situations. Be at least as interested in your
reactions as in the situation or person that causes you to react. Notice
also how often your attention is in the past or future. Don't judge or
analyze what you observe. Watch the thought, feel the emotion, observe
the reaction. Don't make a personal problem out of them. You will then
feel something more powerful than any

of those things that you observe: the still, observing presence itself
behind the content of your mind, the silent watcher. Intense presence is
needed when certain situations trigger a reaction with a strong
emotional charge, such as when your self-image is threatened, a
challenge comes into your life that triggers fear, things "go wrong," or
an emotional complex from the past is brought up. In those instances,
the tendency is for you to become "unconscious." The reaction or emotion
takes you over --- you "become" it. You act it out. You justify, make
wrong, attack, defend. . . except that it isn't you, it's the reactive
pattern, the mind in its habitual survival mode. Identification with the
mind gives it more energy; observation of the mind withdraws energy from
it. Identification with the mind creates more time; observation of the
mind opens up the dimension of the timeless. The energy that is
withdrawn from the mind turns into presence. Once you can feel what it
means to be present, it becomes much easier to simply choose to step out
of the time dimension whenever time is not needed for practical purposes
and move more deeply into the Now. This does not impair your ability to
use time --- past or future --- when you need to refer to it for
practical matters. Nor does it impair your ability to use your mind. In
fact, it enhances it. When you do use your mind, it will be sharper,
more focused. The enlightened person's main focus of attention is always
the Now, but they are still peripherally aware of time. In other words,
they continue to use clock time but are free of psychological time.

LETTING GO OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TIME Learn to use time in the practical
aspects of your life --- we may call this "clock time" --- but
immediately return to present-moment awareness when those practical
matters have been dealt with. In this way, there will be no buildup of
"psychological time," which is identification with the past and
continuous compulsive projection into the future.

If you set yourself a goal and work toward it, you are using clock time.
You are aware of where you want to go, but you honor and give your
fullest attention to the step that you are taking at this moment. If you
then become excessively focused on the goal, perhaps because you are
seeking happiness, fulfillment, or a more complete sense of self in it,
the Now is no longer honored. It becomes reduced to a mere
stepping-stone to the future, with no intrinsic value. Clock time then
turns into psychological time. Your life's journey is no longer an
adventure, just an obsessive need to arrive, to attain, to "make it."
You no longer see or smell the flowers by the wayside either, nor are
you aware of the beauty and the miracle of life that unfolds all around
you when you are present in the Now. Are you always trying to get
somewhere other than where you are? Is most of your doing just a means
to an end? Is fulfillment always just around the corner or confined to
short-lived pleasures, such as sex, food, drink, drugs, or thrills and
excitement? Are you always focused on becoming, achieving, and
attaining, or alternatively chasing some new thrill or pleasure? Do you
believe that if you acquire more things you will become more fulfilled,
good enough, or psychologically complete? Are you waiting for a man or
woman to give meaning to your life? In the normal, mind-identified or
unenlightened state of consciousness, the power and infinite creative
potential that lie concealed in the Now are completely obscured by
psychological time. Your life then loses its vibrancy, its freshness,
its sense of wonder. The old patterns of thought, emotion, behavior,
reaction, and desire are acted out in endless repeat performances, a
script in your mind that gives you an identity of sorts but distorts or
covers up the reality of the Now. The mind then creates an obsession
with the future as an escape from the unsatisfactory present. What you
perceive as future is an intrinsic part of your state of consciousness
now. If your mind carries a heavy burden of past, you will experience
more of the same. The past perpetuates itself through lack of presence.
The quality of your consciousness at this moment is what shapes the
future --- which, of course, can only be experienced as the Now. If it
is the quality of your consciousness at this moment that determines the
future, then what is it that determines the quality of your
consciousness? Your degree of presence. So the only place where true
change can occur and where the past can be dissolved is the Now.

You may find it hard to recognize that time is the cause of your
suffering or your problems. You believe that they are caused by specific
situations in your life, and seen from a conventional viewpoint, this is
true. But until you have dealt with the basic problem-making dysfunction
of the mind --- its attachment to past and future and denial of the Now
--- problems are actually interchangeable. If all your problems or
perceived causes of suffering or unhappiness were miraculously removed
for you today, but you had not become more present, more conscious, you
would soon find yourself with a similar set of problems or causes of
suffering, like a shadow that follows you wherever you go. Ultimately,
there is only one problem: the time-bound mind itself. There is no
salvation in time. You cannot be free in the future. PRESENCE IS THE KEY
to freedom, so you can only be free now. FINDING THE LIFE UNDERNEATH
YOUR LIFE SITUATION What you refer to as your "life" should more
accurately be called your "life situation." It is psychological time:
past and future. Certain things in the past didn't go the way you wanted
them to go. You are still resisting what happened in the past, and now
you are resisting what is. Hope is what keeps you going, but hope keeps
you focused on the future, and this continued focus perpetuates your
denial of the Now and therefore your unhappiness. FORGET ABOUT YOUR LIFE
SITUATION for a while and pay attention to your life. Your life
situation exists in time. Your life is now. Your life situation is
mind-stuff. Your life is real. Find the "narrow gate that leads to
life." It is called the Now. Narrow your life down to this moment. Your
life situation may be full of problems --- most life situations are ---
but find out if you have any problem at this moment. Not tomorrow or in
ten minutes, but now. Do you have a problem now? When you are full of
problems, there is no room for anything new to enter, no room for a
solution. So whenever you can, make some room,

create some space, so that you find the life underneath your life
situation. USE YOUR SENSES FULLY. Be where you are. Look around. Just
look, don't interpret. See the light, shapes, colors, textures. Be aware
of the silent presence of each thing. Be aware of the space that allows
everything to be. Listen to the sounds; don't judge them. Listen to the
silence underneath the sounds. Touch something --- anything --- and feel
and acknowledge its Being. Observe the rhythm of your breathing; feel
the air flowing in and out, feel the life energy inside your body. Allow
everything to be, within and without. Allow the "isness" of all things.
Move deeply into the Now. You are leaving behind the deadening world of
mental abstraction, of time. You are getting out of the insane mind that
is draining you of life energy, just as it is slowly poisoning and
destroying the Earth. You are awakening out of the dream of time into
the present.

ALL PROBLEMS ARE ILLUSIONS OF THE MIND FOCUS YOUR ATTENTION ON THE NOW
and tell me what problem you have at this moment. I am not getting any
answer because it is impossible to have a problem when your attention is
fully in the Now. A situation needs to be either dealt with or accepted.
Why make it into a problem? The mind unconsciously loves problems
because they give you an identity of sorts. This is normal, and it is
insane. "Problem" means that you are dwelling on a situation mentally
without there being a true intention or possibility of taking action now
and that you are unconsciously making it part of your sense of self. You
become so overwhelmed by your life situation that you lose your sense of
life, of Being. Or you are carrying in

your mind the insane burden of a hundred things that you will or may
have to do in the future instead of focusing your attention on the one
thing that you can do now. WHEN YOU CREATE A PROBLEM, you create pain.
All it takes is a simple choice, a simple decision: No matter what
happens, I will create no more pain for myself. I will create no more
problems. Although it is a simple choice, it is also very radical. You
won't make that choice unless you are truly fed up with suffering,
unless you have truly had enough. And you won't be able to go through
with it unless you access the power of the Now. If you create no more
pain for yourself, then you create no more pain for others. You also no
longer contaminate the beautiful Earth, your inner space, and the
collective human psyche with the negativity of problem making. Should a
situation arise that you need to deal with now, your action will be
clear and incisive if it arises out of present-moment awareness. It is
also more likely to be effective. It will not be a reaction coming from
the past conditioning of your mind but an intuitive response to the
situation. In other instances, when the time-bound mind would have
reacted, you will find it more effective to do nothing --- just stay
centered in the Now.

THE JOY OF BEING To alert you that you have allowed yourself to be taken
over by psychological time, you can use a simple criterion. ASK
YOURSELF: Is there joy, ease, and lightness in what I am doing? If there
isn't, then time is covering up the present moment, and life is
perceived as a burden or a struggle. If there is no joy, ease, or
lightness in what you are doing, it does not necessarily mean that you
need to change what you are doing. It may be sufficient to change the
how. "How" is always more important than "what." See if you can give
much more attention to the doing than to the result that you want to
achieve

through it. Give your fullest attention to whatever the moment presents.
This implies that you also completely accept what is, because you cannot
give your full attention to something and at the same time resist it. As
soon as you honor the present moment, all unhappiness and struggle
dissolve, and life begins to flow with joy and ease. When you act out of
present-moment awareness, whatever you do becomes imbued with a sense of
quality, care, and love --- even the most simple action. DO NOT BE
CONCERNED WITH THE FRUIT OF YOUR ACTION --- just give attention to the
action itself. The fruit will come of its own accord. This is a powerful
spiritual practice. When the compulsive striving away from the Now
ceases, the joy of Being flows into everything you do. The moment your
attention turns to the Now, you feel a presence, a stillness, a peace.
You no longer depend on the future for fulfillment and satisfaction ---
you don't look to it for salvation. Therefore, you are not attached to
the results. Neither failure nor success has the power to change your
inner state of Being. You have found the life underneath your life
situation. In the absence of psychological time, your sense of self is
derived from Being, not from your personal past. Therefore, the
psychological need to become anything other than who you are already is
no longer there. In the world, on the level of your life situation, you
may indeed become wealthy, knowledgeable, successful, free of this or
that, but in the deeper dimension of Being you are complete and whole
now.

THE TIMELESS STATE OF CONSCIOUSNESS When every cell of your body is so
present that it feels vibrant with life, and when you can feel that life
every moment as the joy of Being, then it can be said that you are free
of time. To be free of time is to be free of the psychological need of
the past for your identity and the future for your fulfillment. It
represents the most profound transformation of consciousness that you
can imagine.

WHEN YOU HAVE HAD YOUR FIRST FEW GLIMPSES OF THE TIMELESS STATE OF
CONSCIOUSNESS, you begin to move back and forth between the dimensions
of time and presence. First you become aware of just how rarely your
attention is truly in the Now. But to know that you are not present is a
great success: That knowing is presence --- even if initially it only
lasts for a couple of seconds of clock time before it is lost again.
Then, with increasing frequency, you choose to have the focus of your
consciousness in the present moment rather than in the past or future,
and whenever you realize that you had lost the Now, you are able to stay
in it not just for a couple of seconds, but for longer periods as
perceived from the external perspective of clock time. So before you are
firmly established in the state of presence, which is to say, before you
are fully conscious, you shift back and forth for a while between
consciousness and unconsciousness, between the state of presence and the
state of mind identification. You lose the Now, and you return to it,
again and again. Eventually, presence becomes your predominant state.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER FOUR

DISSOLVING UNCONSCIOUSNESS It is essential to bring more consciousness
into your life in ordinary situations when everything is going
relatively smoothly. In this way, you grow in presence power. It
generates an energy field in you and around you of a high vibrational
frequency. No unconsciousness, no negativity, no discord or violence can
enter that field and survive, just as darkness cannot survive in the
presence of light. When you learn to be the witness of your thoughts and
emotions, which is an essential part of being present, you may be
surprised when you first become aware of the background "static" of
ordinary unconsciousness and realize how rarely, if ever, you are truly
at ease within yourself. On the level of your thinking, you will find a
great deal of resistance in the form of judgment, discontent, and mental
projection away from the Now. On the emotional level, there will be an
undercurrent of unease, tension, boredom, or nervousness. Both are
aspects of the mind in its habitual resistance mode. OBSERVE THE MANY
WAYS IN WHICH UNEASE, discontent, and tension arise within you through
unnecessary judgment, resistance to what is, and denial of the Now.
Anything unconscious dissolves when you shine the light of consciousness
on it. Once you know how to dissolve ordinary unconsciousness, the light
of your presence will shine brightly, and it will be much easier to deal
with deep unconsciousness whenever you feel its gravitational pull.
However, ordinary unconsciousness may not be easy to detect initially
because it is so normal. MAKE IT A HABIT TO MONITOR YOUR MENTAL AND
EMOTIONAL STATE through self-observation. "Am I at ease at this moment?"
is a good question to ask yourself frequently.

Or you can ask: "What's going on inside me at this moment?" Be at least
as interested in what goes on inside you as what happens outside. If you
get the inside right, the outside will fall into place. Primary reality
is within, secondary reality without. BUT DON'T ANSWER THESE QUESTIONS
IMMEDIATELY. Direct your attention inward. Have a look inside yourself.
What kind of thoughts is your mind producing? What do you feel? Direct
your attention into the body. Is there any tension? Once you detect that
there is a low level of unease, the background static, see in what way
you are avoiding, resisting, or denying life --- by denying the Now.
There are many ways in which people unconsciously resist the present
moment. With practice, your power of self-observation, of monitoring
your inner state, will become sharpened.

WHEREVER YOU ARE, BE THERE TOTALLY Are you stressed? Are you so busy
getting to the future that the present is reduced to a means of getting
there? Stress is caused by being "here" but wanting to be "there," or
being in the present but wanting to be in the future. It's a split that
tears you apart inside. Does the past take up a great deal of your
attention? Do you frequently talk and think about it, either positively
or negatively? The great things that you have achieved, your adventures
or experiences, or your victim story and the dreadful things that were
done to you, or maybe what you did to someone else? Are your thought
processes creating guilt, pride, resentment, anger, regret, or
self-pity? Then you are not only reinforcing a false sense of self but
also helping to accelerate your body's aging process by creating an

accumulation of past in your psyche. Verify this for yourself by
observing those around you who have a strong tendency to hold on to the
past. DIE TO THE PAST EVERY MOMENT. You don't need it. Only refer to it
when it is absolutely relevant to the present. Feel the power of this
moment and the fullness of Being. Feel your presence. Are you worried?
Do you have many "what if " thoughts? You are identified with your mind,
which is projecting itself into an imaginary future situation and
creating fear. There is no way that you can cope with such a situation,
because it doesn't exist. It's a mental phantom. You can stop this
health- and life-corroding insanity simply by acknowledging the present
moment. BECOME AWARE OF YOUR BREATHING. Feel the air flowing in and out
of your body. Feel your inner energy field. All that you ever have to
deal with, cope with, in real life --- as opposed to imaginary mind
projections --- is this moment. Ask yourself what "problem" you have
right now, not next year, tomorrow, or five minutes from now. What is
wrong with this moment? You can always cope with the Now, but you can
never cope with the future --- nor do you have to. The answer, the
strength, the right action, or the resource will be there when you need
it, not before, not after. Are you a habitual "waiter"? How much of your
life do you spend waiting? What I call "small-scale waiting" is waiting
in line at the post office, in a traffic jam, at the airport, or waiting
for someone to arrive, to finish work, and so on. "Large-scale waiting"
is waiting for the next vacation, for a better job, for the children to
grow up, for a truly meaningful relationship, for success, to make
money, to be important, to become enlightened. It is not uncommon for
people to spend their whole life waiting to start living. Waiting is a
state of mind. Basically, it means that you want the future; you don't
want the present. You don't want what you've got, and you want what you
haven't got. With every kind of waiting, you unconsciously create inner
conflict between your here and now, where you don't want to be, and

the projected future, where you want to be. This greatly reduces the
quality of your life by making you lose the present. For example, many
people are waiting for prosperity. It cannot come in the future. When
you honor, acknowledge, and fully accept your present reality --- where
you are, who you are, what you are doing right now --- when you fully
accept what you have got, you are grateful for what you have got,
grateful for what is, grateful for Being. Gratitude for the present
moment and the fullness of life now is true prosperity. It cannot come
in the future. Then, in time, that prosperity manifests for you in
various ways. If you are dissatisfied with what you have got, or even
frustrated or angry about your present lack, that may motivate you to
become rich, but even if you do make millions, you will continue to
experience the inner condition of lack, and deep down you will continue
to feel unfulfilled. You may have many exciting experiences that money
can buy, but they will come and go and always leave you with an empty
feeling and the need for further physical or psychological
gratification. You won't abide in Being and so feel the fullness of life
now that alone is true prosperity. GIVE UP WAITING AS A STATE OF MIND.
When you catch yourself slipping into waiting . . . snap out of it. Come
into the present moment. Just be, and enjoy being. If you are present,
there is never any need for you to wait for anything. So next time
somebody says, "Sorry to have kept you waiting," you can reply, "That's
all right, I wasn't waiting. I was just standing here enjoying myself
--- in joy in my self." These are just a few of the habitual mind
strategies for denying the present moment that are part of ordinary
unconsciousness. They are easy to overlook because they are so much a
part of normal living: the background static of perpetual discontent.
But the more you practice monitoring your inner mental-emotional state,
the easier it will be to know when you have been trapped in past or
future, which is to say unconscious, and to awaken out of the dream of
time into the present. But beware: The false, unhappy self, based on
mind identification, lives on time. It knows that the present moment is
its own death and so feels very threatened by it. It will do all it can
to take you out of it. It will try to keep you trapped in time.

In a sense, the state of presence could be compared to waiting. It is a
qualitatively different kind of waiting, one that requires your total
alertness. Something could happen at any moment, and if you are not
absolutely awake, absolutely still, you will miss it. In that state, all
your attention is in the Now. There is none left for daydreaming,
thinking, remembering, anticipating. There is no tension in it, no fear,
just alert presence. You are present with your whole Being, with every
cell of your body. In that state, the "you" that has a past and a
future, the personality if you like, is hardly there anymore. And yet
nothing of value is lost. You are still essentially yourself. In fact,
you are more fully yourself than you ever were before, or rather it is
only now that you are truly yourself.

THE PAST CANNOT SURVIVE IN YOUR PRESENCE Whatever you need to know about
the unconscious past in you, the challenges of the present will bring it
out. If you delve into the past, it will become a bottomless pit: There
is always more. You may think that you need more time to understand the
past or become free of it, in other words, that the future will
eventually free you of the past. This is a delusion. Only the present
can free you of the past. More time cannot free you of time. Access the
power of Now. That is the key. The power of Now is none other than the
power of your presence, your consciousness liberated from thought forms.
So deal with the past on the level of the present. The more attention
you give to the past, the more you energize it, and the more likely you
are to make a "self " out of it. Don't misunderstand: Attention is
essential, but not to the past as past. Give attention to the present;
give attention to your behavior, to your reactions, moods, thoughts,
emotions, fears, and desires as they occur in the present. There's the
past in you. If you can be present enough to watch all those things, not
critically or analytically but nonjudgmentally, then you are dealing
with the past and dissolving it through the power of your presence. You
cannot find yourself by going into the past. You find yourself by coming
into the present.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER FIVE

BEAUTY ARISES IN THE TILLNESS OF YOUR PRESENCE Presence is needed to
become aware of the beauty, the majesty, the sacredness of nature. Have
you ever gazed up into the infinity of space on a clear night, awestruck
by the absolute stillness and inconceivable vastness of it? Have you
listened, truly listened, to the sound of a mountain stream in the
forest? Or to the song of a blackbird at dusk on a quiet summer evening?
To become aware of such things, the mind needs to be still. You have to
put down for a moment your personal baggage of problems, of past and
future, as well as all your knowledge; otherwise, you will see but not
see, hear but not hear. Your total presence is required. BEYOND THE
BEAUTY OF THE EXTERNAL FORMS, there is more here: something that cannot
be named, something ineffable, some deep, inner, holy essence. Whenever
and wherever there is beauty, this inner essence shines through somehow.
It only reveals itself to you when you are present. Could it be that
this nameless essence and your presence are one and the same? Would it
be there without your presence? Go deeply into it. Find out for
yourself.

REALIZING PURE CONSCIOUSNESS Whenever you watch the mind, you withdraw
consciousness from mind forms, which then becomes what we call the
watcher or the witness.

Consequently, the watcher --- pure consciousness beyond form --- becomes
stronger, and the mental formations become weaker. When we talk about
watching the mind, we are personalizing an event that is truly of cosmic
significance: Through you, consciousness is awakening out of its dream
of identification with form and withdrawing from form. This foreshadows,
but is already part of, an event that is probably still in the distant
future as far as chronological time is concerned. The event is called
--- the end of the world. TO STAY PRESENT IN EVERYDAY LIFE, it helps to
be deeply rooted within yourself; otherwise, the mind, which has
incredible momentum, will drag you along like a wild river. It means to
inhabit your body fully. To always have some of your attention in the
inner energy field of your body. To feel the body from within, so to
speak. Body awareness keeps you present. It anchors you in the Now. The
body that you can see and touch cannot take you into Being. But that
visible and tangible body is only an outer shell, or rather a limited
and distorted perception of a deeper reality. In your natural state of
connectedness with Being, this deeper reality can be felt every moment
as the invisible inner body, the animating presence within you. So to
"inhabit the body" is to feel the body from within, to feel the life
inside the body and thereby come to know that you are beyond the outer
form. You are cut off from Being as long as your mind takes up all your
attention. When this happens --- and it happens continuously for most
people --- you are not in your body. The mind absorbs all your
consciousness and transforms it into mind stuff. You cannot stop
thinking. To become conscious of Being, you need to reclaim
consciousness from the mind. This is one of the most essential tasks on
your spiritual journey. It will free vast amounts of consciousness that
previously had been trapped in useless and compulsive thinking. A very
effective way of doing this is simply to take the focus of your
attention away from thinking and direct it into the body, where Being
can be felt in the first instance as the invisible energy field that
gives life to what you perceive as the physical body.

CONNECTING WITH THE INNER BODY Please try it now. You may find it
helpful to close your eyes for this practice. Later on, when "being in
the body" has become natural and easy, this will no longer be necessary.
DIRECT YOUR ATTENTION INTO THE BODY. Feel it from within. Is it alive?
Is there life in your hands, arms, legs, and feet --- in your abdomen,
your chest? Can you feel the subtle energy field that pervades the
entire body and gives vibrant life to every organ and every cell? Can
you feel it simultaneously in all parts of the body as a single field of
energy? Keep focusing on the feeling of your inner body for a few
moments. Do not start to think about it. Feel it. The more attention you
give it, the clearer and stronger this feeling will become. It will feel
as if every cell is becoming more alive, and if you have a strong visual
sense, you may get an image of your body becoming luminous. Although
such an image can help you temporarily, pay more attention to the
feeling than to any image that may arise. An image, no matter how
beautiful or powerful, is already defined in form, so there is less
scope for penetrating more deeply.

GOING DEEPLY INTO THE BODY To go even more deeply into the body, try the
following meditation. Ten to fifteen minutes of clock time should be
sufficient. MAKE SURE FIRST THAT THERE ARE NO EXTERNAL DISTRACTIONS such
as telephones or people who are likely to interrupt you. Sit on a chair,
but don't lean back. Keep the spine erect. Doing so will help you to
stay alert. Alternatively, choose your own favorite position for
meditation. Make sure the body is relaxed. Close your eyes. Take a few
deep breaths. Feel yourself breathing into the lower abdomen, as

it were. Observe how it expands and contracts slightly with each in and
out breath. Then become aware of the entire inner energy field of the
body. Don't think about it --- feel it. By doing this, you reclaim
consciousness from the mind. If you find it helpful, use the "light"
visualization I just described. When you can feel the inner body clearly
as a single field of energy, let go, if possible, of any visual image
and focus exclusively on the feeling. If you can, also drop any mental
image you may still have of the physical body. All that is left then is
an all-encompassing sense of presence or "beingness," and the inner body
is felt to be without a boundary. Then take your attention even more
deeply into that feeling. Become one with it. Merge with the energy
field, so that there is no longer a perceived duality of the observer
and the observed, of you and your body. The distinction between inner
and outer also dissolves now, so there is no inner body anymore. By
going deeply into the body, you have transcended the body. Stay in this
realm of pure Being for as long as feels comfortable; then become aware
again of the physical body, your breathing and physical senses, and open
your eyes. Look at your surroundings for a few minutes in a meditative
way --- that is, without labeling them mentally --- and continue to feel
the inner body as you do so. Having access to that formless realm is
truly liberating. It frees you from bondage to form and identification
with form. We may call it the Unmanifested, the invisible Source of all
things, the Being within all beings. It is a realm of deep stillness and
peace, but also of joy and intense aliveness. Whenever you are present,
you become "transparent" to some extent to the light, the pure
consciousness that emanates from this Source. You also realize that the
light is not separate from who you are but constitutes your very
essence. When your consciousness is directed outward, mind and world
arise. When it is directed inward, it realizes its own Source and
returns home into the Unmanifested.

Then, when your consciousness comes back to the manifested world, you
reassume the form identity that you temporarily relinquished. You have a
name, a past, a life situation, a future. But in one essential respect,
you are not the same person you were before: You will have glimpsed a
reality within yourself that is not "of this world," although it isn't
separate from it, just as it isn't separate from you. Now let your
spiritual practice be this: AS YOU GO ABOUT YOUR LIFE, don't give 100
percent of your attention to the external world and to your mind. Keep
some within. Feel the inner body even when engaged in everyday
activities, especially when engaged in relationships or when you are
relating with nature. Feel the stillness deep inside it. Keep the portal
open. It is quite possible to be conscious of the Unmanifested
throughout your life. You feel it as a deep sense of peace somewhere in
the background, a stillness that never leaves you, no matter what
happens out here. You become a bridge between the Unmanifested and the
manifested, between God and the world. This is the state of
connectedness with the Source that we call enlightenment.

HAVE DEEP ROOTS WITHIN The key is to be in a state of permanent
connectedness with your inner body --- to feel it at all times. This
will rapidly deepen and transform your life. The more consciousness you
direct into the inner body, the higher its vibrational frequency
becomes, much like a light that grows brighter as you turn up the dimmer
switch and so increase the flow of electricity. At this higher energy
level, negativity cannot affect you anymore, and you tend to attract new
circumstances that reflect this higher frequency. If you keep your
attention in the body as much as possible, you will be anchored in the
Now. You won't lose yourself in the external world, and

you won't lose yourself in your mind. Thoughts and emotions, fears and
desires may still be there to some extent, but they won't take you over.
PLEASE EXAMINE WHERE YOUR ATTENTION IS at this moment. You are listening
to me, or you are reading these words in a book. That is the focus of
your attention. You are also peripherally aware of your surroundings,
other people, and so on. Furthermore, there may be some mind activity
around what you are hearing or reading, some mental commentary. Yet
there is no need for any of this to absorb all your attention. See if
you can be in touch with your inner body at the same time. Keep some of
your attention within. Don't let it all flow out. Feel your whole body
from within, as a single field of energy. It is almost as if you were
listening or reading with your whole body. Let this be your practice in
the days and weeks to come. Do not give all your attention away to the
mind and the external world. By all means focus on what you are doing,
but feel the inner body at the same time whenever possible. Stay rooted
within. Then observe how this changes your state of consciousness and
the quality of what you are doing. Please don't just accept or reject
what I am saying. Put it to the test.

STRENGTHENING THE IMMUNE SYSTEM There is a simple but powerful
self-healing meditation that you can do whenever you feel the need to
boost your immune system. It is particularly effective if used when you
feel the first symptoms of an illness, but it also works with illnesses
that are already entrenched if you use it at frequent intervals and with
an intense focus. It will also counteract any disruption of your energy
field by some form of negativity. It is not a substitute, however, for
the moment-to-moment practice of being in the body; otherwise, its
effect will only be temporary. Here it is.

WHEN YOU ARE UNOCCUPIED FOR A FEW MINUTES, and especially last thing at
night before falling asleep and first thing in the morning before
getting up, "flood" your body with consciousness. Close your eyes. Lie
flat on your back. Choose different parts of your body to focus your
attention on briefly at first: hands, feet, arms, legs, abdomen, chest,
head, and so on. Feel the life energy inside those parts as intensely as
you can. Stay with each part for fifteen seconds or so. Then let your
attention run through the body like a wave a few times, from feet to
head and back again. This need only take a minute or so. After that,
feel the inner body in its totality, as a single field of energy. Hold
that feeling for a few minutes. Be intensely present during that time,
present in every cell of your body. Don't be concerned if the mind
occasionally succeeds in drawing your attention out of the body and you
lose yourself in some thought. As soon as you notice that this has
happened, just return your attention to the inner body.

CREATIVE USE OF MIND If you need to use your mind for a specific
purpose, use it in conjunction with your inner body. Only if you are
able to be conscious without thought can you use your mind creatively,
and the easiest way to enter that state is through your body. WHENEVER
AN ANSWER, A SOLUTION, OR A CREATIVE IDEA IS NEEDED, stop thinking for a
moment by focusing attention on your inner energy field. Become aware of
the stillness. When you resume thinking, it will be fresh and creative.
In any thought activity, make it a habit to go back and forth every few
minutes or so between thinking and an inner kind of listening, an inner
stillness.

We could say: Don't just think with your head, think with your whole
body.

LET THE BREATH TAKE YOU INTO THE BODY If at any time you are finding it
hard to get in touch with the inner body, it is usually easier to focus
on your breathing first. Conscious breathing, which is a powerful
meditation in its own right, will gradually put you in touch with the
body. FOLLOW THE BREATH WITH YOUR ATTENTION as it moves in and out of
your body. Breathe into the body, and feel your abdomen expanding and
contracting slightly with each inhalation and exhalation. If you find it
easy to visualize, close your eyes and see yourself surrounded by light
or immersed in a luminous substance --- a sea of consciousness. Then
breathe in that light. Feel that luminous substance filling up your body
and making it luminous also. Then gradually focus more on the feeling.
Don't get attached to any visual image. You are now in your body. You
have accessed the power of Now.

OceanofPDF.com

PART TWO

RELATIONSHIP AS SPIRITUAL PRACTICE

OceanofPDF.com

Love is a state of Being. Your love is not outside; it is deep within
you. You can never lose it, and it cannot leave you. It is not dependent
on some other body, some external form.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER SIX

DISSOLVING THE PAIN-BODY The greater part of human pain is unnecessary.
It is self-created as long as the unobserved mind runs your life. The
pain that you create now is always some form of nonacceptance, some form
of unconscious resistance to what is. On the level of thought, the
resistance is some form of judgment. On the emotional level, it is some
form of negativity. The intensity of the pain depends on the degree of
resistance to the present moment, and this in turn depends on how
strongly you are identified with your mind. The mind always seeks to
deny the Now and to escape from it. In other words, the more you are
identified with your mind, the more you suffer. Or you may put it like
this: The more you are able to honor and accept the Now, the more you
are free of pain, of suffering --- and free of the egoic mind. Some
spiritual teachings state that all pain is ultimately an illusion, and
this is true. The question is: Is it true for you? A mere belief doesn't
make it true. Do you want to experience pain for the rest of your life
and keep saying that it is an illusion? Does that free you from the
pain? What we are concerned with here is how you can realize this truth
--- that is, make it real in your own experience. Pain is inevitable as
long as you are identified with your mind, which is to say as long as
you are unconscious, spiritually speaking. I am talking here primarily
of emotional pain, which is also the main cause of physical pain and
physical disease. Resentment, hatred, self-pity, guilt, anger,
depression, jealousy, and so on, even the slightest irritation, are all
forms of pain. And every pleasure or emotional high contains within
itself the seed of pain: its inseparable opposite, which will manifest
in time. Anybody who has ever taken drugs to get "high" will know that
the high eventually turns into a low, that the pleasure turns into some
form of pain. Many people also know from their own experience how easily
and quickly an intimate relationship can turn from a source of pleasure
to a source of

pain. Seen from a higher perspective, both the negative and the positive
polarities are faces of the same coin, are part of the underlying pain
that is inseparable from the mind-identified egoic state of
consciousness. There are two levels to your pain: the pain that you
create now, and the pain from the past that still lives on in your mind
and body. As long as you are unable to access the power of the Now,
every emotional pain that you experience leaves behind a residue of pain
that lives on in you. It merges with the pain from the past, which was
already there, and becomes lodged in your mind and body. This, of
course, includes the pain you suffered as a child, caused by the
unconsciousness of the world into which you were born. This accumulated
pain is a negative energy field that occupies your body and mind. If you
look on it as an invisible entity in its own right, you are getting
quite close to the truth. It's the emotional pain-body. The pain-body
has two modes of being: dormant and active. It may be dormant 90 percent
of the time; in a deeply unhappy person, though, it may be active up to
100 percent of the time. Some people live almost entirely through their
pain-body, while others may experience it only in certain situations,
such as intimate relationships, or situations linked with past loss or
abandonment, physical or emotional hurt, and so on. Anything can trigger
it, particularly if it resonates with a pain pattern from your past.
When it is ready to awaken from its dormant stage, even a thought or an
innocent remark made by someone close to you can activate it.

BREAKING IDENTIFICATION WITH THE PAIN-BODY THE PAIN-BODY DOESN'T WANT
YOU TO OBSERVE IT DIRECTLY and see it for what it is. The moment you
observe the pain-body, feel its energy field within you, and take your
attention into it, the identification is broken.

A higher dimension of consciousness has come in. I call it presence. You
are now the witness or the watcher of the painbody. This means that it
cannot use you anymore by pretending to be you, and it can no longer
replenish itself through you. You have found your own innermost
strength. Some pain-bodies are obnoxious but relatively harmless, for
example, like a child who won't stop whining. Others are vicious and
destructive monsters, true demons. Some are physically violent; many
more are emotionally violent. Some will attack people around you or
close to you, while others may attack you, their host. Thoughts and
feelings you have about your life then become deeply negative and
self-destructive. Illnesses and accidents are often created in this way.
Some pain-bodies drive their hosts to suicide. When you thought you knew
a person and then you are suddenly confronted with this alien, nasty
creature for the first time, you are in for quite a shock. It is more
important, however, to observe it in yourself than in someone else.
WATCH OUT FOR ANY SIGN OF UNHAPPINESS IN YOURSELF, in whatever form ---
it may be the awakening painbody. This can take the form of irritation,
impatience, a somber mood, a desire to hurt, anger, rage, depression, a
need to have some drama in your relationship, and so on. Catch it the
moment it awakens from its dormant state. The pain-body wants to
survive, just like every other entity in existence, and it can only
survive if it gets you to unconsciously identify with it. It can then
rise up, take you over, "become you," and live through you. It needs to
get its "food" through you. It will feed on any experience that
resonates with its own kind of energy, anything that creates further
pain in whatever form: anger, destructiveness, hatred, grief, emotional
drama, violence, and even illness. So the pain-body, when it has taken
you over, will create a situation in your life that reflects back its
own energy frequency for it to feed on. Pain can only feed on pain. Pain
cannot feed on joy. It finds it quite indigestible. Once the pain-body
has taken you over, you want more pain. You become a victim or a
perpetrator. You want to inflict pain, or you want to

suffer pain, or both. There isn't really much difference between the
two. You are not conscious of this, of course, and will vehemently claim
that you do not want pain. But look closely and you will find that your
thinking and behavior are designed to keep the pain going, for yourself
and others. If you were truly conscious of it, the pattern would
dissolve, for to want more pain is insanity, and nobody is consciously
insane. The pain-body, which is the dark shadow cast by the ego, is
actually afraid of the light of your consciousness. It is afraid of
being found out. Its survival depends on your unconscious identification
with it, as well as on your unconscious fear of facing the pain that
lives in you. But if you don't face it, if you don't bring the light of
your consciousness into the pain, you will be forced to relive it again
and again. The pain-body may seem to you like a dangerous monster that
you cannot bear to look at, but I assure you that it is an insubstantial
phantom that cannot prevail against the power of your presence. WHEN YOU
BECOME THE WATCHER and start to disidentify, the pain-body will continue
to operate for a while and will try to trick you into identifying with
it again. Although you are no longer energizing it through your
identification, it has a certain momentum, just like a spinning wheel
that will keep turning for a while even when it is no longer being
propelled. At this stage, it may also create physical aches and pains in
different parts of the body, but they won't last. Stay present, stay
conscious. Be the ever-alert guardian of your inner space. You need to
be present enough to be able to watch the pain-body directly and feel
its energy. It then cannot control your thinking. The moment your
thinking is aligned with the energy field of the painbody, you are
identified with it and again feeding it with your thoughts. For example,
if anger is the predominant energy vibration of the pain-body and you
think angry thoughts, dwelling on what someone did to you or what you
are going to do to him or her, then you have become unconscious, and the
pain-body has become "you." Where there is anger, there is always pain
underneath.

Or when a dark mood comes upon you and you start getting into a negative
mind-pattern and thinking how dreadful your life is, your thinking has
become aligned with the pain-body, and you have become unconscious and
vulnerable to the pain-body's attack. "Unconscious," the way that I use
the word here, means to be identified with some mental or emotional
pattern. It implies a complete absence of the watcher.

TRANSMUTING SUFFERING INTO CONSCIOUSNESS Sustained conscious attention
severs the link between the pain-body and your thought processes and
brings about the process of transmutation. It is as if the pain becomes
fuel for the flame of your consciousness, which then burns more brightly
as a result. This is the esoteric meaning of the ancient art of alchemy:
the transmutation of base metal into gold, of suffering into
consciousness. The split within is healed, and you become whole again.
Your responsibility then is not to create further pain. FOCUS ATTENTION
ON THE FEELING INSIDE YOU. Know that it is the pain-body. Accept that it
is there. Don't think about it --- don't let the feeling turn into
thinking. Don't judge or analyze. Don't make an identity for yourself
out of it. Stay present, and continue to be the observer of what is
happening inside you. Become aware not only of the emotional pain but
also of "the one who observes," the silent watcher. This is the power of
the Now, the power of your own conscious presence. Then see what
happens.

EGO IDENTIFICATION WITH THE PAIN-BODY The process that I have just
described is profoundly powerful yet simple. It could be taught to a
child, and hopefully one day it will be one of the first things children
learn in school. Once you have understood the basic principle of being
present as the watcher of what happens inside you --- and you
"understand" it by experiencing it --- you have at your disposal the
most potent transformational tool. This is not to deny that you may
encounter intense inner resistance to disidentifying from your pain.
This will be the case particularly if you have lived closely identified
with your emotional pain-body for most of your life and the whole or a
large part of your sense of self is invested in it. What this means is
that you have made an unhappy self out of your pain-body and believe
that this mind-made fiction is who you are. In that case, unconscious
fear of losing your identity will create strong resistance to any
disidentification. In other words, you would rather be in pain --- be
the pain-body --- than take a leap into the unknown and risk losing the
familiar unhappy self. OBSERVE THE RESISTANCE WITHIN YOURSELF. Observe
the attachment to your pain. Be very alert. Observe the peculiar
pleasure you derive from being unhappy. Observe the compulsion to talk
or think about it. The resistance will cease if you make it conscious.
You can then take your attention into the pain-body, stay present as the
witness, and so initiate its transmutation. Only you can do this. Nobody
can do it for you. But if you are fortunate enough to find someone who
is intensely conscious, if you can be with them and join them in the
state of presence, that can be helpful and will accelerate things. In
this way, your own light will quickly grow stronger. When a log that has
only just started to burn is placed next to one that is burning
fiercely, and after a while they are separated again, the first log will
be burning with much greater intensity. After all, it is the same fire.
To be such a fire is one of the functions of a spiritual teacher. Some
therapists may also be able to fulfill that function, provided that they
have gone beyond the

level of mind and can create and sustain a state of intense conscious
presence while they are working with you. The first thing to remember is
this: As long as you make an identity for yourself out of the pain, you
cannot become free of it. As long as part of your sense of self is
invested in your emotional pain, you will unconsciously resist or
sabotage every attempt that you make to heal that pain. Why? Quite
simply because you want to keep yourself intact, and the pain has become
an essential part of you. This is an unconscious process, and the only
way to overcome it is to make it conscious.

THE POWER OF YOUR PRESENCE TO SUDDENLY SEE that you are or have been
attached to your pain can be quite a shocking realization. The moment
you realize this, you have broken the attachment. The pain-body is an
energy field, almost like an entity, that has become temporarily lodged
in your inner space. It is life energy that has become trapped, energy
that is no longer flowing. Of course, the pain-body is there because of
certain things that happened in the past. It is the living past in you,
and if you identify with it, you identify with the past. A victim
identity is the belief that the past is more powerful than the present,
which is the opposite of the truth. It is the belief that other people
and what they did to you are responsible for who you are now, for your
emotional pain or your inability to be your true self. The truth is that
the only power there is, is contained within this moment: It is the
power of your presence. Once you know that, you also realize that you
are responsible for your inner space now --- nobody else is --- and that
the past cannot prevail against the power of the Now. Unconsciousness
creates it; consciousness transmutes it into itself. St. Paul expressed
this universal principle beautifully: "Everything is shown up by being
exposed to the light, and whatever is exposed to the light itself
becomes light."

Just as you cannot fight the darkness, you cannot fight the pain-body.
Trying to do so would create inner conflict and thus further pain.
Watching it is enough. Watching it implies accepting it as part of what
is at that moment.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER SEVEN

FROM ADDICTIVE TO ENLIGHTENED RELATIONSHIPS LOVE/HATE RELATIONSHIPS
Unless and until you access the consciousness frequency of presence, all
relationships, and particularly intimate relationships, are deeply
flawed and ultimately dysfunctional. They may seem perfect for a while,
such as when you are "in love," but invariably that apparent perfection
gets disrupted as arguments, conflicts, dissatisfaction, and emotional
or even physical violence occur with increasing frequency. It seems that
most "love relationships" become love/hate relationships before long.
Love can then turn into savage attack, feelings of hostility, or
complete withdrawal of affection at the flick of a switch. This is
considered normal. If in your relationships you experience both "love"
and the opposite of love --- attack, emotional violence, and so on ---
then it is likely that you are confusing ego attachment and addictive
clinging with love. You cannot love your partner one moment and attack
him or her the next. True love has no opposite. If your "love" has an
opposite, then it is not love but a strong egoneed for a more complete
and deeper sense of self, a need that the other person temporarily
meets. It is the ego's substitute for salvation, and for a short time it
almost does feel like salvation. But there comes a point when your
partner behaves in ways that fail to meet your needs, or rather those of
your ego. The feelings of fear, pain, and lack that are an intrinsic
part of egoic consciousness but had been covered up by the "love
relationship" now resurface. Just as with every other addiction, you are
on a high when the drug is available, but invariably there comes a time
when the drug no longer works for you. When those painful feelings
reappear, you feel them even more strongly than before, and what is
more, you now perceive your partner as the cause

of those feelings. This means that you project them outward and attack
the other with all the savage violence that is part of your pain. This
attack may awaken the partner's own pain, and he or she may counter your
attack. At this point, the ego is still unconsciously hoping that its
attack or its attempts at manipulation will be sufficient punishment to
induce your partner to change their behavior, so that it can use them
again as a cover-up for your pain. Every addiction arises from an
unconscious refusal to face and move through your own pain. Every
addiction starts with pain and ends with pain. Whatever the substance
you are addicted to --- alcohol, food, legal or illegal drugs, or a
person --- you are using something or somebody to cover up your pain.
That is why, after the initial euphoria has passed, there is so much
unhappiness, so much pain in intimate relationships. They do not cause
pain and unhappiness. They bring out the pain and unhappiness that is
already in you. Every addiction does that. Every addiction reaches a
point where it does not work for you anymore, and then you feel the pain
more intensely than ever. This is one reason why most people are always
trying to escape from the present moment and are seeking some kind of
salvation in the future. The first thing that they might encounter if
they focused their attention on the Now is their own pain, and this is
what they fear. If they only knew how easy it is to access in the Now
the power of presence that dissolves the past and its pain, the reality
that dissolves the illusion. If they only knew how close they are to
their own reality, how close to God. Avoidance of relationships in an
attempt to avoid pain is not the answer either. The pain is there
anyway. Three failed relationships in as many years are more likely to
force you into awakening than three years on a desert island or shut
away in your room. But if you could bring intense presence into your
aloneness, that would work for you too.

FROM ADDICTIVE TO ENLIGHTENED RELATIONSHIPS

WHETHER YOU ARE LIVING ALONE OR WITH A PARTNER, this remains the key:
being present and intensifying your presence by taking your attention
ever more deeply into the Now. For love to flourish, the light of your
presence needs to be strong enough so that you no longer get taken over
by the thinker or the pain-body and mistake them for who you are. To
know yourself as the Being underneath the thinker, the stillness
underneath the mental noise, the love and joy underneath the pain, is
freedom, salvation, enlightenment. To disidentify from the pain-body is
to bring presence into the pain and thus transmute it. To disidentify
from thinking is to be the silent watcher of your thoughts and behavior,
especially the repetitive patterns of your mind and the roles played by
the ego. If you stop investing it with "selfness," the mind loses its
compulsive quality, which basically is the compulsion to judge, and so
to resist what is, which creates conflict, drama, and new pain. In fact,
the moment that judgment stops through acceptance of what is, you are
free of the mind. You have made room for love, for joy, for peace. FIRST
YOU STOP JUDGING YOURSELF; then you stop judging your partner. The
greatest catalyst for change in a relationship is complete acceptance of
your partner as he or she is, without needing to judge or change them in
any way. That immediately takes you beyond ego. All mind games and all
addictive clinging are then over. There are no victims and no
perpetrators anymore, no accuser and accused. This is also the end of
all codependency, of being drawn into somebody else's unconscious
pattern and thereby enabling it to continue. You will then either
separate --- in love --- or move ever more deeply into the Now together,
into Being. Can it be that simple? Yes, it is that simple. Love is a
state of Being. Your love is not outside; it is deep within you. You can
never lose it, and it cannot leave you. It is not dependent on some
other body, some external form.

IN THE STILLNESS OF YOUR PRESENCE, you can feel your own formless and
timeless reality as the unmanifested life that animates your physical
form. You can then feel the same life deep within every other human and
every other creature. You look beyond the veil of form and separation.
This is the realization of oneness. This is love. Although brief
glimpses are possible, love cannot flourish unless you are permanently
free of mind identification and your presence is intense enough to have
dissolved the pain-body --- or you can at least remain present as the
watcher. The pain-body cannot then take you over and so become
destructive of love.

RELATIONSHIPS AS SPIRITUAL PRACTICE As humans have become increasingly
identified with their mind, most relationships are not rooted in Being
and so turn into a source of pain and become dominated by problems and
conflict. If relationships energize and magnify egoic mind patterns and
activate the pain-body, as they do at this time, why not accept this
fact rather than try to escape from it? Why not cooperate with it
instead of avoiding relationships or continuing to pursue the phantom of
an ideal partner as an answer to your problems or a means of feeling
fulfilled? With the acknowledgment and acceptance of the facts also
comes a degree of freedom from them. For example, when you know there is
disharmony and you hold that "knowing," through your knowing a new
factor has come in, and the disharmony cannot remain unchanged. WHEN YOU
KNOW YOU ARE NOT AT PEACE, your knowing creates a still space that
surrounds your nonpeace in a loving and tender embrace and then
transmutes your nonpeace into peace. As far as inner transformation is
concerned, there is nothing you can do about it. You cannot transform
yourself, and you

certainly cannot transform your partner or anybody else. All you can do
is create a space for transformation to happen, for grace and love to
enter. So whenever your relationship is not working, whenever it brings
out the "madness" in you and in your partner, be glad. What was
unconscious is being brought up to the light. It is an opportunity for
salvation. EVERY MOMENT, HOLD THE KNOWING OF THAT MOMENT, particularly
of your inner state. If there is anger, know that there is anger. If
there is jealousy, defensiveness, the urge to argue, the need to be
right, an inner child demanding love and attention, or emotional pain of
any kind --- whatever it is, know the reality of that moment and hold
the knowing. The relationship then becomes your sadhana, your spiritual
practice. If you observe unconscious behavior in your partner, hold it
in the loving embrace of your knowing so that you won't react.
Unconsciousness and knowing cannot coexist for long --- even if the
knowing is only in the other person and not in the one who is acting out
the unconsciousness. The energy form that lies behind hostility and
attack finds the presence of love absolutely intolerable. If you react
at all to your partner's unconsciousness, you become unconscious
yourself. But if you then remember to know your reaction, nothing is
lost. Never before have relationships been as problematic and conflict
ridden as they are now. As you may have noticed, they are not here to
make you happy or fulfilled. If you continue to pursue the goal of
salvation through a relationship, you will be disillusioned again and
again. But if you accept that the relationship is here to make you
conscious instead of happy, then the relationship will offer you
salvation, and you will be aligning yourself with the higher
consciousness that wants to be born into this world. For those who hold
on to the old patterns, there will be increasing pain, violence,
confusion, and madness. How many people does it take to make your life
into a spiritual practice? Never mind if your partner will not
cooperate. Sanity --- consciousness --- can only come into this world
through you. You do not need to wait for the world to become sane, or
for somebody else to become conscious, before you can be enlightened.
You may wait forever.

Do not accuse each other of being unconscious. The moment you start to
argue, you have identified with a mental position and are now defending
not only that position but also your sense of self. The ego is in
charge. You have become unconscious. At times, it may be appropriate to
point out certain aspects of your partner's behavior. If you are very
alert, very present, you can do so without ego involvement --- without
blaming, accusing, or making the other wrong. When your partner behaves
unconsciously, relinquish all judgment. Judgment is either to confuse
someone's unconscious behavior with who they are or to project your own
unconsciousness onto another person and mistake that for who they are.
To relinquish judgment does not mean that you do not recognize
dysfunction and unconsciousness when you see it. It means "being the
knowing" rather than "being the reaction" and the judge. You will then
either be totally free of reaction or you may react and still be the
knowing, the space in which the reaction is watched and allowed to be.
Instead of fighting the darkness, you bring in the light. Instead of
reacting to delusion, you see the delusion yet at the same time look
through it. Being the knowing creates a clear space of loving presence
that allows all things and all people to be as they are. No greater
catalyst for transformation exists. If you practice this, your partner
cannot stay with you and remain unconscious. If you both agree that the
relationship will be your spiritual practice, so much the better. You
can then express your thoughts and feelings to each other as soon as
they occur, or as soon as a reaction comes up, so that you do not create
a time gap in which an unexpressed or unacknowledged emotion or
grievance can fester and grow. LEARN TO GIVE EXPRESSION to what you feel
without blaming. Learn to listen to your partner in an open,
nondefensive way. Give your partner space for expressing himself or
herself. Be present. Accusing, defending, attacking --- all those
patterns that are designed to strengthen or protect the ego or to get
its needs met will then become redundant. Giving space to others --- and
to yourself --- is vital. Love cannot flourish without it.

When you have removed the two factors that are destructive of
relationships --- when the pain-body has been transmuted and you are no
longer identified with mind and mental positions --- and if your partner
has done the same, you will experience the bliss of the flowering of
relationship. Instead of mirroring to each other your pain and your
unconsciousness, instead of satisfying your mutual addictive ego needs,
you will reflect back to each other the love that you feel deep within,
the love that comes with the realization of your oneness with all that
is. This is the love that has no opposite. If your partner is still
identified with the mind and the pain-body while you are already free,
this will represent a major challenge --- not to you but to your
partner. It is not easy to live with an enlightened person, or rather it
is so easy that the ego finds it extremely threatening. Remember that
the ego needs problems, conflict, and "enemies" to strengthen the sense
of separateness on which its identity depends. The unenlightened
partner's mind will be deeply frustrated because its fixed positions are
not resisted, which means they will become shaky and weak, and there is
even the "danger" that they may collapse altogether, resulting in loss
of self. The pain-body is demanding feedback and not getting it. The
need for argument, drama, and conflict is not being met.

GIVE UP THE RELATIONSHIP WITH YOURSELF Enlightened or not, you are
either a man or a woman, so on the level of your form identity you are
not complete. You are one-half of the whole. This incompleteness is felt
as male-female attraction, the pull toward the opposite energy polarity,
no matter how conscious you are. But in that state of inner
connectedness, you feel this pull somewhere on the surface or periphery
of your life. This does not mean that you don't relate deeply to other
people or to your partner. In fact, you can relate deeply only if you
are conscious of Being.

Coming from Being, you are able to focus beyond the veil of form. In
Being, male and female are one. Your form may continue to have certain
needs, but Being has none. It is already complete and whole. If those
needs are met, that is beautiful, but whether or not they are met makes
no difference to your deep inner state. So it is perfectly possible for
an enlightened person, if the need for the male or female polarity is
not met, to feel a sense of lack or incompleteness on the outer level of
his or her being, yet at the same time be totally complete, fulfilled,
and at peace within. If you cannot be at ease with yourself when you are
alone, you will seek a relationship to cover up your unease. You can be
sure that the unease will then reappear in some other form within the
relationship, and you will probably hold your partner responsible for
it. ALL YOU REALLY NEED TO DO IS ACCEPT THIS MOMENT FULLY. You are then
at ease in the here and now and at ease with yourself. But do you need
to have a relationship with yourself at all? Why can't you just be
yourself? When you have a relationship with yourself, you have split
yourself into two: "I" and "myself," subject and object. That
mindcreated duality is the root cause of all unnecessary complexity, of
all problems and conflict in your life. In the state of enlightenment,
you are yourself --- "you" and "yourself " merge into one. You do not
judge yourself, you do not feel sorry for yourself, you are not proud of
yourself, you do not love yourself, you do not hate yourself, and so on.
The split caused by self-reflective consciousness is healed, its curse
removed. There is no "self " that you need to protect, defend, or feed
anymore. When you are enlightened, there is one relationship that you no
longer have: the relationship with yourself. Once you have given that
up, all your other relationships will be love relationships.

OceanofPDF.com

PART THREE

ACCEPTANCE AND SURRENDER

OceanofPDF.com

When you surrender to what is and so become fully present, the past
ceases to have any power. The realm of Being, which had been obscured by
the mind, then opens up. Suddenly, a great stillness arises within you,
an unfathomable sense of peace. And within that peace, there is great
joy. And within that joy, there is love. And at the innermost core,
there is the sacred, the immeasurable, That which cannot be named.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER EIGHT

ACCEPTANCE OF THE NOW IMPERMANENCE AND THE CYCLES OF LIFE There are
cycles of success, when things come to you and thrive, and cycles of
failure, when they wither or disintegrate, and you have to let them go
in order to make room for new things to arise, or for transformation to
happen. If you cling and resist at that point, it means you are refusing
to go with the flow of life, and you will suffer. Dissolution is needed
for new growth to happen. One cycle cannot exist without the other. The
down cycle is absolutely essential for spiritual realization. You must
have failed deeply on some level or experienced some deep loss or pain
to be drawn to the spiritual dimension. Or perhaps your very success
became empty and meaningless and so turned out to be failure. Failure
lies concealed in every success, and success in every failure. In this
world, which is to say on the level of form, everybody "fails" sooner or
later, of course, and every achievement eventually comes to naught. All
forms are impermanent. You can still be active and enjoy manifesting and
creating new forms and circumstances, but you won't be identified with
them. You do not need them to give you a sense of self. They are not
your life --- only your life situation. A cycle can last for anything
from a few hours to a few years. There are large cycles and small cycles
within these large ones. Many illnesses are created through fighting
against the cycles of low energy, which are vital for regeneration. The
compulsion to do, and the tendency to derive your sense of self-worth
and identity from external factors such as achievement, is an inevitable
illusion as long as you are identified with the mind. This makes it hard
or impossible for you to accept the low cycles and allow them to be.
Thus, the intelligence of the organism may take over as a
self-protective measure and create an illness in order to force you to
stop, so that the necessary regeneration can take place.

As long as a condition is judged as "good" by your mind, whether it be a
relationship, a possession, a social role, a place, or your physical
body, the mind attaches itself to it and identifies with it. It makes
you happy, makes you feel good about yourself, and it may become part of
who you are or think you are. But nothing lasts in this dimension where
moth and rust consume. Either it ends or it changes, or it may undergo a
polarity shift: The same condition that was good yesterday or last year
has suddenly or gradually turned into bad. The same condition that made
you happy then makes you unhappy. The prosperity of today becomes the
empty consumerism of tomorrow. The happy wedding and honeymoon become
the unhappy divorce or the unhappy coexistence. Or a condition
disappears, so its absence makes you unhappy. When a condition or
situation that the mind has attached itself to and identified with
changes or disappears, the mind cannot accept it. It will cling to the
disappearing condition and resist the change. It is almost as if a limb
were being torn off your body. This means that your happiness and
unhappiness are in fact one. Only the illusion of time separates them.
TO OFFER NO RESISTANCE TO LIFE is to be in a state of grace, ease, and
lightness. This state is then no longer dependent upon things being in a
certain way, good or bad. It seems almost paradoxical, yet when your
inner dependency on form is gone, the general conditions of your life,
the outer forms, tend to improve greatly. Things, people, or conditions
that you thought you needed for your happiness now come to you with no
struggle or effort on your part, and you are free to enjoy and
appreciate them --- while they last. All those things, of course, will
still pass away, cycles will come and go, but with dependency gone there
is no fear of loss anymore. Life flows with ease. The happiness that is
derived from some secondary source is never very deep. It is only a pale
reflection of the joy of Being, the vibrant peace that you find within
as you enter the state of nonresistance. Being takes you beyond the
polar opposites of the mind and frees you from dependency on form. Even
if everything were to collapse and crumble all around you, you

would still feel a deep inner core of peace. You may not be happy, but
you will be at peace.

USING AND RELINQUISHING NEGATIVITY All inner resistance is experienced
as negativity in one form or another. All negativity is resistance. In
this context, the two words are almost synonymous. Negativity ranges
from irritation or impatience to fierce anger, from a depressed mood or
sullen resentment to suicidal despair. Sometimes the resistance triggers
the emotional pain-body, in which case even a minor situation may
produce intense negativity, such as anger, depression, or deep grief.
The ego believes that through negativity it can manipulate reality and
get what it wants. It believes that through it, it can attract a
desirable condition or dissolve an undesirable one. If "you" --- the
mind --- did not believe that unhappiness works, why would you create
it? The fact is, of course, that negativity does not work. Instead of
attracting a desirable condition, it stops it from arising. Instead of
dissolving an undesirable one, it keeps it in place. Its only "useful"
function is that it strengthens the ego, and that is why the ego loves
it. Once you have identified with some form of negativity, you do not
want to let go, and on a deeply unconscious level, you do not want
positive change. It would threaten your identity as a depressed, angry,
or hard-doneby person. You will then ignore, deny, or sabotage the
positive in your life. This is a common phenomenon. It is also insane.
WATCH ANY PLANT OR ANIMAL AND LET IT TEACH YOU acceptance of what is,
surrender to the Now. Let it teach you Being. Let it teach you integrity
--- which means to be one, to be yourself, to be real.

Let it teach you how to live and how to die, and how not to make living
and dying into a problem. Recurring negative emotions do sometimes
contain a message, as do illnesses. But any changes that you make,
whether they have to do with your work, your relationships, or your
surroundings, are ultimately only cosmetic unless they arise out of a
change in your level of consciousness. And as far as that is concerned,
it can only mean one thing: becoming more present. When you have reached
a certain degree of presence, you don't need negativity anymore to tell
you what is needed in your life situation. But as long as negativity is
there, use it. Use it as a kind of signal that reminds you to be more
present. WHENEVER YOU FEEL NEGATIVITY ARISING WITHIN YOU, whether caused
by an external factor, a thought, or even nothing in particular that you
are aware of, look on it as a voice saying, "Attention. Here and Now.
Wake up. Get out of your mind. Be present." Even the slightest
irritation is significant and needs to be acknowledged and looked at;
otherwise, there will be a cumulative buildup of unobserved reactions.
You may be able to just drop it once you realize that you don't want to
have this energy field inside you and that it serves no purpose. But
then make sure that you drop it completely. If you cannot drop it, just
accept that it is there and take your attention into the feeling. AS AN
ALTERNATIVE TO DROPPING A NEGATIVE REACTION, you can make it disappear
by imagining yourself becoming transparent to the external cause of the
reaction. I recommend that you practice this with little, even trivial,
things first. Let's say that you are sitting quietly at home. Suddenly,
there is the penetrating sound of a car alarm from across the street.
Irritation arises. What is the purpose of the irritation? None
whatsoever. Why did you create it? You didn't. The mind did. It was
totally automatic, totally unconscious. Why did the mind create it?
Because it holds the unconscious belief that its resistance, which you
experience as negativity or unhappiness in some form, will somehow
dissolve the undesirable condition. This, of course, is a

delusion. The resistance that it creates, the irritation or anger in
this case, is far more disturbing than the original cause that it is
attempting to dissolve. All this can be transformed into spiritual
practice. FEEL YOURSELF BECOMING TRANSPARENT, as it were, without the
solidity of a material body. Now allow the noise, or whatever causes a
negative reaction, to pass right through you. It is no longer hitting a
solid "wall" inside you. As I said, practice with little things first.
The car alarm, the dog barking, the children screaming, the traffic jam.
Instead of having a wall of resistance inside you that gets constantly
and painfully hit by things that "should not be happening," let
everything pass through you. Somebody says something to you that is rude
or designed to hurt. Instead of going into unconscious reaction and
negativity, such as attack, defense, or withdrawal, you let it pass
right through you. Offer no resistance. It is as if there is nobody
there to get hurt anymore. That is forgiveness. In this way, you become
invulnerable. You can still tell that person that his or her behavior is
unacceptable, if that is what you choose to do. But that person no
longer has the power to control your inner state. You are then in your
power --- not in someone else's, nor are you run by your mind. Whether
it is a car alarm, a rude person, a flood, an earthquake, or the loss of
all your possessions, the resistance mechanism is the same. You are
still seeking outside, and you cannot get out of the seeking mode. Maybe
the next workshop will have the answer, maybe that new technique. To you
I would say: DON'T LOOK FOR PEACE. Don't look for any other state than
the one you are in now; otherwise, you will set up inner conflict and
unconscious resistance. Forgive yourself for not being at peace. The
moment you completely accept your non-peace, your non-peace becomes
transmuted into peace. Anything you accept fully will get you there,
will take you into peace. This is the miracle of surrender. When you
accept what is, every moment is the best moment. That is enlightenment.

THE NATURE OF COMPASSION HAVING GONE BEYOND THE MIND-MADE OPPOSITES, you
become like a deep lake. The outer situation of your life, whatever
happens there, is the surface of the lake. Sometimes calm, sometimes
windy and rough, according to the cycles and seasons. Deep down,
however, the lake is always undisturbed. You are the whole lake, not
just the surface, and you are in touch with your own depth, which
remains absolutely still. You don't resist change by mentally clinging
to any situation. Your inner peace does not depend on it. You abide in
Being --- unchanging, timeless, deathless --- and you are no longer
dependent for fulfillment or happiness on the outer world of constantly
fluctuating forms. You can enjoy them, play with them, create new forms,
appreciate the beauty of it all. But there will be no need to attach
yourself to any of it. As long as you are unaware of Being, the reality
of other humans will elude you, because you have not found your own.
Your mind will like or dislike their form, which is not just their body
but includes their mind as well. True relationship becomes possible only
when there is an awareness of Being. Coming from Being, you will
perceive another person's body and mind as just a screen, as it were,
behind which you can feel their true reality, as you feel yours. So,
when confronted with someone else's suffering or unconscious behavior,
you stay present and in touch with Being and are thus able to look
beyond the form and feel the other person's radiant and pure Being
through your own. At the level of Being, all suffering is recognized as
an illusion. Suffering is due to identification with form. Miracles of
healing sometimes occur through this realization, by awakening
Being-consciousness in others --- if they are ready. Compassion is the
awareness of a deep bond between yourself and all creatures. Next time
you say, "I have nothing in common with this person," remember that you
have a great deal in common: A few years from now --- two years or
seventy years, it doesn't make much difference --- both of you

will have become rotting corpses, then piles of dust, then nothing at
all. This is a sobering and humbling realization that leaves little room
for pride. Is this a negative thought? No, it is a fact. Why close your
eyes to it? In that sense, there is total equality between you and every
other creature. ONE OF THE MOST POWERFUL SPIRITUAL PRACTICES is to
meditate deeply on the mortality of physical forms, including your own.
This is called: Die before you die. Go into it deeply. Your physical
form is dissolving, is no more. Then a moment comes when all mind-forms
or thoughts also die. Yet you are still there --- the divine presence
that you are. Radiant, fully awake. Nothing that was real ever died,
only names, forms, and illusions. At this deep level, compassion becomes
healing in the widest sense. In that state, your healing influence is
primarily based not on doing but on being. Everybody you come in contact
with will be touched by your presence and affected by the peace that you
emanate, whether they are conscious of it or not. When you are fully
present and people around you manifest unconscious behavior, you won't
feel the need to react to it, so you don't give it any reality. Your
peace is so vast and deep that anything that is not peace disappears
into it as if it had never existed. This breaks the karmic cycle of
action and reaction. Animals, trees, flowers will feel your peace and
respond to it. You teach through being, through demonstrating the peace
of God. You become the "light of the world," an emanation of pure
consciousness, and so you eliminate suffering on the level of cause. You
eliminate unconsciousness from the world.

THE WISDOM OF SURRENDER

It is the quality of your consciousness at this moment that is the main
determinant of what kind of future you will experience, so to surrender
is the most important thing you can do to bring about positive change.
Any action you take is secondary. No truly positive action can arise out
of an unsurrendered state of consciousness. To some people, surrender
may have negative connotations, implying defeat, giving up, failing to
rise to the challenges of life, becoming lethargic, and so on. True
surrender, however, is something entirely different. It does not mean to
passively put up with whatever situation you find yourself in and to do
nothing about it. Nor does it mean to cease making plans or initiating
positive action. SURRENDER IS THE SIMPLE but profound wisdom of yielding
to rather than opposing the flow of life. The only place where you can
experience the flow of life is the Now, so to surrender is to accept the
present moment unconditionally and without reservation. It is to
relinquish inner resistance to what is. Inner resistance is to say "no"
to what is, through mental judgment and emotional negativity. It becomes
particularly pronounced when things "go wrong," which means that there
is a gap between the demands or rigid expectations of your mind and what
is. That is the pain gap. If you have lived long enough, you will know
that things "go wrong" quite often. It is precisely at those times that
surrender needs to be practiced if you want to eliminate pain and sorrow
from your life. Acceptance of what is immediately frees you from mind
identification and thus reconnects you with Being. Resistance is the
mind. Surrender is a purely inner phenomenon. It does not mean that on
the outer level you cannot take action and change the situation. In
fact, it is not the overall situation that you need to accept when you
surrender, but just the tiny segment called the Now. For example, if you
were stuck in the mud somewhere, you wouldn't say: "Okay, I resign
myself to being stuck in the mud." Resignation is not surrender. YOU
DON'T NEED TO ACCEPT AN UNDESIRABLE OR UNPLEASANT LIFE SITUATION. Nor do
you need to deceive yourself and say that there is nothing wrong with
it. No.

You recognize fully that you want to get out of it. You then narrow your
attention down to the present moment without mentally labeling it in any
way. This means that there is no judgment of the Now. Therefore, there
is no resistance, no emotional negativity. You accept the "isness" of
this moment. Then you take action and do all that you can to get out of
the situation. Such action I call positive action. It is far more
effective than negative action, which arises out of anger, despair, or
frustration. Until you achieve the desired result, you continue to
practice surrender by refraining from labeling the Now Let me give you a
visual analogy to illustrate the point I am making. You are walking
along a path at night, surrounded by a thick fog. But you have a
powerful flashlight that cuts through the fog and creates a narrow,
clear space in front of you. The fog is your life situation, which
includes past and future; the flashlight is your conscious presence; the
clear space is the Now. Non-surrender hardens your psychological form,
the shell of the ego, and so creates a strong sense of separateness. The
world around you and people in particular come to be perceived as
threatening. The unconscious compulsion to destroy others through
judgment arises, as does the need to compete and dominate. Even nature
becomes your enemy and your perceptions and interpretations are governed
by fear. The mental disease that we call paranoia is only a slightly
more acute form of this normal but dysfunctional state of consciousness.
Not only your psychological form but also your physical form --- your
body --- becomes hard and rigid through resistance. Tension arises in
different parts of the body, and the body as a whole contracts. The free
flow of life energy through the body, which is essential for its healthy
functioning, is greatly restricted. Bodywork and certain forms of
physical therapy can be helpful in restoring this flow, but unless you
practice surrender in your everyday life, those things can only give
temporary symptom relief since the cause --- the resistance pattern ---
has not been dissolved.

There is something within you that remains unaffected by the transient
circumstances that make up your life situation, and only through
surrender do you have access to it. It is your life, your very Being ---
which exists eternally in the timeless realm of the present. IF YOU FIND
YOUR LIFE SITUATION UNSATISFACTORY or even intolerable, it is only by
surrendering first that you can break the unconscious resistance pattern
that perpetuates that situation. Surrender is perfectly compatible with
taking action, initiating change or achieving goals. But in the
surrendered state a totally different energy, a different quality, flows
into your doing. Surrender reconnects you with the source-energy of
Being, and if your doing is infused with Being, it becomes a joyful
celebration of life energy that takes you more deeply into the Now.
Through nonresistance, the quality of your consciousness and, therefore,
the quality of whatever you are doing or creating is enhanced
immeasurably. The results will then look after themselves and reflect
that quality. We could call this "surrendered action." IN THE STATE OF
SURRENDER, you see very clearly what needs to be done, and you take
action, doing one thing at a time and focusing on one thing at a time.
Learn from nature: See how everything gets accomplished and how the
miracle of life unfolds without dissatisfaction or unhappiness. That's
why Jesus said: "Look at the lilies, how they grow; they neither toil
nor spin." IF YOUR OVERALL SITUATION IS UNSATISFACTORY or unpleasant,
separate out this instant and surrender to what is. That's the
flashlight cutting through the fog. Your state of consciousness then
ceases to be controlled by external conditions. You are no longer coming
from reaction and resistance. Then look at the specifics of the
situation. Ask yourself, "Is there anything I can do to change the
situation, improve it, or remove myself from it?" If so, take
appropriate action.

Focus not on the hundred things that you will or may have to do at some
future time but on the one thing that you can do now. This doesn't mean
you should not do any planning. It may well be that planning is the one
thing you can do now. But make sure you don't keep running "mental
movies" that continually project yourself into the future, and so lose
the Now. Any action you take may not bear fruit immediately. Until it
does --- do not resist what is. IF THERE IS NO ACTION YOU CAN TAKE, and
you cannot remove yourself from the situation either, then use the
situation to make you go more deeply into surrender, more deeply into
the Now, more deeply into Being. When you enter this timeless dimension
of the present, change often comes about in strange ways without the
need for a great deal of doing on your part. Life becomes helpful and
cooperative. If inner factors such as fear, guilt, or inertia prevented
you from taking action, they will dissolve in the light of your
conscious presence. Do not confuse surrender with an attitude of "I
can't be bothered anymore" or "I just don't care anymore." If you look
at it closely, you will find that such an attitude is tainted with
negativity in the form of hidden resentment and so is not surrender at
all but masked resistance. As you surrender, direct your attention
inward to check if there is any trace of resistance left inside you. Be
very alert when you do so; otherwise, a pocket of resistance may
continue to hide in some dark corner in the form of a thought or an
unacknowledged emotion.

FROM MIND ENERGY TO SPIRITUAL ENERGY START BY ACKNOWLEDGING THAT THERE
IS RESISTANCE. Be there when it happens, when the resistance arises.
Observe how your mind creates it, how it labels the situation, yourself,
or others. Look at the thought process involved. Feel the energy of the
emotion.

By witnessing the resistance, you will see that it serves no purpose. By
focusing all your attention on the Now, the unconscious resistance is
made conscious, and that is the end of it. You cannot be conscious and
unhappy, conscious and in negativity. Negativity, unhappiness, or
suffering in whatever form means that there is resistance, and
resistance is always unconscious, Would you choose unhappiness? If you
did not choose it, how did it arise? What is its purpose? Who is keeping
it alive? Even if you are conscious of your unhappy feelings, the truth
is that you are identified with them and keep the process alive through
compulsive thinking. All that is unconscious. If you were conscious,
that is to say totally present in the Now, all negativity would dissolve
almost instantly. It could not survive in your presence. It can only
survive in your absence. Even the pain-body cannot survive for long in
your presence. You keep your unhappiness alive by giving it time. That
is its lifeblood. Remove time through intense present-moment awareness
and it dies. But do you want it to die? Have you truly had enough? Who
would you be without it? Until you practice surrender, the spiritual
dimension is something you read about, talk about, get excited about,
write books about, think about, believe in --- or don't, as the case may
be. It makes no difference. NOT UNTIL YOU SURRENDER does the spiritual
dimension become a living reality in your life. When you do, the energy
that you emanate and which then runs your life is of a much higher
vibrational frequency than the mind energy that still runs our world.
Through surrender, spiritual energy comes into this world. It creates no
suffering for yourself, for other humans, or any other life form on the
planet.

SURRENDER IN PERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS

It is true that only an unconscious person will try to use or manipulate
others, but it is equally true that only an unconscious person can be
used and manipulated. If you resist or fight unconscious behavior in
others, you become unconscious yourself. But surrender doesn't mean that
you allow yourself to be used by unconscious people. Not at all. It is
perfectly possible to say "no" firmly and clearly to a person or to walk
away from a situation and be in a state of complete inner nonresistance
at the same time. WHEN YOU SAY "NO" to a person or a situation, let it
come not from reaction but from insight, from a clear realization of
what is right or not right for you at that moment. Let it be a
nonreactive "no," a high-quality "no," a "no" that is free of all
negativity and so creates no further suffering. If you cannot surrender,
take action immediately: Speak up or do something to bring about a
change in the situation --- or remove yourself from it. Take
responsibility for your life. Do not pollute your beautiful, radiant
inner Being nor the Earth with negativity. Do not give unhappiness in
any form whatsoever a dwelling place inside you. IF YOU CANNOT TAKE
ACTION --- if you are in prison, for example --- then you have two
choices left: resistance or surrender. Bondage or inner freedom from
external conditions. Suffering or inner peace. Your relationships will
be changed profoundly by surrender. If you can never accept what is, by
implication you will not be able to accept anybody the way they are. You
will judge, criticize, label, reject, or attempt to change people.
Furthermore, if you continuously make the Now into a means to an end in
the future, you will also make every person you encounter or relate with
into a means to an end. The relationship --- the human being --- is then
of secondary importance to you, or of no importance at all. What you can
get out of the relationship is primary --- be it material gain, a sense
of power, physical pleasure, or some form of ego gratification. Let me
illustrate how surrender can work in relationships.

WHEN YOU BECOME INVOLVED IN AN ARGUMENT or some conflict situation,
perhaps with a partner or someone close to you, start by observing how
defensive you become as your own position is attacked, or feel the force
of your own aggression as you attack the other person's position.
Observe the attachment to your views and opinions. Feel the
mental-emotional energy behind your need to be right and make the other
person wrong. That's the energy of the egoic mind. You make it conscious
by acknowledging it, by feeling it as fully as possible. Then one day,
in the middle of an argument, you will suddenly realize that you have a
choice, and you may decide to drop your own reaction --- just to see
what happens. You surrender. I don't mean dropping the reaction just
verbally by saying "Okay, you are right," with a look on your face that
says, "I am above all this childish unconsciousness." That's just
displacing the resistance to another level, with the egoic mind still in
charge, claiming superiority. I am speaking of letting go of the entire
mental-emotional energy field inside you that was fighting for power.
The ego is cunning, so you have to be very alert, very present, and
totally honest with yourself to see whether you have truly relinquished
your identification with a mental position and so freed yourself from
your mind. IF YOU SUDDENLY FEEL VERY LIGHT, CLEAR, AND DEEPLY AT PEACE,
that is an unmistakable sign that you have truly surrendered. Then
observe what happens to the other person's mental position as you no
longer energize it through resistance. When identification with mental
positions is out of the way, true communication begins. Nonresistance
doesn't necessarily mean doing nothing. All it means is that any "doing"
becomes nonreactive. Remember the deep wisdom underlying the practice of
Eastern martial arts: don't resist the opponent's force. Yield to
overcome. Having said that, "doing nothing" when you are in a state of
intense presence is a very powerful transformer and healer of situations
and people.

It is radically different from inactivity in the ordinary state of
consciousness, or rather unconsciousness, which stems from fear,
inertia, or indecision. The real "doing nothing" implies inner
nonresistance and intense alertness. On the other hand, if action is
required, you will no longer react from your conditioned mind, but you
will respond to the situation out of your conscious presence. In that
state, your mind is free of concepts, including the concept of
nonviolence. So who can predict what you will do? The ego believes that
in your resistance lies your strength, whereas in truth resistance cuts
you off from Being, the only place of true power. Resistance is weakness
and fear masquerading as strength. What the ego sees as weakness is your
Being in its purity, innocence, and power. What it sees as strength is
weakness. So the ego exists in a continuous resistancemode and plays
counterfeit roles to cover up your "weakness," which in truth is your
power. Until there is surrender, unconscious role-playing constitutes a
large part of human interaction. In surrender, you no longer need ego
defenses and false masks. You become very simple, very real. "That's
dangerous," says the ego. "You'll get hurt. You'll become vulnerable."
What the ego doesn't know, of course, is that only through the letting
go of resistance, through becoming "vulnerable," can you discover your
true and essential invulnerability.

OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER NINE

TRANSFORMING ILLNESS AND SUFFERING TRANSFORMING ILLNESS INTO
ENLIGHTENMENT Surrender is inner acceptance of what is without any
reservations. We are talking about your life --- this instant --- not
the conditions or circumstances of your life, not what I call your life
situation. Illness is part of your life situation. As such, it has a
past and a future. Past and future form an uninterrupted continuum,
unless the redeeming power of the Now is activated through your
conscious presence. As you know, underneath the various conditions that
make up your life situation, which exists in time, there is something
deeper, more essential: your Life, your very Being in the timeless Now.
As there are no problems in the Now, there is no illness either. The
belief in a label that someone attaches to your condition keeps the
condition in place, empowers it, and makes a seemingly solid reality out
of a temporary imbalance. It gives it not only reality and solidity but
also continuity in time that it did not have before. BY FOCUSING ON THIS
INSTANT and refraining from labeling it mentally, illness is reduced to
one or several of these factors: physical pain, weakness, discomfort, or
disability. That is what you surrender to --- now. You do not surrender
to the idea of "illness." Allow the suffering to force you into the
present moment, into a state of intense conscious presence. Use it for
enlightenment. Surrender does not transform what is, at least not
directly. Surrender transforms you. When you are transformed, your whole
world is transformed, because the world is only a reflection.

Illness is not the problem. You are the problem --- as long as the egoic
mind is in control. WHEN YOU ARE ILL OR DISABLED, do not feel that you
have failed in some way, do not feel guilty. Do not blame life for
treating you unfairly, but do not blame yourself either. All that is
resistance. If you have a major illness, use it for enlightenment.
Anything "bad" that happens in your life --- use it for enlightenment.
Withdraw time from the illness. Do not give it any past or future. Let
it force you into intense present-moment awareness --- and see what
happens. Become an alchemist. Transmute base metal into gold, suffering
into consciousness, disaster into enlightenment. Are you seriously ill
and feeling angry now about what I have just said? Then that is a clear
sign that the illness has become part of your sense of self and that you
are now protecting your identity --- as well as protecting the illness.
The condition that is labeled "illness" has nothing to do with who you
truly are. Whenever any kind of disaster strikes, or something goes
seriously "wrong" --- illness, disability, loss of home or fortune or of
a socially defined identity, break-up of a close relationship, death or
suffering of a loved one, or your own impending death --- know that
there is another side to it, that you are just one step away from
something incredible: a complete alchemical transmutation of the base
metal of pain and suffering into gold. That one step is called
surrender. I do not mean to say that you will become happy in such a
situation. You will not. But fear and pain will become transmuted into
an inner peace and serenity that come from a very deep place --- from
the Unmanifested itself. It is "the peace of God, which passes all
understanding." Compared to that, happiness is quite a shallow thing.
With this radiant peace comes the realization --- not on the level of
mind but within the depth of your Being --- that you are indestructible,
immortal.

This is not a belief. It is absolute certainty that needs no external
evidence or proof from some secondary source.

TRANSFORMING SUFFERING INTO PEACE In certain extreme situations, it may
still be impossible for you to accept the Now. But you always get a
second chance at surrender. YOUR FIRST CHANCE IS TO SURRENDER each
moment to the reality of that moment. Knowing that what is cannot be
undone --- because it already is --- you say yes to what is or accept
what isn't. Then you do what you have to do, whatever the situation
requires. If you abide in this state of acceptance, you create no more
negativity, no more suffering, no more unhappiness. You then live in a
state of nonresistance, a state of grace and lightness, free of
struggle. Whenever you are unable to do that, whenever you miss that
chance --- either because you are not generating enough conscious
presence to prevent some habitual and unconscious resistance pattern
from arising, or because the condition is so extreme as to be absolutely
unacceptable to you --- then you are creating some form of pain, some
form of suffering. It may look as if the situation is creating the
suffering, but ultimately this is not so --- your resistance is. NOW
HERE IS YOUR SECOND CHANCE AT SURRENDER: If you cannot accept what is
outside, then accept what is inside. If you cannot accept the external
condition, accept the internal condition. This means: Do not resist the
pain. Allow it to be there. Surrender to the grief, despair, fear,
loneliness, or whatever form the suffering takes. Witness it without
labeling it mentally. Embrace it.

Then see how the miracle of surrender transmutes deep suffering into
deep peace. This is your crucifixion. Let it become your resurrection
and ascension. When your pain is deep, all talk of surrender will
probably seem futile and meaningless anyway. When your pain is deep, you
will likely have a strong urge to escape from it rather than surrender
to it. You don't want to feel what you feel. What could be more normal?
But there is no escape, no way out. There are many pseudo escapes ---
work, drink, drugs, anger, projection, suppression, and so on --- but
they don't free you from the pain. Suffering does not diminish in
intensity when you make it unconscious. When you deny emotional pain,
everything you do or think as well as your relationships become
contaminated with it. You broadcast it, so to speak, as the energy you
emanate, and others will pick it up subliminally. If they are
unconscious, they may even feel compelled to attack or hurt you in some
way, or you may hurt them in an unconscious projection of your pain. You
attract and manifest whatever corresponds to your inner state. WHEN
THERE IS NO WAY OUT, THERE IS STILL ALWAYS A WAY THROUGH. So don't turn
away from the pain. Face it. Feel it fully. Feel it --- don't think
about it! Express it if necessary, but don't create a script in your
mind around it. Give all your attention to the feeling, not to the
person, event, or situation that seems to have caused it. Don't let the
mind use the pain to create a victim identity for yourself out of it.
Feeling sorry for yourself and telling others your story will keep you
stuck in suffering. Since it is impossible to get away from the feeling,
the only possibility of change is to move into it; otherwise, nothing
will shift. So give your complete attention to what you feel, and
refrain from mentally labeling it. As you go into the feeling, be
intensely alert.

At first, it may seem like a dark and terrifying place, and when the
urge to turn away from it comes, observe it but don't act on it. Keep
putting your attention on the pain, keep feeling the grief, the fear,
the dread, the loneliness, whatever it is. Stay alert, stay present ---
present with your whole Being, with every cell of your body. As you do
so, you are bringing a light into this darkness. This is the flame of
your consciousness. At this stage, you don't need to be concerned with
surrender anymore. It has happened already. How? Full attention is full
acceptance, is surrender. By giving full attention, you use the power of
the Now, which is the power of your presence. No hidden pocket of
resistance can survive in it. Presence removes time. Without time, no
suffering, no negativity, can survive. THE ACCEPTANCE OF SUFFERING is a
journey into death. Facing deep pain, allowing it to be, taking your
attention into it, is to enter death consciously. When you have died
this death, you realize that there is no death --- and there is nothing
to fear. Only the ego dies. Imagine a ray of sunlight that has forgotten
it is an inseparable part of the sun and deludes itself into believing
it has to fight for survival and create and cling to an identity other
than the sun. Would the death of this delusion not be incredibly
liberating? DO YOU WANT AN EASY DEATH? Would you rather die without
pain, without agony? Then die to the past every moment, and let the
light of your presence shine away the heavy, timebound self you thought
of as "you."

ENLIGHTENMENT THROUGH SUFFERING --- THE WAY OF THE CROSS The way of the
cross is the old way to enlightenment, and until recently it was the
only way. But don't dismiss it or underestimate its efficacy. It still

works. The way of the cross is a complete reversal. It means that the
worst thing in your life, your cross, turns into the best thing that
ever happened to you, by forcing you into surrender, into "death,"
forcing you to become as nothing, to become as God --- because God, too,
is no-thing. Enlightenment through suffering --- the way of the cross
--- means to be forced into the kingdom of heaven kicking and screaming.
You finally surrender because you can't stand the pain anymore, but the
pain could go on for a long time until this happens. ENLIGHTENMENT
CONSCIOUSLY CHOSEN means to relinquish your attachment to past and
future and to make the Now the main focus of your life. It means
choosing to dwell in the state of presence rather than in time. It means
saying yes to what is. You then don't need pain anymore. How much more
time do you think you will need before you are able to say, "I will
create no more pain, no more suffering?" How much more pain do you need
before you can make that choice? If you think that you need more time,
you will get more time --- and more pain. Time and pain are inseparable.

THE POWER TO CHOOSE Choice implies consciousness --- a high degree of
consciousness. Without it, you have no choice. Choice begins the moment
you disidentify from the mind and its conditioned patterns, the moment
you become present. Until you reach that point, you are unconscious,
spiritually speaking. This means that you are compelled to think, feel,
and act in certain ways according to the conditioning of your mind.

Nobody chooses dysfunction, conflict, pain. Nobody chooses insanity.
They happen because there is not enough presence in you to dissolve the
past, not enough light to dispel the darkness. You are not fully here.
You have not quite woken up yet. In the meantime, the conditioned mind
is running your life. Similarly, if you are one of the many people who
have an issue with their parents, if you still harbor resentment about
something they did or did not do, then you still believe that they had a
choice --- that they could have acted differently. It always looks as if
people had a choice, but that is an illusion. As long as your mind with
its conditioned patterns runs your life, as long as you are your mind,
what choice do you have? None. You are not even there. The
mind-identified state is severely dysfunctional. It is a form of
insanity. Almost everyone is suffering from this illness in varying
degrees. The moment you realize this, there can be no more resentment.
How can you resent someone's illness? The only appropriate response is
compassion. If you are run by your mind, although you have no choice you
will still suffer the consequences of your unconsciousness, and you will
create further suffering. You will bear the burden of fear, conflict,
problems, and pain. The suffering thus created will eventually force you
out of your unconscious state. YOU CANNOT TRULY FORGIVE YOURSELF or
others as long as you derive your sense of self from the past. Only
through accessing the power of the Now, which is your own power, can
there be true forgiveness. This renders the past powerless, and you
realize deeply that nothing you ever did or that was ever done to you
could touch even in the slightest the radiant essence of who you are.
When you surrender to what is and so become fully present, the past
ceases to have any power. You do not need it anymore. Presence is the
key. The Now is the key. Since resistance is inseparable from the mind,
relinquishment of resistance --- surrender --- is the end of the mind as
your master, the impostor pretending to be "you," the false god. All
judgment and all negativity dissolve.

The realm of Being, which had been obscured by the mind, then opens up.
Suddenly, a great stillness arises within you, an unfathomable sense of
peace. And within that peace, there is great joy. And within that joy,
there is love. And at the innermost core, there is the sacred, the
immeasurable, That which cannot be named.

OceanofPDF.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am grateful to Victoria Ritchie, Connie Kellough, Marc Allen and the
staff at New World Library for their support and superb editing of this
book. My special thanks to all those individuals who helped promote and
support The Power of Now in its early stages. Only some of them are
mentioned here. Cathy Bordi, Marina Borusso, Randall Bradley, Ginna
Bell-Bragg, Tommy Chan, Greg Clifford, Steve Coe, Barbara Dempsey, Kim
Eng, Alison Etter, Doug France, Joyce Franzee, Remi Frumkin, Wilma
Fuchs, Stephen Gawtry, Pat Gordon, Matthew and Joan Greenblatt, Jane
Griffith, Surati Haarbrucker, Marilyn Knipp, Nora Morin, Karen McPhee,
Sandy Neufeld, Jim Nowak, Carey Parder, Carmen Priolo, Usha Raetze,
Joseph Roberts, Steve Ross, Sarah Runyen, Nikki Sachdeva, Spar Street,
Marshall and Barbara Thurber, Brock Tully. I would like to express my
love and gratitude to the owners and staff of the many privately owned
bookstores that have been instrumental in getting The Power of Now out
into the world. You are doing wonderful work! My special thanks go to:
Banyen Books, Vancouver, BC Bodhi Tree Bookstore, Los Angeles, CA
East-West Bookshop, Seattle WA East-West Bookshop, Mountain View, CA
Greenhouse Books, Vancouver, BC Heaven on Earth Book Store, Encinitas,
CA New Age Books & Crystals, Calgary, AB

Omega Bookstore, Toronto, ON Open Secret Book Store, San Rafael, CA
Thunderbird Book Store, Carmel, CA Transitions Bookplace, Chicago, IL
Watkins Bookshop, London, UK

OceanofPDF.com

NAMASTE PUBLISHING P.O. Box 62084 Vancouver, British Columbia V6J 4A3,
Canada www.namastepublishing.com Email: namaste@telus.net. Tel.:
604-224-3179 Our publishing mission is to make available healing and
transformational publications that acknowledge, celebrate, and encourage
our readers to live from their true essence and thereby come to remember
who they truly are. If you liked this book, you may also want to become
aware of our other transformational publications, including CDs and DVDs
exclusive to Namaste Publishing. To do this, please visit our website at
www.namastepublishing.com. To receive full benefit from our books, we
invite you to read our daily blog, The Compassionate Eye. We also invite
you to sign up for our free monthly newsletter, in which we bring you
articles by our staff writers, book and movie reviews, frequent
downloads from our authors, and information on our forthcoming
publications. To order any of our publications, find out the teaching
schedules of our authors, schedule one of our authors for a teaching or
speaking event, or sign up to receive our blog or newsletter, please
visit our home page: www.namastepublishing.com

OceanofPDF.com

NEW WORLD LIBRARY is dedicated to publishing books and other media that
inspire and challenge us to improve the quality of our lives and the
world. We are a socially and environmentally aware company, and we
strive to embody the ideals presented in our publications. We recognize
that we have an ethical responsibility to our customers, our staff
members, and our planet. We serve our customers by creating the finest
publications possible on personal growth, creativity, spirituality,
wellness, and other areas of emerging importance. We serve New World
Library employees with generous benefits, significant profit sharing,
and constant encouragement to pursue their most expansive dreams. As a
member of the Green Press Initiative, we print an increasing number of
books with soy-based ink on 100 percent postconsumer-waste recycled
paper. Also, we power our offices with solar energy and contribute to
nonprofit organizations working to make the world a better place for us
all. Our products are available in bookstores everywhere. For our
catalog, please contact: New World Library 14 Pamaron Way Novato,
California 94949 Phone: 415-884-2100 or 800-972-6657 Catalog requests:
Ext. 50 Orders: Ext. 52 Fax: 415-884-2199 Email:
escort@newworldlibrary.com

To subscribe to our electronic newsletter, visit www.newworldlibrary.com

OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com


