![](images/00007.jpeg)

[]{#titlepage.xhtml}

<div>

<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" version="1.1" width="100%" height="100%" viewbox="0 0 500 700" preserveaspectratio="none">
`<image width="500" height="700" xlink:href="images/00007.jpeg">`{=html}`</image>`{=html}
</svg>

</div>

[]{#part0000.html}

[]{#part0000.html_title}![Image](images/00001.jpeg){.calibre1}

[]{#part0001.html}

Copyright © 2013

by don Miguel Ruiz Jr.

All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this work in any
form whatsoever, without permission in writing from the publisher,
except for brief passages in connection with a review.

Cover design by Adrian Morgan

Cover art © Lukiyanova Natalia / frenta / Shutterstock

Text design by Jane Hagaman

Hierophant Publishing

8301 Broadway, Suite 219

San Antonio, TX 78209

888-800-4240

[www.hierophantpublishing.com](http://www.hierophantpublishing.com)

If you are unable to order this book from your local bookseller, you may
order directly from the publisher.

Library of Congress Control Number: 2012954093

ISBN 978-1-938289-08-8

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Printed on acid-free paper in the United States

[www.redwheelweiser.com](http://www.redwheelweiser.com)

[www.redwheelweiser.com/newsletter](http://www.redwheelweiser.com/newsletter)

[]{#part0002.html}

# []{#part0002.html_ded .calibre5}Dedication {.chaptitle}

*To all whom I love*

[]{#part0003.html}

Among individuals, as among nations, respect for the rights of others is
peace.

---B[ENITO]{.small} J[UAREZ]{.small}

[]{#part0004.html}

# []{#part0004.html_cont .calibre5}Contents {.chaptitle}

[Foreword, by don Miguel Ruiz](#part0005.html_fore)

[Introduction](#part0006.html_intro)

[1 An Exploration of Perception and Potential](#part0007.html_ch1)

[2 Understanding the Personal Dream and the Dream of the
Planet](#part0008.html_ch2)

[3 Knowledge and Attachments](#part0009.html_ch3)

[4 The Five Levels of Attachment](#part0010.html_ch4)

[5 Level One: The Authentic Self](#part0011.html_ch5)

[6 Level Two: Preference](#part0012.html_ch6)

[7 Level Three: Identity](#part0013.html_ch7)

[8 Level Four: Internalization](#part0014.html_ch8)

[9 Level Five: Fanaticism](#part0015.html_ch9)

[10 The Biggest Demon](#part0016.html_ch10)

[11 Moving through the Levels of Attachment](#part0017.html_ch11)

[12 Uncovering Our Stories and Assumptions](#part0018.html_ch12)

[13 Recognizing the Role of Attachments in
Conflict](#part0019.html_ch13)

[14 Honoring Our Emotions](#part0020.html_ch14)

[Afterword](#part0021.html_after)

[Acknowledgments](#part0022.html_ack)

[]{#part0005.html}

# []{#part0005.html_fore .calibre5}[]{#part0005.html_page_ix .calibre5}Foreword {.chaptitle}

Don Miguel Ruiz Jr., my first son, belongs to a new generation of
artists, Toltecs, who are transforming the way of life of our beloved
humanity.

My son has spent a great portion of his life silently rebelling against
the way other people live, creating many judgments and opinions. He did
not realize that in doing so, he was becoming attached to those
judgments and opinions, and his emotional reactions were becoming
increasingly intense.

One day he had a conversation with his grandmother---a conversation that
would forever change his life. During this conversation, his
grandmother, a faith healer, helped him understand the attachment she
had to the rituals she used for healing her patients. My son saw his own
reflection in this interaction with his grandmother and was able
[]{#part0005.html_page_x}to clearly see all of his attachments. This is
how his rebellion came to an end.

Although it took him a couple of years to completely assimilate this
experience into his life, he finally decided to share it in a book. *The
Five Levels of Attachment* is that book, and it is destined to transform
the lives of millions of readers. It is written in a way that is simple,
congruent, and easy to understand.

This book will help you gain awareness of how your attachments have
created your reality, and how your belief system has been making all the
decisions in the story of your life. It will also help you see how you
create your identity based on the opinions and judgments of others
around you. Don Miguel Ruiz Jr. explains how our beliefs become
intimately connected to our identity, or who we think we are. This
belief of what the truth is in turn creates all our attachments and all
our emotional responses.

He also explains how our attachment to our beliefs distorts our
perceptions, allowing us to readjust our perceptions until they conform
to the rest of our belief system. This awareness helps us to easily
understand how we create our own superstitions and might become fanatics
of our own attachments.

[]{#part0005.html_page_xi}He helps us realize that although we live in
the present, our attachment makes us dream of a past that no longer
exists, a past that is full of regret and drama. Our attachments also
take us to an uncertain future full of fears that do not yet exist,
making us feel unsafe.

By explaining how our attachments can be divided into five levels of
intensity, he teaches us how to assess our own attachment to any
particular belief that we have, and points out that the majority of the
world\'s population lives within levels three and four, Identity and
Internalization.

As you will see, don Miguel Jr. clearly states the influence attachment
has over the decisions we make when designing the story of our life, and
how these attachments move us away from reality. He also offers very
effective tools that will help us improve the way we handle our levels
of attachment and our resulting emotional reactions. This improvement
will be reflected in the interactions we have with those around us,
especially our loved ones.

This book is definitely destined to become a classic---one you will
surely be reading again and again.

---D[ON]{.small} M[IGUEL]{.small} R[UIZ]{.small}

[]{#part0006.html}

# []{#part0006.html_intro .calibre5}[]{#part0006.html_page_xiii .calibre5}Introduction {.chaptitle}

Everything is made of light. We are the stars; and the stars are us.
When we see this, all of our senses are truly open and there is no need
to interpret the world. In this moment, our full, unlimited potential is
available to us. There is nothing blocking our way. . . .

---D[ON]{.small} M[IGUEL]{.small} R[UIZ]{.small}, *T[HE]{.small}
F[OUR]{.small} A[GREEMENTS]{.small}*

My father, don Miguel Ruiz, a teacher and retired medical doctor, spent
many thoughtful and transformative years interpreting our Toltec
traditions to fit the world we live in today. The Toltecs were great
women and men of knowledge who lived thousands of years ago in the area
that is now known as south central Mexico. In the
[]{#part0006.html_page_xiv}Nahuatl language, *Toltec* means "artist,"
and according to our teachings, the canvas for our art is life itself. I
learned about the Toltec way of life through the oral traditions of my
family, who (according to my paternal great-great-grandfather, don
Exiquio) are direct descendants of the Toltecs of the Eagle Knight
lineage. This knowledge came to me by way of my grandmother, Madre
Sarita.

We call ourselves Toltecs not just because of our lineage, but because
we are artists. Life is the canvas of our art, and the work of our
tradition is to teach the life lessons that will help us create our
masterpiece.

The Toltec tradition is not a religion, but rather a way of life in
which our great masterpiece is living in happiness and love. It embraces
spirit while honoring the great many masters of all of the world\'s
traditions. The whole point of all this work is to be happy, to enjoy
life, and to enjoy the relationships with the people we love the most,
starting with oneself.

I began my apprenticeship into my family\'s tradition in San Diego,
California, when I was fourteen years old. My seventy-nine-year-old
grandmother, Madre Sarita, was my teacher and the spiritual head of our
family. She was a *curandera*, a faith healer who helped people in her
small temple in Barrio Logan, a neighborhood in San Diego,
[]{#part0006.html_page_xv}with the power of her faith in God and love.
Since my father was a medical doctor, the juxtaposition of the two forms
of healing allowed me to see our tradition through different points of
view.

I appreciated the power of my grandmother\'s words long before I had a
firm grasp of their meaning. I also saw things that others could only
describe as "magic" transformed into everyday happenings; miraculous
healings were the norm for Madre Sarita. I still felt a strong pull from
the outside world, though---the allure of hanging out with my friends,
of being like everyone else. I moved back and forth between the Toltec
world of my family and the mainstream world of school and friends,
constantly struggling to find a way to combine my experiences and yet
keep them separate at the same time.

Though she spoke no English, my grandmother gave sermons and lectures
across the country. My apprenticeship began with translating my
grandmother\'s lectures from Spanish to English. For many years, I
awkwardly stumbled over her words, and my grandmother would just look at
me and laugh.

One day she asked me if I knew why I stumbled. I had all sorts of
answers: you are speaking too quickly, you don\'t give me a chance to
catch up, some words don\'t have []{#part0006.html_page_xvi}a direct
translation. . . . She just looked at me silently for a few moments and
then asked, "Are you using knowledge, or is knowledge using you?"

I looked at her blankly. She continued, "When you translate, you try to
express my words through what you already know, what you think is true.
You do not hear me; you hear yourself. Imagine doing the same thing
every single moment in life. If you are looking through life and
translating it as it goes along, you will miss out on living it. But if
you learn to *listen* to life, you will always be able to express the
words as they come. Your knowledge has to become a tool you will use to
guide you through life but that can also be put aside. Do not let
knowledge translate everything you experience."

I nodded in response, but it didn\'t dawn on me until many years later
what my grandmother was truly talking about. Throughout life, we
constantly narrate, or commentate on, everything we do, say, see, touch,
smell, taste, and hear. As natural storytellers, we continuously keep
the plot moving forward, sometimes missing millions of subplots that are
developing on their own. It is like taking a sip of wine and saying,
"It\'s a bit dry; it has definitely aged well, but I can taste the bark.
I\'ve had better." Instead of simply experiencing the joy and flavors of
the wine, we are []{#part0006.html_page_xvii}analyzing the flavor,
trying to break it down and fit it into a context and language we
already know. In doing this, we miss out on much of the actual
experience.

This is a simple example of how we narrate life--- explaining it, but,
more importantly, justifying and judging it. Instead of taking an
experience for what it is, we create a story to make it fit our beliefs.
During Madre Sarita\'s talks, I had to completely shut down my thoughts,
because if my mind\'s commentary got in the way I would miss out on her
message. With this simple process, my grandmother showed me that if we
only see the world through the filters of our preconceptions, we are
going to miss out on actually living. After much practice, I eventually
learned to close my eyes, shut out the world that existed outside my
head, and translate *every single word* she said accurately.

Seeing beyond our filters---our accumulated knowledge and beliefs---does
not always come naturally. We have spent years growing attached to them
in various degrees, and they feel safe. Whatever we become attached to
can begin to shape our future experiences and limit our perception of
what exists outside our vocabulary. Like blinders on a horse, our
attached beliefs limit our vision, and this in turn limits our perceived
direction []{#part0006.html_page_xviii}in life. The stronger our level
of attachment, the less we can see.

Think about your set of attached beliefs as a unique melody repeating
itself in your mind. In a way, we are constantly trying to force our
melody---the one we have become accustomed to hearing---onto other
melodies, without realizing that often the melody is not our own, and
perhaps it\'s not even the one we want to be playing. If we continue
playing only what we know, never opening ourselves to listen to the
other songs flowing around us, we are letting our attachment to our
particular melody control us. Instead, choose to listen to other
melodies playing. Perhaps you will contribute to them, adding a harmony
or a bass line and just seeing where the music takes you. By letting go
of your attachment to what you think the melody *should* be, you open
yourself to the potential to create a unique and beautiful song of your
own composition or a collaboration that can be shared with others.

![Image](images/00002.jpeg){.calibre1}

In this book, I will teach you the Five Levels of Attachment. They are
guideposts for gauging how attached you are to
[]{#part0006.html_page_xix}your own point of view, as well as how open
you are to other opinions and possibilities. As the level of attachment
increases, one\'s identity, the "who I am," becomes more directly linked
with knowledge, or the "what I know."

Knowledge and the information we perceive are distorted and corrupted by
our narrators---the voices of our thoughts that debate the rightness or
wrongness of every action we take and every thought we have. When we
believe in something so strongly that we lose the awareness of our
Authentic Self within the stories and comments of our internal
narrators, we are allowing our preconceptions to make our decisions for
us. Therefore, it is important to be aware of where we are on the scale
of attachment with any particular belief. With awareness, we can regain
the power to make our own decisions.

It is my hope that you will engage this book to measure how attached you
are to various beliefs and ideas in your life that create your reality,
your Personal Dream, and contribute to our collective reality and the
Dream of the Planet. Only with this deeper awareness of yourself are you
truly free to pursue your passion and experience your full potential.
The choice is up to you!

[]{#part0007.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0007.html_ch1 .calibre5}[]{#part0007.html_page_1 .calibre5}CHAPTER 1 {.chapnum}

# An Exploration of Perception and Potential {.chaptitle1}

Our point of view creates our reality. When we are stuck in our beliefs,
our reality becomes rigid, stagnant, and oppressive. We become bound to
our attachments because we have lost our ability to recognize that we
have a choice to be free of them.

When we look at ourselves in the mirror, we often hear a narrative in
our mind of what we see, a definition of self in the form of an identity
that is based on our "agreements"---the thoughts and beliefs we have
said yes to. This identity stems from ideological beliefs that have come
to us over a period of time from our family, culture, religion,
education, friends, and beyond, and these beliefs
[]{#part0007.html_page_2}are encapsulated into a single system that is
represented in the reflected image of a physical living being---in my
case, a living being named Miguel Ruiz Jr., with a point of view that is
uniquely my own.

Each one of my agreements represents an attachment I have created for
myself over the course of my lifetime. For example, when I look into the
mirror, I perceive myself in this way:

I am . . .

- Miguel
- a Toltec
- a *nagual* (a spiritual guide)
- a Mexican-American
- an American
- a mestizo
- a husband
- a father
- a writer

and so on . . .

This list of self-definitions is my reflection, and when I really look
at myself, I can hear the narration of my agreements
[]{#part0007.html_page_3}and the conditions that have become my model
for self-acceptance. My thoughts are the narrators of my attachments, my
belief system.

I project onto the image of myself the values and attributes that
reflect my beliefs. The more attached I am to my beliefs, the more
difficult it becomes to see myself for who I am at this moment, and the
less freedom I have to see life from a fresh perspective and perhaps
choose a different path. As my attachments become more intense and more
entrenched, I lose the awareness of my Authentic Self as it becomes
obscured by the filters of my belief system. In the Toltec tradition, we
call this the *Smokey Mirror*---the smoke that doesn\'t allow us to
perceive our Authentic Self.

What gives these attachments their strength is *conditional* love. When
you look in the mirror, instead of accepting yourself for who you are at
this very moment, you likely start telling yourself why you are
unacceptable in your current form, and what you need to do to be able to
accept yourself: *I must meet this expectation to be worthy of my own
love.*

The desire to obtain the flawless fulfillment of the archetypal model of
each one of my agreements distorts my reflection even more. I begin to
judge and evaluate []{#part0007.html_page_4}myself according to the
standards of my agreements, which have turned into the conditions for
self-acceptance. I implement a system of reward and punishment to train
myself to reach that archetypal model; this is known in the Toltec
tradition as *domestication*.

The primary tool used to domesticate oneself is self-judgment. Using my
archetypal model of what "I am Miguel" is supposed to mean, I see upon
looking at my reflection all the perceived flaws or inadequacies, and my
domestication springs into action:

- "I\'m not smart enough."
- "I\'m not attractive enough."
- "I don\'t have enough."
- "I\'m lacking this or that."

and so on.

Self-judgment resides where self-acceptance wishes to be. Our attachment
to these negative beliefs and self-judgments can become so normal that
we don\'t even recognize them as condemnations anymore; we accept them
as a part of who we are. But at a very basic level, our self-judgments
are all consequences of what we believe about ourselves at our
core---whether we accept or reject ourselves.

[]{#part0007.html_page_5}Of all the beliefs to detach from, this is the
most important one: *Let go of the attachment that you must obtain some
image of perfection in order to be happy.* And this isn\'t only about
appearances; it includes the way we think, the philosophy we follow, our
spiritual pursuits, and our place in society. All these things are
conditions upon which we accept ourselves. We think that in order to be
worthy of our own love we must live up to the expectations we place on
ourselves---but we need to realize that these expectations are the
expression of our agreements, not of our true nature.

Ironically, it is often at the moment that we have the opportunity to
see our truth---when we are faced with our reflection, whether in a
mirror or outside in the world--- that the narrators speak the loudest.
I know of people, myself included, who have refused to look at
themselves in the mirror because the self-judgments were deafening. It
is impossible for people---teens and adults alike---to live up to an
illusion.

Of course, it\'s easy to blame our media, our culture, or our community
for perpetuating images of what is expected of us. We are flooded with
commercials and archetypal images of heroes and heroines, beautiful
damsels in distress and professional athletes, examples of ugliness and
how *not* []{#part0007.html_page_6}to be. But at the very core of it,
there is no one to blame, because a commercial, like self-judgment, has
no power over us unless we agree with its message. It is only when we
willingly attach ourselves to these images and distortions that our
happiness is compromised.

We do not need to take the blame for these self-judgments. We can simply
become aware that they have been developing in our lives since childhood
through the process of domestication. Once we are aware of our
self-judgments, we can reclaim our freedom by choosing for ourselves to
transcend the rewards and punishment model that has been imposed upon us
to eventually arrive at a place of self-acceptance.

We have a choice. . . . That is our power.

When you look into the mirror, you are the only one who can hear your
narrators; only you know what those self-judgments are. They take
whatever voice and shape you give them, but they are only the expression
of something you\'ve already said yes to. You can make the choice to
detach yourself from the standards that create an unrealistic image of
yourself by knowing that you have the power to say no. When you no
longer believe in a self-judgment, it will no longer have any power over
you. You can choose to view yourself from a place of acceptance
[]{#part0007.html_page_7}based on the undeniable truth that you are
already perfect and complete exactly the way you are right now.

From this point of view, you may still choose to make some life changes;
but now the motivation to change is not because you hope to someday love
yourself but because you *already do* love yourself. When the reflection
is viewed from this angle, change flows in synchronicity with the
trajectory of your life, and the possibilities are limitless. Suffering
only occurs when we forget that.

## []{#part0007.html_ch1-sec001 .calibre5}Mistaking Perfection for Imperfection {.subtitle}

When my father first tried to get me to understand that I am perfect, I
found it impossible to accept. I tried to understand, but I couldn\'t. I
was attached to my belief that perfection is something to be attained
through hard work and dedication---and I still had a long way to go. How
could I be perfect? I hadn\'t yet accomplished my goals: I wasn\'t what
I wanted to be. I couldn\'t attract the girl I wanted. I didn\'t weigh
what I thought I should weigh. On and on I went with my diatribe,
managing to ascertain and then judge all of my imperfections.

With this kind of perfection, whenever our story does
[]{#part0007.html_page_8}not match our beliefs, we judge it as
imperfect; then we punish ourselves for not living up to our beliefs of
how we think we should live. We eventually acquire a definition of
perfection that has nothing to do with actual perfection: "being free
from all flaws or defects." Most often, we read this definition through
the eyes of judgment, from the point of view of someone outside who\'s
trying to live up to the stories we\'ve created about ourselves.

If we do happen to achieve perfection momentarily from this point of
view, we reward ourselves with conditional self-love. Then we use
conditional self-love as our motivator to pursue this distorted idea of
perfection in the future. It\'s a circuitous problem.

I continued to struggle with this concept as I grew older. Still, my
father persisted throughout the years with this message. He told me,
"Miguel, when you understand that you are perfect just the way you are,
you will see that everything is perfect just the way it is."

It\'s not easy to just wake up one day and say you,\'re perfect and
actually believe it. It requires desire and commitment. First, you leave
behind any false ideals of perfection---you release your attachment to
what you believe it means to be the perfect you. In order to learn this
lesson, I needed to stop judging myself for not meeting my own
[]{#part0007.html_page_9}expectations and accept myself for who I am at
this very moment. I began at the beginning, learning to love myself and
giving gratitude every morning for being alive.

Second, you view life through the eyes of an artist and accept that
everything is a work in progress, a never-ending masterpiece. Every
brushstroke is perfect simply because it exists. As the paint hits the
canvas, it grows and develops into what it is---even if we don\'t always
have an outline to keep us in the lines. Whether colorful scribbles or a
detailed landscape, each element of the piece is fulfilling and
complete, even as we continue to paint, changing and evolving with every
stroke of life. As my father says, "Our life is a canvas, and we are all
Picassos."

From an early age, it is engrained in almost every one of us that we
must achieve certain ideals or become "somebody" in order to be worthy
of our own acceptance, of our own love. Existing within this
as-soon-as-I-have-this or once-I-do-that mentality chains us to the
belief that we are not free to live our lives now.

Many of us are familiar with Miguel de Cervantes\' great literary
masterpiece *Don Quixote*. In it, retired gentleman Alonso Quijano moves
to La Mancha and becomes so caught up in books of chivalry that his
sense of reality becomes so distorted his identity transforms
[]{#part0007.html_page_10}into the character of don Quixote. He sees the
world through filters of fantasy and adventure. Whatever reality
presents, don Quixote redirects the story to fit his own expectations
and beliefs. By the end, our hero is defeated and dejected, chasing
after an image that forever eludes him.

Like don Quixote, we are constantly investing ourselves into the stories
we want to believe. We create our own personas so that we are
"somebody." When I was young, I took on various identities. I was Miguel
Ruiz Jr., the Goth. Then I became Miguel the Intellectual, then Miguel
the Bohemian, then Miguel the Artist, and so on. I gave myself rules the
same way don Quixote created his rules---through a distorted perception
of who I was. Other people would see their own truth and wonder what I
was doing. But all I saw was what I wanted to see. And like don
Quixote\'s faithful servant Sancho Panza, I heard my stories and knew I
was being a little crazy, but I believed them just in case I was right.

I spent many years trying to live up to those images I created of myself
before discovering that *this* is who I am---no story needed. It\'s
really me. I am perfect at this very moment, and that is all I need to
enjoy my life. Once I learned this, I could change my life in any
direction []{#part0007.html_page_11}I saw fit at any given moment. I now
had the freedom to choose. The possibilities became endless, just as
they always had been. I do not make changes in my life today because I
feel I must change in order to accept and love myself; I make changes to
express myself and experience more of life, because I already accept and
love myself for who I am.

Flaws and defects originate from our own ideas and beliefs. In order to
recognize perfection---or to see the world and ourselves *as is*---we
become aware of our attachments to our ideas and beliefs and let go of
them, even if only briefly, to see beyond them. I have always been
perfect, and so have you. When we can\'t perceive this, it\'s because we
are too busy judging everything for not being something other than what
it is. The world and everything in it is perfect simply because it
exists at this very moment, in the only manner it can possibly exist.
The same is true for me and for you. And that is perfection: "I am
because I am at this moment."

This is what freedom is: the ability to enjoy and be exactly who you are
without suppressing yourself in the form of judgment. A bird is a bird.
A saguaro is a saguaro. A human is a human. Miguel is Miguel. You are
you. Perfect.

[]{#part0007.html_page_12}From that point of view, change is different.
If we try to change without first accepting who we are, we risk creating
more false images of ourselves. But if we accept ourselves for who we
are at this very moment, we change because we want to grow and evolve
with life; love is no longer the condition for change, it is the
starting point for change. This is the true meaning of unconditional
love.

[]{#part0008.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0008.html_ch2 .calibre5}[]{#part0008.html_page_13 .calibre5}CHAPTER 2 {.chapnum}

# Understanding the Personal Dream and the Dream of the Planet {.chaptitle1}

Our mind\'s main job is to *dream*---to perceive and project information
onto a linear reality framed by matter when we are awake, and onto a
nonlinear reality without a material frame when we are asleep or
daydreaming. Our existence continually travels back and forth between
these two types of dreams, or forms of perception.

## []{#part0008.html_ch2-sec001 .calibre5}The Personal Dream {.subtitle}

First, there is your Personal Dream. No one else will ever know what it
is like to live life through your point of view.
[]{#part0008.html_page_14}I might know you for years, but I will *never*
know what it feels like to be you. I cannot know what it feels like to
be in your body. I will never know, for example, what coffee tastes like
when you drink it; I can only know this from my point of view. I am
alone. I was born alone, and I will die alone. There is no one else
living in this body, and there is no one seeing life through my eyes.
Your beliefs, and your beliefs alone, belong to you. You are the only
one who is with you for your entire life. Imagine if you didn\'t like
yourself. That would be a tough life, because there is no escaping
yourself. Regardless of how much you may distract yourself, you can
never escape your own point of view.

We have many different kinds of relationships in this life, and they
last for different durations of time. There are people who have been in
my life forever, like my mom and dad. And there are others who I hope
will be in my life for a long time, like my wife and my children. Other
people might come and go more quickly---friends, coworkers,
acquaintances. But no matter what the case may be, eventually we will
have to say goodbye someday as the moment to move on arrives.

You perceive and project your life and your dream. This dream is
constructed through your thoughts and []{#part0008.html_page_15}your
experiences of being alive. You experience your dream through the
nervous system in your body, through your eyes and ears, through your
emotions, through your love. You are the only one who knows how
wonderful it is to feel that pleasure of eating a meal you enjoy, of
hugging or kissing someone, of simply being alive, through your own
perception. This is your Personal Dream. You can make it the most
beautiful paradise or the most perfect nightmare; it is all based on
what you believe in, what you think, what you know.

## []{#part0008.html_ch2-sec002 .calibre5}The Dream of the Planet {.subtitle}

Every living creature is in communion. The communion between us can be
as small as you and me or it can be as big as a household, a community,
a nation, a continent, and so on. Along this line, the Dream of the
Planet can be as small as a dream shared between just two individuals or
it can be as large as a dream shared amongst everyone in existence---and
anywhere in between.

What constructs the Dream of the Planet? It starts with you and me. Just
as I am responsible for me to the tips of my fingers, you are
responsible for you to the tips of your fingers. We are two individual
dreams, two individual []{#part0008.html_page_16}points of perception.
This relationship between us, however small it may be, is the dream
called *us*. It happens when we interact with one another and the ideas,
concepts, and agreements flow between us.

The Dream of the Planet is composed of our yeses and nos---also known as
*intention.* For every yes, something is created. For every no, there is
no creation. With our imagination, we can create things that might be
beautiful or ugly, and as soon as we say yes, the action is taken to
manifest that thing. The Dream of the Planet is constructed by our
collective choices; is the manifestation of our shared intention.

We are all connected because we have a desire to engage one another. We
are now sharing a piece of a common dream, and this is the Dream of the
Planet. You see, the Dream of the Planet is constructed by that need to
share and communicate with one another. We either engage each other in a
relationship based on respect, or we impose and subjugate each other
disrespectfully with a need to make each other fit the mold of our own
beliefs and ideals.

The person I am right now is the accumulation of my yeses and nos over
the course of my life, and that is true for each and every one of us.
Action is taken on a large scale when enough of us say yes. This is how
the Dream []{#part0008.html_page_17}of the Planet moves and acts. A good
way to visualize this is to imagine a flock of birds. Amazingly, the
birds are all flying in unison, but as soon as one lead bird changes the
pattern, the other birds say yes and follow. Sometimes the flock splits
in two, each group saying yes to a different direction. Sometimes they
come back together. The birds who followed said yes to that direction.
Now think about this flock as a community of people. Whoever controls
yes controls the Dream of the Planet. Remember, the Dream of the Planet
is as small as you and me, and it is as big as a nation---or the entire
world.

On a smaller scale, when there are just two individuals, whoever
controls the yes controls that relationship. This is why people often
try to impose their beliefs on one another or, conversely, why they may
subjugate their will to another\'s point of view. Harmony exists when we
engage one another with respect, honoring each other\'s yeses and nos as
we construct the dream of us.

![Image](images/00002.jpeg){.calibre1}

Both the Personal Dream and the Dream of the Planet are built on
knowledge. This is the tool by which we are
[]{#part0008.html_page_18}able to survive in the world. But, as we will
see in the next chapter, as our attachment to knowledge increases it
narrows our ability to perceive life as it truly is, thus narrowing our
potential.

[]{#part0009.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0009.html_ch3 .calibre5}[]{#part0009.html_page_19 .calibre5}CHAPTER 3 {.chapnum}

# Knowledge and Attachments {.chaptitle1}

If my attachment to what I know blinds me to all the available options,
then my knowledge is controlling me; it is controlling my intention, and
it is creating my Personal Dream for me. But with awareness of my
attachments comes the opportunity to take back that control and to live
as I choose.

## []{#part0009.html_ch3-sec001 .calibre5}Ever-Changing Meanings {.subtitle}

I am only responsible for what I say; I am not responsible for what you
hear.

--D[ON]{.small} M[IGUEL]{.small} R[UIZ]{.small}

[]{#part0009.html_page_20}Symbols are representations that allow us to
understand one another\'s experience of life. Words are symbols whose
meanings and definitions give order to our experiences and allow us to
communicate what we know. Words have an appealing but also very
necessary and utilitarian function: they are the primary symbols
allowing us to understand one another and create the agreements that
build the Dream of Us, the Dream of the Planet. Take for example the
word "sun." In all of its translations, it is a symbol that represents
the entity that illuminates our solar system. In the Toltec tradition,
the sun represents the creation of life, where the Earth is the mother,
the sun is the father, and the merging of the two creates life.

A symbol\'s meaning is derived from agreement by a community, a culture,
a nation, and so on. A definition is created by consensus---and when
enough of us say yes to that representation, we call this *knowledge*.

For example, right now you are holding a book. "Book" is a symbol that
represents the object in your hands. I could point to a book and you
would know what it is because you can directly perceive it and you have
past experience with it. You can still understand the concept of a book
and visualize one even when neither one of us is holding one because of
a previous tangible reference. []{#part0009.html_page_21}There is very
little at stake in agreeing that a bound collection of paper with words
on it is a book.

However, there are symbols for ideas and concepts that we all manage
differently based on our own perceptions and points of view. Love,
spirit, morality---these symbols represent concepts that are defined by
an agreement but can never be fully understood by someone else\'s
description or explanation. These symbols are virtual in the sense that
they are intangible. When we use symbols to stand for concepts---whether
we perceive them as good or bad or neutral---we are trying to give form
to the formless. The more people who agree with us about a definition
for an intangible concept, the more that idea seems to take form. This
is why we refer to the Dream of the Planet as an illusion; the meaning
of the symbols, the words, that construct our ideas and beliefs only
feels solid through the agreement of the majority of individuals who are
a part of that society or community. The building blocks of our society
and our identity as a family or a nation are malleable and subject to
change as individual dreams merge to create the Dream of the Planet
through agreement and disagreement---yeses and nos.

For instance, when enough people come together and agree that a certain
behavior is immoral---they have []{#part0009.html_page_22}defined what
it means to be immoral---that belief becomes more solid in appearance if
a law is created reflecting that agreement. The people who engage in
that behavior after the law is created are then labeled as "immoral" by
the group that created the law. And if a law is broken, they will be
punished accordingly.

But this consensus is an illusion because the idea of immorality never
stops being virtual; it doesn\'t exist "out there" somewhere, it only
exists in the mental agreements we make. In order to maintain the
illusion, the symbol and the attached belief require continuous support
by the group of people. That continuous support is the very fuel that
increases an individual\'s attachment to a belief.

Because a virtual concept\'s solidity is dependent on the agreement, the
need for it to be real can be overpowering and all consuming. The
attachment to the belief in the form of a symbol can become so great
that those who ascribe to it cannot conceive of there being any other
belief that can take its place. These symbols feel solid not only
because we might agree with these virtual agreements but also because we
can take action based on them. When we take action based on our ideas,
it seems like we have manifested them as reality. But a symbol\'s
meaning is []{#part0009.html_page_23}always still dependent on the
agreement of an individual or society.

For example, there was a brief moment in time when a tulip was more
valuable than gold. In the 1600s, during the Dutch Golden Age, the price
of a tulip was ten times the annual income of a middle class merchant.
The exotic flower, which was brought to Vienna from the Ottoman Empire
in the 1500s, was in high demand for its beauty and soon became a symbol
of status. When the mosaic virus decimated the population, making the
wait for a single blooming tulip seven to twelve years (while also
giving the infected tulips an even more exotic look), the price for the
bulb skyrocketed. As a trader\'s market for tulip bulbs developed,
people began selling their personal property in order to buy bulbs and
resell them later at a higher price. Unfortunately for these latecomers,
the infatuation with tulips soon fizzled and the market collapsed. When
the agreement about tulips changed many lost their financial worth,
resulting in a massive economic downturn. But the tulip never stopped
being a tulip. The financial worth was the illusion. The nature of these
types of agreements is that their definitions are always subject to
change.

When looked at this way, we can see how fragile and transient our
definitions and meanings of ideas and []{#part0009.html_page_24}concepts
are. We can also see the great power they hold. This is precisely why we
invest so much of our energy in trying to prove that our definitions and
our interpretations of things are right. This is the fabric that
constructs our reality.

However, when we become so attached to that reality, and to the meanings
of the symbol that constructed that reality, we do not allow room for
change and growth. We may find ourselves struggling, fighting, arguing
with others (and with ourselves) to maintain our beliefs and definitions
of the way things work, becoming prisoners of our own beliefs. It is
through those beliefs that we have constructed the story of us. No
wonder they elicit such an emotional reaction. But by becoming aware of
the nature of our beliefs, we have the power to change our stories and
our agreements. Since knowledge is the bridge that allows us to
understand one another, it is an instrument by which we can create the
dream or the reality in which we want to live. Our intention, or will,
is the force that gives knowledge its meaning, expressed throughout our
bodies onto the Dream of the Planet.

When each of us expresses something, we express it from the point of
view of what we know. Listen closely, but receive all words and other
symbols with skepticism. []{#part0009.html_page_25}When you let go of
your attachment to the meaning and the perceived truth that you apply to
words and symbols---mine, yours, and others\'---you have the freedom to
step back and decide for yourself if those meanings reflect your
experience in life. In addition, by openly listening to someone else\'s
expression of their knowledge without holding an attachment of what
those symbols mean, you have the opportunity to better understand them.

## []{#part0009.html_ch3-sec002 .calibre5}Attachments and Our Sense of Self {.subtitle}

When my family and I were moving from Arizona to Northern California, my
little girl Audrey was three years old and had been in preschool for
about a month. She loved our Arizona home and her school, so when we
told her we were moving and she would be starting a new school, she
became upset. "No, Dad! My school! My house! Mine!" she cried.

In the days that followed, she clung to everything in her life---us, her
toys, her best friend at school, even her school principal. My wife and
I kept telling her that she was going to be fine. She would be in a new
school with new friends and it would all be great. When we
[]{#part0009.html_page_26}picked her up from school that last day,
Audrey flatly refused to leave, hiding behind the principal\'s leg. In
that moment, I paid very close attention to her. I imagined what the
situation was like from her point of view: everything she knew would be
going away. Her whole world was going to change, and she did not know
who or what was going to remain. She grabbed hold of her friend Leo as
he approached. "My Leo!" she cried. We eventually convinced her that it
was time to go, and she reluctantly released her grasp on those things
she had held so dear.

When we place ourselves in a safety zone where we feel comfortable and
secure, and we are firmly entrenched in the this-is-who-I-am mindset,
the worst thing imaginable is that it will all go away. And yet this
happens again and again in varying degrees throughout our lives. When I
believe something must stay in its rightful place, exactly as it is, for
me to be OK, I have become attached to it, I have confused this external
thing with who I am. If that external thing changes, and eventually
everything does, how do I react? If I have placed my sense of self in
it, then I have to defend it. I have to argue for it. I have to come up
with definitions, and meaning. In short, I have created an attachment.

[]{#part0009.html_page_27}I know that I have put an attachment to a
thing outside of myself when the fear of change takes hold of me. In
change, the world I know can disappear, forcing me to go into the
uncomfortable darkness of not knowing. But change is inevitable, and it
arises time and time again throughout our lives: a relationship ends, we
lose a job, leave a home, get a new wrinkle, a graying hair, or
experience the death of a loved one, and so on.

If I look at all the things I have placed my sense of self in, I will
find that my identity is placed in it. Fear comes when these things are
threatened, because through my attachment I have interpreted these as
being a part of myself; thus, an attachment is created to resist the
possibility of that loss. When we look closely, we can notice how we\'re
always defending the object of our attachment in one way or another. In
essence, we are defending our definition of self. This is what my little
girl does when she goes around claiming "Mine!" It\'s not just the
object she is defending---it\'s her sense of self. I\'m happy to report
that as soon as Audrey walked through the door of our new house, she
became excited. She ran into her new room and exclaimed, "My room!"

The challenge I have for you is to change your agreement, to see
yourself as a perfect human being, and to
[]{#part0009.html_page_28}realize that there is no object, idea, or
knowledge that you need to be complete. You are perfect because you are
alive in this present moment, transforming continuously with life. If we
can see ourselves as perfect just the way we are because we are alive at
this moment, we are free. Our attachments no longer define us. Instead,
the knowledge we gather becomes a tool that can help us decide how we
want to engage in dreams---the personal and collective---and how we
choose to act is the manifestation of our intention.

Looking at the story of your life, do you take action as dictated by
your attachment to knowledge, or do you use knowledge to take an action
based on the awareness of your present moment? My grandmother asked me
many years ago: Is knowledge controlling you, or are you controlling
knowledge? You can answer this for yourself when you come to know how
attached you are to your knowledge, your beliefs, or something outside
yourself. When I was first confronted with this question, I did not know
that knowledge could lead us astray, causing us to suffer unless we take
the helm. I did not know how to answer my grandmother\'s question.

My grandmother believed that every attachment I form allows knowledge to
control me. She spoke of heaven and []{#part0009.html_page_29}hell, of
demons and angels, of various levels of attachment and the consequences
associated with them. This was her language, and it fit the experiences
and context of her life. In the next chapter, I will explain the same
teachings using an analogy reflecting our modern dream.

[]{#part0010.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0010.html_ch4 .calibre5}[]{#part0010.html_page_31 .calibre5}CHAPTER 4 {.chapnum}

# The Five Levels of Attachment {.chaptitle1}

To start, I will describe the levels of attachment using a very simple
analogy that allowed me to relate it to my life: soccer (or football, as
it is known almost everywhere outside the United States). You don\'t
actually have to like sports to get this analogy. In fact, you might
even discover that not liking sports enhances your understanding of the
concept. On the other hand, you might see an accurate reflection of your
own level of attachment to a game or a team or recognize these examples
in the people around you. Remember, you can apply the meaning behind
this analogy to any situation you have in your life.

## []{#part0010.html_ch4-sec001 .calibre5}[]{#part0010.html_page_32 .calibre5}Level One: The Authentic Self {.subtitle}

Imagine that you like soccer, and you can go to a game at any stadium in
the world. It could be a magnificent stadium or a dirt-filled field. The
players could be great or mediocre. You are not rooting for or against a
side. It doesn\'t matter who is playing. As soon as you see a game, you
sit, watch, and enjoy it for those ninety minutes. You simply enjoy
watching the game for what it is. The players could even be kicking
around a tin can, and you still enjoy the ups and downs of the sport!
The moment the referee blows the whistle that ends the game---win or
lose---you leave the game behind. You walk out of the stadium and
continue on with your life.

At this level, you can enjoy a moment in time without any real
attachment. You invested just enough of yourself to choose to attend or
watch the game. This is you in total control of knowledge. You
experienced the purest form of joy, stemming from your pure desire to
experience life without conditions.

## []{#part0010.html_ch4-sec002 .calibre5}Level Two: Preference {.subtitle}

This time, you attend a game---again, at any stadium in the world, with
any teams playing---but now you root []{#part0010.html_page_33}for one
of the teams. You\'ve realized that if you invest a little more of
yourself by identifying a preference, the emotional roller coaster makes
the game more exciting. You decide which team to root for based on just
about anything---from the color of the uniforms to the names of the
players. Perhaps you simply pick the home team. You spend the game
rooting for one team but not necessarily against the other. Still, in
the end, you walk out of the stadium and leave it all behind. At this
level, you\'ve invested a small piece of yourself in the game. You
formed an attachment to something, however arbitrary, and based your
decisions and actions on that attachment. You have engaged in a
preference for a team.

You created a story of victory or defeat that shaped the experience, but
the story had nothing to do with you personally, because the story was
about the team. You engaged with the event and the people around you,
but at the end of the game, you simply say, "That was fun," and let go
of the attachment. This ability to attach and detach easily allows you
to invest an emotional side of yourself that will enjoy the ups and
downs of a great game. Life is happening, and you are able to share it
with those around you, regardless of how they see themselves.

## []{#part0010.html_ch4-sec003 .calibre5}[]{#part0010.html_page_34 .calibre5}Level Three: Identity {.subtitle}

This time, you are a committed fan of a particular team. Their colors
strike an emotional chord inside of you. When the referee blows the
whistle, the result of the game affects you on an emotional level. This
is *your* favorite team. You can still go to any stadium or field in the
world, but nothing compares to seeing this team play. Your team, winning
or losing, partially defines your character beyond the ninety minutes of
the game. You feel elated when your team wins; when your team loses, you
feel disappointed. But still, your team\'s performance is not a
condition of your own self-acceptance. And if your team loses, you\'re
able to accept the defeat as you congratulate the other side. You accept
the victories and disappointments as part of the emotional roller
coaster that makes life interesting, but your self-worth is not based on
these outcomes. If you meet a fan of the opposing team, you see not only
a fan of soccer but also a fellow human being with whom you are willing
to share a beer. You can sit together and discuss soccer and you can
talk about how great you think your team is. You might even admit that
you think their team is great as well. Your feelings and opinions
surrounding your team are not a condition by which you relate to others
or to yourself.

[]{#part0010.html_page_35}At this level, your attachment to your team
begins to impact your personal life outside the stadium gates as you
relate to the world as a fan. The separation isn\'t quite as clear as it
was at first. At Level Three, this culture, this team, has become a
small part of your identity. When the event or moment passes, it still
forms who you think you are. You take the knowledge with you and begin
to shape parts of your life around this team, bringing it to other
environments that have nothing to do with it. For example, if your team
loses, you might have a bad day at work, argue with someone about what
or who is responsible for the team losing, or feel sad despite the good
things going on around you. No matter what the effect is, you\'ve let an
attachment change your persona. Your attachment bleeds into a world that
has nothing to do with it.

## []{#part0010.html_ch4-sec004 .calibre5}Level Four: Internalization {.subtitle}

Staying with our sports analogy, at Level Four your association with
your favorite team has now become an intrinsic part of your identity.
The story of victory and defeat is now about *you*. Your team\'s
performance affects your self-worth. When reading the stats, you
admonish players for making *us* look bad. If the opponent team wins,
you get []{#part0010.html_page_36}angry that they beat *you.* You feel
disconsolate when your team loses, and may even create excuses for the
defeat. Of course you would never sit down with one of their fans in a
pub for a friendly chat! You might even find yourself consumed with
finding out more information about the players. On the other hand, each
and every word of praise your team earns feels as though it is directed
at you. Not only have you brought the game home, you have completely
incorporated it into your persona, shaping your identity by your belief
of what it means to be a "real" fan.

Although the team---the "piece of knowledge" in this story---has nothing
to do with you in reality, your self-importance correlates with your
attachment. Your life and your attachment are so blurred that everything
starts to revolve around this team. Your fellow fans had better behave,
too, because they all represent these colors, and these colors mean
something: they have value in your life. They had better fit what it
means to be a real fan. Otherwise, they shouldn\'t call themselves one.
You find yourself debating how much better your team is outside the
context of the game. You believe that anyone who doesn\'t agree with you
is wrong. This is the point where the belief has moved from an identity
to internalization. When dealing with the fans of opposing teams, you
will []{#part0010.html_page_37}argue and shout, but it will stop short
of fisticuffs. You can still limit your defense to just arguing. While
you may have some friends who are not soccer fans, you much prefer the
company of those who think like you. As your attachment grows, you might
make your loyalty to this team a condition by which you allow others to
be in a relationship with you, including yourself. In other words, you
have internalized your attachment to such an extent that it has become a
condition of self-acceptance. Thus, you begin to impose this image onto
the people you love as well as the people you interact with in your
everyday life.

## []{#part0010.html_ch4-sec005 .calibre5}Level Five: Fanaticism {.subtitle}

At this level, you worship your team! Your blood bleeds their colors! If
you see an opposing team\'s fan, they are automatically your enemy,
because this shield must be defended! This is your land, and others must
be subjugated so that they, too, can see that your team is the *real*
team; others are just frauds. What happens on the field says everything
about you. Winning championships makes you a better person, and there is
always a conspiracy theory that allows you to never accept a loss as
[]{#part0010.html_page_38}legitimate. There is no longer a separation
between you and your attachment of any kind. You are a committed to your
team through and through, a fan 365 days a year. Your family is going to
wear the jersey, and they better be fans of your team. If any of your
kids become a fan of an opposing team, you will disinherit them. *Out!*
At Level Five, your family can easily be torn apart and destroyed if any
one of you turns your back on the team. Relationships mean nothing to
you unless they are a believer in your team. Every action you take,
every decision you make, is within the rules that you think make a great
fan. Of course, you can\'t see anything from the point of view of
someone who does not share your love of your team. If you did, you would
be considered a traitor by your own standards. At Levels Three and Four
you may still have friends who do not like soccer, but at Level Five you
don\'t waste your time with people who don\'t love the sport. They do
not know better. You choose not to have them in your life, and you are
willing to fight for what you believe in. Your belief becomes more
important than the experience. As your attachment grows, it can reach a
culminating point where respect is lost even for humanity. In your eyes,
a true fan is willing to die and kill for his team. It doesn\'t even
matter if the referee blows the whistle to start
[]{#part0010.html_page_39}or end the game. It doesn\'t even matter if
they play soccer. The symbol and the colors are more important than your
own life or anyone else\'s life.

Whenever we believe something without question, we are at risk for
attachment at this most extreme level---and it can exist in the most
unlikely places. If you are having difficulty relating to the sports
analogy at this level of attachment, let me conclude with two real-life
examples. At the end of one soccer season in Europe, a big name club was
relegated into the second division, a lesser division. After witnessing
that team\'s final loss, a fan went home and hung himself. For him, life
was no longer worth living if his team wasn\'t in the Premier League. In
another instance, a bus driver was a fan of a team that lost the
Champions League final. He was so upset by this that he drove his bus
into a group of people wearing the winning team\'s jersey. Four people
died for wearing the "wrong" colors. This man\'s attachment to his team
was so great he killed for it.

Fortunately, murder and suicide due to a favorite team\'s loss are rare
occurrences. But when we turn to topics such as religion, politics, or
our ideas about money, sex, and power, the examples of attachment at
this level are numerous. Turn on any news station and it\'s easy to
[]{#part0010.html_page_40}see. It\'s important to realize that when we,
or anyone else, become attached to a set of beliefs at this level, it is
easy not to see the humanity of an individual since we can only see the
personalization of an idea that we stand against.

At Level One, you can go to any church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or
drum circle, and you will find and feel the love and grace of God. At
Level Five, God just happens to be the focus of devotion that the
religion is centered on; in other words, the religion is more important
than God. Imagine spirituality, homeopathic remedies, or veganism. Apply
the levels to race or ethnicity or sexual orientation. Apply it to love.
The Five Levels of Attachment can be applied to any form of information,
and suddenly the consequences become far less trivial.

![Image](images/00002.jpeg){.calibre1}

While soccer is a good introduction to the Five Levels of Attachment
because it breaks down the concept into fairly understandable parts, the
purpose is for you to see how the levels play out in your own life. As I
explain the levels in detail in the ensuing chapters, you will begin to
think about how attached you are to your various beliefs. You will learn
[]{#part0010.html_page_41}how to assess what level you are on for every
belief that you have---not as a basis for judgment, but to perceive a
deeper understanding of self. The goal is to shift your perspective and
see the potential that is present beyond your beliefs, and notice how
your understanding of love and respect changes as your attachments\'
hold on you diminishes. Lastly, as we move through these next chapters,
keep in mind my grandmother\'s question: "Is knowledge controlling you,
or are you controlling knowledge?"

[]{#part0011.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0011.html_ch5 .calibre5}[]{#part0011.html_page_43 .calibre5}CHAPTER 5 {.chapnum}

# Level One The Authentic Self {.chaptitle1}

"Is knowledge controlling you, or are you controlling knowledge?"

I am a living being regardless of my knowledge, which exists only
because I exist.

The first level of attachment represents the Authentic Self, the living
being that is the full potential of life. It describes that force that
not only animates the body but also gives life to our mind and our soul.
The Authentic Self is always present, and it is only our attachments
that keep us from remembering who we really are. From this place, our
name is an empty symbol whose definition or meaning is
[]{#part0011.html_page_44}determined by our agreement; the action of
making that agreement is the first expression of "me."

When we were born, our parents lifted us up and held us in their arms.
They envisioned endless possibilities for us in their love for us. They
saw the unlimited potential of our Authentic Self---the life force that
could take any action in any direction that would lead to those
possibilities. But as we grew up, those possibilities diminished, as our
vision of what we were able to do and be became narrowed by our
attachments until we believed we had little choice in life. The truth is
that we narrowed our possibilities by our own will. Yes, it is true that
the Dream of the Planet can narrow our possibilities if we wish to play
along with its rules; but the agreements we make with ourselves matter
most when it comes to being able to manifest our intent. This is because
a simple no in our own mind can stop us from taking any form of action.
That is how powerful our agreements are.

We never stopped being the potential that our parents envisioned for us
when we were babies. The only difference is that as adults we now have
control of not just our body but also our mind. We require no knowledge
to be our Authentic Self, and our awareness of this is what allows us to
use knowledge as we engage the world, using
[]{#part0011.html_page_45}our body through our mind as the vehicle that
allows us to take action in life.

It is a beautiful symbiotic relationship of action/reaction through
which we are able to experience a connection, a communion, between
ourselves and all of creation. In all of our traditions, we hear the
lessons of the wise men and women who teach us the beauty of life and
how to let go of illusions, reminding us of our true essence. This is a
moment of harmony with everything and the energy of life that courses
through us. Every world religion and spiritual tradition has a name for
the moment when we become aware that nothing but harmony exists. In the
Toltec tradition we would call this *being in constant communion with
our creator.* The only thing that separates us from one another is our
point of perception; together we make a whole.

*Engagement* is the action of interacting with the focal point of our
attention. As we engage life, we naturally go up and down the levels of
our attachments, like a flower continuously opening and closing as days
pass by. Sometimes we let go of our awareness as we increase our
attachment to a focal point; other times we remember our authenticity as
we let go of the attachment. But regardless of our degree of attachment,
we are always our Authentic []{#part0011.html_page_46}Selves; we just
simply forget that as we move up the levels of attachment.

With the practice of awareness we develop a discipline, a strengthening
of our will that allows us to remain in a state of harmony longer . . .
if we choose to. Many religious and spiritual traditions in the world
have created a discipline that fosters this harmony, such as prayer,
meditation, yoga, chanting, and dancing, among many others. This
knowledge is an instrument of transformation, and experiencing it is the
manifestation of the Authentic Self.

I used to think that the world\'s greatest masters of every tradition
were the best examples of the Authentic Self. But now I realize that
everyone I know and see is a personification of the Authentic Self. We
are all creating, producing, learning, engaging, and loving life. We are
all the personification of life; we are always the Authentic Self. We
simply make the choice to see it in ourselves and others.

There is a moment when the Authentic Self becomes no longer an abstract
term, but an experience. I believe we all experience such a moment. It
could be during meditation, while painting or dancing, working or
working out, lecturing or talking, making love, eating, or playing.
It\'s the moment when judgment stops and pure harmony takes over.

[]{#part0011.html_page_47}For me, I have crossed that threshold from
concept to experience while jogging---usually around the one-mile
marker. This is when I am no longer thinking about my route, pace, or
even the pain in my legs. This is a moment when everything goes calm,
and all I can feel is my breath, the stride, and the environment. My
mind suddenly shuts off and I am completely in the moment, and I know
exactly what I am doing without the need for thought. From this place,
even the term Authentic Self disappears, along with the rest of my
thoughts. I am simply alive with the complete freedom to love myself and
everybody as I choose. I have no need to distort the information I
perceive because my perception of life is unencumbered by any
attachments. The Authentic Self is the harmony of mind, body, and soul
as the expression of Life. To tell the story of the Authentic Self is to
tell the story of life, regardless of where humanity may be in the form
of an individual\'s awareness.

When we reside at this level, we have the freedom to choose how we want
to engage the Dream of the Planet. The awareness that we are the living
being that gives life to our beliefs, to our knowledge, lets us choose
with complete freedom where we want to place our intent and create, for
as long as we choose to engage it by our agreement. Our
[]{#part0011.html_page_48}will is set with the full awareness of our
intent. Knowledge is alive in our minds precisely because we are alive,
and that knowledge is the tool by which we can communicate with the rest
of the world.

In this state of harmony we have the potential to love unconditionally
because we have no conditions for self-acceptance, just a willingness to
engage love with a respect for self and others. If someone were to say
or do something insulting when we are residing in Level One, the
Authentic Self, it wouldn\'t bother us. Their words and actions would
fall off us like loose garments, as there is nothing in us for them to
stick to. Because our love is not based on a behavior that we agree with
or find acceptable, we love them even through such instances. From here,
every possibility is available to us: We have the freedom to evolve as
life evolves and to engage the people we love without the need to
domesticate them to our point of view.

[]{#part0012.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0012.html_ch6 .calibre5}[]{#part0012.html_page_49 .calibre5}CHAPTER 6 {.chapnum}

# Level Two Preference {.chaptitle1}

"Is knowledge controlling you, or are you controlling knowledge?"

I use knowledge as the tool by which I engage my preferences in life.

At the second level of attachment, we still move with the awareness of
the Authentic Self. We recognize our ability to attach ourselves to
something as we engage in the present moment, but we are also able to
let go of the attachment when the moment has passed. We see ourselves as
a reflection of life in the Dream of the Planet, and we attach and
detach ourselves with ease simply by recognizing and letting go of that
reflection.

[]{#part0012.html_page_50}Here\'s an example: Do you remember playing
make-believe as a kid? I recall that before beginning the game, we\'d
all discuss the roles we\'d be playing. Then, we would each draw from
our knowledge of what was needed to create a mask that resembled us in
that role so that we could play. Next, we would take on the persona of
that role. Our faces would change as soon as we started playing, and our
behavior would be adapted to fit the battlefield, the hair salon, the
dinner table, the hospital, or even a day in the office. What made these
games so much fun is that we used our imaginations and played our parts
to create a fantasy world in which we could all engage each other in
different scenarios, as if we were playing in a dream with others while
we were awake. As much fun as it was to engage in these games with our
friends and family, when the game was over, we took off the mask that
was created by our knowledge and went back to being ourselves.

At Level Two, we have the awareness that knowledge is a tool that
provides us with the information we need to make choices about where we
wish to place our attention and take action. But at this level we don\'t
distort the information we perceive, and we are using it to engage only
in this moment. We can choose to adapt in accordance with the present
life situation without losing the awareness []{#part0012.html_page_51}of
our Authentic Self, without the need to project a false image of self.
In the Toltec tradition, this is called *controlled folly*---the
awareness and honoring of self as we engage the people around us who
project an image, or mask, onto us. Our awareness allows us to see the
temptation to become attached to that projected mask, but we maintain
clarity. At this level of attachment we don\'t forget we are playing a
game, which makes it easier for us to detach once the game is over.

This awareness allows us to live without needing to distort knowledge to
fit our individual points of view, our attachments, and thus, knowledge
at this stage is still our ally. It is not corrupted by our sense of
self-importance or any form of conditional love. Our relationship with
knowledge allows us to engage life as it is; we are able to make choices
with our reason as we perceive the difference between truth and
distortion, and knowledge is a clean and perfect reflection of life.

From the Toltec standpoint, this is the *clean mirror*--- we see every
situation as it is, unclouded by smoke. We have the awareness that
knowledge is the perfect reflection of life, and we are life. We have
the awareness that the act of engaging in life is an act of love, and
because we are choosing the direction in which we want to go and
[]{#part0012.html_page_52}how we want to live, this is the act of
unconditional love for ourselves. By approaching our lives as a work of
art based on our own self-love, this allows us to unconditionally love
the people in our lives for who they are without needing to domesticate
them to see our point of view. Respect for the manifestation of our
loved ones\' own individual dreams, whether or not we agree with their
choices, is always present at this level of attachment. Our love for
self allows us to give love to the community. After all, we cannot give
or share what we don\'t have.

Every thought and idea that forms our belief system has power only
through our agreement in the form of yes or no; and it is our preference
of how we want to engage the Dream of the Planet and life.

The word *Toltec* means "artist" in English, and life is the canvas for
a Toltec\'s art. I am aware that knowledge is an instrument by which I
am able to interact with the world, and my yeses and nos are the chisels
or paintbrushes by which I create. I engage in the Toltec tradition by
choice, fully aware that the name Toltec refers to an action or
agreement belonging to a philosophy. Not calling myself a Toltec
wouldn\'t lessen my agreement or the lessons I learn from this oral
tradition. This means my agreement is not subjugated to an identity, my
knowledge []{#part0012.html_page_53}is not in the form of a mask that
gives meaning to my definition of self. I am free to choose to agree,
disagree, scrutinize, and engage with the Toltec philosophy, or any
other, as much as I want. I am free to relate and engage in
relationships with people who have a preference for another tradition or
philosophy. I can change my mind when I no longer fully agree, or I may
agree with it my whole life. That is true with every belief I have: I
engage it for as long as I want to engage it, knowing full well that I
am a living being with the full potential to experience life with or
without that agreement. This is what gives power to my agreements; I
make them because I want to. This is my art, my agreement: to allow
myself to experience life in its ever-changing truth with love.

Think about an individual who chooses to eat healthfully, and through
her search, she has chosen as her preference to follow a vegan diet---a
diet that includes no animal products. She uses this knowledge to inform
her choices when she eats, but she does not use the knowledge to
identify herself as "vegan," nor does she use the knowledge to
domesticate herself or others by it. If she chooses to have ice cream,
she can do so without self-judgment and then reengage the vegan diet
afterward if she so chooses. She uses knowledge
[]{#part0012.html_page_54}to engage her preference with regard to her
nutrition without ever losing her awareness of self.

Now substitute the example of a vegan diet with a lifestyle choice of
your own. Do you engage in this choice with preference, or is it a rigid
framework by which you judge your self-worth? If the latter, you know
you are attached at a level beyond preference.

Our attention gives direction to the bridge that allows us to express
and share with one another our knowledge of life---the agreements by
which we construct our relationships, as well as express our
preferences. With awareness, knowledge remains the bridge of
communication between us, a clean foundation as we construct the Dream
of Us. In our shared dream, it is my preference to be in this
relationship at this moment and to love everyone, as well as myself,
unconditionally.

[]{#part0013.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0013.html_ch7 .calibre5}[]{#part0013.html_page_55 .calibre5}CHAPTER 7 {.chapnum}

# Level Three Identity {.chaptitle1}

"Is knowledge controlling you, or are you controlling knowledge?"

I identify myself with my knowledge, although I use it to see and
understand the world.

We have a need to name, describe, and understand the things we engage
with in life. Knowledge allows us to understand the world and the
universe, but when it comes to understanding ourselves, our identity is
a symbol that can be wrapped up in an expression of our knowledge.

From the stance of knowledge, identity is the grounding sense of self
that allows us to have our place in the []{#part0013.html_page_56}Dream
of the Planet; it gives us a point of reference by which we identify and
engage with one another. But this identity is a mask that blurs our
awareness of the Authentic Self, an attachment at this level occurs when
we identify ourselves with our knowledge.

In the Toltec tradition, the mirror is still a clean reflection at the
Identity level, but it is here that we begin to lose the awareness of
the line that separates life and the reflection in the mirror. This is
where we begin to believe that the reflection is the truth.

The main condition for acceptance in the Dream of the Planet is that our
identity is recognized in a world of seven billion souls. Although we do
not domesticate ourselves forming this identity (domestication occurs in
Level Four, Internalization), by adopting it, we are hoping to be
understood by our community, and thus ourselves. In wanting to be heard
by the Dream of the Planet, our voice takes on an identity to express
itself---or so we think.

When we use knowledge to construct the Dream of Us, or the Dream of the
Planet, our identity is the mask by which the Dream of the Planet will
understand us. When speaking mind to mind, knowledge recognizes
knowledge, so we become attached to the mask of our identity. At this
level we forget that the mask of our identity is an
[]{#part0013.html_page_57}empty symbol---just like a word whose
definition is subject to an agreement set by us and the use of knowledge
in the Dream of the Planet. Just as language can change over time, so,
too, can our identity mask.

As we increase our attachment to our identity, knowledge and consensus
become very important to us, to the point where they give us meaning in
life. So we construct the mask of our identity by becoming the
embodiment of our acquired knowledge in the form of our passion. This is
a mask based on our preferences in life.

Everyone we meet has a name and an identity with a meaning to go along
with that name. Identity can be based on things like the color of our
skin, the nationality of our family, the religion we practice, the
political party that best reflects our beliefs, the sports team that
allows us the excitement of winning and losing, the work we engage in
every day, and the activities we love to participate in. Our name and
identity give us a purpose and a sense of belonging.

For example, think of the people you know and the identities either they
have assumed or you have ascribed to them: Patty the Teacher, Scott the
Fireman, Joe the Next-Door Neighbor, José the Brother. What identities
have you adopted for yourself? How do you portray those
[]{#part0013.html_page_58}identities in the world? When you are at Level
Three, you confuse these identities with who you really are.

As adults, we still have the ability to play make-believe like we did
when we were children---that is, we still have the ability to create a
mask based on our knowledge of how to engage one another in a particular
setting. But as adults, the mask becomes a way to adapt socially and
relate to a group with whom we are interacting, and we have forgotten
that it\'s just a mask. . . . We think the mask *is* us!

To return to a sports metaphor, consider how non-football fans can get
so involved in Super Bowl parties. Knowing that it\'s fun and exciting
to invest something of oneself in the game, non-football fans will
likely choose a side to root for, eagerly climbing aboard the emotional
roller coaster of the game. But when the game is over, whether or not
the favored team has won, a person at the level of Preference (Level
Two) will be able to walk away from the game detached from the moment.

Now contrast that with the fans who may be out of sorts for days if
their team loses, or incredibly jubilant if their team is victorious.
Having forgotten to remove the mask, they are attached at Level Three.
At the Identity level, the Authentic Self has the mask of the attachment
in the form of identity.

[]{#part0013.html_page_59}This level of attachment can feel great when
your team wins, or when things are going your way; but as life shows us,
what goes up must come down, and no one wins all the time. That is why
suffering inevitably occurs when you are attached at this level: we
won\'t always be able to get what we want; but instead of having a
preference and moving on if things don\'t go our way, at this level we
have become attached.

Let\'s continue with the example of the vegan woman. At this level, she
now calls herself a vegan, the symbol of her preference, even when she
is not engaging in a meal. Her identity as a vegan gives her a purpose
and a place in her community, and when she makes choices, her identity
as a vegan is reflected. If she were to have ice cream, she may feel
disappointed in her choice, but after a short time she will forgive
herself and move on. She does not place unreasonable conditions on
herself for self-acceptance based on her identity, nor do her friends
and family need to be vegan in order to be in her life. She still has
respect for others\' manifestations of their Personal Dreams, just as
she has respect for her own manifestation.

These are the hallmarks of Level Three: we have donned the mask of
identity and forgotten it is a mask. This forgetting of who we really
are, the Authentic Self, []{#part0013.html_page_60}leads to some
suffering, but generally not an inordinate amount.

In the next level, Internalization, our attachment to knowledge becomes
more pronounced, domestication occurs, and we cause suffering for
ourselves and those around us.

[]{#part0014.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0014.html_ch8 .calibre5}[]{#part0014.html_page_61 .calibre5}CHAPTER 8 {.chapnum}

# Level Four Internalization {.chaptitle1}

"Is knowledge controlling you, or are you controlling knowledge?"

My identity, in the form of my knowledge, gives me the rules and
guidelines by which I live my life.

The fourth level of attachment, Internalization, describes a degree of
attachment to knowledge where our identity becomes the model by which we
accept ourselves. This is domestication through attachment.

At this level, our narrators have begun to set the conditions by which
we domesticate our identity. They measure []{#part0014.html_page_62}our
acceptance and rejection of ourselves and others based on the beliefs we
use to construct the mask of our identity. We will distort the
information we receive to reinforce the conditions of what we expect
from life. The narrators also serve our need to validate who we are in
our Personal Dream, as well as the face we present to the Dream of the
Planet. Our knowledge is corrupted; it is no longer a clean reflection,
but a Smokey Mirror.

Our sense of self is the personification of our beliefs, and our will is
subjugated by the need to fit in with the Dream. Thus, our mask may not
necessarily be in the form of our passion, but we will wear whatever
mask we think we need to be accepted.

At this level of attachment, our focus is on internalizing an idealized
version of our identity, and we may project a false image of self to
secure our acceptance. This is the direct result of our domestication
through conditional love. Acceptance is the reward of domestication,
while rejection is the punishment. Although these conditions for
acceptance and rejection may not be as rigid as the next level of
attachment, they are learned and ingrained through the constant
interaction we have with others. We use these conditions as guideposts
for accepting and rejecting other people, but also (and especially)
ourselves. []{#part0014.html_page_63}The attachment is to the mechanism
of acceptance and rejection itself, which corrupts knowledge to fit our
sense of self and influences how we relate with life. At this point,
we\'ve lost our respect for self and others, and conditional love is all
we know.

One day, I had just gotten back from being in the park in Teotihuacán,
Mexico, and decided to go to my hotel room to rest for a couple of
hours. I turned the television on to a program in which two young women
were combing a beach in Mexico looking for the "the best and worst
fashions on the beach." They were both dressed stylishly, and as they
walked the beach with confidence, they critiqued and ridiculed whomever
they judged to be poorly dressed. The camera would then zoom in on
unflattering shots of the unsuspecting beachgoers. In the segment, it
seemed like everyone received a failing grade---the two hosts were
apparently the only well-dressed people on the beach. Toward the end of
the segment, however, they ran into someone they deemed to be even
better dressed than they were. One of the hosts walked up to the
fashionable lady, showered her with praise, and asked her to share her
fashion wisdom. The change in the hosts\' demeanor was incredible: they
went from being unmerciful judges to subjugated followers.

[]{#part0014.html_page_64}As I watched the show, I couldn\'t help but
think back to my teenage years, where walking down the hall was very
much like this television show. I had been both the recipient of
criticism and the critic myself, working on an image where adulation was
the expression of acceptance. I remember feeling uncomfortable when I
was the focus for not meeting the standards of one group, and I remember
how righteous I felt being the critic in the group I identified with.

This kind of behavior isn\'t limited to appearances or trends---it
occurs in spiritual circles, in the workplace, and in many other facets
of life. The mechanism of our conditional love---the judge and the
victim---has been mastered by many individuals.

I have seen some people turn the identity of a Toltec into a catalyst
for their own domestication by turning the agreements for pursuit of
personal freedom into conditions of acceptance, even rejecting others
who engage in traditions that are different from ours. So it doesn\'t
matter what the belief is, attachment at this level will corrupt it.

To continue with our dietary example, let\'s say the person who calls
herself a vegan now uses her identity as the catalyst for her
conditional love. In order to be worthy of her own love, she must be a
strict vegan and not stray, []{#part0014.html_page_65}lest she feel the
wrath of her self-judgment. She surrounds herself with other vegans who
will confirm the worthiness of being a vegan by accepting and judging
themselves and others. She limits the people in her life who are not
vegan and will try to domesticate the people she loves to change their
diet, feeling pity for them for not being awake to her point of view.
Thus, she is in constant conflict with points of view that do not side
with her own. She is still eating a healthy diet, but she is imposing
onto herself and others the knowledge that goes along with her
preference in life; her mask of identity still reflects a passion of her
Authentic Self, but the smoke has created a distorted image of that
truth as domestication has set in.

Only unhappiness stems from the judge and victim mentality. To live up
to these conditions and be accepted, we hide who we really are not only
from others but also from ourselves. We are completely confused,
believing that the mask we have created is who we are. We create what we
believe is an acceptable image for conditional love, regardless of our
passion and preference in life, and project that image solely for the
purpose of acceptance. The image of a *luchador* (a Mexican professional
wrestler) comes to mind, always fighting for fame and fortune. While he
is keeping his enemies from taking []{#part0014.html_page_66}his mask
off and exposing his true identity, he is also trying to take off his
opponent\'s mask so that his shines brighter with glory.

Attachment at this level results in disharmony between mind, body, and
soul, and this is reflected in all of one\'s relationships. The only
glimpses of peace come through individual victories, and these moments
are far from permanent. This is the version of the Dream of the Planet
that appears to be in constant conflict.

[]{#part0015.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0015.html_ch9 .calibre5}[]{#part0015.html_page_67 .calibre5}CHAPTER 9 {.chapnum}

# Level Five Fanaticism {.chaptitle1}

"Is knowledge controlling you, or are you controlling knowledge?"

My knowledge controls my every action.

Level Five, Fanaticism, describes a rigid attachment to knowledge with
an excessive intolerance of opposing views. It is driven by a need to
believe in something one hundred percent, even though that something\'s
meaning is dependent upon the agreement of others. Anything that
contradicts or puts into question the sustainability of the belief is a
direct threat, and a fanatic will defend the belief at any cost.
Prejudice, intolerance, and violence are []{#part0015.html_page_68}the
instruments by which the belief is imposed onto the Dream of the Planet.

Regardless of how it can appear, the driving force behind fanaticism is
not hate or anger, but rather an extreme form of conditional love for
self and others. This is how any beautiful belief in the world can
become lost in corruption, as knowledge controls a person\'s will for
the sake of its own existence.

With fanaticism, a person\'s beliefs have fully and completely
domesticated them, and knowledge becomes rigid and controlling. It has a
tight grip on our will. Attachment at this degree requires us to try and
domesticate everyone around us, and we become tyrants. There is no
freedom in tyranny. In the Toltec tradition, the smoke does not let us
see that there even is a mirror. The smoke is all we see.

For example, to illustrate this level on a small but far-reaching scale,
I turn again to our young vegan woman who is now a mother. She
domesticates her son to fall in line with the family tradition of being
vegan, in an effort to give him the identity that she is convinced is
the only correct one---the identity she has adopted for herself. (Please
keep in mind that my objective here is not to judge veganism or make any
of these examples a catalyst for debate; I only want to present a
mirror.)

[]{#part0015.html_page_69}Imagine a dinner at this family\'s home. The
young mother is making a meal in the kitchen while her husband and son
sit at the dining room table.

"What would you like to eat?" asks the mother.

"Carne asada," replies the boy.

"We don\'t eat carne asada in this house," she says in a serious tone.

The boy begins to protest and pleads with his father to support him. The
father, who has adopted the mother\'s belief system, responds by asking
the son to listen to his mother. The child reiterates his plea for carne
asada, as his mother responds that the rest of the family only likes
healthy vegan meals.

"We are vegans," says the mother.

"No! I am not a vegan," says the boy.

"Okay, then you are going to have to find a new place to live," says the
mother.

The mother\'s attachment to this ideal has led to a condition for the
child: that to be a member of the family he must be a vegan too. This is
domestication, as the reward for the child to eat a vegan meal is his
acceptance as a member of the family. If he does not, he will be
rejected by his family. Under Level Four, Internalization, there is
still space for the boy to say no with the possibility that
[]{#part0015.html_page_70}the mother will not follow through with her
condition. But when the attachment becomes fanatical, the result is
unrelenting conflict and domestication, and any contrary response leads
to absolute rejection.

Imagine this situation in a family where the attachment is between a
father and daughter about differing political beliefs, or a brother who
is fanatical about the healing properties of homeopathic remedies and a
sister who is fanatical about the healing properties of traditional
medicine. This is an unrelenting war, where passion is replaced by
obsession---an obsession to live up to the conditions of the mask of our
identity---and whoever wins reinforces their attachment as the righteous
beacon of knowledge that will awaken everybody to their truth.

This type of interaction within families is not uncommon and could also
be applied to religious beliefs, social status, and so on. This is a
case where one feels they must impose their beliefs upon other members
of the family and will not cease until they are successful at
subjugating the other\'s will or until a loss of the relationship
occurs. This is the real consequence of fanaticism---a wedge between
people who would really love one another if it weren\'t for this
argument.

I have seen people become fanatical about the Toltec
[]{#part0015.html_page_71}tradition as well, where the concepts and
lessons of personal freedom in the agreements and teachings aren\'t as
important as the need to impose the philosophy on themselves and others
as the only truth.

"I only want to be around people who are enlightened by the Toltec
philosophy" is a comment I have heard on occasion. I have also heard
criticism for not being "Toltec enough." It doesn\'t matter what the
belief system is, if someone is fanatical, they have let their happiness
and acceptance of others be dependent on adherence to that belief
system. This form of unrelenting conflict can take a person to the point
where an idea or belief is more important than their own life, let alone
the lives of others.

Stories of honor killings throughout the world--- regardless of religion
or social status---embody an extreme form of conditional love within a
family. From a point of view where a person\'s behavior is forced upon
them under conditions of life and death, the Dream of the Planet can be
seen as a nightmare: death in the name of love. When it is possible to
be so attached to a way of life that the lives of our own family members
are considered less important than upholding family values, then imagine
what the extreme form of this level of attachment is capable of when it
comes to perfect strangers.

[]{#part0015.html_page_72}The most obvious examples of fanaticism can be
found in news reports that describe killings in the name of some cause,
belief, or way of life---where one\'s love for their fellow man is
entirely conditional upon the others\' willingness to do or be exactly
what is expected and acceptable within that belief system. The narrators
speak so loudly in these cases that they drown out the Authentic Self
completely and relentlessly impose conditional love to such an extreme
that death is a means to the end.

Attachment at this level doesn\'t present itself only in the form of
death, but where the violence of torture, rape, or any desecration of
another being---be it man, woman, child, or animal---becomes a viable
choice and action. Fanaticism is the complete loss of respect for
another living being, when we no longer see an individual as a living
being, and instead only an idea or a number. Unfortunately, there are
many stories that illustrate this in the news and sensationalist media,
but know that the individuals who take such actions all suffer from a
form of illusion in which they believe they are justified in taking such
actions.

Fanatics also impose unrealistic standards on themselves, trying to fit
a mold at the risk of their own life. This is the case with anorexia or
bulimia, where a person []{#part0015.html_page_73}is so attached to
achieving a certain ideal that they can no longer see the truth of who
they are, even when they see themselves in the mirror. The image of
oneself can become so distorted that one\'s own perception of one\'s
humanity is lost. There is no awareness that a line has been crossed;
only an illusion remains. Death comes without the awareness of having
decided to take one\'s own life.

These extreme examples of fanaticism are probably not something you, the
reader, are experiencing in your own life. But an attachment at this
level has other manifestations that are not so easily recognized.

Loved ones can do their best to try to wake someone from this illusion,
but as with anything, the individual must have an authentic desire to
change their mind; but that doesn\'t mean the loved ones should stop
trying. A will or desire to live is the catalyst for that change of
mind. Once that desire is found and respect for one\'s humanity is
regained, an individual can begin to move down the levels of attachment.
At this point, the illusion can begin to fade. This is true for both the
aggressor and the victim; we cannot give what we don\'t have. Letting go
of this attachment starts by respecting our own life.

There is still a lot of work to be done to let go of the illusion---the
corrupted version of knowledge that no []{#part0015.html_page_74}longer
reflects life, but what our attachment wants to see. As we find that
grounding desire, we begin to see a sliver of truth that acts as a
foundation for our transformation. Though we still work to let go of
illusion, we have found a moment of clarity . . . a truth, in the form
of life, was chosen. In regaining respect for our own humanity and the
humanity of others, we begin to become aware of the strength of our own
will.

[]{#part0016.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0016.html_ch10 .calibre5}[]{#part0016.html_page_75 .calibre5}CHAPTER 10 {.chapnum}

# The Biggest Demon {.chaptitle1}

My father has always pushed me to question my knowledge, challenge my
attachments, and discover new ways of understanding. And so, during my
training, he would often present me with puzzles. One day he asked,
"Miguel, do you know what the biggest demon in the world is?"

I thought for a moment, then shook my head no.

"It\'s love," he replied, with a slight smile playing on his lips.

"How can *love* be the biggest demon in the world?" I responded
doubtfully, feeling my emotional reaction coursing through my body, its
epicenter somewhere around my belly. I felt the irritation of a child
who knows his father is about to burst another one of his favorite
bubbles.

[]{#part0016.html_page_76}"Solve the puzzle, and you will find out," he
said.

I looked at my father, the man who had written the book *The Mastery of
Love*, in disbelief. "Love can\'t be the biggest demon in the world!" I
practically shouted. "We are all love. We all share love. Love is all we
are."

To this, he simply replied, "Miguel, figure it out," and he walked away.

I thought about this, but it made absolutely no sense to me. We *are*
love. We are born *into* love. How could he even say that love is a
demon---and allegedly the *biggest* demon of all? And if I *am* love,
how can *I* be the biggest demon in the world?

The puzzle sat unsolved in my mind for quite some time.

Then came my moment of clarity, the kind that arrives out of the blue
and sets you on the path that guides you through the rest of your life.
It arrived while I was watching the San Diego Chargers play against the
Oakland Raiders, two football teams that share a big rivalry. I am well
aware of my level of attachment to the Chargers. When I watch them play,
I make a conscious choice to engage in the game, and I quickly go to a
Level Three attachment. Sometimes I even go to a Level Four. This is
probably why my epiphany came during a football game.

[]{#part0016.html_page_77}In the first quarter of this particular game,
the television suddenly went silent. Something was wrong with the
television or the transmission, and the game had *no* sound at all. I
couldn\'t hear what was going on! Sensing an opportunity, I decided to
assign myself an exercise. I challenged myself to watch the game as if I
had never watched football before. My goal was to unlearn, or let go of,
what I knew about football and simply enjoy the scene in front of me. I
wanted to detach from all of my preconceptions.

It took me quite a while to stop describing to myself what was happening
on the field and just watch the game unfold. I saw two teams in battle
and began to understand their plays and actions from a fresh
perspective. I began to see each action as if it were truth unfolding.
My mind went silent, and I simply watched. A deeper connection formed
between me and what was happening on the field at that moment. I was
enthused by the play of both teams.

Somewhere around half time, the sound returned. And lo and behold, there
were now two voices describing what was happening, narrating every
moment. The narrators were telling me where to place my focus, and I
could feel my attention being steered until I was no longer watching the
game unfold as I had before, but instead was listening to what I was
being told. The narrators []{#part0016.html_page_78}informed me when to
cheer and when not to cheer. They explained why the ball was thrown, why
a touchdown was possible, and why the defense was doing so well. Then
they started describing things that weren\'t even happening on the
field: why a player held out on his contract, who should be traded,
which player didn\'t deserve to even be on the team. I began to pay
attention to only what the voices wanted me to see as they excitedly
pointed out stunning plays and judgmentally expressed disapproval of
weak players. When the game ended, I could only recall what those
sportscasters wanted me to remember. Only glimpses of truth---a
touchdown, a great tackle, or an amazing pass---shone through all that
narration. Then the post-game show started, and every moment of the game
was recounted. I apparently needed a team of narrators to tell me what I
had just seen.

That\'s when I had my sudden realization: I have those same commentators
in my own head. The only difference is that they have my own voice. Just
like taking a sip of wine and thinking about the region and varietal of
the grapes instead of enjoying the experience, I let the narrators talk
about whatever catches my attention, and it is usually something I\'m
already attached to. This pulls me away from my experience of the
present moment the []{#part0016.html_page_79}way a rubber band stretched
too far snaps backward. The narrators are the voices of the filter of
what we know, the thoughts and beliefs that construct our belief system.
This is what my father referred to as the voice of knowledge. I simply
call them the narrators.

In the Toltec tradition, there is a symbol we use to describe all the
chatter in our mind---the *mitote*, which means "a thousand voices all
talking at the same time." Those voices are all trying to catch your
attention, and the ones that speak the loudest are usually the ones that
manifest in the form of an attachment. Some narrators may speak from
distortion, while others may speak from truth. Through our reason we are
able to tell the difference between the two, but it is difficult for us
to tell them apart if we are attached to them. Depending on which
narrators we are attracted to, we will perceive the world through their
narration, thus creating our world in their image.

Of course I had always understood this on an intellectual level, but
through this experience, I finally understood it on a much deeper,
intuitive level. These narrators are the personification of our
attachments to things, ideas, and beliefs. They can keep us rooted to
past experiences as we try to make sense of the present. We have a
predilection []{#part0016.html_page_80}for fitting new experiences
neatly into our preconceptions of life. These voices also keep us
focused on some idealistic goal for ourselves, something to attain in
the future, or something we might even convince ourselves we will never
attain but think we should still strive for.

Turning our attention back to love, our narrators also play a major role
in our relationships. In my own case, when I was younger I fell in love
with a beautiful young lady. But after some time of just enjoying our
love for each other, we grew comfortable and fell into a routine. At
this point, we began to find some faults with the relationship and
started to argue over what "should be" in order for our relationship to
meet our expectations.

Other than what she told me, I had no idea what was really going on in
her mind. However, I knew what was going on in mine. My narrators were
commentating: "To be the perfect girlfriend, she *should* be like this .
. . Our love is *supposed* to be this way . . . She does this to control
me . . . How can I make her happy? . . . I *should* do this . . ." All
the things my narrators told me were based on my attachment to what I
believed a relationship should be in order for us to continue loving
each other. All these expectations were informed by my past experience
and the beliefs I had acquired growing up. I allowed
[]{#part0016.html_page_81}my knowledge to analyze how a relationship is
supposed to be, and I believed it. I was no longer connecting or having
a communion with my beloved; my attention was on the voice of my
narrators. At the time, I could see that while our love was still there,
our attachment to the ideas about what we thought love should be would
ultimately come between us. This was all a product of listening to our
narrators.

And so, through this football game insight and the reflection of my
relationship, I finally understood what my father meant when he said
that love is the biggest demon. Instead of simply experiencing love,
being love, narrators explain how love should feel: what makes us worthy
of love; who should love us, and how they should express it; what we
need to do or achieve to love ourselves, and what others need to do in
order to receive our love in return. We begin to believe the narrators\'
analysis of what love should be and become attached to that belief; we
begin to impose it on ourselves and others, thus creating a distorted
reflection of love. Narrators convince us that if we can achieve an
imagined perfection, we will be so full of love that life will be smooth
going from then on. But what has really happened is we have made love
conditional. And if we continue to follow the guidance of our
[]{#part0016.html_page_82}narrators, we will go from childhood to young
adulthood and beyond attached to the idea that we need to find a living
personification of what "true love" is.

In order to be in love, we must have someone to love. And of course,
that person is supposed to love us back. We get really hung up on this
part---forming our idea of love through positive and negative
reinforcement, much the way we do as children, always seeking our
parents' approval, yearning for their acceptance and shrinking from
their disapproval. This kind of love has so many conditions attached
that suffering is inevitable. And, in this way, love becomes the biggest
demon of all. Our distortions turn the angel of unconditional love into
the demon, a symbol of the distortion of the truth, exaggerating our
fears and distorting our view even more, creating a personal hell for
ourselves.

When we look in the mirror and do not see a reflection of love, it means
we can\'t see through the smoke that distorts our view and makes us
think that love is something that needs to be gained, like the elusive
carrot on a stick.

If we look at our reflection and into our eyes, we will see what lies
beyond them, we will see the truth. There is no need to chase love, when
we are love. We simply release our attachment to what we expect to see
so that we can see []{#part0016.html_page_83}beyond it. We turn off the
volume on our narrators, the voice of our knowledge, and simply engage
the present, and the true image of love will appear.

We have always been love. But we have grown so accustomed to the smoky,
distorted reflection of love that doesn\'t allow us to see or accept
ourselves that we don\'t know how to live life without it, which is the
biggest lie. But when we become aware of our attachment and decide to
let go of the distortion, then the motivation to change comes from our
own love, and it gives us a whole new perspective on life. This genuine
motivation is the subject of the next section.

When we let go of our attachment to our narrators--- specifically their
judgments and criticisms---and accept ourselves as we are, conditional
love will no longer be the motivator that compels us to change. For
example, if I look in the mirror and say, "Hey, Miguel, you are out of
shape. No one will take you seriously if you look like that, you need to
lose some weight," I am being motivated by the distorted opinions of my
narrators. But when I look in the mirror and say, "Hey, Miguel, you are
the perfect you in this moment, and I accept you completely, but I see
that you might want to lose a few pounds in order to be more healthy,"
then I am being motivated []{#part0016.html_page_84}to make changes by
the desire to care for myself, which comes from self-love. Going on a
diet is not a condition by which I accept myself. Rather, I recognize
the truth of my unhealthy state, and I decide to make a change---not
because conditional love has forced my hand, but because I love and
accept myself.

Taking steps to improve our health, change careers, or really do
anything that will transform our lives is often an emotional process.
The fear of failure or of not obtaining the goal we set out to achieve
often keeps us from taking action and actually perpetuates what we do
*not* want.

In an episode of *Frasier*, a popular American TV show in the 1990s,
Frasier is battling his past and has a hallucination of all of his
former love interests. He comes to a conclusion that illustrates my
point very well, saying: "I am alone because I am afraid to be alone!"
He doesn\'t take a chance on love because he fears he will fail and then
have to feel the discomfort of rejection. Fortunately, he realizes that
the only way forward is to let go of the wounds that are holding him
back.

Believing that we need to avoid rejection at all costs is a very common
belief. For instance, if someone says to you, "I\'m not attracted to
you," you have a choice about what to do with that knowledge. You can
accept the truth []{#part0016.html_page_85}without the narrator and
realize that it has nothing to do with you and has everything to do with
that person and his or her particular taste. The news is still hard to
hear, but it is simple, and it ends there.

Your other choice, and unfortunately this is a more common reaction, is
to take that person\'s taste preference and use it against yourself to
reinforce some negative belief you have: That person is not attracted to
me because I am overweight, I am too short, etc. In this way, you end up
using someone else\'s taste preference to convince yourself that you are
not deserving of your own love or acceptance. The motivation to make
improvements suddenly becomes conditional: If I lose a few pounds, maybe
she will like me better or maybe someone even better will be attracted
to me.

Either way, you are making a choice. You can choose to let your
self-acceptance be subjugated by another person\'s taste or opinion, or
you can choose to accept that they have simply stated what is true for
them and that does not change who you are.

In my experience, the only motivator that brings lasting change is
self-love. When I love and accept myself, I want to treat myself well
and be as healthy as I can be, only then do I have the freedom to
detoxify from whatever has been subjugating my will.

[]{#part0016.html_page_86}When it comes to being motivated by self-love
to make changes in life, there are no musts or shoulds. The key phrase
here is "I want to make this change for me." When you say yes to this
choice, then you can begin the process. Doing it for yourself rather
than to please others or to please your narrators makes all the
difference between creating lasting change versus a temporary illusion.

Regardless of whether you stumble along the way, when you want to make a
change, you keep getting up, exercising your will like a muscle in
training. As your will strengthens, you will know what passion is.
Passion is the expression of love, our Authentic Self, in the form of
our intention. A goal---an end result---is simply a focal point that
allows us to conduct our intention in that direction, enjoying the whole
process that brings us to that point because we are living through it.

Authentic love is the greatest motivator for letting go of our
attachments, while conditional love only strengthens our attachments.
Knowing the difference is key as we enter the process of detaching from
the conditions and agreements that keep us from experiencing our
authenticity. At the root of this is how we relate to ourselves and the
people in our lives: I cannot give what I don\'t have. If I have
conditional love, I will give conditional love. If I have
[]{#part0016.html_page_87}authentic love, then I will be able to give
authentic love. The best way to let go of illusion is choosing to accept
the truth as it is presented to us just as it is. As it has been said,
"The truth will set you free."

[]{#part0017.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0017.html_ch11 .calibre5}[]{#part0017.html_page_89 .calibre5}CHAPTER 11 {.chapnum}

# Moving through the Levels of Attachment {.chaptitle1}

In my experience, the majority of people I encounter in life seem to be
at Levels Three and Four---Identity and Internalization. Although the
voices of fanaticism are certainly the loudest, those at Level Five seem
to represent the minority of the people with whom I have interacted in
the Dream of the Planet. However, it is important to notice that each of
us moves up and down the levels of attachment during the trajectory of
our life, and so we have all experienced different levels of attachment
at one time or another.

We can move up and down the levels with awareness and sometimes without
awareness, like a child who is hooked on an unpleasant moment until
something else []{#part0017.html_page_90}happens to divert or redirect
their attention. Of course, as adults, our attachments are much stronger
than this childlike experience, since we have a tendency to get very
comfortable in our beliefs and circumstances. However, we can still
change the focal point of our attention if we choose to go through the
process of *redirection*.

## []{#part0017.html_ch11-sec001 .calibre5}Redirection {.subtitle}

We must first become aware of where our attention is in the moment.
Becoming aware of our attachments is the start of any process;
recognizing which beliefs we have either become identified with,
internalized, or fanaticized is the first step in moving towards our
Authentic Self in any situation. Accepting the truth at that moment is
accepting ourselves for who we are, attachments and all. From this point
of acceptance, the question will be: "Do I want to keep the attachment?"

If we choose to keep it, and sometimes we will, that is fine, because we
are doing so while being aware of the attachment and choosing to live
life in that way. If we don\'t want to keep it, then we can make a
choice to begin to let go. The freedom to choose between these two
options is the manifestation of our intent, the power of choice.

[]{#part0017.html_page_91}As we grow more attached to what we believe,
it is much more difficult to see the power of our intent. This is
especially true when we have agreements that do not allow us to detach
without first judging ourselves for even thinking of changing our mind.

## []{#part0017.html_ch11-sec002 .calibre5}Moving from Level Five to Level Four {.subtitle}

In Levels Five and Four, Fanaticism and Internalization, the Dream of
the Planet influences the way we view ourselves and how we behave. In
other words, domestication reigns above all else. Moving from the
extreme point of Fanaticism (the loss of humanity) to Internalization
requires the ability to see that our life and all life is more valuable
than any idea or belief.

Love and respect for self and others is the beginning to letting go of
fanaticism. We cannot give what we do not have; respect for life starts
with our own, and love is the grounding source for this respect. Seeing
that our life is worth something allows us to see that the life of
another individual is just as special. But to let go of the most extreme
form of conditional love requires an ability to question the agreements
that are tied to it. The act of []{#part0017.html_page_92}questioning
produces a moment of clarity that allows us to see our truth.

A consequence of this attachment to knowledge at the level of Fanaticism
is that we impose self-judgment upon ourselves for even thinking that
there may be another way in the form of questioning: For example, how
dare I think of any other possibility other than Toltec? I\'m a traitor
to the philosophy! I should burn for this treachery!

When we are at Level Five, it is difficult to even question our
attachments. However, questioning is indeed the way to break through the
grip our attachment to knowledge has upon our will. This process is a
bit like being on the monkey bars---the only way to move forward is to
let go of the bar that is behind us as we propel ourselves forward to
reach for the next bar. If we do not let go of the previous bar, we
won\'t be able to move forward.

A moment of doubt in a belief can be the crack that will begin to expand
our perception. Doubt in the form of skepticism with the willingness to
learn allows us to withhold our agreement until we have clearly heard
and considered everything that pertains to our belief. Skepticism makes
it possible to reassess a belief and make a decision to hold on to it by
saying yes or no. []{#part0017.html_page_93}Remember, there is a yes at
the root of every belief we have, but a no can be enough to change our
beliefs. Our no is just as powerful as our yes. This is the assertion of
our will, and our becoming aware of it allows us the opportunity to no
longer be subjugated by our knowledge. Here, we begin to realize that
we---not our knowledge---are in control.

To recap, moving from Level Five, Fanaticism, to Level Four,
Internalization, requires an awareness of the knowledge we perceive and
then asking ourselves: Do I really believe this? Why do I believe this?
Does this belief serve me? Reevaluating our beliefs introduces the
option to continue to believe or to change. The mere act of exercising
choice allows us to once again become aware of our own will. Letting go
of Fanaticism is to allow ourselves to listen to what we perceive and
reassess our willingness to say yes or no to it with awareness; to
choose to redirect the focal point of our attention as we become more
aware of the vast possibilities life is offering us. The best way to let
go of illusion is to say yes to the truth when it is presented to us.

## []{#part0017.html_ch11-sec003 .calibre5}[]{#part0017.html_page_94 .calibre5}Moving from Level Four to Level Three {.subtitle}

Moving from Level Four, Internalization, to Level Three, Identity,
requires that we recognize our attachment to the mechanism of
conditional love. Acceptance and rejection itself (our narrators\'
distorted commentary) is, according to Toltec tradition, the catalyst
for the distortion or corruption of knowledge that allows us to
internalize our identity. When we let go of that internal struggle
between truth and lies, we cross over to Level Three, Identity. In our
tradition, this rebellion represents the birth of a Toltec warrior: when
we recognize that the mechanism has a hold of us, we make a choice to
not believe in it, thus beginning an internal war for our own personal
freedom.

My father\'s beautiful work, *The Four Agreements*, and *The Fifth
Agreement*, a collaboration between my father and my brother don José,
as well as the works of many other great spiritual and inspirational
teachers and masters from other beautiful traditions, provide us with
incredibly useful tools to help us move from Level Four,
Internalization, to Level Three, Identity.

For example, when we make the choice to practice the Toltec agreements,

1.  []{#part0017.html_page_95}Be impeccable with your word
2.  Don\'t take anything personally
3.  Don\'t make assumptions
4.  Always do your best
5.  Be skeptical, but learn to listen

we begin to let go of those agreements and conditions by which we deem
ourselves unworthy of our own love and begin to see our attachments from
a perspective of objectivity. We also become aware that our attachment
to domestication may even tempt us to use these Toltec agreements of
personal freedom (or any such tools for transformation) as the
conditions of self-acceptance and our acceptance of others. Thus, we
distort these tools from the instruments of transformation that they are
intended to be into the Five Conditions of our personal freedom.

How do we keep our choice to pursue our personal freedom from becoming
the conditions of our own acceptance? We apply the lessons by our own
choice and remain aware that they are merely the tools we use to guide
our intent as we practice the mastery of our own self-love---in other
words, we begin to use knowledge as []{#part0017.html_page_96}an
instrument to help guide our intent with awareness. This requires a
choice to accept ourselves for who we are. The moment we realize that we
can love ourselves just the way we are, we can see that domestication is
no longer needed; our acceptance is no longer in the future. We are
living that love at this moment. Becoming aware of our actions, taking
responsibility for our own will, and repenting, if need be, allow us to
forgive ourselves and others for our actions and theirs, which helps us
to let go of domestication.

### []{#part0017.html_ch11-sec004 .calibre5}*Exercise: Using a Labyrinth in the Toltec Tradition* {.subtitle1}

In my family\'s Toltec tradition, we practice a method of forgiveness
and letting go of our domestication, as well as our emotional wounds and
poison, by using the labyrinth---a single-path maze. It is a symbol and
ceremony used in various ways by many tribes and traditions of the
world. The particular exercise that follows is performed in our Toltec
tradition, but it is not the only way to use the labyrinth as a tool for
transformation.

Envision yourself at the beginning of the labyrinth. First, you must be
willing to enter. If you are not ready to forgive and let go, you have a
choice to not enter the []{#part0017.html_page_97}labyrinth. This
exercise only has power if you say yes by your own will, and by your own
will alone will you be able to engage in the exercise. If you do choose
to enter, this is the action of saying, "Yes, I am ready to forgive and
take responsibility for my own will."

As you enter the labyrinth, imagine it is a road map of your past that
leads to your present moment in life. With every turn, envision a
person, a moment, or a belief that you have used in some way to
domesticate yourself. What or whom have you used to subjugate your own
will in order to be accepted by yourself or others? When you hold that
vision in your mind---a person for example---stop, envision him or her,
and become aware of how their words have contributed to your
domestication and say, "Forgive me. I have used your words to go against
myself." Although that person might have used his or her words and
actions to domesticate you, or to cause you harm or pain, you are the
one who ultimately said yes to the belief and allowed it to blossom in
your mind.

Becoming aware of your responsibility for your half of a relationship is
crucial as well---it\'s not just the other person\'s fault. Recognize
that you have been using someone else\'s words or past actions to
potentially cause both of you harm, simply by saying yes. The action of
saying yes is []{#part0017.html_page_98}letting their words and actions
impact you, allowing them to hurt you or go against you. Their words and
actions have power to hurt you only by permission, because you chose to
agree with them.

Forgiveness happens the moment you say no to carrying this pain, this
weight, this hurt, and let go of it all. Say aloud or to yourself,
"Forgive me, I have used your words and actions against myself, and I
will no longer use them to hurt myself again." Forgiveness is the action
that allows us to move forward in the labyrinth.

In my case, I can envision people who have judged me for the sake of
domestication from their point of view: "Forgive me, I have used your
words and actions against myself, and I will no longer use them this
way." Of course I can also see the people who told me the truth,
especially when I was hurting myself, and I thank them for their clear
reflection of my actions.

Continue through the labyrinth, repeating the same action of forgiveness
as new people and situations come to mind---whatever person or wound
hooks your attention at that moment. That is the next one you are ready
to face and to forgive. As you reach the end of a labyrinth, you may
either find yourself at an exit or at a point in the very center. For
the sake of this illustration, you will find
[]{#part0017.html_page_99}yourself at the entrance to the center of the
labyrinth. Stop here.

Look at the entrance to the center point and envision a mirror. Walk up
to that mirror and see your own reflection. When you are ready, repeat
these words: "Forgive me, I have used your words most of all to go
against myself, and I will no longer use them to hurt myself again." The
action of entering the center point of the labyrinth represents the
moment you forgive yourself. This is the action of your own forgiveness
and of reclaiming the power, or the impeccability, of your own word---of
your own intent. You are worthy of your own forgiveness, as much as you
are worthy of your own love.

At this point in this exercise, you have let go of the past by
recognizing that the only thing that exists is this present moment. The
labyrinth itself is now the past, and you can let it go as you forgive
yourself. With awareness, you can now draw the knowledge from your past
to make choices in the present moment. The labyrinth expands as you live
your life, but the only truth is in that center, that present moment
where you are alive. The labyrinth ceremony ends when you recognize that
you are worthy of your own love because you are alive in this very
moment.

[]{#part0017.html_page_100}![Image](images/00002.jpeg){.calibre1}

This ceremony is a living symbol; it only has power through our intent.
Like the active work of applying the lessons and writings of the masters
and teachers who help us heal from our wounds, the labyrinth is meant to
represent the active work of letting go of illusion. Letting go of our
knowledge in the form of Level Four, Internalization, allows us to once
again reclaim our personal freedom from the tyrant of our domestication
as we move to the third level of attachment, Identity.

When we are no longer controlled by the distorted voices of our
narrators, our identity gives our experiences significance and allows us
to understand them by using our knowledge as an effective, helpful tool.
Thus, our identity and our knowledge enable us to interact with the
Dream of the Planet with a power we do not have when we are at the level
of Internalization.

In order for us to relate to and be a part of the Dream of the Planet,
knowledge needs to understand us. This is the function of knowledge: it
fulfills a need to understand ourselves and the world in which we live.
We use it to manage our experience of life and to express
[]{#part0017.html_page_101}our impressions of it. The philosopher René
Descartes\' famous proclamation "I think, therefore I am" is the
expression of this attachment to identity. But "I think, therefore I am"
is uncorrupted by the mechanism of judge and victim since it no longer
has to distort knowledge to fit the attachment; it simply describes what
is without distortion.

The attachment to identity is the personification of knowledge as
ourselves; we call ourselves a concept in an effort to make sense of our
complex selves. The moment we let go of our attachment to identity is
the moment we become aware of the separation of our being and what we
know. Knowledge exists only because we are alive, and our will is the
bridge between knowledge and ourselves in the form of our choice between
yes and no.

## []{#part0017.html_ch11-sec005 .calibre5}Moving from Level Three to Level Two {.subtitle}

Moving from Level Three, Identity, to Level Two, Preference, is the
moment we become aware of ourselves without needing to identify
ourselves. Level Three is like having a mask you don\'t realize you can
remove. The moment you understand that the image of the mask is
[]{#part0017.html_page_102}not you, you regain the awareness of your
true self---an individual who is completely free to take any direction
in life.

At the root of everything that gives form to our belief systems there is
a yes. That yes gives life to an idea, a symbol, or a story because it
has your intent. Each person\'s identity has a meaning because they give
it a meaning by agreeing with it. Letting go of the attachment to an
identity is recognizing that there is a clear separation between you
(the Authentic Self ) and knowledge. That line is your yes and your no;
it is your intention.

When you recognize your truth, that you are a living being regardless of
what you know, you are free to let go of the attachment of needing to
know who you are, because you have the awareness that you are. When you
authentically choose how you want to engage in your own life, as well as
in the Dream of the Planet, the mask of your identity no longer has to
shield your Authentic Self in order to have a voice. You are in control
of your intention, your personal dream.

The hallmarks of this level of attachment are that you love yourself
unconditionally in this present moment; you play in the Dream of the
Planet knowing that your yes and no give life to your art; and you
understand that truth []{#part0017.html_page_103}exists regardless of
whether or not you believe in it, while a belief only exists for as long
as you believe in it.

Let\'s revisit the imagery of the Smokey Mirror through our Toltec
Tradition. We\'ve broken through the smoke enough to see the mirror as
we let go of Fanaticism; we\'ve cleared the smoke as we let go of
Internalization; and we\'ve become aware that the mirror only reflected
the truth as we let go of Identity. Now, as we let go of Preference, we
become aware of being the truth that the mirror reflects.

## []{#part0017.html_ch11-sec006 .calibre5}Moving from Level Two to Level One {.subtitle}

Preference is based on an awareness of the Authentic Self, the living
being that is me, and the willingness to engage life. We have the
awareness that in the present moment can take any direction, but there
is a preference for a certain direction. Regardless of that preference,
or the action we may take based on it, the awareness of the Authentic
Self will endure. We can engage completely in the moment or concept.

Moving from Preference to the Authentic Self is simply the act of
disengaging from our preferences as the moment passes. We can then
reengage (attach) or disengage (detach) at will when we choose to live
in the moment.

### []{#part0017.html_ch11-sec007 .calibre5}[]{#part0017.html_page_104 .calibre5}*What Is the Authentic Self?* {.subtitle1}

What\'s in a name? That which we call a rose

By any other name would smell as sweet.

---W[ILLIAM]{.small} S[HAKESPEARE]{.small}

The level of the Authentic Self is a name or term that simply describes
the living being that has the capacity to engage life. Our Authentic
Self is present throughout each and every level; we simply have filters
that block our awareness of it. We can choose to be our Authentic Self
as a being who is completely free from attachment, if that is what we
choose to be. This state can be temporarily reached through meditation
and other similar practices. (I say *temporarily* because our awareness
normally fluctuates throughout our lives as we engage the Dream of the
Planet and are tempted by the mechanism of the judge and the victim.)

The Authentic Self is the living being that gives life to our bodies,
enabling us to perceive and project life and interact with the Dream of
the Planet; it is the energy that moves this pen across the paper until
the being leaves this body. It is pure, unlimited potential.

"What is 'me,' if it\'s not my identity or my Authentic Self?" is the
question my knowledge asks of me. Even the label we are using---"the
Authentic Self"---is a symbol to express
[]{#part0017.html_page_105}something we want to understand. *Who am I?*
This is one of the most important questions on the spiritual path. The
answer cannot be put into words, yet I know that I exist. Just as I can
say, "I am not this body," I can also say, "I am not this mind." I am
just this living being giving both my body and my mind life---an empty
definition whose meaning can only be determined by my yes or no.

![Image](images/00002.jpeg){.calibre1}

The Five Levels of Attachment aren\'t rules or guidelines for
"achieving" Level One, the Authentic Self. The Five Levels are simply a
framework to help us become aware of where we are at this moment in
relation to the various things in our life. We can look at any situation
and determine what is driving our thoughts and behavior as far as a
particular attachment is concerned.

With awareness of how attached we are to a particular belief or idea, we
regain something very important: our ability to make a choice, to say
yes or no all over again. The true freedom we have as individuals is to
be able to choose with full awareness of what we want and don\'t want,
instead of allowing our knowledge to dictate what
[]{#part0017.html_page_106}we are supposed to be or choose. Our freedom
to choose is true freedom; it is free will.

If we choose to remain attached to something that brings us pain, it is
because that thing also comforts us in some way. Knowing this, we have
the opportunity to further examine ourselves. If we are unaware, we go
through life with blinders on, a slave to the distorted commentary of
our narrators. But with awareness, we will be able to answer my
grandmother\'s question: "Is knowledge controlling you, or are you
controlling knowledge?" The answer is the truth of where I am at this
moment, and the truth will set me free.

When you are ready to let go of an attachment, all that is required to
begin is a willingness to say, "Yes, I want to let go." And that is the
simple beauty of it. From a place of awareness, we no longer require the
mechanism of the judge and victim to motivate ourselves. Our new
motivator is passion, stoked only by unconditional love and recognition
of our limitless potential to move forward in the trajectory of our
choosing.

[]{#part0018.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0018.html_ch12 .calibre5}[]{#part0018.html_page_107 .calibre5}CHAPTER 12 {.chapnum}

# Uncovering Our Stories and Assumptions {.chaptitle1}

It\'s one thing to define and illustrate attachments in general, but it
is quite another to recognize attachments in ourselves. This can be
achieved by examining our beliefs and their effects on our Personal
Dream. There is a difference between learning from our own experience in
life and learning from what others tell us their experiences have been.
Just like in the teachings of my family, I didn\'t understand until I
was able to see a concept or trait in myself. It is my intention that
the next section will help guide you on your personal journey of
self-exploration.

## []{#part0018.html_ch12-sec001 .calibre5}[]{#part0018.html_page_108 .calibre5}Exercise: Uncovering Your Assumptions {.subtitle}

Begin drawing a circle on a piece of paper until you are about
three-quarters done, then stop. Even though you have not completed it,
you can still recognize the shape as a circle. This is because the mind
has the ability to make the assumption that we are looking at a circle
and will complete it for us. The same is true if we draw two sides of a
triangle. We see it as a triangle.

Based on our past experiences, our mind has the uncanny ability to fill
in the missing parts when all the information is not available. This is
the Gestalt principle of closure: our minds react to familiar patterns
even though we have received incomplete information. Artists use this
method when creating conceptual art, which is often quite
thought-provoking and mind-boggling.

But the mind doesn\'t just do this with geometrical shapes. It fills in
gaps to make assumptions about *everything*. The mind shows preference
when adding information, too, and favors adding what it thinks it
already knows---that is, it supplements incomplete new information with
the beliefs it is already attached to. As an example, let\'s pretend I
am a man who is brokenhearted []{#part0018.html_page_109}over my last
relationship in which my girlfriend left me for another guy. I have a
new girlfriend whom I\'ve been dating for a few months. I am waiting for
her phone call. As time passes by I wonder, Why hasn\'t she called? It
is seven p.m., and she should be finished with work. And then my mind
attempts to answer my question. Here are some possibilities that my mind
comes up with, based on my past experience, to "complete the triangle":

1.  She is out with her girlfriends.
2.  She is at the gym working out.
3.  She is with another man.

Although I didn\'t have all the information, my mind came up with three
possibilities. If I am unaware of my attachment to past experience that
I label as knowledge, I will gravitate to the story that best fits my
narrative: "She is with another man!"

Coming from a place of unawareness, my emotional reaction is to grab
hold of this last assumption and think back to any time when she wasn\'t
available for me. As I do so, my anger and my attachment grow, and my
mind reinforces my insecurity with even more assumptions. Of course,
that explains everything! I think.

[]{#part0018.html_page_110}At that moment the door opens, and in walks
my girlfriend with shopping bags full of food and goodies. "Surprise!"
she says. I turn around in anger, and shout, "You are cheating on me!"
*BANG!* Fight.

Because I was still stuck on my last failed relationship, my insecurity
was dominant, and the assumption that my new girlfriend had also cheated
on me best fit my storyline. Coming from a healthier place, I could have
attached myself to one of the other assumptions, or no assumption at
all. But my attention went to the information that fed my insecurity
because it felt most familiar to me at the time. This is the problem
with making assumptions.

To make matters worse, we not only are predisposed to assume things, we
also become attached to our assumptions and convince ourselves of their
truth. They complete the missing line in the story so that we can grasp
a "whole truth" by shining light (what we think we know based on our
previous knowledge) into the darkness of the unknown. But it is a line
of information that is not based in truth; it is a line that satisfies
an internal need for resolution. We are willing to even distort this
line so that life fits what we believe it should be based on prior
experiences.

If the actions we take in life are based on information
[]{#part0018.html_page_111}we perceive, not having all the information
can stop us in our tracks. Our sense of security is often dependent on
knowing the big picture and taking the right actions, although we cannot
possibly know everything. From that point of view, there is a need for
assumptions to reinforce our sense of security. The more we are attached
to a belief that offers us that sense of security, the more attached we
are to the "correctness" of that assumption.

We are only one point of perception and cannot possibly be aware of
everything. Therefore, one action experienced by many will have many
stories to explain and justify it. Each person fills in their version of
the story with the familiar lines of what they assume to be true based
on their attachments. We are attached to creating a story about every
action from our own point of view, describing, explaining, and fitting
it into our own belief system. This is what we have been taught to do.

Let\'s say I stand up from where I am sitting, walk across the room, and
kiss your hand. The kiss is truth. The missing information is: Why did I
do that? What does the action represent? What does it all mean?

The answers to these questions are subjective and are based on what we
already know and all the possibilities that are available within our
belief system. Only I know []{#part0018.html_page_112}for certain why I
have kissed your hand. When we don\'t have all the information, often
the first story we tell ourselves is closest to the truth. You may say,
"Miguel kissed my hand to prove a point." But as we tell and retell our
story about the event, we add on to the story, often coming up with less
desirable possibilities, like in the example about my girlfriend not
calling. Someone with distorted perception might end up convincing
herself that I kissed her hand out of pity because she is getting old.

Believing an assumption is a choice, though if I am *unaware* that my
mind is filling in gaps, then this is not really a choice at all. I am
at the mercy of my assumptions. But when I have that awareness, an
assumption allows me to consider a possibility that will only become
true the moment, and *only* at that moment, when it comes to fruition.
If the assumption is incorrect, with awareness I am able to simply
release it, and new possibilities abound. Seeing our attachments for
what they are allows us to see that an assumption is merely one
possibility.

When we are aware that our assumptions are not necessarily truth but
simply possibilities, little discipline is required to not act on them.
We already know that an assumption is a story we have created that shows
a possibility, []{#part0018.html_page_113}and if life presents a
different truth, then we detach from that possibility because it no
longer serves us.

## []{#part0018.html_ch12-sec002 .calibre5}Exercise: Discovering the Foundation of Your Beliefs through Assumptions {.subtitle}

Here is a little exercise for you: Tap into your memory and recall those
experiences by which you made assumptions that were later shown to be
untrue. Why did you make the assumptions you made? Identify the missing
pieces of information and think about why you chose to fill in the gaps
the way you did at the time. In almost every case, the stories you
create will be based on your attachments to certain belief structures,
and if you leave the source of these attachments uninvestigated, they
will assuredly cause you future suffering.

For example, in the earlier fictitious example of my girlfriend
surprising me with dinner, I had assumed she was late because she was
cheating on me. If this assumption goes unchecked, the wound of her
imagined betrayal would negatively impact my emotional sense of self and
reinforce my faulty beliefs about relationships just as if it had been
true. In other words, a wound that was created
[]{#part0018.html_page_114}by an assumption will have a lasting impact
as an attachment until the moment I see the fallacy of my assumption.

But you can\'t stop with just recognizing the assumption; the purpose of
this exercise is to become aware of the foundation of your
beliefs---especially the ones that have a negative impact on your life.
When we build our belief structure on assumptions and we become attached
to that structure, we are living in ignorance. The truth, however, is
the path to freedom. Becoming aware of those assumptions, and the source
of our attachment to them, allows us the opportunity to truly heal from
a wound.

## []{#part0018.html_ch12-sec003 .calibre5}The Quest for Truth versus the Quest for Being Right {.subtitle}

When you become aware of how attachment distorts and corrupts knowledge,
you can begin to see how some people easily confuse the quest for truth
with the quest for being right. These are not the same thing. The quest
to be right is about self-importance: we need to be right in order to
accept ourselves; this is a condition we place on our self-acceptance
and our acceptance of others. The quest for truth, on the other hand, is
the desire to discover---regardless of whether our beliefs are supported
in the process.

## []{#part0018.html_ch12-sec004 .calibre5}[]{#part0018.html_page_115 .calibre5}Making a Choice to Accept or Reject Our Beliefs {.subtitle}

My grandmother, Madre Sarita, was a faith healer. People who witnessed
her actions would create fantastical stories about them, attributing
magical qualities to her ability to help others achieve better health.
They called themselves believers. Every time she healed someone, an
observer would analyze and describe her actions, making it all sound so
phenomenal and otherworldly. My grandmother would always say, "God
healed this person, not me," yet others would still put their own spin
on it and spread their belief to others.

Since these fantastic stories were about my grandmother, I really wanted
to believe in them. I had witnessed many of the same events, as I saw
many people truly recover from their ailments. But I began to notice
that other people\'s perceptions of what had happened didn\'t
necessarily fit mine. While I felt an experience, other people tried to
explain it by calling it magic. Somewhere between the lines was the
truth, but all the superlatives kept it hidden. This made it mystical
and fueled fanaticism in those people who were firmly attached to such a
belief. So at a young age, I had to learn to decipher what
[]{#part0018.html_page_116}was truth and what was just a story. I
learned to rely on my own perception but to question my own perception
as well.

If I had tried to tell someone who insisted Madre Sarita had performed
magic that they were misperceiving something about the action, they
never would have believed me. After all, they were speaking of something
they had personally witnessed and benefited from: *magic*. The believers
would dismiss anyone who disagreed with them as not being able to
understand. So I learned to let it go. As I became aware of my
attachment to being right, my need to convince them to see it from my
point of view was reflected back to me.

Later, I thought I could depend on things I learned in school to be
true. After all, what I was learning was drawn from common sense and
history. Then one day my father told me not to believe everything I was
learning in school. In much the same way people had interpreted Madre
Sarita\'s actions, people had interpreted the stories and ideas I was
being taught. That news really threw me for a loop, but I came to
understand that I had to look for the truth in *all* cases.

In Mexico, where I spent much of my childhood, there is a story that
schools teach about six heroic cadets who
[]{#part0018.html_page_117}defended themselves in the war against the
United States. At the Battle of Chapultepec, the U.S. Army came into
Mexico City from the west and tried to take over the palace. Six cadets
remained, and they defended the palace and the city, but they fell one
by one. Juan Escutia, the last of Los Niños Héroes, refused to be taken
by the enemy. He wrapped himself in a Mexican flag and threw himself
from the palace point.

When you go to Chapultepec Castle and see the area where he supposedly
landed and then look to the stone marking the point from where he
supposedly jumped, it seems impossible for him to have accomplished this
feat. Modern historians refute this patriotic myth, and some say the
cadets never existed at all, despite genealogical evidence. Fact or
fiction, it is taught in history textbooks. Mexico is not the only
country or culture whose textbooks contain stories rather than facts.

As a child, I believed the story of Los Niños Héroes because I didn\'t
know better. Now, I have the choice to believe it or not. I know that
within the words a feeling of patriotism can be found. That is truth,
even if the story is false.

I choose to believe I am Toltec, a descendent of the Eagle Knights,
because I choose to believe the words of []{#part0018.html_page_118}my
great-great-grandfather don Exiquio, who passed away when he was 116
years old. He was already an elder when my grandmother was born in 1910.
His word stands. This belief is a leap of faith. My family may pass on
the teachings of Eagle Knights, but are we truly descendants, as our
oral traditions tell us? Knowing that our history is based on word in no
way negates it. I also have to be honest in understanding that the
stories we tell now contain generations of distortions and adaptations.
Still, the lessons remain the same, and so I *choose* to believe in the
lesson. That is my *preference*.

The stories that we tell about ourselves to make us feel comfortable and
safe are simply history. We can choose to believe because we want to,
keeping in mind that the stories do not describe the truth of who we
really are. And we must be careful, as the very act of wanting to
believe in these stories blinds us to the truth. Believing the stories
without question or scrutiny ultimately leads to disillusionment, as we
become attached to the identity we have created for ourselves through
the telling of the story. Remember, a story can describe a moment, an
experience, a lesson in life; but regardless of how clean a reflection
of the truth it may be, it is still a story that we can choose to
believe or not.

[]{#part0018.html_page_119}Things in our world go beyond reason and
logic. But to believe---in the mystical, or in the scientific---without
being skeptical is letting knowledge take control. The fantasy then
becomes more real than life itself, to the point where we spend so much
time looking for the spectacular that we don\'t realize joy can be found
in the everyday occurrences happening all around us.

When we base our identity and self-importance on what we believe,
regardless of whether it is in the earthly or the supernatural realm, we
will find it difficult to be skeptical. And when we question everything
we believe in, the foundation on which we have built our identity will
prove to be shaky. But remember, self-confidence is being able and
willing to question your own beliefs.

Many people believe that self-confidence means standing behind your
beliefs one hundred percent. If you fail to listen to what else is going
on in the world and only rely on what you think you know and believe,
you\'ve attached yourself to an idea that blinds. This is not
confidence; it is stubbornness. We are conditioned to behave in such a
way that whenever we encounter a truth that contradicts something we
believe, we are quick to either reject it or create a story that
protects our belief and further weaves a web of distortion. In so
[]{#part0018.html_page_120}doing, we keep distorting our faith further,
forming new beliefs to keep our sense of self safe.

The lesson here is to shift our confidence away from our beliefs and
back to ourselves, since we are the living beings who give life to the
beliefs in the first place. In other words, rather than having
confidence in *what* we know, we have confidence in *who we are*.
Instead of defending or debating a belief with all our might, we look
and listen to what is going on around us. Questioning ourselves and
being open to changing our minds about something does not mean that we
must question our core being. With self-confidence, we can simply
question our beliefs and the stories we\'ve created to describe our
being.

Ask yourself,

- Where did I learn that belief?
- How is that belief affecting me?
- Am I using that belief well?
- Do I still need that belief?

These questions can help you identify the things that inhibit your full
potential. Consider a particular issue, action, or relationship. Are
your past beliefs regarding that topic still true in the present? We
often fear that changing []{#part0018.html_page_121}our point of view is
admitting that something about us is wrong. Thinking we have been wrong
can lead to guilt, because actions we\'ve taken and things we\'ve said
have been based on that one belief. If we decide that a belief is no
longer working for us, it can potentially make us question every past
action that was based on that belief. It does not have to be this way.
Instead, we can choose to be aware that what works one day may not work
the next. Things change, and we do not need to go back over each and
every action. Our virtue has not been lost. Remember to proceed with
self-love and self-acceptance at all times, as this is the only path to
real and lasting change. In the next chapter, we will continue with the
exploration of how being unaware of our attachments can cause suffering
in our lives, especially when dealing with others.

[]{#part0019.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0019.html_ch13 .calibre5}[]{#part0019.html_page_123 .calibre5}CHAPTER 13 {.chapnum}

# Recognizing the Role of Attachments in Conflict {.chaptitle1}

Most of us have an ideal version of how we think the world should be. I
*have to.* You *must.* They *should.* It *has to be.* When we hear these
words, we are listening to the voices of our narrators expressing an
agreement that is at a higher level of attachment. The narrators are
reminding us how things are to progress within the framework of our
understanding in order for the world to be the way we want or expect it
to be. These are the rules we have created for ourselves to live
by---and if we fail to follow these rules, we judge ourselves (and
others) harshly. We have to get it "right," and our beliefs dictate to
us what that means. Depending on our level of attachment to a particular
[]{#part0019.html_page_124}belief, we may not waver in the least,
remaining so closed-minded that we cannot even think about alternatives.

Whenever we hear someone say that the world should be such and such way,
as beautiful as the idea may be, we must realize that it can be easily
corrupted, because for the world to be in this ideal state, the idealist
*must* impose his or her beliefs on others and subjugate those who
refuse to fit in with their "perfect" image of the world.

Sometimes we think that the only way to make someone a better person,
and, by extension, make the world a better place, is to convince them
that they should see things our way. But there are plenty of people
around us who don\'t behave the way we think they should, and we waste
energy trying to convince them to be something they are not, instead of
allowing them to be who they are.

When we think that we know more or better than someone else, we are
setting ourselves up for a clash of beliefs. This is what corrupts a
beautiful idea. The idea can be anything---organic food, civil rights,
tolerance, animal rights, world peace . . . or any seemingly noble idea
you can think of. A fanatical attachment to any of these ideas will
create more harm than good. Once the attachment to the belief outweighs
the importance of the message, it corrupts the idea; respect is lost,
and freedom is compromised. []{#part0019.html_page_125}Without respect
for the freedom of choice, peace is not possible.

When we become so attached to these "noble" beliefs, we use guilt or
place conditions on others to encourage them to conform to our
standards. We know we are doing this when we hear ourselves say things
like, "Aren\'t you ashamed of what you are doing?" or "How could you be
so thoughtless?" To bend others to our will, we look for anything that
tugs at their emotional structure---and when we cannot find any buttons
to push, we may become even angrier and more uncompromising.

In the case of loved ones whom we feel are harming themselves through
bad habits, we may think by instilling fear in them we can bring about
lasting change: You must get help! You have to let me help you! You
should not be doing this to yourself! Unfortunately, this type of
approach simply causes more pain. Someone who is shamed into making
changes isn\'t changing anything.

We are all free to choose our beliefs and create our attachments from
our own point of view. There is no one master plan that we all must
follow or perish! There are seven billion people living in our world,
and so there are seven billion different points of view. If we each
insisted that only our point of view is valid, then we would also
[]{#part0019.html_page_126}have seven billion clashes in our world. As
long as we engage in the I-am-right-and-you-are-wrong struggle, there
will always be conflict. It is our attachment to being right---our
attachment to our personal importance---that keeps us from experiencing
freedom in both our Personal Dream and the Dream of the Planet.

Freedom of choice is not about being right or wrong; it is about opening
up the channels of communication and respecting one another as human
beings in order to create a community that we share with one another.
When we become too attached to an ideal, the first thing that we lose is
respect; first for the people around us, and eventually for ourselves.
While our points of view may differ, we are all a product of the same
source. The only thing that separates us is our attachment to our own
point of view and our attachment to the belief that others must share
it. This is where we begin putting conditions on our love for one
another, and this is the source of conflict.

## []{#part0019.html_ch13-sec001 .calibre5}Defending Our Ideals {.subtitle}

Once you are aware of your beliefs, you will be able to question your
ideals and viewpoints. With awareness, this questioning will no longer
shake your foundation. You []{#part0019.html_page_127}will no longer
find yourself defending your viewpoints or imposing them upon others.

If two people who have very different beliefs argue, the argument might
never end. In an attempt to convince each other to change, to fit their
version of what they each believe is true, they create a veil between
them. Their inability to listen results in a lack of respect.

Although it may appear that one side is ahead for a while and then the
other, as long as each side is attached to their beliefs, the battle
never ends. It is only when one person is able to step back and listen
to the other without judging that is there is potential for a shift to
occur. By consistently questioning our own beliefs, we open up infinite
possibilities and avoid getting trapped inside a closed mind that only
wants to be right.

We do not need to defend ourselves or our beliefs against other
people\'s opinions and beliefs. Our only need is self-respect. When we
have self-respect, we do not take what other people say and do
personally. If we give in to the temptation to make someone else\'s
actions a personal affront, we have lost that self-respect by saying yes
to their agreement. Once we do this, the attachment to this belief makes
it necessary for us to switch our motive from one of defense to offense.
With one shift, we can easily go from []{#part0019.html_page_128}being
victim to aggressor, which has a whole new set of consequences. By not
taking things personally we do not give in to our personal importance
and can therefore make decisions based on mutual respect that will solve
problems instead of making them worse.

Recently, a worker came to my home to install something. As I do with
anyone who comes to my home, I sat and spoke with him, asking questions
and watching him work. He asked me what I did, and I explained a little
about what I do. He grew agitated, saying there is only one truth, only
one way, and everyone else just wants your money.

He spoke about his pastor and the teachings of his church, reiterating
that there is only one way. I didn\'t argue with him, I just listened to
what he was saying. By my grandmother\'s application, that is learning.
As he was leaving, he said to me, "When I die, I only have to answer to
one person. If I\'m wrong, well, I\'ll find out then."

He went on to tell me that the reason he believes is not because he had
love or faith, but because he wants to get into heaven. That was his
main purpose. At least that is what he said to me. He said, "Miguel, you
can say whatever you want to all those people, but remember there is
only one way, one truth."

[]{#part0019.html_page_129}Through listening to him, I had indeed
learned something. He shared his belief system, but that is not what I
learned. What I learned is that he honestly believed what he was telling
me. And who am I to say otherwise? Had I felt the need to retort, this
would have been based on my own attachment to my identity and my
beliefs, and a battle of personal importance would have begun between
us.

This worker showed me that if I had to chosen to argue with him, I would
be forming my own attachment to knowledge, which had nothing to do with
him. This gave me the freedom of choice. I was able to look at my belief
square in the face and chose to listen to both him and myself. How he
chooses to live his life has no bearing on how I live mine. Although I
can see how his attachments and his knowledge control him, I know that
it is not my place to object.

Instead of blindly and deafly arguing a point fueled by our personal
importance, we can at least be willing to admit that we might be wrong
or that the situation can be looked at from an entirely different
perspective, as in the case of the worker. When we choose to share our
truth with others from this place, we can begin building mutual respect.
When we look at our beliefs and viewpoints with
[]{#part0019.html_page_130}an open mind, it becomes clear to us how
attached we are to our own beliefs.

Being aware of our attachments allows us to regain power over our
freedom to choose whether or not we want to continue to hold them. The
choice is crucial. Sometimes we choose to root for our home team or
debate religion or politics with our family. Sometimes we choose to
devote a portion of our life to a cause or a movement, and sometimes we
choose not to. Having awareness, however, will let us know if our
personal importance begins to corrupt the essence of whatever activity
we have chosen to engage in. If we find ourselves vehemently defending
our position or cause, it means our attachment has crowded out our
awareness.

Listening to what others say without giving their words power over us
allows us to become aware of our own truth. It enables us to see what is
real for us and what is just an illusion---a lie fueled by personal
importance. The gift of listening will expose any illusions of personal
importance. If we are coming from a place of awareness, our truth does
not need to be defended through the ego-feeding mechanics of an
argument. It requires very little energy on our part to simply state our
truth, if we choose to state it. When the truth is simple, you know your
foundation []{#part0019.html_page_131}is solid. Of course, there may
come a time to stand up for that truth. If that time comes, you can be
confident that you are standing on firm ground with the full awareness
of the power of your own will.

![Image](images/00002.jpeg){.calibre1}

There comes a point in life when we grow tired of needing to be
right---especially when we see how this ego-feeding need affects our
relationships with people who just want to be our friends, with the
beautiful souls who just wanted to love us. Our attachments don\'t let
us see further than the tips of our own noses.

We all have a catalyst, a call to action, which moves us into making a
change in our life. This catalyst almost always comes from outside of
us, but as we become aware of how our filter of knowledge is
constructed, we realize that lasting change only comes from within. Our
changes affect how we interact with the people in our life and impact
the communal dream---the Dream of the Planet.

I am the one who said yes and no, I am the one who made all of my
agreements, and I am the only one who is able to change them. When I see
how my attachments are []{#part0019.html_page_132}affecting my
relationship with myself and the Dream of the Planet, I realize that I
am the only one who can change it. This is the awakening of our
intention in the form of our free will.

As you embark upon the final chapter of this book, I wish to leave you
with the idea that it truly is possible to engage in our human existence
while seeing beyond our attachments and fully experiencing life. My
intention is that the final chapter will provide you with the tools to
help you exercise your free will. That is the power you have, and I
celebrate that to the fullest. I only share my words; I have no power
over you. As the words reach you, you are the one who says, yes, I
agree, or no, I don\'t agree. That is the freedom of choice.

[]{#part0020.html}

![Image](images/00003.jpeg){.calibre1}

::: calibre9
:::

# []{#part0020.html_ch14 .calibre5}[]{#part0020.html_page_133 .calibre5}CHAPTER 14 {.chapnum}

# Honoring Our Emotions {.chaptitle1}

When we talk about it on paper, detaching or reducing our level of
attachment to something doesn\'t sound so difficult, does it? If we find
ourselves in an unhealthy situation, we walk away. If we fail to reach a
goal, we try again. If we want to make a change, we move forward with
our transformation. There is no need to complicate anything; we keep it
simple, moving from one interaction to another without becoming too
attached to any one outcome.

But in life it rarely happens this way. This is because we are human,
not heartless robots. Our emotions rise to the surface, and we initially
feel pain when we try to reduce our dependence on things outside
ourselves---the things to which we are most strongly attached. So the
question is, how do we deal with the emotions that arise on the path?

[]{#part0020.html_page_134}It\'s important to keep in mind that our
emotions are real and should not be ignored as if they don\'t exist or
stuffed away as if they aren\'t valid. Emotions create the most
authentic anchor we have to ourselves. The whole spectrum of
emotions---fear, love, jealousy, insecurity, anger, joy---is very real.
But here\'s the thing: What triggers those emotions may *not* be real.
At this point, you probably understand how this can be true.

Emotions help us communicate with each other. Without the ability to
express what we are feeling and to recognize how others feel, we would
be at some disadvantage. Take the example of my son, Alejandro, who is
diagnosed with high-functioning autism. We are teaching him how to
express his emotions so that we know what he is feeling and he can
interpret what others are feeling. One of the tools we use is a teddy
bear, a gift from his aunt, which shows different emotions. We are also
teaching him the words that go along with each emotion. This is the most
basic use of knowledge, and it is necessary for each of us to learn this
throughout our lives, as early as possible, so that we can express our
sense of self and convey our needs and desires within the Dream of the
Planet. Some of us, like my little girl Audrey, are really good at
sharing what we are experiencing emotionally. Some of us
[]{#part0020.html_page_135}are not as good at it yet, like Alejandro.
Still, an emotion is present with or without a label, with or without a
facial expression. An emotion is truth.

Again, what we are experiencing is real, but what triggered the feeling
could be based on an illusion or a distortion. Here is an example. I am
holding my newborn son, Alejandro, in my arms, and I am filled with
bliss. I am not thinking, I am simply allowing that moment to engulf me.
The emotion is real; the moment is real. I have not created a story in
my mind. Then, let\'s say that as I\'m holding him, a little thought
grows in my head: What if I lose him? All of a sudden that illusion,
that insecurity, that fear, has stirred in me. This little seed of fear
takes hold, and as I am exposed completely to the emotion, I feel that
fear of losing my son engulf me. I go from a moment of complete bliss to
a moment of pure terror. The trigger was an illusion, but I still felt
the emotions.

Our emotions---regardless of the triggers---are expression of ourselves.
These are the important questions to ask: Are we aware of the triggers?
Do we know if the trigger is based on reality or if it is based on
faulty information? Is the trigger based on an attachment to a certain
belief or expectation?

Whenever I\'m upset, I know that something I hold to
[]{#part0020.html_page_136}be true has been put to the test. I look at
that agreement inside and out and ask myself, is it an agreement based
on truth or illusion? If I am very attached to that agreement, I might
end up using a lot of my energy to keep it alive. If I have to struggle
that hard to give something life, it cannot be very solid, can it? If I
become skeptical, I am giving myself a choice to once again believe that
agreement or not.

Uncomfortable emotions are like car alarms: they let us know there is a
problem to attend to, a wound for us to work on, thus allowing us to see
our own truth. Whenever an emotion gets triggered, it is the opportune
moment to ask questions such as: What is this about? What agreement is
at the heart of this? What attachment does this threaten? Do I really
believe this? Is it important? Answering these questions gives us the
opportunity to examine our beliefs and choose whether or not to continue
to believe.

We honor our emotions by realizing that they are an expression of how we
feel and what we are going through. We look at what has triggered our
emotions, while still allowing ourselves to simply feel. We further
honor our emotions by having the awareness that they may have been
triggered by something not based on truth. Thus, we use our emotions as
a tool for transformation, because []{#part0020.html_page_137}they
completely expose whatever agreement has been hiding beneath the
surface. I am grateful to my emotions for telling me my truth, for it is
only through exposure that we regain the power to choose between "I will
continue to agree" and "I am ready to let go."

## []{#part0020.html_ch14-sec001 .calibre5}Clearing Away the Smoke from My Reflection {.subtitle}

When I look into the mirror, I perceive myself this way: I am . . .

- Miguel
- a Toltec
- a nagual
- a Mexican-American
- an American
- a mestizo
- a husband
- a father
- a writer

and so on . . .

[]{#part0020.html_page_138}When viewed through the rules of my
attachments, this is the list of self-definitions I might use as
conditional models for self-acceptance. Where there are conditions for
self-love, it is because my perception is controlled by internalization
or fanaticism. However, without attachments, each and every one of these
labels is just a definition that I can choose to either say yes or no to
as part of my identity. I can simply choose one of these identifications
as the preference by which I want to engage life for the moment.

My awareness gives me the opportunity to see my reflection as I am at
this moment. The mirror is reflecting my truth: a physical body that is
an empty symbol, much like the words in the above list, whose definition
of self is dependent upon my agreements. Even without definitions, it is
still reflecting a living being with the full potential to go in any
direction. Regardless of the name we give it---even a name such as
Authentic Self---it is simply reflecting life. Looking into a clean
mirror, without the filters of my belief system (the Smokey Mirror), I
perceive life as the "I am."

The clean mirror is the awareness that reflects the full potential of
life. How I define myself and what I say yes or no to (the execution of
my intention) are my choice. If I choose, I can call this awareness the
Authentic Self---the []{#part0020.html_page_139}representation of life
in the form of this body. Whatever I choose, I see myself just as I am.

Imagine looking into the mirror and seeing yourself just the way you are
at this very moment, without self-judgment. Maybe you become aware that
there is something about you that is interfering with your
health---physical or emotional. That is the truth of your body right
now. When you are looking into a clear mirror, you do not make a
self-judgment based on that truth, nor do you need to identify yourself
as being unhealthy in some way. You simply look at yourself as who you
are at this very moment.

Now, from a place of self-love, you can choose to take an action based
on your perception, which, in this case, is seeing the truth of the
condition of your health. This action is not a condition you place upon
yourself to earn self-love; you love yourself for who you are at this
moment. Whether you make a change or not has no bearing on this love.
This isn\'t complacency; you are actively making a choice, and that
choice is the action of your intent, your full potential.

There are 360 degrees of possibilities surrounding you. This
point---this now---is your potential. To move forward in any direction
is to make a choice; you say yes []{#part0020.html_page_140}to something
and no to all else. This is true regardless of whether or not you are
aware of the infinite possibilities present in each moment. As described
throughout these pages, the more attached you are to something, the more
your vision is obscured and narrowed, sometimes to the point where you
are convinced that there is only one way to proceed. Your attachment to
a belief cuts off your ability to see beyond that one possibility. So,
as you make choices to let go of attachments that no longer work for
you, your options seem to grow and expand. But what you are really doing
is increasing your perspective, as all possibilities are there all
along.

## []{#part0020.html_ch14-sec002 .calibre5}Reclaiming Our Power and Gaining Our Freedom {.subtitle}

As I mentioned in the introduction, my grandmother was my first teacher
in the ways of our tradition, and it was through my apprenticeship with
her that I learned to quiet my mind and trust my heart, allowing
inspiration to flow through me. My grandmother also taught me the power
of faith, especially in God, whom she credited for her abilities as a
faith healer. In her later years she began waking up at three a.m. to
pray and meditate with her rosary and candle.
[]{#part0020.html_page_141}Then she would begin healing, working, and
consulting with people in need throughout the day.

When I completed college, my father became the teacher of our
traditions. Through his guidance, I faced all the attachments I had
created throughout my life, letting go to the point where my every wound
was painfully exposed. In this way, I was able to heal from the pain of
my own creation.

It is not easy letting go, especially when the things we believe about
ourselves (even those that cause us pain) provide a familiar comfort
zone. When we place our personal importance on knowledge and that is
taken away, the crash is very harsh. Eventually, through the continued
and authentic process of releasing our attachments, we find that who we
are requires no justification to accept ourselves. This realization is
very powerful; it\'s like letting go of the railing when you are certain
you are free from any danger by falling.

At the time, my dad was spending time in Oceanside, California, and my
grandma was there for a visit. Always looking for teaching
opportunities, my father recognized an opportunity for a lesson.

"Miguel," he said to me. "Your grandmother is afraid of death. Help her
to let go."

[]{#part0020.html_page_142}I looked at my father with astonishment.

My grandma turned to me and raised her eyebrows as if to say "Oh
really?"

I swallowed. I did not want to do this.

"Miguel, help your grandma. Tell her why it\'s OK to let go of her
fear."

I immediately got up, and as my grandmother had taught me so many years
earlier, I cleared my mind, allowing myself to act and speak without
attachment to my thoughts. My job was to help her let go of her final
attachment: Level One, the Authentic Self.

I guided her wheelchair up to the big mirror in the hallway.

"Grandma, look at yourself in the mirror. You are beautiful. You are
wonderful. You are the most passionate, smartest, and toughest person I
have ever known. Imagine everything you hold to be truth---your family,
your children, your Bible, your rosary, your incense, your candles. You
have faith in all these things, and this same faith allows you to
perform miracles for others. You may have said that it was God who
healed people, and while that is still truth, it is also truth that your
faith allowed you to do it. Your faith is so strong that everything you
believe in comes alive with every breath you take. It is
[]{#part0020.html_page_143}your attachment to this physical form, to
which you give life, that keeps you from wanting to let go.

"Look into this mirror, Grandma, and imagine these things all around you
that you hold dear. Your faith is so strong that you put Sarita in each
and every single one of them. In the same way you have given life to
your thoughts, your beliefs, and your ideals, these things are alive
because of you. It is time to take your energy back from these things
and release your attachments to them. Let go of the fear of what you are
without them and what they are without you. When you take back your
power from these things, you will no longer identify yourself by them.
Then, there will only be you . . . you and your image of Sarita, your
body. When you are ready to let go of this final attachment, you will
pass away in peace."

Madre Sarita kissed me then and nodded. She passed away about a month
and a half later. She lived to be ninety-eight years old, and she was
always helping others. My love and gratitude for her are always going to
be with me.

![Image](images/00002.jpeg){.calibre1}

[]{#part0020.html_page_144}While we may not be talking about literal
death here as we discuss the prospect of letting go of our attachments,
we are talking about the potential death of how we identify
ourselves---the things we love, the knowledge we have, the ideas we
create. Everything we hold so dear is alive within us because of the
energy we give it through our attachments.

It is easier for us to attribute a power to something outside ourselves
than it is for us to see that *we are* the power that gives things in
our world life. We are the ones responsible for ourselves and our
reality. We are the creators of our own dream. This is why our
self-judgment is so strong and alive with a force that can hold us back
and rooted to the past---we gave our narrators the power! Fortunately,
we do not have to die to reclaim it. Independent of the attachments that
weigh us down, each one of us has the freedom to live life to the
fullest at any given moment. The field of possibilities awaits our next
step, and we can take that step confident in our ability to do so. When
we are aware and see the truth of infinite potential, that is ultimate
freedom.

[]{#part0021.html}

# []{#part0021.html_after .calibre5}[]{#part0021.html_page_145 .calibre5}Afterword {.chaptitle}

I have experienced a lot of life since I first started to apprentice in
my family\'s traditions. I have felt the ups and downs of life---from
confrontations to harmony, from feeling anger and fear to happiness and
love. I have learned that the key to all forms of transformation is
awareness. The starting point for any form of transformation is set on
our willingness to accept our truth at that moment of awareness, a
moment that moves with us along our path of transformation.

I developed an attachment to an outcome when I first started my work,
but I continued into a process that goes beyond that attachment. I saw
that there is an attachment to everything I have ever perceived---and
only because I was afraid of the unknown. We feel most at ease with our
safety net, of course, but as I began to move outside of that safety
zone, the levels of attachment began to take shape
[]{#part0021.html_page_146}and my understanding of my grandmother\'s
lesson was reflected in my life.

We all want to be a part of a group or a community, to find that place
that allows us to feel as one. We are always looking for that communion,
so in the end, all of this work is about the ability to have a
harmonious relationship with my brothers, my sisters, and myself. At
first I thought it was about a quest to discover the hidden secrets of
life, glazed with incredible stories of the metaphysical. But this
practice really is about life itself. It has always been about creating
a clear channel of communication with the people I love, starting with
myself.

Understanding the Five Levels of Attachment is the beginning of
reestablishing an unconditional relationship with ourselves. I start by
recognizing that my life is worth something and that my body and my mind
are the tools by which I am able to express myself---in love, intellect,
and awareness. Knowledge turns to wisdom when the information that
describes the world is a clear reflection of truth that flows and
evolves along with us as we move through life. Love starts with me.

We don\'t all live in a monastery or an ashram where we are surrounded
by people who are working toward the same end, allowing one another to
enter into silence and work []{#part0021.html_page_147}on our process.
Rather, we live in the Dream of the Planet, where we are continuously
interacting with people who find themselves at various levels of their
own attachments. As we interact with others and want harmony in those
relationships, the harmony starts with us. We become aware of ourselves
and accept ourselves, and we are then able to give to others what we
hope to receive in return.

The discipline of staying in that awareness while being able to relate
to others is called "Controlled Folly." This mastery cannot be started
without first becoming aware of our own truth, and the Five Levels of
Attachment are an instrument that allow us to see our present truth with
more clarity. As we begin to reconstruct our Personal Dream with greater
awareness into our personal great work of art (which is always in
progress), we have the ability to choose to create the most perfect
harmony, if that is our desire.

In the end, it is all about seeing knowledge as the building blocks to
co-create a dream with another person while maintaining our awareness of
self. I enjoy interacting with the Dream of the Planet. I enjoy using
knowledge to communicate my dream with you. I enjoy playing with the
world that surrounds me with respect and love. I am a part of this
creation. We can all become aware that it is love that bonds us to one
another. We can love each other with
[]{#part0021.html_page_148}conditions or with respect. The difference is
harmony---a form of heaven on earth. When we have respect for one
another\'s free will, then we have peace.

For me, home is no longer a physical place; home is me. It is everywhere
my heart and love go. Wherever I am, that is where I call home. What
better way to express our freedom than to let go of the wounds that have
kept us oppressed? What better way to use my words than to say I forgive
you? What better way to say I am free than to say that I love another
without fear?

Let us enjoy this moment in life. The past is done, the future is
coming, and the best way to say hello is by learning to say goodbye. I
am love and peace starts with me. I do not see race, creed, religion,
gender, or whatever else as a division of the human species. I do not
see a belief that tears me away from my brother and sister. I do not see
an ego, a personal importance that forbids me from communing with
everything in existence.

The point of life is to love, and to do so is a choice. In that choice I
take action, and in that action, I am love. I have a voice. I can use it
to oppress, or I can use it to liberate. I can create, I can lead, and I
can love. The same is true for you. Together we can say, I love.

All we have and are is love.

[]{#part0022.html}

# []{#part0022.html_ack .calibre5}[]{#part0022.html_page_149 .calibre5}Acknowledgments {.chaptitle}

With all of my love, I honor my teachers: my grandmother, Madre Sarita,
and my father, don Miguel Ruiz.

My gratitude to my family for teaching me how to love unconditionally:
my lovely Susan, my son Alejandro, my daughter Audrey, my Mama Coco, and
my brothers don Jose Luis and Leonardo Carlos. My abuelita Leonarda, my
abuelito don Luis, my aunt Martha, my Mama Gaya, my brother Ramakrishna
(Trey), and my sisters Kimberly-Jeanne, Jennifer, and Jules Jenkins.

I want to express my immense gratitude to Randy Davila for believing in
this project by being my publisher; to Carol Killman Rosenberg, for
helping me find my center by being my editor; to Kristie Macris, for
helping me find my voice to start this long journey; to Marilee Scott,
for helping me find the ground to stand on; and to Janet
[]{#part0022.html_page_150}Mills, for your guidance and the continuous
push for the essence of the word.

I want to pay tribute to all of my schoolteachers who taught me how to
use knowledge, especially Jean-Pierre Gorin, for teaching me how to tell
a story; Catalina Heredia, for believing in me and teaching me how to
learn analytically; and my Theory of Knowledge teacher, Maria Esther
Rodriguez Ruvalcaba, for reminding me that I really don\'t know
anything.

All of my love and respect to my father\'s students who were also my
spiritual teachers: Gary van Warmerdam, Barbara Emrys, Allan Hardman,
Ted and Peggy Raess, Gini Gentry, Rita Rivera, and HeatherAsh
Amara---you\'ve all taught me so much love. And to the community that
sprang from all of these teachings, my gratitude and love to you always.

[]{#part0023.html}

# []{#part0023.html_about .calibre5}[]{#part0023.html_page_151 .calibre5}About the Author {.chaptitle}

![Image](images/00004.jpeg){.calibre1}

At the age of fourteen, don Miguel Ruiz Jr. apprenticed to his father
don Miguel and his grandmother Madre Sarita. From that early age, he was
called upon to translate Madre Sarita\'s prayers, lectures, and
workshops from Spanish into English. In this way, through constant
repetition and review, he learned the content of her teachings in both
languages. Through interpreting for Madre Sarita, don Miguel Jr. came to
understand the power of faith. He saw firsthand how his grandmother
manifested her intent to heal people, both physically and spiritually.

Don Miguel Jr.\'s apprenticeship lasted ten years. When he reached his
mid-twenties, his father intensified his
[]{#part0023.html_page_152}training. At the apex of this power journey,
don Miguel said to his eldest son, "Find your way out. Go home and
master death by becoming alive."

For the past six years, don Miguel Jr. has applied the lessons learned
from his father and grandmother to define and enjoy his own personal
freedom while achieving peace with all of creation. Being able to apply
his teachings to the world around him gave Miguel Jr. a new
understanding of the lessons his father and grandmother had passed on to
him, once again giving him the desire to pass on his tradition. After
decades of training, Miguel Jr. was finally ready to share everything he
had learned. As a nagual in the Toltec tradition, he now helps others
discover optimal physical and spiritual health, so that they may achieve
their own personal freedom.

Don Miguel Jr. is married and has two young children. And so, as a
nagual, he begins once again to pass along the wisdom and tools of his
family\'s traditions in helping others to achieve their own personal
freedom and optimal physical and spiritual health.

[www.miguelruizjr.com](http://www.miguelruizjr.com)

[]{#part0024.html}

![Image](images/00005.jpeg){.calibre1}

Hierophant Publishing

8301 Broadway, Suite 219

San Antonio, TX 78209

888-800-4240

[www.hierophantpublishing.com](http://www.hierophantpublishing.com)

[]{#part0025.html}

![Image](images/00006.jpeg){.calibre1}
