THE EMOTION CODE How to Release Your Trapped Emotions for Abundant
Health, Love and Happiness

THE EMOTION CODE How to Release Your Trapped Emotions for Abundant
Health, Love and Happiness

Dr. Bradley Nelson Wellness Unmasked Publishing Mesquite, Nevada

First Edition, June 2007 Copyright © 2007 Dr. Bradley B. Nelson All
rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. No portion of this book may be used or reproduced in any
manner whatsoever without the written permission of the publisher,
except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and
reviews. For information contact: Wellness Unmasked Publishing 450
Hillside Drive Mesquite, NV 89027 Published in the United States by
Wellness Unmasked Publishing, a division of Wellness Unmasked
Incorporated, Mesquite, Nevada. "The Emotion Code", "Heart-Wall", and
"Body Code" are trademarks of Wellness Unmasked, Inc. Library of
Congress Control Number: 2007928684 Nelson, B. (Bradley), 1957The
Emotion Code: How to Release Your Trapped Emotions for Abundant Health,
Love and Happiness / Dr. Bradley Nelson. p. cm. Includes bibliographic
references and index. ISBN 978-0-9795537-0-7 (pbk.)

DEDICATION

To the memory of Bruce A. Nelson, Sr. and Ruth Nelson, my wonderful
parents, who always loved and believed in me. To the memory of Doctors
Ida Glynn Harmon and Allen Baine, (Doc and Ida) who healed my body when
I was a very sick boy and introduced me to the world of natural healing.
To Dr. Stanley Flagg, my teacher and mentor. Finally, to my wife Jean,
whose ideas, insights, contributions, dreams and support made this work
possible.

A NOTE TO READERS

The Emotion Code is a self-help method that quite often produces
marvelous results and wonderful benefits, both physical and emotional in
nature. Nevertheless, it is a relatively new discovery and has not been
thoroughly studied. This book is based on the personal observations and
experiences of Dr. Bradley Nelson. You, the reader, must take 100%
responsibility for your own health, both physical and emotional. The
Emotion Code should not be misconstrued or used to diagnose the presence
or absence of any particular mental, physical or emotional ailment.
Neither muscle-testing nor the Sway Test should be used to diagnose the
presence or absence of disease. This book is not intended to be a
substitute for the services of any health care professional. Neither the
author nor the publisher is responsible for any consequences incurred by
those employing the remedies or treatments discussed or taught herein.
Any application of the material set forth in the following pages is at
the reader's discretion and is his or her sole responsibility. The
stories in this book are all true, but the names have been changed in
some circumstances to protect privacy.

CONTENTS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Part I TRAPPED EMOTIONS 1 TRAPPED EMOTIONS: THE
INVISIBLE EPIDEMIC What is a Trapped Emotion? Your Future Held Hostage
The Damage Trapped Emotions Cause Trapped Emotions and Physical Pain
Trapped Emotions and Disease 2 THE SECRET WORLD OF TRAPPED EMOTIONS
Conscious versus Subconscious Talking to the Body The Sway Test Do You
Have a Trapped Emotion? Energy Medicine Trapped Emotions and Children
Trapped Emotions are Common The Resonance of Trapped Emotions The Dual
Nature of Trapped Emotions The Physical Effects of Trapped Emotions
Phobias Night Terrors Can You Afford to Keep Them? Part II THE ENERGETIC
WORLD 3 MYSTERIES OF THE ANCIENT ENERGY HEALERS

The Spirit and the Temple Thoughts are Things The Mysterious Quantum
World The Intelligent Universe Walking on Air Messages from Water The
Human Energy Field 4 HEALING WITH MAGNETS Your Magnetic Existence My
Introduction to Magnets A New Healing Tool Magnifying Your Intention The
Governing Meridian Part III USING THE EMOTION CODE 5 GETTING ANSWERS
FROM THE INNER MIND Muscle Testing Your Body Knows Best Testing Other
People Testing Yourself Nonverbal Communication Troubleshooting The Veil
of Memory 6 RELEASING TRAPPED EMOTIONS Step 1: Obtain Permission Step 2:
Establish a Baseline Step 3: See if a Trapped Emotion Exists Step 4:
Determine Which Emotion It Is Finding the Correct Emotion

Digging Deeper Releasing an Emotion from Yourself Releasing an Emotion
from Another Person Confirming the Release Dealing With Specific Issues
Processing the Release Prenatal Trapped Emotions Inherited Trapped
Emotions Pre-Conception Trapped Emotions The Emotion Code Flowchart 7
THE WALLS AROUND OUR HEARTS The Heart-Brain The Discovery of the
Heart-Wall Protecting the Core of You How We Are Meant to Live Children
and Heart-Walls Finding and Releasing the Heart-Wall Determining the
Heart-Wall Material Anne Horne's Story Counting the Cost 8 SURROGATES,
PROXIES & DISTANCE HEALING Surrogate Testing How to Do Surrogate Testing
Surrogate Testing Children Julie's Story Surrogate Testing Animals
Getting Permission Proxy Testing How to Do Proxy Testing

9 THE EMOTION CODE AND ANIMALS A Horse is a Horse, of Course... Working
on Animals Twiggs Gets Dognapped Brandy's Naughty Behavior Boofy the
Paranoid Cat Abandoned Puppies A Horse's Sorrow Amazing Horse Stories
More Amazing Horse Stories Part IV A BRIGHTER FUTURE 10 LIFE WITHOUT
TRAPPED EMOTIONS The Law of Attraction You Choose Your Emotions About
Letting Go About Pride About Forgiveness About Charity About Integrity
The Refiner's Fire of Life About Prayer ABOUT THE AUTHOR
HealersLibrary.com Seminars Nikken Magnets

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

My express thanks go out to those who have helped in the creation of
this work. To my patients, for allowing me to be their friend and
doctor, and for allowing me to share their stories. To my brother Greg,
for introducing me to magnetic healing and to a new way of seeing
things. To my brother Bruce, for teaching me about the power of
intention and the power of charity. To my sisters Michele and Noelle,
for their positive encouragement and love. To Donna Beech for listening
to me for hours on end, and for organizing my material and helping me to
get started. To Jean and Natalie Nelson and Ryan Muirhead for their
excellent help with editing and photography. To Kristi, Natalie, Jean,
Rhett, Ian, Elisabeth, Angela, Noelle and Cierra for modeling, and to
Drew and Joseph for their ideas and positive input. To Joseph, for his
artistic input and creativity, and to Drew for being so supportive and
helpful. To Isamu Masuda, for his dream of healing the world and for
creating the magnetic tools to do just that. To my wife Jean, for
sticking with me through thick and thin, for being my inspiration, my
helper and my best friend. Finally, to God for answering my prayers, for
blessing me with the gifts I would need to accomplish this work, for
making me an instrument of healing, and for guiding my life all along
the way.

PART I TRAPPED EMOTIONS

TRUTH IS STRANGER THAN FICTION, BUT THIS IS BECAUSE FICTION IS OBLIGED
TO STICK TO PROBABILITY; TRUTH IS NOT. -MARK TWAIN

1 TRAPPED EMOTIONS: THE INVISIBLE EPIDEMIC

Where would you be without your emotions? If the sum total of all your
experiences makes up the tapestry of your life, it is the emotions you
have experienced that give that tapestry its color. Our emotions really
do give color to our lives. Try to imagine for a moment a world where no
emotions could occur. No joy would be possible. No feelings of
happiness, bliss, charity or kindness. No love would be felt, no
positive emotions of any kind. On this imaginary emotionless planet,
there would be no negative emotions either. No sorrow, no anger, no
feelings of depression, and no grief. To live on such a planet would be
to merely exist. With no ability to feel emotions of any kind, life
would be reduced to a gray, mechanical ritual from cradle to grave. Be
grateful that you can feel emotions! But are there emotions you have
experienced that you would rather not have felt? If you are like most
people, your life has had its darker times. You have probably
experienced moments of anxiety, as well as other times of grief, anger,
frustration, and fear. You may have experienced periods of sorrow, as
well as depression, low self-esteem, hopelessness, or any of a wide
variety of negative emotions. What you may not realize is that some of
the negative emotions you've experienced, even though you may have felt
them long ago, may still be creating problems for you in subtle, yet
very damaging ways. The Emotion Code is about finding those old emotions
and releasing them forever. Much of our suffering is due to negative
emotional energies that have become 'trapped' within us. The Emotion
Code is a simple and powerful method of finding and releasing these
trapped energies. Many people have found that when they free themselves
of their trapped emotions they are able to live healthier and happier
lives. A single trapped emotion can create both physical and emotional
problems. The following real-life examples illustrate how releasing
trapped emotional energy using the Emotion Code can result in
astonishing and sudden

improvements in physical and emotional wellness: Allison's debilitating
hip pain left her instantly, and she was able to dance in her
performance that night... Linda's constant feelings of suicidal
depression went away... Jennifer's chronic anxiety was gone, and she now
felt the total confidence she'd been longing for... Laurie reported that
for the first time in her life, she could feel God's love for her...
Sheryl was finally able to shed her anger for her ex-husband, and create
a wonderful, loving relationship with a new man... Julia aced her court
reporting test, after failing several times... Larry's foot pain
disappeared along with his limp... Connie's allergies disappeared...
Neil's 2 year-long feeling of resentment for his boss vanished...
Yolaunda finally lost the weight she'd been struggling to lose for
years... Joan's bulimia was gone within a week... Tom's vision
improved... Jim's shoulder pain disappeared... Mindy's carpal tunnel
syndrome went away... Sandy's knee pain, which she had seen three other
doctors for, was gone in moments... Carol's night terrors, which had
plagued her for over 30 years, were gone within a week, and did not
return... I was present at each of these events and many others like
them. In many years of practice and teaching, I have seen countless
seemingly miraculous healings such as these, all as a result of simply
releasing trapped emotions using the Emotion Code. My purpose in writing
this book is to teach you how to find and remove trapped emotions from
yourself and from others. Whether you are a doctor or a fisherman, a
housewife or a teenager, you can learn the Emotion Code. It's simple.
Anyone can learn how to be free from the very real and damaging effects
of

trapped emotions.

What is a Trapped Emotion?

As you live through the days and years of your life you are continually
experiencing emotions of one sort or another. Life can be difficult and
emotions can sometimes feel overwhelming. All of us experience negative
emotional extremes at times. Most of us would rather forget some of
these challenges, but unfortunately, the influence of these events can
stay with us in the form of trapped emotions. Sometimes, for reasons
that we do not yet understand, emotions do not process completely. In
these cases, instead of simply experiencing the emotion and then moving
on, the energy of the emotion somehow becomes "trapped" within the
physical body. So instead of moving beyond your angry moment, or a
temporary bout with grief or depression, this negative emotional energy
can remain within your body, potentially causing significant physical
and emotional stress. Most people are amazed to find out that their
"emotional baggage" is more literal than they had imagined. Trapped
emotions actually consist of welldefined energies that have a shape and
form. Although they are not visible, they are very real. Neil's
Resentment

In this story, a Canadian teacher shares how a difficult situation
resulted in a trapped emotion that stayed with him, impacting his life
in a negative way. A number of years ago when I was teaching school, the
principal and I just did not get along well at all. We fought almost
from day one over one topic or another. She was extremely vicious,
vindictive, and emasculating in every way, shape and form. Finally,
about January of the school year, I bailed out. I saw my doctor, and
went on stress leave. He said, 'Take some time off and regroup and
recuperate.' So I did that for about three months, and at the end of
three months I went back to the school board with a clean bill of
health, but with a proviso from the doctor that I was not to be put back
into the same situation with this

rather nasty principal. Anyway, the feelings surrounding her and that
whole situation would never leave. They would well up often, and I would
ruminate on the situation, thinking about it, and I would feel my blood
pressure rising, and I would feel the anger and resentment building up
within me about the way I had been treated, and the fact that she never
had any disciplinary measures even though she had a history of being
rather sinister, if you will, to teachers who disagreed with her
approach to principalship. Anyway, this went on for 2 years. I couldn't
sleep at night because I'd be so bent out of shape from all the negative
feelings I was carrying. We were visiting Southern California and went
and saw Dr. Brad Nelson and went to his clinic, and he rolled a magnet
up and down my back, and released this feeling of resentment, and when
he did so, I felt, I actually felt, something leave me. And from that
point forward, even though I still don't like the woman, I don't have
the negative feelings and the rising blood pressure, the anger, the
resentment, which had possessed me for several years. So, that's the
story of an emotional blockage gone, with these principles and the
Emotion Code that Dr. Brad teaches. Neil B., Alberta, Canada

Your Future Held Hostage

Do you ever feel that you are struggling under the weight of something
that you can't quite put your finger on? Perhaps your life is not
turning out how you had hoped. Perhaps your attempts to form lasting
relationships never seem to work out. You may wish that certain events
in your past had never occurred but feel powerless to move beyond them.
You may even have an uneasy feeling that your present is being held
hostage by your past in some vague and indefinable way. Jennifer's
Self-Sabotage

Jennifer's experience is a good example of how trapped emotions can get
in your way. She was my daughter's close friend, a fun-loving college
student with a bright future. On her way home for the summer, she
stopped by to visit

our family. Her college life was going well, but she expressed concern
that events from her past still troubled her, and she wondered if she
was suffering from trapped emotions. She told me she'd been involved in
a tumultuous relationship with a young man the year before. Jennifer
said that since the failure of that stormy relationship, she felt the
sting of insecurity every time she met someone new, and had an unfounded
fear of commitment that she couldn't overcome. She told me that she
seemed to unintentionally sabotage every potential relationship that she
began. I tested her and discovered that there was indeed, at least one
trapped emotion that was contributing to her problem. I decided to help
her learn to treat herself, so she could continue to release her own
trapped emotions without my assistance, since she lived some distance
away. She quickly and easily learned the Emotion Code and proceeded to
find several trapped emotions in her body, most notably the emotion of
creative insecurity. This particular emotion arises from a lack of
confidence about creating things; from painting a picture, starting a
new job, or entering into a new relationship, etc. Jennifer had
experienced this emotion in her prior relationship, and it had become
trapped within her. She was able to release the creative insecurity as
well as a few other trapped emotions from her body within a few minutes,
and then continue her drive home. A few days later she called,
exclaiming that she felt an amazing difference. She said that she felt a
noticeable improvement in her ability to articulate her thoughts and
express herself in the company of a particular young man that she was
dating. Previously she had felt intimidated and shy around him, but
after releasing her trapped emotions she felt very at ease and
confident. Months later, she continued to watch the relationship grow.
She felt certain that she would have sabotaged it if she had not
released her trapped emotions. Getting rid of your trapped emotions can
help you to overcome the obstacles of your past and can bring new life
to your marriage, family, and other personal relationships. Freeing
yourself from your trapped emotions can make you feel more secure and
motivated, and can liberate you to create the relationships, career, and
life that you always wanted. People frequently sense that they are
somehow burdened by their past emotions, but they don't seem to know how
to get over them. Some seek help through traditional psychotherapy,
which does not directly address trapped emotions, but typically
addresses their symptoms.

Many people fail to perform up to their ability and have difficulty
making their life work as they should. Oftentimes, the underlying cause
of their frustration is a trapped emotion from a past event that they
may not realize is sabotaging their efforts. The next story is a perfect
example of how this can happen. Julia the Court Recorder

Julia was going to school to become a court recorder, and was excited
about her future job prospects. Court recorders learn to type on a
specialized phonetic machine, and have to type very rapidly and
accurately to record everything said in the courtroom. Julia did fine in
class, but whenever she had to take an examination where the pressure
was really on, she would fail. She was very worried, as she had failed
the test 3 times, and was afraid that this next examination would be her
last chance to pass. I tested her to see if there was a trapped emotion
that might be influencing her behavior in the testing situation, and the
answer her body gave was "Yes." In her case, the trapped emotion was
discouragement. When she was 15 years old she had gone through a
difficult time when her parents were divorcing. She had experienced
overwhelming discouragement which had become trapped in her body. In the
testing situation, with the pressure on, the trapped emotion of
discouragement would sabotage her performance. We released the trapped
discouragement, and she sailed through her next test feeling relaxed and
confident, and received a nearly perfect score. Julia had no idea that
her parents' divorce and her old feelings about it could be affecting
her negatively in the present. In the same way that the effects of the
wind are felt rather than seen, trapped emotions are invisible, yet can
exert a powerful influence upon you. It is my experience that a
significant percentage of physical illness, emotional difficulty and
self-sabotage are actually caused by these unseen energies. The Emotion
Code will help you reclaim your life, enjoy better health, and finally
be free from the insidious and subtle forces that trapped emotions are
exerting upon you.

The Damage Trapped Emotions Cause

Trapped emotions can cause you to make the wrong assumptions, overreact
to innocent remarks, misinterpret behavior and short-circuit your
relationships. Even worse, trapped emotions can create depression,
anxiety and other unwanted feelings that you can't seem to shake. They
can interfere with proper function of your body's organs and tissues,
wreaking havoc with your physical health, causing pain, fatigue and
illness. Yet, no matter how great your suffering may be, the invisible
energy of trapped emotions will remain undiagnosed by conventional
medicine, even though they may be a major causative factor in your
physical and emotional difficulties. To eliminate any kind of problem
that has to do with your health or wellbeing, the underlying causes of
the problem must be addressed. There are many powerful drugs that can
relieve the symptoms of disease. But when the drug wears off, the
symptoms often return, because the underlying causes of the disease have
not been dealt with. It is important for you to recognize and remove
your own trapped emotions before they cause more damage. You can live a
much better life by getting rid of them. This book proclaims the truth,
that trapped emotions are a significant yet hidden cause of much illness
and suffering, both emotional and physical in nature. Times Heals All
Wounds? Perhaps Not...

You've probably heard it said that time heals all wounds, but this is
not necessarily true. You may think you have let go of all your
emotional pain from prior relationships, and maybe you've had therapy to
deal with it. It may seem like it's all behind you now, but your body
can literally be inhabited by the invisible energies of old emotions.
These are wounds that time alone cannot and will not heal. They can
cause you to act and feel differently in your current relationships and
may even cause you to sabotage them. When a trapped emotion is released,
a burden is literally lifted. In fact, people often experience a feeling
of lightness upon the release of a trapped emotion. Finding and
releasing those trapped negative energies can literally make changes in
how you feel and behave, in the choices that you make, and in the

results that you get. The Emotion Code is about clearing away the
baggage, so that you can be who you really are inside. You are not your
emotional baggage, but sometimes your trapped emotions can derail you,
or cause you to travel on paths you'd rather not take. Trapped emotions
can keep you from living the vibrant, healthy life you are meant to
live.

Trapped Emotions and Physical Pain

In addition to obvious emotional pain, millions of people are suffering
from physical aches and pains. Many times there are unseen trapped
emotional energies that contribute to or create physical pain. The next
example illustrates how trapped emotions can exert an astonishingly
powerful influence over the physical body. Debbie's Broken Heart

Debbie had been a patient of mine for a year or so, when one day she
came into my office complaining of what she thought might be a heart
attack. She had chest pain and difficulty breathing; her left arm was
completely numb, as was the left side of her face. She said it had been
gradually getting worse for about 24 hours. I immediately had her lie
down and put my staff on alert that we may need medical assistance.
After checking her vital signs and finding them to be normal, I tested
her body to see if these symptoms were being caused by a trapped
emotion. The answer her body gave was "Yes." I continued to test Debbie,
and quickly determined that the trapped emotion was heartache. A little
more testing revealed that this emotion had become trapped in her body
three years earlier. At this point she burst into tears and exclaimed,
"I thought I'd dealt with all that in therapy! I can't believe that is
showing up now!" I asked, "Can you share what happened?" She replied
that three years before, her husband had an affair. The news was
devastating to her. It destroyed her marriage and wrecked her life for a
while, but she gradually came to terms with it. She cried a lot of
tears, spent a year in therapy, got remarried, and moved on- or so she
thought. Debbie expressed surprise that her past heartache was still
affecting her, and

in such a dramatic way. How could this event be the source of her
physical pain when she'd gone to such lengths to deal with it already?
She had done all the things we're told to do. She'd cried and expressed
her feelings, sought the comfort of friends and the advice of
therapists, opened up a dialogue with her husband and reconciled with
her divorce. It had not been easy and she'd made a lot of important
progress. In her mind she'd dealt with it and put it behind her. What
she didn't see is what none of us can see. There was a physical effect
from her experience that was silent and invisible until she began to
manifest symptoms from it. She had dealt with her troubles in every way
but this. She was suffering from a trapped emotion. I released the
trapped heartache from her body, and within seconds the feeling came
back into her arm and into her face. Suddenly she could breathe freely
and the chest pain and heaviness were gone. She left the office shortly
after, feeling completely fine. The overwhelming heartache that she had
felt during those early days of her breakup had literally become trapped
in her physical body. The instantaneous relief of her physical symptoms
was astounding to me. I was left to ponder on the mechanism that was at
work here. How could a single trapped emotion cause such extreme
physical symptoms? Debbie's experience is a dramatic example of how
trapped emotions can affect us physically, and how traditional therapy
cannot and does not attempt to remove them, although traditional therapy
certainly has its place. Typically trapped emotions will not cause
symptoms as intense as the ones that Debbie experienced. Most are more
subtle, yet exert an imbalancing influence on both mind and body.
Sharon's Mother was a Pain

A patient named Sharon came to my office one day complaining of pain in
her abdomen. She told me that the pain felt like it was coming from her
right ovary. I tested her to see if the cause of her pain was due to a
trapped emotion, and found that it was. Further testing revealed that
the exact emotion was frustration, that it had to do with her mother,
and that it had become trapped in her body three days earlier. The
moment I arrived at this determination, she became quite upset

and angrily hissed, "Oh, my mother! She called me three days ago, and
dumped all of this stuff on me! I wish she would just get out of my
life, and leave me alone!" I released the trapped frustration from her
body and the pain instantly vanished. Sharon was amazed, and could
hardly believe that the pain was entirely and suddenly gone. Even more
amazing to Sharon was the fact that her intense frustration with her
mother was the apparent cause of the physical pain she had been
suffering from for the last three days. Trapped emotions can even create
muscular imbalances that lead to joint malfunction and eventual joint
degeneration and arthritis. I have seen hundreds of cases where acute
physical pain instantly left the body upon the release of a trapped
emotion. Jim's Bad Knees

Removing trapped emotions can often relieve pain and suffering, even in
cases that would be considered hopeless by conventional medicine. This
is a letter I received from a former patient whose case certainly fits
this description. I was your patient for a few years and know that I had
many physical problems with my legs, knees and back when I came to you.
I was able to withstand the side effects of the various supplements you
prescribed to cleanse my system and then through your abilities to
release the resentments, anger and fear that I was hanging on to, we
were able to achieve a physical position where my knees stopped hurting
(I had been told by my doctor that replaced my hips that my knees needed
replacing because they were worn out also) and I was able to walk, climb
stairs, etc. pain-free for the first time in years. To this day I am
basically active and pain-free. This is not to say that arthritis
doesn't come into play as I continue to grow older, but the worn-out
knees are still working fine and for that I am grateful. I wish you the
best with your book and pray that it can open the door for others to a
healthy life. Keep the faith, Jim H. People often put up with their
pain, and end up simply "living with it", especially when they cannot
find a solution or a reason for it. Pain is the body's way of telling
you there is a problem; it's a warning sign.

In my experience working with people in pain, I've observed that trapped
emotions are actually creating the pain at least 50% of the time.

Pinned to the Past

I was teaching a workshop once in Las Vegas when I had an interesting
experience. I asked for a volunteer, and a young woman in her early
twenties came up out of the audience. I asked her if she had any
particular physical complaints, and she said no, that she was healthy,
and had no problems. I muscle tested her to see if she had a trapped
emotion, and she did. The emotion was unsupported, which is a feeling
similar to being all alone, and without help when you really need it.
Through muscle testing I asked her body when this emotion had become
trapped. I asked, "Did this emotion become trapped within the last five
years?" "No." "Did this emotion become trapped between ages ten and
twenty?" "No." "Did this emotion become trapped between ages birth to
ten?" "Yes." "Did this emotion become trapped in the first five years of
your life?" "Yes." "Did this emotion become trapped in the first year of
your life?" "Yes." "Did this emotion occur after one year of age?" "No."
I asked her if she had any idea what this might be about, and she shook
her head no. It just so happened that this young woman had arrived at
the workshop with her mother and they had been sitting together in the
audience. At this point, I looked out at the audience and noticed that
her mother looked very uncomfortable. Her hand was covering her mouth
and she looked either frightened or very embarrassed, I couldn't tell
which. I asked her if she knew what might have happened, since her
daughter was too young to remember. In a very pained and embarrassed
voice she explained, "Well, when Jessica was a baby I used cloth
diapers, which I would close with safety pins. There was one particular
occasion where I'm ashamed to say that I accidently pinned her to her
diaper. She cried and cried, but I didn't realize that she was pinned to
her diaper until I changed her again. I can't believe this is showing up
now and I felt so horrible about this and I still do." I turned to
Jessica and asked, "Is that what this trapped emotion is about?" I
pressed down on her arm and it was very strong, indicating that this was
indeed the case. I released the trapped emotional energy by rolling
three times

down her back with a 'MagCreator,' a magnetic massage device made by the
Nikken company , and she sat down again. About two weeks later I
received the following e-mail: Hi Dr. Brad, When you were in Las Vegas,
you cleared a trapped emotion for my daughter, Jessica, stemming from
infancy. Jessica has suffered from hip and knee pain since about the age
of 12 years...it has gotten worse as she got older. Since you worked on
clearing her trapped emotion of feeling unsupported (about 1 1/2 weeks
ago), she has had no pain or constriction in her hips and knees. She has
never gone more than a day or two without pain, and because it was
worsening, it was beginning to affect her gait. She is ecstatic, and now
is experiencing a "new" sense of inner joy. She sends her heartfelt
thanks. Jessica said feel free to share her story....she is certainly
telling everyone in Las Vegas about it! Thank you! -Maureen C. Here is
another example of a trapped emotion creating physical pain. The event
that caused the trapped emotion happened when Jessica was a baby, and
she had no conscious memory of it. Had we not released it, I believe
that Jessica may have eventually become disabled, and the true cause of
her disability -- her trapped emotion -- would have remained
undiscovered. Of course, not all physical pain is caused by trapped
emotions. But isn't it interesting to contemplate that they can cause or
contribute to physical pain? I have come to understand that trapped
emotions seem to be involved, to one degree or another, in nearly every
illness I have encountered. How is this possible?

Trapped Emotions and Disease

The most ancient idea in the art of healing is that disease is caused by
imbalance in the body. Trapped emotions are perhaps the most common type
of imbalance that human beings suffer from. I believe that trapped
emotions can be implicated in nearly all diseases, either directly or
indirectly. Because trapped emotions are nearly universal, and because
they always create distortion in the energy field of the body, and
because they are completely invisible, they can cause an incredibly wide
variety of physical

problems without being unmasked. Trapped emotions are truly epidemic,
and are the insidious, invisible cause of much suffering and illness,
both physical and emotional in nature. Trapped emotions lower immune
function and make the body more vulnerable to disease. They can distort
body tissues, block the flow of energy, and prevent normal function of
organs and glands. On the following page is a list of conditions and
diseases that my patients came to me with, where trapped emotions
appeared as a contributing factor, and many times as the entire cause of
the condition.

I am not saying that releasing trapped emotions is a cure-all. The
Emotion Code should not be used by itself in attempting to address any
major disease or medical condition, but rather, it should be looked upon
as an adjunctive therapy. When trapped emotions are contributing to
physical illness, removing them can only help. The Emotion Code is easy
to use and precise. Sometimes the release of a trapped emotion will
bring about an instantaneous and dramatic effect, but most of the time
the effects are more subtle, yet they always seem to bring a greater
sense of contentment and peace, whether they are immediate or gradual.

If you are like many of the people who have come to my seminars over the
years, using the Emotion Code will bring a new joy and freedom to your
life. It will give you a greater feeling of serenity because you will be
freeing yourself from your old emotional baggage. The results can bring
balance, a new inner calm and profound healing where nothing else has
before.

THE DOCTOR OF THE FUTURE WILL GIVE NO MEDICINE, BUT WILL INTEREST HIS
PATIENTS IN THE CARE OF THE HUMAN FRAME, IN DIET, AND IN THE CAUSE AND
PREVENTION OF DISEASE. -THOMAS A. EDISON

2 THE SECRET WORLD OF TRAPPED EMOTIONS

By now, you are probably wondering whether you have any trapped emotions
yourself, and what they might be. Here is a list of circumstances that
often result in trapped emotions: Loss of a loved one Divorce or
relationship problems Financial hardship Home or work stress Miscarriage
or Abortion Physical trauma Physical or Emotional Combat Physical,
mental, verbal or sexual abuse Negative self-talk Negative beliefs about
yourself or others Long-term stress Rejection Physical illness Feelings
of inferiority Internalization of feelings Neglect or abandonment This
list is by no means all-inclusive. The only way to know whether you have
trapped emotions is to ask the subconscious mind. This can be done quite
easily, but first a little explanation is in order.

Conscious versus Subconscious First, let's discuss the difference
between the conscious and the subconscious mind. Here is a simple way to
look at it. It has been said many times that we humans use only about
10% of our brain. What is really meant by this is that the conscious
mind needs about 10% of our brain's resources. In other words,

thinking, moving about, making choices, planning, seeing, hearing,
tasting, touching, and smelling are all conscious activities, and take
up 10% of the processing power of our brain. If this is true, what is
the other 90% of the brain doing? If the conscious mind takes up 10% of
your brain, we can refer to the other 90% as the subconscious mind. This
silent and unconscious majority of the brain is constantly busy storing
information and keeping your body systems running efficiently. It is
also important to understand that the subconscious mind exerts an
unseen, yet profound influence over the things we do, and how we behave
and feel. Most people give little thought to their subconscious minds.
But imagine for a moment having to take over the functions that your
subconscious mind performs. Imagine the difficulty of instructing your
digestive system how to digest your lunch, or telling your cells how to
create enzymes and proteins. Imagine if you had to worry about keeping
your heart beating or keeping air moving in and out of your lungs every
moment of every day. And you think you have a full schedule now! Like a
computer, your subconscious mind is capable of storing vast amounts of
information. Brain surgery is often done while the patient is conscious.
The brain has no pain-sensing nerves, and surgeons take advantage of
this fact to get feedback from their patients while their brains are
being delicately probed during surgery. Dr. Wilder Penfield discovered
that under certain circumstances people who are undergoing brain surgery
will have memories return to them when a certain area of the brain is
stimulated. For example, the surgeon might touch an area of the brain
with his electrode and the alert patient suddenly will remember a scene,
a smell, or a sound from a particular moment in their life.1 Often these
flashes of memory are about events or scenes that would be unremembered
under normal circumstances. If the same area of the brain is touched
again with an electrode in the same precise spot, the same memory will
be reexperienced. If you are like me, sometimes it seems difficult to
remember what happened yesterday. I believe, however, that your
subconscious mind is an amazing recording device. I believe that
everything you've ever done in your entire life has been logged in your
subconscious mind.

Every face you've ever seen in a crowd, every smell, every voice, every
song, every taste, every touch and every sensation you have ever
experienced has been recorded by your subconscious. Every virus,
bacteria or fungus that has ever invaded your body, all your injuries,
all your thoughts and feelings, and the entire history of every cell in
your body has all been archived. Your subconscious is also aware of any
trapped emotions that your body may be harboring, and it also knows
exactly what effect these trapped emotions are having on your physical,
emotional and mental well-being. All of this and more is tucked away in
the subconscious mind. The Computer-Mind

Your subconscious is also aware of exactly what your body needs in order
to get well. But how can you get to this information? I began asking
myself that same question when I was in chiropractic school. I learned
that the brain is essentially a computer, the most powerful computer in
the known universe. This made me wonder if healers would ever be able to
tap into the immense power of the brain, to find critical information
about what was wrong with their patients. During my years of practice, I
learned that it is actually possible to retrieve information from the
subconscious, using a form of kinesiology, or muscle testing. First
developed by Dr. George Goodheart in the 1960s as a way to correct
structural imbalance in the skeleton, muscle testing is now widely
accepted. While many physicians world-wide use muscle testing procedures
to correct spinal misalignments and other imbalances, the fact that
muscle testing can be used to get information directly from the
subconscious mind is less recognized.2

Talking to the Body The ability to open a line of communication with a
patient's subconscious mind through muscle testing became a powerful
tool for me. It enabled me to know what a patient needed in order to get
well, as quickly as possible. I came to trust the body's wisdom
implicitly and to have great faith in the body's innate ability to
communicate that wisdom to me, through muscle

testing. Many years of teaching seminars to both lay-people and doctors
taught me that anyone can do it. Anyone can learn to get answers from
the body, and anyone can take the necessary steps to help the body heal.
You don't have to be a doctor; you just have to be willing to learn. I
have been driven for many years to share this marvelous knowledge with
the world. It took much prayer and effort to refine and simplify the
Emotion Code, and now it is simple enough that anyone can learn it. You
will soon have all the knowledge you need to begin using this method on
yourself to remove trapped emotional energies from your body. Negative
versus Positive Stimuli

Before I can teach you how to get information from your subconscious
mind, you must understand one basic principle. This is that all
organisms, no matter how primitive, will respond to positive or negative
stimuli. For example, plants grow towards sunlight and away from
darkness. An amoeba in an aquarium will move towards light and away from
darkness. If a drop of poison is placed into that same aquarium, the
amoeba will move away from that poison and head toward cleaner water. On
a subconscious level, the human body is no different. Your body will
normally be drawn toward positive things or thoughts and repelled by
negative things or ideas. In fact, this has been going on all your life,
without your even being aware of it. If you will allow yourself to quiet
your conscious mind and tune in to your body, you will learn that your
subconscious is quite able to communicate with you. Are you ready to let
your subconscious mind speak to you?

The Sway Test The simplest method I know of to get answers from your
subconscious mind is called the Sway Test. You will learn other methods
of muscle testing later on in this book, but the Sway Test is extremely
simple to learn and does not require the assistance of anyone else, and
so can be used when you are alone.

To try the Sway Test, assume a standing position and make sure you are
comfortable. The room should be quiet and free of distractions,
including music and television. It will be easiest for you to learn if
you are alone or with someone who is learning along with you. Here's
what to do: Stand with your feet shoulder width apart so that you are
comfortably balanced. Stand still, with your hands by your sides. Let go
of all your worries and relax your body completely. Close your eyes if
you are comfortable doing so. Within a few seconds you will notice that
it is actually impossible to stand perfectly still. Your body will
continually shift its position very slightly in different directions as
your muscles work to maintain your standing posture. You will notice
that these movements are very slight, and are not under your conscious
control. When you make a positive, true or congruent statement, your
body should begin to sway noticeably forward, usually within less than
ten seconds. When you make an incongruent or untrue statement your body
should sway backwards within the same time frame.

Swaying Forward

I believe this phenomenon occurs because of how you are used to
perceiving the world around you. In spite of the fact that your
environment surrounds you completely at all times, on all sides, you are
used to only dealing with what is directly in front of you at any given
time. When you drive a car, when you walk, when you eat, when you work
at your desk, you are constantly dealing with the world in front of you,
not the world behind you or to the sides of you. When you make any kind
of a statement, your body perceives that thought as if it were like
anything else it has to deal with, like a file on your desk or food on
your plate. Essentially, you can think of the statement you make as
being right in front of you, ready to be dealt with and processed. When
you are ready, simply state the words "unconditional love." Keep this
phrase in your mind, and try to feel the feelings that are connected
with this phrase. In a few moments, you should notice your body sway
forward. Like a plant growing toward the light, your body will gently
sway toward the positive energy of that thought. The movement of your
body toward this thought may be more sudden than gradual in some cases,
and may surprise you! Now clear your mind, and say the word "hatred."
Try to feel the feelings that are connected with this thought. Just as
any organism will automatically move away from a poisonous or harmful
substance, your body should move away from the thought of "hatred." You
should notice that your body, within ten seconds or so, will begin to
sway backward. It is very important that you don't try to force your
body to sway either forward or backward. Simply allow your body to sway
on its own. You are giving your subconscious mind its first opportunity
to speak to you in this very direct way, and it must be done gently for
the best result. Don't force it. It will become easier with practice.
Now try making a statement that you know to be true. State your name out
loud, saying, "My name is \_\_\_\_\_." If your name is Alex for example,
you would say, "My name is Alex." Your subconscious mind knows what is
congruent or true. When you make a true statement, you'll feel your body
begin to gently sway forward, because your body is drawn towards
positivity, congruency and truth. Now you can try an untrue or
incongruent statement. If your name is Alex for example, you might say,
"My name is Chris", or "My name is Kim." As long as you choose a name
that is not your own, your subconscious mind will know that this
statement is incongruent or untrue. Once you have made this statement,
if you keep your mind clear of other thoughts, you should feel your body
begin to sway backwards within a few seconds. This is because your body
is not only repelled by negative thoughts such as "hatred", but

incongruence and falsity are also repulsive to the mind and body.

Swaying Backward

Keep Your Mind Clear

Make sure you keep your mind clear of other thoughts after making your
statement. If your thoughts are wandering, it will be difficult for your
subconscious mind to determine exactly what it is you are after. What
if, for example, you make a positive or true statement, but then
immediately begin thinking about the argument you had with your spouse
last night? You will probably sway backwards, because the memory of that
event is negative, and your body will naturally want to move away from
it. It is important to have patience with yourself. When you are first
learning this method, it may take a little longer than expected for your
body to sway. Don't get discouraged if this happens. Your body's
response time will shorten significantly the more you practice. The most
challenging aspect of this form of testing for many people is that it
requires them to give up control for a few moments, and allow their body
to do what it wants to do. For some, giving up control is not easy.
Nevertheless,

this is a simple skill to learn, and it shouldn't take you very long to
become proficient. The main thing is to stay focused on whatever
statement or thought you are putting out. Just keep your mind calm and
allow your subconscious to communicate with you through the mechanism of
your physical body. If for any reason, you are not physically able to
perform this test, don't worry. There are several other options that I
will outline for you in chapter five.

Do You Have a Trapped Emotion?

As soon as you think you have the hang of it, you are ready to put the
Sway Test to good use. Make this statement, "I have a trapped emotion.
"Your body will most likely sway forward, giving you an affirmative
answer that you have at least one trapped emotion. If your body sways
backward, don't assume that you are free of trapped emotions just yet.
This may mean that your trapped emotions are buried a bit deeper and
might take a little more effort to uncover, but it's not a problem. I
will discuss how to find and release this type of trapped emotion later
on. What Trapped Emotions Are Made Of

Everything in the universe is made of energy, whether that energy
manifests in physical form or remains invisible. It is the particular
arrangement of these energies, and their specific rates of vibration,
that determine how they will appear to us. At the most basic level,
everything that exists is made of the same stuff -- energy. Not only are
you made of energy, but other forms of energy are passing through your
body at this very moment. Energy that we cannot see is all around us in
the form of radio waves, x-rays, infrared, thought waves and emotions.
We are like fish swimming in a sea of energy. Energy is the material
from which all things are made; it is in all things and through all
things, and fills the interspaces of the universe. We can feel energy
when it is in the form of emotions, and if negative emotional energies
become trapped within us, they may adversely affect us.

Trapped emotions are made of energy, just as energy makes up our bodies
and everything else in the universe. Where Our Emotions Come From

Thousands of years ago, ancient physicians were astute observers of the
human body. They found that people whose lives were dominated by a
certain emotion would have corresponding physical ailments. For example,
people whose lives were ruled by anger seemed to suffer from liver and
gall bladder trouble. People who spent their lives feeling grief would
often suffer from lung or colon trouble. Fearful people seemed to have
kidney and bladder problems. Eventually, a correlation was made between
the emotions we experience and the various organs of the body. It was
believed that the organs themselves actually produced the emotions that
people felt. In other words, if you are feeling the emotion of fear,
your kidneys or bladder are creating that particular energy or
vibration. If you are feeling grief, it is being produced by your lungs
or your colon, and so on. Of course, we now know that certain areas of
the brain are activated when we feel certain emotions. We also know that
there is a biochemical component to the emotions that we feel.
Dr. Candace Pert, in her book Molecules of Emotion clearly explains this
biochemical side of our nature, which is perfectly valid.3 There is an
energetic side to our nature as well, and there is an energetic
component to our emotions that is only now beginning to be explored and
correlated by modern science. After much experience gained from clinical
practice, I am convinced that the organs in the body really do produce
the emotions we experience. The ancient physicians were right. If you're
feeling an emotion of anger, it's not coming entirely from your brain;
it's actually emanating from your liver or gall bladder. If you are
feeling the emotion of betrayal, the emotion is emanating from your
heart or your small intestine. Remember that we used to think the body
and the mind were separate and distinct, but their dividing line has now
blurred to the point where we don't know where the influence of one
begins and the other ends.

Your entire body is intelligent, not just your brain. Your organs are
separate intelligences within your body that perform certain functions
and produce specific emotions or feelings. People are usually surprised
to learn that the various organs in our bodies produce the emotions that
we feel. Yet there are correlations to this principle in life that are
quite distinct, although they escape the attention of most physicians.
Did Trapped Emotions Kill Dana Reeve?

We all remember the tragic injury that rendered actor Christopher Reeve
a quadriplegic. We were touched by the unfailing devotion of his wife,
Dana, and were shocked and saddened when she died. It was only ten
months after her husband's death that she announced to the world that
she had lung cancer, and seven months later she died at age 44. Dana
Reeve was a non-smoker who died of lung cancer, and although
conventional wisdom holds that her death was due to second-hand smoke, I
believe otherwise. The lungs produce the emotion we call grief, and an
overabundance of grief will certainly lead to the creation of trapped
emotions, often affecting the parent organ. Dana certainly had reasons
to grieve, and I believe that trapped emotions, grief among others, were
at least partly responsible for her death, and perhaps entirely
responsible. The Angry Drunk

Another example can be found in the way that alcohol affects people. We
all know that people who become alcoholics often die of liver disease.
But we also know that many people who drink can become quite angry and
violent when under the influence. Alcohol is broken down and processed
by the liver, and too much alcohol over-stimulates the liver. When you
overstimulate or overload an organ, it will produce more of the emotion
that it is designed to produce. The liver produces feelings of anger.
This is the mechanism that is often at work when drinking results in
violence. If you have an organ that is diseased, overstimulated, or
imbalanced in some way, the emotions related to that organ will often be
heightened.

Trapped emotions are always found to have emanated from a particular
organ, no matter where that trapped emotion lodges in the body. For
example, a trapped emotion of anger may have originally emanated from
your liver, but it may become lodged literally anywhere in your body.
Correlations between the organs and our emotions are both fascinating
and important to understanding how our bodies really work. It all goes
back to the ancient art of energy healing.

Energy Medicine

Energy healing is one of the oldest practices known in the world today.
Since 4000 B.C., healers have understood that our health greatly depends
on the quality of energy that flows through and makes up our bodies. In
Chinese medicine, that energy is called "Qi" or "Chi." In Ancient Indian
or Ayurvedic medicine, this energy is called "Prana." Imbalances of this
part of our existence may deeply affect our physical and mental health.
We can compare this energy to electricity. We can't see electricity, but
we can feel it. Electricity is colorless and odorless. It's invisible,
yet it certainly is real. If you've ever stuck your finger in a light
socket or been shocked getting the toast out of a toaster, then you'll
know what I mean. You may not be able to see it, but it's definitely
there! As human beings, we are used to perceiving things in a way that
conforms to our belief systems. We form our beliefs about the physical
world at an early age. We learn that if we fall off the monkey bars at
school, we will meet the ground with a painful thud, yet we could never
imagine that both the ground and the monkey bars, as solid as they seem
to us, are actually made of vibrating energies. We may like to think
that the world around us is exactly as we are used to seeing it, but
Einstein, Tesla and others have shown us that the universe is really
much more complex and wonderful than we ever could possibly have
imagined. The Quantum World

You must remember that old saying, "I know it like the back of my
hand..." But how well do you really know the back of your hand?

Take a look at it. Your eyes see the surface of your skin with its
wrinkles, fingernails and little hairs. You know exactly how the back of
your hand looks from that perspective. But if you magnify your hand
under a microscope, you won't see the same skin and creases you've
become so familiar with. Instead, you might think you are looking at the
surface of a strange planet, covered with hills and valleys. Turn up the
power on your microscope, magnifying your skin 20,000 times, and you'll
see a field of swarming cells. Magnify it a lot more and you'll see
molecules. Magnify those molecules and you'll see the atoms that make up
those molecules. Magnify those atoms and you'll see the subatomic energy
clouds that make up those atoms-the electrons, the protons, the neutrons
and other subatomic particles. It's still the back of your hand, but it
looks nothing like the hand you know. If you glance at it now, your hand
looks solid. Slap it down on the table and it makes a nice, substantial
thud. Your hand may seem solid, but there's actually a lot of empty
space there. At the subatomic level, there are vast distances between
each spinning electron. Atoms are 99.99999999% empty space. Your hand is
99.99999999% empty space! If you could remove all the empty space from
the atoms in your hand, it would become so small you would need a
microscope to see it! It would virtually disappear, although it would
still weigh the same and contain the same number of atoms. It might take
a moment to comprehend this idea. Your hand seems solid, but it is made
of dynamic energy, in constant vibration. In fact, physicists now
understand that the so-called "subatomic particles" which make up the
atom are not really particles at all. They measure the contents of the
atom in "energy units" instead, because it's so much more accurate.4
Thoughts are Energy

Like everything else in the universe, the thoughts that you create are
made of energy. Thought-energy has no boundary. Your thoughts are not
confined to a certain volume and location like your physical body. While
we like to think that all of our unspoken thoughts are private and that
they are confined to our own heads, it's not true. Each of us is like a
radio station, constantly broadcasting the energy of our

thoughts, which emanate from us and fill the immensity of space,
touching all those around us for good or ill. This doesn't mean that we
can read other people's minds, but the energy of other people's thoughts
are detected to some degree on a subconscious level. Try staring
intently at the back of someone's head in a crowd, and inevitably they
will turn and look right at you before long. Lots of us have had this
experience, and if you haven't, try it. It works every time! We are all
Connected

The reality is, the entire human family is connected energetically. When
people are suffering and dying on the other side of the earth, we feel
their distant cries and anguish on a subconscious level and we are
darkened by it. When something tragic happens in the world, the whole
world feels it subconsciously, and is affected by it. On the other hand,
when wonderful things happen in the world, we all are brightened
together. The connectedness that we all have will often manifest as
subtle thoughts that float up from the subconscious level to our
conscious minds. This energy connection seems strongest between a mother
and her children. Mothers often seem to be able to sense when one of
their children is in trouble. We call this mother's intuition, and my
own mother was an expert at it. Our connection to our own mothers is
perhaps strongest because of the spiritual umbilical that binds us to
them. The most powerful example of this energetic connection occurred to
one of my patients a number of years ago. She was sitting at home one
night, watching television with her husband. Suddenly, she began
experiencing severe, hammering pains throughout her body which
inexplicably moved from one area to another. The violence of this sudden
attack was terrifying, and when it was over she was greatly relieved,
but exhausted and frightened. She had never experienced anything like
this before, and had no idea what had suddenly gone wrong in her body.
Her attempts to explain this bizarre and excruciating attack baffled
everyone, including her doctors. Three days later, she got a phone call
from her son, who was working in the Philippines. He called her from his
hospital bed and told her that he had been severely beaten by the local
police a few days before. When they compared the time of his beating to
the time of her experience, they were one and the same. Somehow, she was
connected enough to her son to literally "feel his

pain." Talk about mother's intuition! Thoughts are Powerful

Your thoughts are immensely powerful. Whenever you say what you're
thinking or write something down, you're using the energy of your
thoughts to affect the world around you. It is through thought, belief
and intention that all things happen. Reputable laboratory experiments
have repeatedly shown that thoughts can directly influence the rate of
growth in plants, fungi, and bacteria. William Tiller, a physicist at
Stanford University, has shown that thoughts can affect electronic
instruments.5 Studies have proven that when the energy of thought is
directed intentionally, it can impact someone else, regardless of
whether they are nearby or all the way around the world. Depending on
whether the person focusing the thought uses calming or activating
imagery, for instance, they can create a greater sense of relaxation or
anxiety in the targeted person. The effect is so distinctive that it can
be measured in a laboratory by galvanic skin response, a highly
sensitive method of measuring electrical changes in the skin.6 Imagine
how your own thoughts affect you. Everyone has some kind of internal
conversation at times. What do you say to yourself? Many people
criticize themselves far more often than they praise themselves.
Negative selftalk may be hurting you more than you realize. What about
other people around you? Do you ever wonder if others can sense how you
feel about them? Other people's subconscious minds are continually
detecting the vibrations of your thoughts. Have you ever had a moment
with a friend, where he or she blurted out just what you were thinking?
Have you ever instinctively known who was about to call you, before the
phone even rang? These are not coincidences, they are evidences of the
power of thought energy. Finding trapped emotions using the Emotion Code
is along the same lines as detecting the vibration of another person's
thoughts or feelings. The difference is that you can ask the body, and
actually get definitive answers, instead of guessing. Then you can
release the trapped emotions for good, and know with certainty that they
are permanently gone.

Serendipity vs Precision

Any alternative health care practitioner can tell you that almost
everyone carries around old emotional energies from their past. Our
physical bodies hold onto trapped emotions, and doctors and body workers
are aware of this because often a simple touch can bring out a flood of
emotions and memories in a patient. At one time or another, nearly every
practitioner I know -- from chiropractors to energy workers to massage
therapists -- has had the experience of provoking an unexpected
emotional release in a patient, as the body let go of the energy it had
been holding on to. Releasing those trapped emotions can result in
profound and immediate healing. While any emotional release that occurs
in this serendipitous way is welcome, this is usually not the intention
of the therapist, and any emotional release that occurs is only
accidental. The Emotion Code approach, however, is much more deliberate.
I sometimes think of it as "emotional surgery" because we are searching
out the trapped emotions with a clear intention of removing them.
Nothing is left to chance. Trapped emotions are potentially so
destructive that you need to find them and get them out of your body,
and then confirm that they have been released. The Emotion Code helps
you do exactly that in a precise and simple way.

Trapped Emotions and Children I have twin boys who are, at the time of
this writing, eighteen years old. One of my early experiences with
trapped emotions happened with my son, Rhett when he was a toddler.
Rhett and Drew are fraternal twins, and are about as different as two
boys can be. Drew was always very affectionate with both my wife and me.
Rhett was very affectionate with my wife Jean, but developed some sort
of hang-up about me around age three. When I would try to hug him or be
close to him or snuggle with him he would push me away and say "Bad
doctor! Away!" At first we thought he was just passing through some kind
of stage. We assumed that he would grow out of it, but his negative
feelings toward me persisted for over a year. It was a source of
heartache and frustration to me. I didn't understand why my little boy
felt this way about me. One evening, Jean and I were sitting and talking
together. Rhett was sitting on Jean's lap. I opened my arms to him to
give him a hug. He gave me the same

reaction as before, pushing me away and saying "Bad doctor! Away!" This
time I really felt the hurt. I could feel the heartache welling up
within my chest, and I felt like I was going to cry. My wife said, "You
know, maybe he has a trapped emotion." Up until this point we had only
treated adults for trapped emotions. We decided to check him and see.
Using the Emotion Code we found that he did have a trapped emotion. The
emotion was grief. But it wasn't his grief about me, it was actually my
grief about him. In other words, at some point he perceived that I had
grief about him. He felt that grief strongly enough that it created a
trapped emotion in his body. Testing showed that this emotion became
trapped when my oldest daughter and I had an argument that Rhett was
witness to. Even though I was not grieved about him, he perceived the
grief I was experiencing about her, and applied it to himself. We
released the trapped grief, and to my amazement he walked right over to
me and put his arms around me. As I cried and held my little boy, I was
astonished and excited at the same time. If my son could be changed so
instantaneously by simply removing a trapped emotion, then how many
other children could be helped? The Pilot's Daughter

The next day in my clinic I was talking with a patient about what had
happened with Rhett. She said, "You know, I think my little girl might
have a trapped emotion. My husband is an airline pilot. Every week he's
gone for several days in a row, and when he comes back, our six-year-old
daughter will run and hide from him. She just won't have anything to do
with him when he comes home from his trips, and it breaks his heart."
She brought her daughter into the office the following day. I found that
she did have a trapped emotion about her father. In this case, the
trapped emotion was sorrow. It was her own sorrow about her father
leaving and being gone for long periods of time. At some point, this
sorrow was so strong that it imbalanced her body, and the emotion became
trapped. This emotional energy was exerting a very strong subconscious
affect and was influencing her behavior towards him. We released the
emotion, and they went home. The following week the mother returned to
the office and said, "Doctor Nelson, your emotional treatment really
works. My husband was gone when I came in and had my daughter treated. A
few days ago my husband came home from overseas, and when he opened the
door our little girl ran and

jumped into his arms. She has never done that, ever! He is thrilled!
Thank you so much." Drew and His Traumatic Delivery

By the time our twin boys were four years old, Rhett was very articulate
and talkative. Drew was just the opposite, so much so that my wife and I
began to grow concerned. At four years old, Drew still wasn't speaking
in sentences. He rarely said a word and when he started to speak he'd
often put his hand over his mouth, as though he were afraid to say
anything. He seemed fearful in general. When we went to the neighborhood
pool, Rhett jumped right in, but Drew stood at the edge, looking
anxious. He was very cautious about trying new things. He was also
claustrophobic. If he went outside to play and the door closed behind
him, he would panic and scream. Psychological testing showed that Drew
had a high IQ, but was not developing at the same pace as the norm for
other kids his age. Hearing tests showed that his hearing was normal.
There seemed to be no explanation for what was going on with Drew. After
our experience with Rhett, we decided to see if Drew might have trapped
emotions, not realizing that they were the actual cause of his troubles.
As we tested him, we quickly found a number of trapped emotions that
were the result of traumatic things that had happened on the day that he
was born and shortly thereafter. Jean's labor and delivery had been very
long, lasting twenty-two hours total. Rhett was born first. He looked
beautiful and content and immediately went to sleep. Drew was born 14
minutes later and emerged blue and limp, looking really rough. A team of
doctors circled around him immediately. They weren't sure he would make
it. His situation was critical. He pulled through, but the next 10 days
or so continued to be very traumatic. We had taken both of the boys home
when they were a couple of days old but Drew had to be readmitted to the
hospital for testing to see what was wrong. He was unable to keep any
breast milk down and was rapidly loosing weight. We were told that he
had picked up a life-threatening infection during his first few days.
The doctors had to do a spinal tap on his tiny body, and administer
antibiotics intravenously to save his life. Against our wishes, Jean and
I were ordered out of the room as this procedure

was begun. We were unable to comfort him in any way, and could only
listen helplessly as Drew screamed in terror while they repeatedly tried
to insert the needles into his tiny veins and into his spine. We didn't
dwell on Drew's traumatic experiences ourselves, and we never discussed
these events with him as a child. It was very upsetting for us to even
think about it. Four years later, as far as we knew, he had no memory of
these events, but he did have a lot of fear, about a lot of things. One
by one, we found and released the trapped emotions that related to these
traumatic events. We were amazed by what Drew had perceived as an
infant, and how deeply it had scarred him emotionally. He probably
expected that coming into the world would be wonderful. Instead he came
into an incredibly painful situation that he could scarcely cope with.
It was like being born into hell. As you might imagine, he had trapped
emotions of fear, terror and abandonment. Undoubtedly, these were the
exact feelings he'd had during the emergency room procedures that we all
found so difficult to endure. Drew had also developed a trapped emotion
of panic while he was in the womb waiting in line behind his reluctant
brother, who was in no hurry to emerge from his dark and comfortable
home. This trapped emotion of panic proved to be the reason behind his
claustrophobia. In addition, he had a trapped emotion of anger that he
had inherited from his grandfather. It was actually this inherited anger
that was making him reluctant to talk. He was afraid that he would hurt
someone with his words, which explained why he would always cover his
mouth when he would speak. We released all of these trapped emotions and
retired for the night. The next morning at breakfast, we couldn't
believe the difference! Drew was like a little chatterbox. Suddenly and
for the first time in his life, he was speaking in complete sentences.
Without the trapped emotions keeping him attached to the traumas of the
past, he was able to let go of his fears. His claustrophobia vanished,
along with his fearful attitude. He was free to become bright, happy,
and inquisitive.

Trapped Emotions are Common

It isn't really possible to tell by looking at someone if they have
trapped emotions, but nearly everyone does. During my years in practice,
it was rare that I treated a patient who had no discernible trapped
emotions. I remember one patient in particular who fell into this
category. This man spent a lot of

time in meditation, and struck me as being a calm, kind and unflappable
sort of person who was very much in control of his emotions. Did I say
"in control of his emotions?" We will talk more about that very subject
in chapter ten, in terms of avoiding trapped emotions in the future. The
vast majority of us do have trapped emotions, simply because of what we
have been through and who we are at this point in our journey. Often,
when someone has been through a traumatic or intensely emotional event
-- such as a car accident, an argument or a divorce -- they will have
trapped emotional energy about it. However, not every emotional event
will create a trapped emotion. The body is designed to deal with
emotional energy in the normal course of events. So when an emotion
becomes trapped, it's partly because of extenuating circumstances --
such as when we have lowered resistance or when we are overly tired or
otherwise off-balance. When our bodies are not at their best we are more
vulnerable to developing trapped emotions.

The Resonance of Trapped Emotions

Each trapped emotion resides in a specific location in the body,
vibrating at its own particular frequency. Before long, that vibration
will cause surrounding tissues to vibrate at that same frequency. We
call this phenomenon resonance. In my seminars, I use tuning forks to
demonstrate how powerfully our universe responds to resonance. One of my
tuning forks vibrates at 512 Hz. The sound it makes is very
high-pitched. The tines of the other tuning fork are a different size.
That fork vibrates at 128 HZ and makes a much lower sound. If you were
to place any number of different-sized tuning forks in a room, and
strike one of them, all the other tuning forks of that particular
frequency would start humming faintly. If you stop the sound coming from
the tuning fork you struck, all the others will keep vibrating. It's not
because of some natural affinity between tuning forks. This is the way
our universe works. If you strike a tuning fork and place it against a
pane of glass, the glass will begin to vibrate at the same frequency.
That's because the tuning fork forces the energies that make up the
glass into motion -- in sync with its own vibration. When you have a
trapped emotion it's a bit like having a tuning fork in your body that
is continually vibrating at the specific frequency of a negative
emotion. Unfortunately this may bring more of this particular

emotion into your life.

Tuning Forks

Have you ever seen someone who's agitated infect a roomful of people
with that same emotion? Maybe you're calmly waiting in a doctor's office
with several other people who are quietly reading magazines, when an
upset patient comes in. He paces around the room, picking up magazines,
then putting them back down. He speaks to the receptionist in an
irritated tone. His body language gives his mood away. But it's the
invisible effect that's most powerful. That patient is sending a strong,
agitated vibration out into the room. Some of the cells in your body and
those of the receptionist and the other patients will literally start
vibrating at that frequency. Before long, everyone's feeling a little
agitated. It changes the mood of the room. People start feeling
differently and reacting differently. The agitated patient has not only
attracted more agitation into his own life. He's actually generated it
in the people around him as well. Negative Vibrations

If you have a trapped emotion, you will attract more of that emotion
into your life. You will also tend to feel that emotion more readily and
more often than you otherwise would. You can think of a trapped emotion
as being like a ball of energy, because that is exactly what it is. They
have a size and a shape, even though they are invisible and are made
only of energy. They usually seem to vary in size from

that of an orange to that of a melon. Trapped emotional energy will
always lodge somewhere in the physical body, and the body tissues that
lie within that sphere will tend to fall into resonance with the
vibrational energy of the trapped emotion. In other words, those tissues
will actually be experiencing that emotional vibration on a continual
basis. Suppose you have a trapped emotion of anger. You've carried it
around for years, not even knowing it was there. As a result, whenever
you come into a situation where you could become angry, it's much more
likely that you will become angry, because in a fascinating and literal
way, part of you is already angry. If part of your body is already
vibrating at the frequency of anger due to a trapped emotion, it is much
easier for your entire being to fall into resonance with anger when
something happens that could elicit an angry response from you.
Sometimes people don't understand why they get ticked off so easily, or
why they can't shake certain emotions. It's often because the very
emotion they are struggling with is trapped within them, from a past
experience they may scarcely remember. This is why, when trapped
emotions are released, the effect is incomparable to any other form of
therapy. Often, the emotion and behavior that has been so difficult to
shake, is simply gone. It can seem almost too simple to believe, but
once you experience it yourself, you will understand. Until you release
your own trapped emotions, you will continue to labor under their
weight. Lori and the Cheerleader

I have seen this phenomenon on countless occasions, but one particular
patient's experience will help to illustrate this. Lori had a trapped
emotion of resentment. When I traced the original occurrence of this
emotion back in time, I found that it had become trapped in high school,
and that it was actually her resentment for another female. At this
point, Lori said, "Well, of course. I know exactly what this is about."
She explained that there was a particular girl on the cheerleading squad
that she just could not stand. For whatever reasons, she felt a lot of
resentment for this girl during their high

school years. The resentment never really went away, since it had become
trapped in Lori's body. Lori said, "You know, I still have so much
resentment for her. It's kind of weird, I guess. I'm forty-three years
old now. High school was a long time ago. You'd think I would have
forgotten all about her, but it's like I can't let go of it. I haven't
even seen her since high school, but whenever I think of her, I can just
feel this resentment welling up inside of me, and I feel all that
resentment for her all over again." I explained to Lori how a trapped
emotion can make it much harder for us to let go of things we would
rather forget. Using a magnet, we released the trapped emotion in a few
seconds, and she left the office. I saw Lori again a few days later, and
she exclaimed, "Dr. Nelson, it worked! Last night I was talking with an
old girlfriend, and that girl's name came up. For the first time since
high school, I felt nothing! Normally, I would have felt that resentment
for her, but I felt nothing! That is so great. Thanks!" Kirk's Life-long
Anger Problem

Kirk was an angry man. He came to me when he was in his late seventies
for treatment of his back pain. It quickly became obvious that there was
something else bothering him. He snapped at my office staff, and tended
to be curt with me as well. He was dismissive with his wife, who was
nothing but supportive and kind to him. At first I attributed his
behavior to the fact that he was in pain. As his back began to improve,
however, his behavior did not. I decided to check him for trapped
emotions, and found anger, bitterness, anxiety, resentment, frustration
and fear, many of which dated back to childhood. The end result of
releasing these emotions was that Kirk became a changed man. He is now a
sweet and doting husband, more concerned about his wife than his own
aches and pains. He used to complain constantly about everything, and
now he turns his interest to others, usually has a smile on his face and
complains very little. The transformation has been remarkable to
everyone that knows him. If only his trapped emotions could have been
released early in his life, he might have had a different kind of life.
Kirk was always free to choose his emotional state, but his trapped
emotions

made it easier for him to fall into resonance with them than to go
against the current. Parts of his body were angry, bitter, anxious,
resentful, frustrated and fearful. That's what he was up against every
waking moment of his life, until we released those energies. The Effect
of an Imbalance

It all comes back to the quantum nature of the body itself. When we get
up every morning, we expect to see our bodies looking the same they did
yesterday and the day before. They seem solid and predictable enough. We
never glance in the mirror while we're trying to get dressed only to see
swirling clouds of energy where our arms and legs used to be. But that's
exactly what we are. No matter how it may seem to you, your body is
actually a collection of energies, flying in close formation. When you
introduce the negative vibration of a trapped emotion into that
formation, you alter the normal vibrational rate of the whole. You won't
necessarily feel it and you definitely can't tell the difference by
looking, but there are other ways to tell. Remember the tuning fork
effect. When your body is hosting a trapped emotion, it will attract
other emotions that vibrate at the same frequency. If the emotion is
fear, for instance, you will become more easily frightened. The longer
that energy resides inside your body, the more you'll get used to
feeling it. Over time, you'll start thinking you're just a fearful
person, because you seem to be afraid so much of the time. In reality,
because part of your body actually exists within this particular trapped
emotional energy or literal "ball of fear", you are set up for failure.
Part of your body is already feeling that emotion on a continual basis
so you will much more readily fall into a state of fear when a fearful
situation presents itself. In other words, since part of your body is
already resonating at the frequency of fear, it's a small step for your
entire body to fall into resonance. Where Trapped Emotions Lodge

People often ask me why an emotion gets trapped in one area of the body
and not another. I often find that trapped emotions lodge in an area
that's vulnerable because of a genetic susceptibility, an injury or
nutritional deficiency that weakens or imbalances the energy of the body
in that area. Sometimes there's a metaphor at work as well. This makes
sense when you realize that our subconscious minds govern our bodies and
our dreams. Symbols and metaphors are the language of the subconscious
mind, so it's very natural for trapped emotions to lodge in an area that
has symbolic significance. For example, let's say you're experiencing
grief for a friend who has had a miscarriage. Instead of experiencing
the emotion and leaving it behind, the emotion becomes trapped. It
wouldn't be surprising for that trapped emotion to lodge in your womb or
breast -- the nourishing organs of creation. Or suppose you're
experiencing one of those difficult periods in life where a series of
things seem to go wrong. You feel frustrated and overwhelmed, as if
you're carrying the weight of the world on your shoulders. In that case,
a trapped emotion may lodge in one of your shoulders. The reality is
that any emotion can get stuck anywhere in the body. If you don't notice
the imbalance, it can go on for years. Eventually, it may cause real
problems with your health, both mental and physical.

The Dual Nature of Trapped Emotions

Trapped emotions affect you in two distinct ways, mentally and
physically. Let's talk about how they affect you mentally first. They
will cause you to feel an exaggerated emotional response. Let's first
examine some real-life situations where trapped emotions were exerting
an obvious mental affect. Marie and Her Trauma

One of the most dramatic examples of this occurred with Marie, a
beautiful and kind-hearted patient in her fifties. A year before she
came to me, her only son had been brutally murdered. As you might
imagine, the death of her son was a horrible blow to Marie. To make
matters worse, the trial of her son's

murderer kept getting delayed in the courts, so she couldn't put it
behind her. She was having a difficult time dealing with life when she
first came to see me. In the year since her son's murder, she'd been
completely caught up in her grief and loss. When we tested her for
trapped emotions, we found one after another related to her son and his
death. We released them. After that, Marie was free. She went back to
being the well-balanced person she always was. Even though she misses
her son and will always feel his absence, she's one of the happiest,
most well-balanced people I know. Her trapped emotions were throwing her
off-balance by sustaining a negative vibration. Once we eliminated them,
she was able to deal with her loss in a healthier way. Sarah and the JFK
Assassination

I will never forget Sarah, a 71 year old woman who came to me for
treatment. I began to ask her subconscious mind through muscle testing
what she needed. We found that she had a trapped emotion of sadness.
While your conscious mind may not remember things very well, your
subconscious mind remembers everything that has ever happened to you. Of
course, it also knows about each trapped emotion in detail. It knows
when the trapped emotion occurred, what the precise emotion was, who was
involved, and more. As I questioned Sarah's subconscious mind about this
trapped emotion, I tried to determine when it had occurred. It turned
out that the emotion of sadness had become trapped in Sarah's body in
1963. On a hunch, I asked, "Is this sadness about the assassination of
John F. Kennedy?" The answer her body gave through muscle testing was
"Yes." The moment we arrived at this, she burst into tears. As her tears
flowed, she said, "Oh, yes, that affected me so deeply. And then when
President Kennedy's son, John, Jr., died in that plane crash a few years
ago, it brought it all back to me. I couldn't do anything but cry for
days." If you're old enough to remember that day in November 1963,
you'll recall how shocking and sad it was. On that day, Sarah's whole
being was filled with sadness. The emotion was overwhelming. It was too
intense to be processed by her physical body, and as a result, it became
trapped.

Trapped Emotions Affect Us Emotionally

Trapped emotions generate a specific energetic vibration. They're also
associated in our minds with specific kinds of events. In Sarah's case,
the emotion of sadness -- resonating at its own particular frequency --
was specifically connected in her mindbody to the sudden death of a
Kennedy. When John Kennedy Jr. was tragically killed, her natural
sadness for that event was amplified by the trapped emotion already
stuck inside her. Part of her body, where the energy of this emotion was
lodged, was already functioning as best it could, immersed for nearly
forty years in the sadness of JFK's death. When she got the news of John
Kennedy Junior's death, her entire body fell into resonance with the
emotion that was trapped. The result was that, instead of crying a
little and moving on, Sarah cried for days, and the pain of that day in
November 1963, came back to her full-force. In fact, that pain had never
really left her at all. In a literal and fascinating way, part of her
body had never stopped feeling that deep sadness. This is a perfect
example of how a trapped emotion can persist for many years and cause
you to experience similar emotions in an exaggerated way. When trapped
emotions are never released, you may feel that pain and heightened
response for the rest of your life. It's so unnecessary, because your
trapped emotions can easily be gotten rid of.

The Rest of the Story

Before I released her sadness, I decided to ask where this emotion had
been residing in her body for almost four decades. What tissues in her
body had been laboring within the sphere of this deep sadness all those
years? What was the effect upon those tissues? The subconscious mind
knows these answers full well, and finding out is as easy as asking. The
answer shocked both of us. Muscle testing showed that the trapped
emotion of sadness was lodged in the area of her left breast. Sarah and
I stared at each other for a moment in wonder. She was a

survivor of breast cancer. Four years before, her left breast had been
removed in a surgical mastectomy. This trapped emotional energy had
become lodged in her left breast, where it remained. Why her left breast
and not some other area of the body? Perhaps she had a greater
vulnerability in her left breast due to a low-grade infection, a prior
injury, or some other imbalance. My own feeling is that it became
trapped in these tissues -- that lay so close to her heart -- because of
her love for President John F. Kennedy. Whatever the reason for its
location, the trapped emotion stayed in her body as the years went by.
It caused a constant low-level irritation in her tissues, and this may
have been a contributing factor to the cancer. The signs were not
recognized soon enough, and ultimately her left breast had to be removed
to save her life, but the sadness remained. Releasing that trapped
sadness from her body helped her to heal emotionally. I only wish I
could have discovered it years earlier, which might have helped her
avoid a lot of pain and suffering, and might have even helped her avoid
breast cancer.

The Physical Effects of Trapped Emotions

Tissues that are continually being distorted by a trapped emotion will
eventually suffer the effects of it. If you take a magnet and hold it
close to an older tube-type television screen or computer monitor, you
will see a very visible distortion of the picture. This is because the
magnetic field is interfering with the normal flow of electrons within
the screen. If you get the magnet too close, or if you leave the magnet
there long enough, it will create a permanent distortion and even ruin
the screen. Trapped emotions affect the body in a similar way. After
all, the body is energy, and so are trapped emotions. But trapped
emotions are a negative energy, and distort the body's tissues, just as
the magnet distorts the picture on the TV screen. Distort the body
tissues long-term, and pain and malfunction will be the result. This is
why the release of a trapped emotion will often cause immediate relief
of discomfort and other symptoms, and possibly the reversal of some
diseases. I think that this is very fertile ground for further research,
which could yield profound insight into the disease process. It is my
experience that trapped emotions can exert an astonishing influence

over the tissues of the body. What happens when those tissues are
continually irritated over time? The first symptom is often pain or
subtle malfunction which can be difficult to detect. If tissues are
irritated over a long period of time, the tissue may eventually enter
into a state of metaplasia, or change. In other words, the specific type
of cell begins to revert back to a more primitive cell. The next step is
malignancy, or cancer. While there are a variety of things that are
thought to cause cancer, I believe firmly that trapped emotions are a
contributing factor to the disease process, as I believe they are to
many, if not most other diseases. Every cancer patient I treated was
found to have trapped emotions embedded in the malignant tissues. It is
possible that some of these energies may have been attracted to the area
precisely because the tissues were in a severe state of imbalance. While
this is possible and even likely as the disease progresses, trapped
emotions are, in my opinion, an underlying cause of cancer. It is vital
that these trapped emotions be removed. Even though they may have
already contributed to the cancer, once removed, they cannot cause any
further damage in the years to come. Rochelle's Lung Cancer

When Rochelle first came to me for treatment, she had a cancer the size
of a baseball in her lung. She was going through chemotherapy when we
met. I asked her body if there were trapped emotions in this malignant
lung tissue and the response was "Yes." The trapped emotions in
Rochelle's tumor dated back many years, to a time when she was a young
woman. She is Filipino, and had married an American sailor stationed in
the Philippines. After they had a child together, Rochelle's husband was
away at sea for six months or more at a time. She'd expected his
frequent absences and had come to terms with the separation in her
conscious mind, but raising a child by herself was difficult and lonely.
Consciously, Rochelle believed she was fine with his absence. But her
body revealed that the emotions of resentment, frustration and
abandonment had become trapped inside of her during this period. "No,
no," Rochelle insisted. "I never felt that way. I knew Danny would be
gone and it was fine with me. I was OK on my own." And yet, after I'd
run

the magnet down her back, Rochelle sat up and shook her head. "You know,
it's the funniest thing," she said. "I feel so much lighter, like a
weight has been lifted from my chest." Since she had to drive 90 minutes
each way to my clinic, I only saw Rochelle three times, but it was
enough for me to release all the trapped emotions that showed up in the
area of her tumor. About five weeks later, she showed up at my office
ecstatic over the good news. Her doctors had taken a new x-ray and the
tumor was completely gone from her lung. Could the trapped emotions have
been a significant contributing factor in the creation of this cancer? I
believe that the answer is yes. Of course, I can't prove that the
release of the trapped emotions eliminated the tumor, since Rochelle was
also undergoing chemotherapy. But by removing the emotions that were
lodged in her chest, we may have made the chemotherapy more effective,
and their removal may have given her body the edge it needed to heal. I
hope to live long enough to see a day when all patients will be treated
with the best of all methods like this. Jean's Painful Ovary

One of the things about trapped emotions that surprised me the most was
their ability to cause physical pain. The very first experience that I
had with this phenomenon was quite dramatic. My wife, Jean suddenly
began experiencing acute and severe pain in her left lower abdomen.
Muscle testing showed that the pain was coming from her left ovary, and
that the cause was emotional. As rapidly as I could, I began to identify
the emotion responsible. To my surprise, I ended up finding not one but
six different emotions. As you will learn later on, we release trapped
emotions one at a time. Sometimes, more than one trapped emotion will be
found nested in the same area, such as in this case. With the exception
of the last emotion, all of them had to do with tragic or upsetting
events that had occurred in the lives of women that were close to Jean.
I released each trapped emotion as it was identified. Amazingly, her
pain level decreased instantly and noticeably with each trapped emotion
that I released. After clearing five trapped emotions, her pain level
was a fraction of what it had been only moments before. Her body
indicated that there was one more trapped emotion. Testing quickly
revealed that an emotion of feeling worthless had become trapped when
Jean was in kindergarten.

The year was 1960. It was an election year, and the contest was between
Richard M. Nixon and John F. Kennedy. Jean's teacher informed her that a
boy and a girl from the school had been chosen to be interviewed by the
local newspaper about the upcoming presidential election, and that she
was one of those chosen. She was told that she would be asked some
questions about the candidates, particularly who she would vote for if
she could. She was excited, and the big day soon came. She was ushered
into a room at the school that had been prepared for the interview.
There were two chairs set up right in front, one for each child. The
interviewer began asking questions of the little boy first, while flash
bulbs popped as his picture was taken. Although her picture was taken,
for some reason, no questions were asked of Jean at all. She was ignored
almost completely, with the exception of being told how to pose for the
photo. Suddenly the interview was over. As she was ushered back to her
classroom she felt confused. Gradually it began to dawn on her how
unimportant she must be. She began to feel worthless, and she felt the
emotion strongly enough that it became trapped in her physical body.
Emotions are energy, and the specific vibration of an emotion determines
precisely which emotion it is. A trapped emotion is like a little ball
of energy which will always "land" or become lodged somewhere in the
physical body. For some reason, this trapped emotion of worthlessness
lodged in Jean's left ovary, where it remained for thirty years. When we
released this last trapped emotion, the remnants of her pain were
instantaneously gone. She got up off the floor and we looked at each
other in mutual amazement at what we had just experienced. Jean has
never had a recurrence of pain in that area. I can't help but wonder
what the consequences to her health might have been if we had not
released those energies from her ovary. Jack's Tennis Elbow

Another example of how trapped emotions can cause physical pain came
from a patient of mine named Jack. He was 42 years old when he came to
me for treatment of his excruciating tennis elbow, which he'd been
suffering from for months. The discomfort in his right forearm had
become so great that he could no longer even turn the key to start his
car without terrible pain. I began treating him with a traditional
chiropractic approach of spinal and extremity

adjustments and physical therapy. After working on him for about a week,
I didn't see much improvement and that surprised me. Tennis elbow is an
ailment that is normally treated very successfully with chiropractic
care. I was frustrated with Jack's lack of improvement. This was in the
early days of my work with trapped emotions, and I hadn't yet thought to
ask his subconscious if emotions had anything to do with his problem. I
was just beginning to understand how powerful trapped emotions can be,
and how they can cause many different kinds of symptoms. I knew they
could cause physical pain, but I also knew that tennis elbow was an
inflammatory condition that I had treated successfully before. However,
since I was having no results with the traditional approach, I decided
to ask Jack's subconscious if trapped emotions were an underlying cause
of his tennis elbow. I was a bit surprised when his body answered,
"Yes." High School Girls

Using the Emotion Code, we identified the first emotion. According to
his body, the trapped emotion was inferiority. It had become trapped in
his body during high school, and had to do with a certain girl he'd
liked. I released it, and Jack was surprised by the immediate effect
this had on his arm. Suddenly his elbow pain had decreased noticeably. I
asked again if there were any trapped emotions that we could release.
His body answered "Yes", so I began asking what the next emotion was,
when it had become trapped, and if it had to do with anyone in
particular. This trapped emotion was also from Jack's high school days,
and was the result of a less than satisfactory relationship -- with a
different girl this time. The trapped emotion was nervousness. When we
released it, Jack's elbow pain lessened even more significantly. We
continued this process until we had removed a total of five trapped
emotions. They were all from high school, and each emotion involved a
different girl. His wife, who was there with him during his treatment
seemed amused. As we released each trapped emotion, the discomfort level
in Jack's forearm noticeably decreased. The moment we released the last
emotion, his pain was completely gone! He turned his arm this way and
that. He imitated turning the key in his car. There was no pain
whatsoever. He had suddenly regained his full range of motion in his
elbow joint, and I could reproduce no pain by pressing my fingers into
the muscles of his forearm, which previously had been very painful to
the touch. This result was astounding to all of us that were witness to
it.

Jack was a tennis player during high school, but hadn't picked up a
racket in years. Trapped emotions tend to gravitate toward weaker areas
of the body, where there is extra stress, an injury or an infection, or
some other imbalance. All of these particular trapped emotions lodged in
the tissues of Jack's forearm. I believe this is because during high
school, his forearm was being repeatedly stressed and even injured to a
degree. At the same time, he was experiencing emotional distress and
picking up trapped emotions from his failing attempts at romance.
Remember that a trapped emotion will always land somewhere, likely at
the weakest link in the body's chain. I still think if I hadn't been
there and seen it for myself, I wouldn't believe it. Within a matter of
a few minutes, Jack's pain went from crippling to non-existent. I was
once again amazed that emotions could somehow directly cause such
dramatic physical pain. Nevertheless, I had just seen it with my own
eyes. As I continued to use the Emotion Code on my patients, I was
amazed by how many conditions were actually being caused in whole or in
part by trapped emotions, and by how destructive they were to my
patients' health. Powerful healing occurs when trapped emotions are
finally released. Who knows how much pain, unhappiness and chronic
illness could be completely avoided by eliminating trapped emotions! I
quickly learned that some of the feelings trapped within my patients'
bodies had been there for much longer than I would have thought
possible. It made me sad to think that, at some level, these patients
had been suffering constantly for all those years, from something that
is so easy to get rid of.

Phobias

A phobia is defined as an irrational, persistent fear of certain
activities, persons, objects or situations. I have found that trapped
emotions are a significant cause of phobias, perhaps the only cause. The
subconscious mind knows what the underlying cause of the phobia is, and
each phobia has one or more trapped emotions that are the cause. The
Airplane Picture Phobia

It is possible to have a phobia about literally anything. For example, I
once treated a woman who had a rather odd phobia. She could not look
upon a picture of an aircraft in a magazine or see one on television
without having a severe panic attack. If a jet flew overhead, she had to
keep her eyes on the ground. If she looked up at the plane, she would
have an attack. I asked her subconscious mind through muscle testing if
there was a trapped emotion that was causing her phobia. The answer was,
"Yes." Through further testing I was able to determine what had
happened. A number of years earlier she had been reading a magazine
article about the crash of a passenger jet. The article was accompanied
by a photograph of the jet taken just before impact. As she read this
article, she was overcome with emotion. She identified strongly with the
terrified passengers, and a trapped emotion was created. I released the
emotion, and the phobia was instantly gone. She was able to look at
airplanes both in photographs and in the sky immediately without any
trouble, and her phobia did not return.

Night Terrors

In another case, a 42 year-old patient named Carol had suffered from
night terrors nearly all her life. Her screams of terror would awaken
her husband and children at least three nights every week! Night terrors
differ from nightmares in that they don't seem to be caused by a
specific dream. Instead, a specific and very frightening emotion is felt
while the victim is asleep. Her night terrors had been a major problem
for most of her life. She had broken both collar bones, multiple ribs
and had even sustained a skull fracture due to her flailing attempts to
escape her terrorizing dream-state. Her subconscious mind responded
affirmatively to my simple question, "Is there a trapped emotion that is
causing your night terrors?" A little further testing revealed that
emotions of panic, terror and fear had become trapped in her body when
she was five years old, during a short period when she was experiencing
a recurring nightmare. The nightmare was long since gone, but the
trapped emotions remained. The result of releasing these trapped
emotions was that within one week the night terrors were gone for good,
and did not return.

Can You Afford to Keep Them?

I believe that removing trapped emotions is vital to your quality of
life. Removing them may prevent many different problems from eventually
occurring. Hopefully you are beginning to understand how releasing your
trapped emotions can give you relief from mental and physical symptoms
you may be suffering from now. By releasing your trapped emotions, you
will be removing the unwanted negative energy-clouds that are hampering
the normal function of your tissues, and you will be helping to
re-establish the free flow of energy, thus helping your body to heal
itself. Your mind will return to a more natural state as well, without
the drama, pain and weight of your old emotions blocking you from
progressing in your life. Next, I will share some amazing secrets that
ancient physicians knew about the human energy field that have just
recently been rediscovered.

PART II THE ENERGETIC WORLD

OUR BIRTH IS BUT A SLEEP AND A FORGETTING: THE SOUL THAT RISES WITH US,
OUR LIFE'S STAR, HATH HAD ELSEWHERE ITS SETTING, AND COMETH FROM AFAR.
NOT IN ENTIRE FORGETFULNESS, AND NOT IN UTTER NAKEDNESS, BUT TRAILING
CLOUDS OF GLORY DO WE COME FROM GOD, WHO IS OUR HOME. -WILLIAM
WORDSWORTH

3 MYSTERIES OF THE ANCIENT ENERGY HEALERS

In 1939, a Russian electrical technician named Semyon Kirlian discovered
what is now known as Kirlian photography.1 Kirlian photography uses
pulsed, high voltage frequencies to take pictures of the radiating
energy fields that surround all living things. The technique is also
referred to as Gas Discharge Visualization, or GDV. Russian scientists
have performed a significant amount of research using Kirlian
photography over the last 65 years, and have found that all things
exhibit the characteristics of an energy field, although living things
have a much more vibrant energy field than inanimate objects.2 Perhaps
the most striking Kirlian images are those of leaves which have been cut
in half, yet still show the complete, intact energy fields of the whole
leaves.3 Is it possible that these Kirlian images are actually revealing
the inner, spiritual nature of things?

Kirlian Photo of Cut Leaf

The existence of the "Human Energy Field" has been a basic tenet of the
healing arts for a very long time. The Hindus understood the vital,
life-giving force which permeates and gives life to all things to be
Prana, an understanding going back 5,000 years. The Chinese taught that
this energy is

called Chi, and understood that if the Chi is imbalanced within an
individual, the result is poor health. Throughout history, as many as 97
diverse and separate cultures had a belief in the human energy field.
Trapped emotions distort and block the flow of this energy, and the
Emotion Code is one simple way to bring this energy back to a more
balanced state.

The Spirit and the Temple

I believe the human energy field is essentially the spirit that exists
within each of us. I believe that if you could somehow magically pull
your spirit out of your body and stand them alongside each other for
comparison, the likeness would surprise you. Many of the near-death
experiences that have been recorded reveal that people who have "died"
have actually just left their bodies for a time. Sometimes they don't
even realize that they have died until they look down and see their
physical body lying there as they hover above it. Individuals such as
these have come to know by their own experience that they are not their
physical body. Instead, their body is more like a temple that houses
their spirit-self. I had an experience once that I will never forget, as
it taught me the truth of this concept. When I was in practice I
regularly saw many patients with difficult and chronic conditions. I was
in the habit of saying a short and silent prayer to God for guidance
before each treatment, and I came to appreciate His help on many
occasions when my own knowledge proved inadequate. One day, after
uttering a silent prayer for help, I turned my attention to the patient
lying on the table before me. At that moment, I was given a gift of
understanding from above. I perceived that I was standing in the
presence of a sacred temple; the temple of the body. I was filled with
the deepest sense of awe and reverence. This inspired perception
revealed the truth about the body on a much higher level of
understanding than I'd ever had before. This spiritual experience
changed how I see people. I have always had a lot of love and respect
for mankind, but now I realize that the truth of our existence is more
profound and sacred than we imagine. We truly are spiritual beings,
having a physical experience here on this earth.

How Your Thoughts Affect Others

Your thoughts originate from your spirit intelligence and can have a
profound effect on those around you. Your thoughts are energy, and are
continually radiating from your body, without limits. The energy of your
thoughts and feelings exerts a subtle effect on other people as well as
other forms of life. We are constantly making contact with others
whether we realize it or not, since all energy is continuous and
connected. A patient named Linda came to me suffering from Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome. She expressed to me that the symptoms of her illness
started after she began sharing a cubicle with a very negative woman at
her office. This woman was constantly seething about one thing or
another. Linda felt that this woman's negative energy had triggered the
downward spiral of her health.

Thoughts are Things Ancient healers had a profound understanding of the
power of thought. In my seminars I use a simple test to illustrate how
thoughts can have a powerful effect on another person's mind and body,
even at a distance. I have a volunteer stand at the front of the room
with his back to the audience. I perform a quick baseline muscle test to
make sure he is testable, by having him say "love", and then pressing
down gently but firmly on his outstretched arm. This should give a
strong muscle response, and he should be able to resist my downward
pressure without any trouble. Then I have him say "hate", and again I
press down on his arm, which now is weakened, making him unable to
resist. After making sure we are ready for the demonstration, I instruct
the volunteer to keep his eyes closed and his mind clear. I make sure to
keep my mind clear as well, so I won't interfere with the demonstration.
I then instruct the audience that when I give the thumbs-up signal
behind his back, they are to silently send positive thoughts to the
volunteer, such as "I love you", or "You are wonderful." I tell the
audience that when I give the thumbs down signal behind his back, they
are to think negative thoughts about the volunteer, such as "I hate
you", or "You are disgusting."

At my thumbs-up signal, the audience begins sending positive thoughts
toward him, and I gently push down on his outstretched arm. I remain
silent during the demonstration to illustrate to everyone in the
audience that it is their thought energy alone that is creating the
effect. Without exception, the subject's arm is always strong. Then I
give the thumbs-down signal and the audience begins sending negative
thoughts to the volunteer. I press down on his arm again, but instead of
being strong, his arm is invariably weak. Remember that during this
process, he is not consciously aware of what signals I am giving the
audience. He not only has his back to them, but my communication with
the audience is non-vocal, my hand signals to them are given behind his
back, and his eyes are closed. This simple test has given consistently
reliable results during all my years of teaching seminars. It works
because we are made of energy, and thoughts are energy, too. When
thought energy from others passes through your energetic being, there
must always be an effect, either positive or negative. In this case, the
audience's negative thoughts about the volunteer weaken him
demonstrably. Their positive thoughts strengthen him. This fascinating,
yet simple test has some rather profound implications. Of course, your
own thoughts will have the most drastic and immediate effect on the
state of your own energy field. Shifting your thinking from positive to
negative will immediately shift your vibrational energy from positive to
negative. This will inevitably produce negative results, the most
obvious and immediate of which is a generalized weakening of the body.
You might imagine how negative thoughts have a weakening affect on your
body's organs and tissues, and how continuing in this state might be
dangerous to your health and well-being. Your subconscious mind is aware
of negative thoughts that might be harming you, whether they are your
own thoughts or not. Often your conscious mind is slow to detect
negative energies if you cannot see proof of them, like facial
expressions, body language or verbal communication. This "proof " is
what you have been taught to look for since you were a little child. I
think we have all been somewhat desensitized, and so most of us are
unable to consciously detect energy that we cannot see. We have been
bombarded with information since the day we were born about what the
world is supposed to be like. We are fed perspectives, opinions,
prejudices, traditions, theories, facts, and doctrines. We hope that
what we have learned is based in truth. We go to

school to learn the "facts" about nature, science and the history of the
world. By the time we reach adulthood, our ideas about the world are
essentially in place. When new information comes along, it is only
natural that our minds are slow to accept and understand things that
don't fit with previously learned information. It might be hard to
accept if the new information requires us to make some changes in our
thinking, especially if it goes against what we've been taught. The
Nature of Things

Most of us never learned that everything around us is made of energy,
vibrating at different levels, making things look different, taste
different, smell different, and feel different. We live in what I like
to call a "Lego" universe. In case you have been living in a cave, (or
perhaps have no experience with children) Legos are little plastic
building blocks that come in various colors, shapes and sizes. Anyone
who has been to a Legoland theme park can tell you that these little
plastic building blocks can be used to build anything from elephants to
skyscrapers. Our universe is also made of little building blocks called
subatomic particles. They are actually not particles at all, but you can
think of them as infinitesimally small units of vibrating energy. If you
put enough of these little energies together, you have an atom. Like
Legos, differing arrangements of these little energies will produce
atoms of different elements, such as hydrogen, carbon, titanium and so
on. Again, like Legos, various atoms can be arranged to make molecules
that we call proteins, fats, carbohydrates, and so on. Ultimately, all
the things we see around us and literally everything that exists,
whether plant, animal, mineral, gas, liquid, solid or anything else, is
made of these little building blocks, and they are made of energy.

The Mysterious Quantum World Subatomic particles are not really
particles; they are instead a "quantum", or a quantity of something that
is quite indefinable. Quantum physics, or the study of these smallest
units of energy, was started by Albert Einstein and his contemporaries.
These brilliant scientists devised some very ingenious

experiments in an attempt to discover more about the nature of these
energies. One of the most startling aspects of quantum research reveals
that these energies behave in different ways depending on what the
observer is expecting to see. Many physicists believe that the only
explanation for these mysterious behaviors is that the energies within
the atom are themselves intelligent to some small degree.4 In one famous
experiment, scientists split an atom, sending two of its particles (or
energies) traveling in different directions at nearly the speed of
light. After the particles had journeyed a certain distance in different
directions, one of the particles passed through a powerful magnetic
field which changed its direction of travel. At the same instant, its
sister particle changed direction too-at precisely the same angle.
Though a considerable distance separated them, the two particles were
still mysteriously connected. What happened to one instantly affected
the other, with no regard to distance or separation. How do you think
this could be? How could these little energies perform such a feat of
apparently instantaneous communication if they were so far apart?5 No
one really knows for certain, at least not yet. However, quantum physics
has shown this phenomenon over and over again. Making a change in one
particle will cause an instantaneous and equivalent change in a
connected particle, no matter how far away it is. It appears that
distance is no barrier to the connectedness of their energy. Remember,
everything is connected to everything else!6 Remembering the Kamikazes

This inexplicable phenomenon is not restricted to the behavior of
individual subatomic particles, however. This strange connectedness has
been shown to occur in the cells in the human body. In one well-known
study, white blood cells were taken from a subject and placed in a Petri
dish. White blood cells are responsible for seeking out and destroying
foreign bacteria, toxins, and other invaders. The subject was hooked up
to electrodes to measure the electrical activity of his body. His white
blood cells were also placed in a highly sensitive device that was able
to measure their electrical activity. Exact measurements were taken of
the electrical activity level of both the patient and his white cells.
One of the men in the study had served in the Navy during World War II
on an aircraft carrier stationed in the Pacific. While he was there,
Japanese kamikaze suicide pilots had attacked. The man was terrified,
and more than

once, he was sure he was going to die. After he was hooked up to the
electrodes, he was shown newsreel footage of kamikaze pilots diving and
attacking aircraft carriers during the war. While it was a long-ago
event, his body had not forgotten it. The sudden acute anxiety that he
felt showed immediately on the readout from the electrodes on his body.
This comes as no real surprise. But the researchers were amazed to see
that his white blood cells on the other side of the room showed exactly
the same burst on the readout. Both readouts were essentially identical.
The electrical currents of the cells were suddenly just as erratic as
the currents in his body. They turned off the projector, and the
electrical activity in both the man and his blood cells across the room
returned to normal. The scientists could hardly believe it. They
repeated the test a number of times, with similar results each time.
Just to see what would happen, the test was repeated again but the
distance between the patient and his white blood cells was increased. In
fact, the measuring device containing the still-living white blood cells
was driven to another laboratory a number of miles away, and the test
was repeated. Keeping precise records of the times and electrical
activities of the man in the room and his cells several miles away, they
repeated the experiment again and again. The man was shown the kamikaze
clips, then allowed to relax. Then he was shown the newsreels again and
allowed to relax. The electrical activity on the man's readouts and
those of his living blood cells several miles away matched every time.
The results of this test went against everything these scientists had
been taught. Ask anyone whether a man who gets upset watching a movie
can make his blood cells act upset -- many miles away -- and you'll
probably be laughed at. It sounds impossible, yet it really happened.7

The Intelligent Universe

Other things even more amazing than this have happened as well. They
seem absolutely miraculous because we don't understand them. In fact, we
are just now beginning to understand the mysterious nature of energy,
how it works and how it can be harnessed. I believe that one of the
greatest secrets of the universe is just now beginning to be unveiled.

This great secret has to do with the modern discovery of the intelligent
nature of subatomic particles, or the intelligent nature of energy.
Imagine for a moment that what quantum physicists are saying is actually
true. Imagine for a moment that the universe in which we live is
entirely made of energies that are themselves somehow intelligent. Think
about this. The chair you are sitting in right now is made of energy.
That energy is intelligent. Your chair can't "think", but on some level,
your chair is composed of countless little energies that are doing
precisely what they are supposed to do to keep your chair in one piece,
helping to make your experience in this world what it is. Max Planck,
one of the greatest minds of the 20th century, considered the father of
Quantum Theory, made the following statement when he was awarded the
Nobel prize for physics: As a man who has devoted his whole life to the
most clear headed science, to the study of matter, I can tell you as a
result of my research about atoms this much: There is no matter as such.
All matter originates and exists only by virtue of a force which brings
the particle of an atom to vibration and holds this most minute solar
system of the atom together. We must assume behind this force the
existence of a conscious and intelligent mind. This mind is the matrix
of all matter. The Power of Intention

Your intention is really just another form of energy. I like to think of
it as a directed form of thought energy. Because energy is intelligent,
it actually has the ability to obey, or cooperate with your intention.
Ancient healers demonstrated an understanding of this concept, that the
universe is filled with and made of intelligent energy, which is able to
respond to intention. Jesus Christ is still known as the greatest healer
of all time, as he routinely healed the blind and crippled, and even
raised the dead. His first miracle, though not about healing,
dramatically demonstrates the concept of intelligent energy.

Jesus was with his disciples at a wedding where the host ran out of
wine, a terrible faux pas in those days. Jesus directed the servants to
fill some large vessels with water, which he then turned to wine to the
astonishment of all those present. I believe that Jesus simply told the
water to become wine, and it simply obeyed his word. But I believe it
worked because the water itself was intelligent, and therefore able to
obey Christ's command ( John 2:1-11, KJV). Feel Like Walking on Water?

Another example from the Bible is a story involving the apostle Peter.
Jesus had sent his apostles to cross the sea while he went up on a
mountain to pray. The apostles were on their ship, in the midst of a
stormy sea, when in the early hours of the morning they saw a figure
walking toward them on the water. The apostles were terrified, and
thought it was a ghost. When they realized it was their master, Peter
cried out to Him, "Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the
water." Jesus said, "Come." Peter got out of the boat and began walking
on the water toward Jesus. He was walking on water! But when he looked
around and realized how unnatural it was to be doing what he was doing,
and how bad the storm was, he began to fear, and immediately started to
sink. Peter cried out, "Lord save me!" Jesus reached out and caught him.
Jesus said, "Oh thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" (Matt
14:22-31, KJV). Peter started out with faith, the belief that he could
walk on water. His faith and intention were so powerful that he was
actually able to do it. The intelligences of the water simply responded
to his belief, to his intention, in a very immediate way, and the normal
state of things instantly changed to support his intention. The moment
Peter began to fear, his clear intention and faith in his own ability to
walk on water began to diminish. As his faith diminished, his clear
intention vanished, and he began to sink, because the universe had to
respond to his new state of mind. You see, Peter began to sink because
he began to doubt, to fear. Doubt and fear are the opposites of faith,
and they cannot coexist. The universe supports your beliefs about
yourself, too. If you think you can't, the universe will support that
belief, and you will not succeed. On the other hand, if you think you
can, the universe will support that belief, and you will be empowered.

Walking on Air

About two months after the death of my father, I had a very unusual
dream. It was profound to me, and I took it as a message from God. I
dreamed that I was walking down a hallway in a university or a college.
The hallway was filled with busy people on their own errands. There were
people all around me, but there was something very unusual happening to
me. I was literally walking on air, about an inch off the floor. The
feeling was absolutely incredible. I tried walking faster, then slower,
to see if it would change my altitude. It didn't change, I was still
walking about an inch off the floor, and the feeling was indescribable!
No one around me seemed to notice this, as they were intent on what they
were doing. I thought to myself, "If I can walk an inch off the ground,
I'll bet I can walk a foot off the ground." As soon as I thought this,
it was done! I was walking a foot off the ground! I looked behind me at
that point, and saw a group of small children, whose eyes were fastened
upon me. They were also walking a foot off the ground, just like me,
although no one else seemed to notice what was happening. I continued
walking, and found I could gain altitude as I desired, and before long,
my head was nearly touching the ceiling. At this point, I noticed that
everyone had stopped what they were doing and had turned their faces up
toward me. They were questioning me, saying, "How are you doing that?
How can you possibly be doing what you're doing?" The answer I gave them
was a message from God to me, and now is a message from God to you. I
said to them, "It's easy! All you have to do is believe you can do it,
and be grateful to God that you are doing it!" Then I looked further
down the hallway, and saw several large glass doors that led outside.
There were beautiful green rolling hills, more campus buildings, and a
vast open sky. I thought to myself, "When I get beyond those doors, I
will be able to fly!" It was at that moment I awakened. Still in a
dreamlike state, I realized clearly what the dream meant. The fact that
I could walk on air meant that I could do whatever I believed I could
do, as long as I was grateful to God that I was doing it. The children
symbolized the simple, pure faith of minds unfettered by a lifetime of
learned limitations. The doors had a dual meaning. They

symbolized the limits that we place on ourselves in this mortal life,
and they also symbolized death. Part of the message was that my father
was beyond those doors, and that he could fly, with no earthly limits to
his abilities. If we express this dream in the form of a mathematical
equation, it would look like this: Your Belief That You Can Do It + Your
Gratitude To God That You Are Doing It = The Results You Want To Obtain

Would we ever begin anything if we did not believe we could do it? No.
Belief is essential to all we do, and is the necessary first step.
Gratitude is an essential part of this equation, and I can't
overemphasize the importance of the word doing. In other words, your
gratitude to God that you are doing it is significant, because it is to
God that we owe everything that we have and are, and it is to Him that
we owe every opportunity that lies is in our path. If you have a goal
that you want to achieve, imagine how grateful you would feel if you had
already achieved it; if you can feel it and expect that it will be, it
will be. As you learn to cultivate gratitude to God for what you already
have, your faith and belief will increase, for you will draw yourself
closer to that very source of power from which all things flow. You will
soon find yourself doing the very thing that was once only a dream. When
your heart is full of gratitude, do you think it is possible to feel
doubt or fear? I don't think so. To be a healer, you must not entertain
thoughts of doubt; you must leave your fears behind. Your heart must be
filled with love and gratitude. Try this with the Emotion Code; it's
easy. All you have to do is believe and be grateful, and you will be
able to do it. I mean this very literally!

Messages from Water

A Japanese scientist, Masaru Emoto, has made a wonderful contribution to

our understanding of the energetic world around us. His book, entitled
The Hidden Messages in Water, details Mr. Emoto's research into the
crystalline structure of water. Mr. Emoto and his colleagues found that
water droplets would form widely different crystalline patterns or
"snowflakes" after being exposed to different kinds of music and then
frozen. Exposure to acid rock music, for example, would result in a very
disrupted crystal, while a Mozart symphony would result in a beautifully
formed crystal. Taking their research further showed that by writing
different words or phrases onto a piece of paper, and then taping the
paper to a vial of water and leaving it overnight, different crystalline
structures would result. The phrase "I love you" would invariably result
in a symmetrical, wellshaped and beautiful ice crystal, while the phrase
"I hate you" would result in a very asymmetrical and disrupted crystal.
The most intensely beautiful ice crystals of all were formed when water
was exposed overnight to the phrase "Love and Gratitude."8 Remember that
your body is over 70% water. Can you see how important it is to maintain
thoughts of positivity instead of negativity? Imagine how your life
would be if you filled yourself with thoughts of love and gratitude on a
continual basis. Imagine how people would be drawn to you. Imagine what
your life could be like. I believe this is how our lives are actually
intended to be! I have read many experiences written by people who died
and went to the "other side", temporarily. I have noticed that in their
near-death experiences, these people were never asked what kind of car
they drove on earth, or how big their bank account was. Instead, they
are very often asked "How much love were you able to develop for your
fellow beings?" and "How much knowledge were you able to gain on earth?"
Life is about having joy. It's about increasing our ability to give and
receive love and it's about gaining all the knowledge we can. It's also
about serving others, feeling grateful for all we have, and learning to
create the life we want. Trapped emotions make it more difficult for us
to experience these joys and tend to short-circuit us both physically
and emotionally.

The Human Energy Field

A few decades ago, scientific thought denied the existence of any sort
of human energy field. Since that time, scientists have completely
changed their minds. They now know with absolute certainty that an
energy field exists. As new technology has come along, they've been able
to test it and find out for certain. For example, one device, called the
SQUID magnetometer, can detect the tiny magnetic fields created by the
biochemical and physiological activities of the body. Using this device,
scientists have learned that all of the tissues and organs in the body
produce specific, magnetic vibrations. They call them biomagnetic
fields.9 This is fairly new information, not widespread knowledge yet.
Although not all medical doctors are aware of this, it has been
determined that the biomagnetic fields in the space around the body give
a more accurate reading of the patient's health than traditional
electrical measurements, like EEG's and EKG's. In fact, scientists now
know that the heart's electromagnetic field is so powerful that you can
take an accurate EKG reading three feet away from the body. The reading
can be taken from any point on the body and any point in the
electromagnetic field, because the field itself contains the information
in a three-dimensional, or holographic way.10 Today's doctors know what
they were taught by their professors, who learned from their professors
before them, and so on. Western medicine is empirical. It's based on
observation. If something can't be observed, it can't be verified. If it
can't be verified, then it isn't true. Despite its drawbacks, doctors
who follow the model of western medicine have often been behind some of
the most brilliant medical advances in history. They excel at developing
important methods of precision testing, breakthrough surgical procedures
and advanced technology. This model has tremendous assets, but it has
its disadvantages as well. As far back as the 1940's, Dr. Harold Saxon
Burr, a distinguished medical researcher at Yale, insisted that
pathology could be detected in the energy field of the body long before
physical symptoms began to emerge. Although he didn't have the skills or
techniques to do it himself, Burr proposed that diseases could be
prevented by adjusting or manipulating the energy field.11 His medical
colleagues thought his ideas seemed unlikely and farfetched, probably
because they were not taught that this could be a possibility when they
were in medical school.

The importance of the energy field is still not taken into account in
traditional Western medical practices, and thus, the patient often
suffers needlessly due to lack of proper attention to the underlying
causes of their illness. Recently, however, many non-traditional healing
practices have gone from being ridiculed to being respected. This is
partially because technology has improved and scientists have been able
to test more accurately, and partially because these alternative healing
methods actually do work. Now mainstream science is even beginning to
acknowledge the existence of the energy meridians used by ancient
Chinese medical doctors for thousands of years. Acupuncture in
particular is being recognized for its energetic healing power, even if
it is not fully understood by the medical community. Chiropractic
adjustments, which remove nerve interference, are also being proven in
clinical trials to have long-lasting and significant benefits, something
that chiropractic doctors and patients have known for over 100 years.
Abundant evidence exists to prove that the human body is an energetic,
vibrant, emotional, and spiritual entity. The old mechanistic approach
proves to be more and more limited and simplistic as we learn about the
nature of energy and of the universe, and how everything is in constant
communication with everything else. As Simon Mitchell points out in his
book, Don't Get Cancer: A philosophy of medicine that is over-reliant on
logic and limited mainly to drugs and surgery is fundamentally flawed.
Acts of logic always rely on analysis, that is, breaking down a 'whole'
into its constituent parts, and examining each minutely. Reductionist
approaches fail to see the connectivity and relatedness of all things.
As a result this philosophy is offering us 'cures' which are often as
dangerous and destructive as the disease itself. Today, we are at a
turning point in medical history. With the discoveries of quantum
physics and molecular biology proving that everything is energy and that
it is all related, a door has been opened. Scientific research is
constantly being conducted, and continues to confirm over and over again
that we are beings of energy, and that there is an intelligent force at
work in the universe. Research will continue to push back the boundaries
on what we know about the human energy field. As it does so, I am
convinced that the energetic basis of human thought will become more
clearly understood, and that the phenomenon of trapped emotions will
eventually be recognized by the scientific community for the damage they
cause.

As technology continues to advance, scientists and doctors will
inevitably realize how important it is to keep the body in a state of
balance. The magnetic and energetic healing techniques that alternative
practitioners already use will hopefully be integrated into conventional
medicine to provide the best, most thorough, and most gentle healing.
There is much to be learned by studying the energy of the human body,
and we are the ones to gain from it. Remember that not so long ago,
scientists didn't recognize that the human body had an energy field,
much less that our very health depended on it! All methods of healing
are valid and have their place. In the future, I see a world where the
best of all possible approaches will combine to the benefit of mankind.
Quick Fixes

I saw first-hand during my years in practice that the body has a
built-in ability to heal itself, another evidence of the body's innate
intelligence. The body sometimes needs help to restore itself to a state
of balance. This help may consist of removing trapped emotions,
detoxification, receiving chiropractic adjustments and proper nutrition,
and more. Healing is a process, and it takes time. But waiting for the
body to heal itself naturally can try our patience. We usually want a
quick fix. We don't want to wait; we want it now. We are conditioned by
endless advertising to think that if we take a pill our problem will be
solved. While some prescription medications do address the cause of
illness, most only cover up the symptoms. They usually do such a
wonderful job at masking our symptoms that we may think our problem is
gone, when it is merely being chemically suppressed. Remember that
symptoms are the body's way of telling you that something is wrong. They
are a warning signal that you need to change something, or that your
body needs some help. Masking symptoms with medications can be a bit
like putting a piece of duct tape over that annoying oil light in your
car that turned on recently. You may cover it up for awhile, but
eventually your car will stop running. The pharmaceutical companies
would have you believe that the best way to get well is to take their
products. For example, heavy advertising in the media helped to create a
tremendous market for anti-depressants. While they have

helped some people, like all drugs, they have side-effects. In fact,
read this excerpt from an official FDA press release, dated October 14,
2004:12 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) today issued a Public
Health Advisory announcing a multi-pronged strategy to warn the public
about the increased risk of suicidal thoughts and behavior
("suicidality") in children and adolescents being treated with
antidepressant medications... The release of trapped emotions have
consistently helped patients to overcome depression. Read this
testimonial from a former patient of mine who was suffering from severe
depression. I had gotten to the point where I was exceedingly suicidal.
Everyday I would wake up and have to decide, 'Do I live or die today?' I
was stuck because part of my belief system was that my life was not mine
to take. That had been a mantra already for several years, and yet I no
longer wanted to live. And I happened to show up at one of Dr. Nelson's
seminars where he talks about emotions. And at that time he didn't talk
about them a whole lot, and I spoke to him after he was finished
speaking, and said 'You mentioned the emotions but you didn't do
anything or talk about it; I need help... I don't want to live, yet I
know that there are some people in this life who are happy, and there
are people in this life who are functioning very well. I'm not, and I
want to be. Can you do something?' And in that moment he cleared
something regarding my lack of joy, and I could literally feel in the
moment that he did that, all of this energy coming back to me. I
actually did not sleep almost the whole night; I was so pumped and so
energized after that. Since then, we have done a lot of work, mostly in
the clearing of trapped emotions, and other work as well, but this
emotional work is so powerful and so key. I am a different person than I
was a year and a half ago. I no longer have the panic attacks; I no
longer have the night terrors I used to have. I am a different person.
I'm alive, I embrace life, and I love life. Thanks - Karen B. If we have
pain, we may need pain medication to be able to deal with it. I'm
grateful we have it, and as I said before, all healing approaches are
valid. Medications can be perfectly appropriate in the short-term, as
they work to relieve symptoms, but they sometimes do more harm than
good. Witness the following article from USA Today, dated December 20,
2006: Non-prescription pain relievers used by millions of U.S. consumers
need stronger health warnings regarding liver or stomach risk, the Food
and Drug Administration said Tuesday. The drugs include some of the most
commonly taken in the USA ---

aspirin, ibuprofen and acetaminophen --- and will affect such household
brands as Motrin, Advil, Aleve and Tylenol. The FDA proposes that:
Products with acetaminophen, such as Tylenol, include warnings for liver
toxicity, particularly when used in high doses, with other acetaminophen
products or with three or more drinks of alcohol a day. Over-the-counter
NSAIDs (short for non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) include
warnings for stomach bleeding in people over 60; those who have had
ulcers, take a blood thinner or more than one NSAID; or those who take
them with alcohol or longer than directed. Attention focused on their
risks in 2004 when prescription NSAID Vioxx was withdrawn because of
heart attack and stroke risk. Last year, the FDA sought a warning on
prescription NSAID Celebrex for cardiovascular and stomach risks. An FDA
advisory panel in 2002 said over-the-counter NSAIDs should have stronger
warnings about stomach bleeding.13 Here is another testimonial from a
former patient who suffered from chronic pain for four years after
falling 2 stories onto a boulder and breaking her back: I consulted
Dr. Nelson because I had broken my back a few years back and had never
gotten over the pain despite several types of physical therapy and
exercise programs. During my first adjustment, I realized that
Dr. Nelson was a true healer; I could just feel it. Almost all of my
adjustments included "emotional releases" from energy blockages in my
body, (unresolved traumatic events live in the energy system of the body
and cause blockages in the energy flow). At first I did not notice any
change, but gradually my pain began to decrease! With Dr. Nelson's help
I discovered that emotions very deep within me were causing the majority
of my pain... My body had so much pain stored inside from so very long
ago, and Dr. Nelson was able to "talk" to my body to help me release it.
What a remarkable process to experience each appointment's release and
the corresponding decrease in pain. Today for the first time in 4 years
I am able to work part-time, but most important of all, I feel a great
healing in my physical and emotional body and have learned the
invaluable fact of how these two are so integrally related. Thank you,
Dr. Nelson!!! In love and light - Linda P.

Getting to the Cause

If the essential cause of your illness is not dealt with, you will have
the illness until your body is able to heal itself. I have seen many
cases where the patient was on medication for their problem for years,
and as soon as they went off the medication, their problem came back
full swing because the underlying cause was still creating the illness.
The underlying cause must be reversed or your problem will not go away
and you must either remain in pain or on drugs forever. Most of us never
learned that we could access the energy of our bodies, to learn what is
wrong and how to fix it. But we live in a remarkable time, when
knowledge of all the ages is being poured out upon mankind beyond
measure. Ancient healing philosophies were full of truth and deep
insights into our energetic nature, and the validity of these approaches
is now being recognized once again. Magnets are one of the most ancient
healing modalities on earth, and are an integral part of the Emotion
Code. Find out why in the next chapter.

A MAN WHO IS SWAYED BY NEGATIVE EMOTIONS MAY HAVE GOOD ENOUGH
INTENTIONS, MAY BE TRUTHFUL IN WORD, BUT HE WILL NEVER FIND THE TRUTH.
-GHANDI

4 HEALING WITH MAGNETS

What is the most powerful healing tool in your home? Some vitamins? A
prescription medication? A healing herbal tea? Something in your fridge?
How about something on your fridge? No, not your shopping list, I'm
talking about the magnet that's holding your shopping list to your
fridge. Believe it or not, the common refrigerator magnet can be one of
the most powerful healing tools you'll ever own, when it comes to
removing trapped emotions, provided you know how to use it. I'll explain
why in this chapter. How healthy you are is directly related to how
balanced your energy field is. Energy healing works to restore and
maintain the harmony of the energy field, so that the body can remain
vitally healthy. But how do you begin to heal the energy field of the
body if you cannot see it? You already know you can find imbalances like
trapped emotions by using the Sway Test to ask the subconscious mind
what is wrong. What can you use as a tool to remove trapped emotions?
The answer is you must use some other form of energy. The easiest to
use, the cheapest and the most widely available energy tool is the
magnet. Magnets emit pure energy and are a powerful tool to fix
energetic imbalances that you cannot see. I have used all kinds of
magnets, from the most expensive and most powerful, to the least
expensive and weakest. Some magnets are specifically designed for
healing the body, and some are not. But I have found that virtually any
magnet can be used to release trapped emotions using the Emotion Code.

Your Magnetic Existence Your existence stretches farther than you can
see or feel, precisely because you are an energetic being, even though
you are also physical. It makes sense to say that if part of your
existence is invisible to you, then perhaps some of the underlying
causes of your health problems might be invisible to you as

well. Most people assume that they exist only inside the limits of their
own skin. Your skin represents the outer layer of what you can see, and
you have been taught that what you see is what is real. Now we have
scientific proof that there is more to you than meets the eye. For
instance, we now know that you generate an electromagnetic field,
created by the electrical activity in your body. It is created by
electrical currents in your nervous system as well as the
electrochemical processes that are constantly occurring in all of your
cells. Scientists now know that the electromagnetic field of your heart
extends 8 to 12 feet from your body in all directions, behind you, above
you, below you, in front of you and to your sides.1 In 1956, Japanese
scientists did the groundbreaking research that proved beyond a doubt
that there were both electric and magnetic forces in the body. By
exposing the body to pulsing electromagnetic fields, they created
electrical changes on a cellular level and altered cell metabolism. This
phenomenon is known in medical science as the piezoelectric effect.
Western medicine acknowledges and accepts the existence of this
electromagnetic field without reservation, but for many years has only
measured the electrical component of it. Scientists and doctors have
measured the body's electrical activity under clinical conditions for
many years. The EKG, or electrocardiogram, which measures the electrical
impulses of the heart, was first put to practical use in 1895. The EEG,
or electroencephalogram, which measures the electrical activity of the
brain, has been used since 1913. A basic law of physics states that
whenever electrical activity is generated, a corresponding magnetic
field will always occur. Scientists can measure this magnetic field
using magnetoencephalographs and magnetocardiograms. These machines
represent a leap ahead over the old technology, which was limited to
measuring only the electrical fields of the heart and brain. Scientists
are coming to recognize how powerful and important these magnetic
interactions are. The brain's pineal gland, which secretes hormones that
affect your whole body, is surrounded by magnetite clusters that are
carefully tuned to perceive and interact with magnetic fields. These are
the same kinds of magnetic clusters that allow homing pigeons,
butterflies and bees to navigate using the earth's magnetic field. It
appears that these magnetite formations in our own

pineal glands have a lot to do with our own sense of direction. A study
published in the respected British Medical Journal found that people who
were suffering from calcification, or hardening of the pineal gland were
significantly more likely to get lost!2 Floating Frogs With Magnetic
Energy

Scientists attempting to understand why magnetism has such a profound
affect on physiology have performed a fascinating experiment using an
extremely powerful magnet and a frog. This is somewhat whimsical, but I
include it because it illustrates the fact that magnets do have a
physical effect. April 12, 1997 "Scientists Make a Frog Levitate"

LONDON (AP) -British and Dutch scientists say they have succeeded in
floating a frog in air --- using a magnetic field a million times
stronger than that of the Earth. And, they say, there is no reason why
larger creatures, even humans shouldn't perform the same gravity defying
feat. 'It's perfectly feasible if you have a large enough magnetic
field,' said Peter Main, professor of physics at Nottingham University,
one of the British scientists who collaborated with colleagues at the
University of Nijmegen to create the first levitating amphibian. Their
endeavors are reported briefly in the current issue of the British
magazine New Scientist. To hold up the frog, the field had to be a
million times that of the Earth, the scientists said, only then was it
strong enough to distort the orbits of electrons in the frog's atoms.
'If the magnetic field pushes the frog away with sufficient force, you
will overcome gravity and the frog will float,' Main said. The trick
doesn't only work on frogs. Scientists say they have made plants,
grasshoppers and fish float in the same way. 'Every ordinary object,
whether it be a frog, a grasshopper or a sandwich, is magnetic, but it's
very rare to see such a spectacular demonstration of this,' said Main.

The scientists said their frog showed no signs of distress after
floating in the air inside a magnetic cylinder.3 Magnets and Healing

When the human body is exposed to a magnetic field, even more
interesting and often surprising things happen. People's illnesses and
imbalances have completely disappeared. Pain has diminished, vertigo has
vanished, and fatigue has been reversed. There have been thousands of
people who have had their health restored by the healing powers of
magnets. Even though the proof is there, modern allopathic medicine is
still currently in the experimental phase with magnets as healing tools.
Many vitalistic healers already know that magnets work wonders, but
medicine cannot scientifically explain the discoveries that their
experiments have revealed. In March of 2005, Time magazine ran a story
about doctors at Columbia University who accidentally discovered a
surprising way to cure depression -- by using magnetic energy. A
Connecticut woman named Martha had been depressed for almost twenty
years. She had gone through all of the recognized traditional treatments
-- seeing psychiatrists and psychologists, consuming any medication they
gave her. But none of the treatments helped her depression. Martha
decided to participate in the experimental treatment procedure at
Columbia. Doctors applied a series of magnetic pulses to the top of her
head. They called the treatment repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (rTMS). After undergoing the hour-long procedure five times
a week for six weeks, Martha said, "I started to see signs of change by
about the third week. By September, I was on top again. I could take
pleasure in things like food and sunshine." At the time the article came
out, Martha had been returning to the institute for repeat sessions on a
periodic basis, and had been depression-free for six months. These
doctors cannot explain exactly why magnetic stimulation works to cure
depression and other disorders. According to Dr. George Wittenberg, a
neurologist at Wake Forest University, "Magnetic stimulation is a clever
way to induce current without actually having an electrical connection."
The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) agrees that there is no
denying the effectiveness of the technique, and they are sponsoring a
study at Columbia and three other institutions to further test the
healing effects of magnetic stimulation.4

In a study published in 2002 in the respected Journal of Neuropsychiatry
and Clinical Neurosciences, seventy-five percent of patients suffering
from depression experienced significant improvement after undergoing
this same type of magnetic treatment.5

My Introduction to Magnets

My own exposure to the power of magnetic therapy came many years ago
through my brother Greg, who had been using magnetic treatments in his
chiropractic office. Greg was so enthusiastic about the effectiveness of
the magnets made by a Japanese wellness company called Nikken, that he
finally persuaded me to give them a try in my own clinic. The moment
after I received my new Nikken "MagBoy" magnet in the mail I found a
patient that would present a real challenge. Laura had come to me for
treatment of her Fibromyalgia, a debilitating condition characterized by
widespread muscular pain of unknown origin. Most of Laura's pain was in
her upper body. Her overall range of motion with both of her arms was
very limited and she could barely raise them to a horizontal position
without being stopped by the pain. I explained to Laura that I'd like to
try a new treatment to see what effect, if any, it might have on her
condition. She agreed, and we chatted while I rolled the magnet
continuously back and forth on her left arm between her shoulder and her
elbow. After a few minutes of this, I tested the range of motion in her
arms again. I had her raise her right arm first, the arm we did not
apply the magnet to. Laura raised her arm until it was almost horizontal
to the floor. I could see that she was in pain, so I had her stop. This
was what I had expected. Then I asked her to raise her left arm, the one
we had used the magnet on. To our mutual surprise, Laura raised her left
arm easily and smoothly up along the side of her head without any
discomfort. Her eyes widened and she exclaimed, "I don't have any pain
at all where you used that! What is that thing? Can I buy it from you?"
I put Laura through more range-of-motion tests, and to my amazement, she
now had full range of motion in her left arm, and no pain. I looked down
at the little silver and blue magnet in my hand with eyes as wide as
Laura's.

These sudden and dramatic results were quite unexpected. I told Laura
all I knew, that it was a Nikken magnet designed for reducing discomfort
in the body. It took Laura very little effort to remove the cause of her
symptoms. My hunch is that in her case, the biggest underlying cause of
her Fibromyalgia was something that the Japanese call "MFDS", or
magnetic field deficiency syndrome. Proponents of MFDS believe that you
can become "deficient" in magnetic energy, just as you can become
deficient in a vitamin or a mineral. Adding a little more magnetic
energy to her body was all that Laura seemed to need to get rid of her
pain. The relief of Laura's Fibromyalgia was just the first miracle I
saw with magnets. I believe that MFDS is a component of many illnesses.
Like most illnesses, Fibromyalgia has a variety of underlying causes
that can vary from person to person, and MFDS is often one of those
components. In cases where it is the major or only underlying cause of
the illness, the application of magnetic energy can result in dramatic
improvement, as was the case with Laura.

A New Healing Tool

It was easy to put these magnets to the test, since I had a never-ending
stream of people who were suffering. Sometimes the results were
inexplicable and even a bit mysterious. One patient, for example, had a
long-term shoulder problem that instantly went away when she put Nikken
magnetic insoles in her shoes. On four separate occasions I was able to
stop acute asthma attacks by simply placing a Nikken magnetic pad on the
patients' chests. I saw allergies improve quickly and dramatically by
placing a magnet on the surface of a patient's body. I saw bruises
disappear, literally overnight. I saw broken bones heal in half the
normal time. In many cases, I came to require certain patients to wear
Nikken magnets as part of their treatment protocol, because they seemed
to shorten the recovery time so dramatically. One patient had a very
large disc bulge (8mm). She refused to have the recommended surgery. By
the time I met her she had lost all feeling in her right leg due to
nerve compression. Twenty-four hours after starting to wear a Nikken
magnet over her disc injury, she began feeling sharp, shooting pains in
her previously numb leg as the healing process began. Within a week she

was able to stop taking all her pain medication. She continued to wear
the magnet on her back, and the pain and inflammation continued to
diminish and completely disappeared. One year later, her radiologist was
baffled when he could find no evidence of her disc bulge upon performing
a repeat CT Scan. It's important to note that all of these cases
involved the use of magnets manufactured by Nikken, Inc., magnets which
were specifically designed for use on the body to relieve discomfort and
promote healing. Cartilage Made New

One of the most amazing healing experiences I have witnessed happened to
my uncle Lovell. When he was a young man in 1937, Lovell injured his
right knee. His doctors recommended surgery, but could not guarantee
that the operation would help him. He decided to not have the surgery,
since the odds of success and failure were about the same. As long as I
knew my uncle he always had his right knee wrapped with Ace bandages. I
found out later that his knee continually bothered him and caused him
pain from this old injury. In 1995, a friend introduced him to magnetic
therapy. This friend insisted that Lovell should put a pair of magnets
on his knee for at least 10 days. These mini-magnets, made by Nikken,
were about the size of a silver dollar. Lovell was skeptical, but
decided that he had nothing to lose by giving it a try. He didn't really
feel any difference in his knee after five days. Even after seven days,
there was no change. Finally on the tenth day something dramatic
happened. To his astonishment, for the first time in 60 years he could
feel no pain in his right knee. He was ecstatic and could hardly believe
it. He continued to wear the magnet day and night for the next two
months. His pain did not come back. At that point, he decided to have
X-rays taken of his knee, so he could compare them to a previous set of
X-rays that had been taken three years earlier. The old X-rays showed
that the cartilage in his knee joint was almost completely gone, and the
bone ends were actually touching. To his doctor's astonishment, this new
set of X-rays showed that the cartilage in his knee had somehow
regenerated. Although spontaneous regeneration of cartilage such as this
is considered a medical impossibility, it happened. The More We Know...

These incredible successes involving Nikken magnets forced me to open my
mind to a new way of thinking -- to something I'd never been taught
before. But I knew I was in good company. Most of the progress in the
history of medicine has been based on creative leaps of imagination.
When new treatments and methods are discovered, the old ones are
abandoned to make way for a more effective style of healing. This is
often a long and arduous process, since we have no guide to help us
along the way, only trial and error. As human beings, we have had our
bodies for thousands of years, but since they came with no "manual", we
have spent much of our time trying to figure out how they work and how
to make them work better. In former times, people thought that illness
was caused by, among other things, blood that had "gone bad." As a
result, bloodletting was a popular practice from antiquity until the
late 1800s, until it was finally abandoned in favor of more advanced
procedures. Approved medical practices, done with the best intentions,
are routinely abandoned when new insights about the body are discovered.
When I was a child, for instance, tonsillectomy or the removal of the
tonsils, was considered a harmless surgery. According to one study, up
to forty percent of young men entering military service in 1960 had had
their tonsils removed.6 Back then it was believed that the tonsils were
expendable, and no one really knew what they were for. Eventually, it
was realized that the tonsils form an important part of the body's
immune system. Today doctors are much more reluctant to take them out.
This is a sign of progress in medicine. The more we know about the true
nature of the human body, the better decisions we can make involving
health. While some of the healing practices from the past are not
correct and have fallen by the wayside, many ancient healing methods and
ideas have been right all along and are now coming back into favor.

Magnifying Your Intention

Because you are made of energy, true healing must address this aspect of
your makeup. Because trapped emotions themselves are also energy, the
most

efficient way to release them is with another form of energy. Intention
is a powerful form of thought-energy. It is possible to release trapped
emotions using the power of your intention alone. I believe that the
intention to release the trapped emotion is really the most important
part of the equation. I use magnets because I believe they literally
magnify the power of your intention to get the job done. Just as a
magnifying glass magnifies an image, I believe that a magnet can
literally magnify your thought-energy and intention beyond your current
capacity. This makes it possible for anyone to release trapped emotions.
You don't have to be a talented or experienced healer to do this work.
If your intention is clear, using a simple magnet to magnify your
intention is all you will need to achieve results formerly available
only to those with vast experience. A simple magnet can powerfully
enhance the energy of your intention, and carry it into the energy field
of the body. The acupuncture system provides the perfect avenue to put
the energy of your intention into the body, and release the trapped
emotion. How Acupuncture Fits In

The practice of acupuncture is based on the existence of the human
energy field, and has been around for thousands of years. In fact,
acupuncture points (or acupoints) and meridians are described in the
world's oldest known book on medicine, the Chinese Huang Ti Nei-Ching,
or The Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal Medicine, written around
2500 B.C.. Acupoints are specific locations that lie along pathways
known as meridians. Meridians can be thought of as small rivers of
energy that flow just beneath the skin. They follow very precise tracks
over the surface of the body that do not vary from person to person. The
existence of these meridians was the subject of speculation and
disagreement for many years. But in the last three decades multiple
research studies have proven their existence. In one study, researcher
Jean-Claude

Darras injected a radioactive isotope called technetium99 into acupoints
and non-acupoints alike. Radioactive isotopes such as this emit
low-level radiation that can be accurately measured and mapped. The
radioactive isotopes that were injected into the acupoints diffused away
from them in very precise patterns that were exactly the same as the
acupuncture meridians that had been mapped out anciently by Chinese
physicians. The same radioactive material that had been injected into
non-acupoints diffused away in no particular pattern.7

The Governing Meridian

Certain meridians are actually thought to function as reservoirs of
energy, which connect with and supply all other acupuncture meridians.
Perhaps the most important of these reservoir meridians is the Governing
Meridian, which begins in the center of the upper lip, runs up and over
the head, and all the way down the center of the spine, ending at the
tailbone.

The Governing Meridian

Because of the interconnections between the Governing Meridian and all
other meridians, it provides the most ideal pathway for what we want to
do as we treat the body for trapped emotions using the Emotion Code. A
trapped emotion is energy. To get rid of a trapped emotion, we need to
overcome it

with another form of energy. The Governing Meridian provides the perfect
window into the body for this purpose. Remember that a magnet actually
magnifies your thought, which is energy. While holding the intention in
your mind to release the trapped emotion that you have found, you simply
pass a magnet over the Governing Meridian. Your magnified intention to
release the trapped emotion enters into the Governing Meridian, and from
there this thought-energy flows quickly into all the other meridians and
areas of the body. This sudden influx of intention-energy has the effect
of releasing the trapped emotion permanently. In many years of practice
and many years of teaching the Emotion Code to students in seminars, we
have never seen a trapped emotion return. Once you release a trapped
emotion, it is gone for good. You don't need to know any acupuncture
points. You don't need to understand how it all works, really. All you
need to do is have a little bit of belief and intention, and it will
work. On the other hand, having some understanding of the mechanism
behind it all will increase your ability as it will increase your faith
in the process. Where Does the Trapped Emotion Go?

To understand how a trapped emotion is released from the body, allow me
to make an analogy. A number of companies now make special headphones
that are able to cancel out background noise. These headphones can make
jobs like leaf-blowing and construction work much more comfortable
because they cancel out the loud noises of the machines used. Another
popular use of noise-canceling headphones is for airline pilots, as the
continual whine of an aircraft engine has been shown to be very
fatiguing. Noise-canceling headphones sense the frequency of sound waves
coming in from outside, and instantly generate a sound wave that is
exactly opposite in phase. When the two sound waves collide, they cancel
each other out. The result is a much quieter experience. I believe that
releasing trapped emotions may make use of a similar phenomenon. Each
trapped emotion has its own particular rate of vibration, its own
frequency. Just as an opposite sound wave can cancel out an extraneous
noise, the energy of your magnified intention can cancel out the

"noise" of a trapped emotion. When you pass a magnet over the Governing
Meridian, you effectively create a flow of opposing energy in the form
of magnified intention. Therefore, the trapped emotion gets cancelled
out, it dissipates and disappears, similar to the noise from the jet
engine. Another example that you are perhaps more familiar with has to
do with credit cards. The magnetic strip on the back of a credit card is
encoded with specific information. When you place a magnet on it, you
might erase the encoded information, destroying the usefulness of the
credit card. Releasing a trapped emotion is similar in that the encoded
emotional energy is quickly, easily and permanently erased when you
swipe a magnet down the Governing Meridian. Magnets are generally
considered quite safe, but there are a few occasions when they should
not be used, or should only be used after approval by a physician. These
include pregnancy, use of implanted pain or insulin pumps, cochlear
implants and pacemakers. Conclusion

Begin to think of yourself as a being made of pure energy. I cannot
emphasize enough how much damage trapped emotions can do. Remember that
they can affect you physically, emotionally and mentally. They are made
of pure energy, but they are negative energy, and the sooner you get rid
of them, the better off you will be. A simple refrigerator magnet, which
you probably already own, will work to release trapped emotions.
Personally, I prefer to use the magnets manufactured by the Japanese
company, Nikken, Inc., because they are specifically designed for use on
the body, and are very comfortable to use. The magnets that I use to
release trapped emotions are designed to roll down the back, are easy to
hold, and as they spin, they produce a larger magnetic field. A lot of
research has gone into their development, and I use them whenever I can.
I have found numerous applications for them (for example, as
painerasers, where a refrigerator magnet would not have the same
effect), and I believe that the Nikken magnets are well worth the modest
investment required. If you'd like more information on Nikken magnets
and how to purchase them, see my web site at:
HealersLibrary.com/Magnets.htm

As your intention, your clarity and your level of faith and belief in
your own ability increases, you will find that the use of a magnet is
optional for you. After all, your own hand is a magnetic instrument, and
you always have it with you! Remember, you have a magnetic field; you
are a magnetic being yourself. You are now gaining the understanding and
the power to literally become a healer by releasing trapped emotions
using the Emotion Code. You will soon learn this simple procedure, which
is incredibly effective and can be lifechanging. The next step is to
learn more ways to tap into the subconscious mind and get concrete
answers.

PART III USING THE EMOTION CODE

IS THE HUMAN BRAIN, AT SOME PRIMAL LEVEL A WONDROUS COMPUTER LINKED WITH
A UNIVERSAL ENERGY FIELD, THAT KNOWS FAR MORE THAN IT KNOWS IT KNOWS? -
E. WHALEN

5 GETTING ANSWERS FROM THE INNER MIND

In chapter two, you learned to use the Sway Test to connect with your
subconscious mind. For some people, the Sway Test works so well and is
so easily learned that it becomes the only testing method that they
employ, and there is nothing wrong with that. But in this chapter, you
will learn a number of other methods of testing, so you can have a
variety from which to choose.

Muscle Testing The most widely used and accepted method of accessing the
internal computer system of the body is known variously as muscle
testing, kinesthetic testing, or simply as kinesiology. Although some
people have never heard of it, muscle testing is not new. Doctors have
been using it since the 1940s to evaluate muscle strength and assess the
extent of an injury. Today physicians and others who specialize in the
mechanics of body movement know that muscle testing has many more
applications than doctors first believed. People are sometimes skeptical
about whether it will work, but once they've seen the results for
themselves, they can't help but be amazed. Muscle testing can tell us
about the overall health and balance of our bodies. It can help identify
vulnerable areas before sickness and disease take hold. It gives us a
direct way to ask the body what's bothering it and, once we've treated
the problem, it can tell us whether we've corrected the problem or not.
It can tell us if trapped emotions are present in the body and let us
know the moment they've been released. So it's no wonder that people are
astounded when they see how well it works. Holly and Her Near -Drowning

To illustrate this, let me share with you a letter I received a number
of years ago from a young woman named Holly. Her Aunt Gwen has been one
of my students for many years and uses muscle testing very effectively
to release trapped emotions. When she was first learning the Emotion
Code, she practiced it on Holly. My Aunt Gwen came to Utah in the summer
of 1999, praising a new technique she had learned. By using muscle
testing, she was able to ask the body questions regarding emotions that
had become 'trapped' in the body, and the body would respond to the yes
or no questions effectively. She wanted to help as many people as she
could with this new method, and to become proficient in the technique. I
grudgingly agreed to be one of her 'victims.' I recall standing in the
room with my arm outstretched, thinking, 'This is so-o-o-o hokey!' Then
my aunt found the first trapped emotion in me: Terror. I shrugged my
shoulders. 'I don't have anything to be terrified of...' 'Shall we ask
what age it comes from?' Aunt Gwen asked. Again I shrugged my shoulders.
'Sure. I guess.' She questioned my body, and my arm seemed to strengthen
or weaken depending on what she was asking me. My arm was strong when
she asked my body if this happened when I was around four years old.
'Does anything come to mind from that age?' she asked. Immediately, I
recalled my tiny, helpless fingers sliding from a metal railing and my
body slipping into water above my head. My sister came and rescued me
and I remembered clinging to her and repeating 'Thank you! Thank you!'
over and over again. 'Yeah... I said,' reluctantly. 'I almost drowned
when I was four years old.' Aunt Gwen checked to see if this was the
source of my terror. It was. She ran a magnet down my back to release
the trapped emotion and that was it. So, so simple. I walked away
thinking, 'That was cool, but now what? What did that do for me?' I will
tell you what it did for me.... I was finishing up a very poor swim
season with my three oldest children. I considered it a total waste of
money because the children had

fought me constantly, whining the whole time. That summer, I hated swim
lessons. I found myself getting anxious every time a lesson was going to
start and if there was a reasonable excuse to miss the lessons
altogether, we would. Then Aunt Gwen worked on me. The swim season
ended. I didn't think much more about it. But I started to feel a
mysterious and subtle change within myself that I couldn't explain. The
following year, we tried swim lessons again. I was suddenly very much
aware of a difference. Without that terrifying memory from my childhood,
I wasn't anxious around the water. In fact, I enjoyed going to the pool.
I used the time to catch up on my reading while the children took their
lessons. What amazed me even more, was the change in my children. Some
people may say it was because they were now a year older and so they
weren't as frightened of swimming. But I would have to disagree. By
clearing a very real emotion that was stuck within me, I know I not only
freed myself, but I freed my children as well. -Holly B. Muscle testing
provides a real window into what is going on in the mindbody. Using
muscle testing, we can literally gain access to our body's internal
computer system and find out where the imbalances are. I refer to it as
asking the body what it knows. I've used it for many years in my
practice because it leads directly to the root of the problem very
quickly. The body-computer always knows, because it is linked into what
is often called Universal Consciousness -- the database of all that is.
No matter how many times I demonstrate it, people are always impressed
by how immediate and accurate muscle testing is. They're amazed by how
much their inner mind knows, and how ready it is to give them the
information they ask for.

Your Body Knows Best

When it comes to our health, what our bodies can reveal to us is vastly
more significant than what we ever know in our conscious minds. During
my years

in practice, I grew to appreciate the subconscious intelligence of my
patients, which nearly always knew what was wrong and what the body
needed. Think about it. Our bodies are tuned into the systems that keep
our eyes blinking and our lungs expanding with air. Our subconscious
minds are constantly monitoring the white blood cells in our veins and
the beating of our hearts. Thankfully, those systems are unconscious to
us. But it's only logical that our internal computer would be perfectly
aware of exactly what's happening inside of us on every level, all the
time. Not only that, but our bodies can tell us exactly what's good for
us and what isn't. We even have a physical response when we tell the
truth or a lie. The muscles are instantly weakened when we lie. They
stay strong when we tell the truth. We can't fool our bodies. Our
subconscious minds know in an instant, without a doubt, whether we are
being true or false -- whether we are acting with integrity -- in our
thoughts, our statements, our actions and our health. In order to keep
us healthy and alive, our bodies use skills that far exceed anything
we're consciously aware of. To prove it, psychiatrist Dr. David Hawkins
used to offer the 1000 or more people who attended his lectures a vivid
demonstration. Inner Knowing

His staff would pass out sealed, unmarked envelopes to every person in
the audience. Each sealed envelope contained a powdery substance. In
half of the envelopes, that powder was an artificial sweetener. In the
other half, it was organic Vitamin C. Dr. Hawkins would then ask
everyone in the audience to pair up and use a simple muscle testing
technique. One person would hold the unmarked envelope over their heart
while their partner tested their muscle strength. They would make note
of whether the muscle was strong or weak, then they would switch roles
and compare. Sometimes the muscles would test weak and sometimes they'd
test strong. Once everyone had completed the simple test, they would
open the envelopes to see whether they were holding the artificial
sweetener or the Vitamin C. Every single time the muscles went weak, the
person was holding the artificial sweetener. When the muscles tested
strong, they were invariably holding an envelope containing Vitamin C.
These results were always

consistent, and in my own lectures I have found them to be quite
repeatable.1 We all know that organic Vitamin C is better for us than an
artificial sweetener, but the fact that the human body on some deeper
level knows what is inside a sealed envelope is truly astounding.
Dr. Hawkins explains it in this way: The individual human mind is like a
computer terminal connected to a giant database. The database is human
consciousness itself, of which our own consciousness is merely an
individual expression, but with its roots in the common consciousness of
all mankind. This database is the realm of genius; because to be human
is to participate in the database, everyone by virtue of his birth has
access to genius. The unlimited information contained in the database
has now been shown to be readily available to anyone in a few seconds,
at any time and in any place. This is indeed an astonishing discovery,
bearing the power to change lives, both individually and collectively,
to a degree never yet anticipated.2

Testing Other People

Muscle testing can also be used to find out what is going on in someone
else's body. You can do that either by testing the person directly or by
using what is known as surrogate or proxy testing. We will talk about
those testing methods in chapter 8. Thousands of vitalistic physicians
and practitioners use muscle testing to help their patients on a daily
basis. You can easily learn it and use it to help yourself, your friends
and your loved ones to identify and release trapped emotions using the
Emotion Code. Here are a few of the easiest and most common methods of
muscle testing someone else: The Basic Arm Test (to test another person)

First of all, ask the person you wish to test if they have pain in
either shoulder. If they do, don't use that arm as it may aggravate
their condition. If they have trouble in both shoulders or if they are
too young, too weak, or too ill to be tested, you should find a
different way to test them using one of the testing methods outlined in
this chapter, or you can use a surrogate person to test them (see
chapter 8). 1 Ask the subject you wish to test to stand up and hold one
arm out directly in front of them, horizontal to the floor. They should
not make a tight fist, but let their hand remain relaxed. 2 Place the
first two fingers of one hand lightly on their arm, just above the wrist
as shown.

Finger Positioning for Basic Arm Test

3 Place your free hand on their opposite shoulder to support them. 4
Tell the subject "I'm going to have you make a statement, and then I'm
going to press down on your arm. I want you to resist me by holding your
arm right where it is; try to prevent me from pushing your arm down." 5
Have the subject state their name. If the subject's name is Kim, for
example, he or she would say, "My name is Kim." 6 Perform the muscle
test by smoothly and steadily increasing the pressure downward on the
subjects' arm, going from no pressure to a fairly firm pressure within
about 3 seconds. 7 The shoulder joint should stay 'locked' against your
firm downward pressure, and should not give way. A person's arm can
rapidly become tired if you overdo the amount of force you use. Remember
that muscle testing does not require brute force. If the statement they
just made is true, you should feel that the arm is "locked" against your
downward pressure. If the statement is false, you should feel their arm
begin to give way under your smoothly increasing

pressure. You should always use the minimum force needed to perceive
whether the arm is staying locked or not. That is what you are looking
for. Now repeat the test, but have the subject make a statement that is
obviously false by using a name that is not their own. Immediately
perform the muscle test again, and you should notice the arm is weaker,
since the statement just made is incongruent with truth, and the
subject's subconscious mind knows it. Tips on the Basic Arm Test

Here are some tips that will help you to improve and become proficient
at muscle testing. 1 Don't use too much force, only what you need to get
your answer. Think finesse, not force. 2 Smoothly increase the force
from zero to firm over about three seconds. 3 Keep your fingers in the
correct position. If you place your fingers on the bones of their wrist,
their arm will weaken because the body will attempt to protect the wrist
bones. You want your fingers to be just above the wrist bones. Your
fingers should be placed just above the bony prominence that can be
found on the back of your hand on the little finger side, just above the
wrist. (See photo) 4 Remember that the person you are testing has to be
willing to be tested. If their attitude is cynical or skeptical, it will
be harder for you to test them. Don't waste your time with people that
don't want to be helped, or that are not open to being helped. Life is
too short. 5 You can experiment with various arm positions to see what
works best for you and whomever you are working on. Another option is
for them to hold their arm out to the side rather than straight out in
front of them.

Testing Yourself Now let's take a look at some ways of using your own
muscles to get answers.

As you try out these methods, it's easiest to make statements that you
already know to be true or false. That way you can know with certainty
if it is working for you. In chapter two you learned to do the Sway Test
by saying the words "unconditional love" or "hatred." Those words are
very powerful and will elicit a definite response from the body.
"Unconditional love" will make you sway forward, and will make any
muscle test strong. "Hatred" has just the opposite effect and will
weaken you. The words "yes" and "no" will have similar effects. The word
"yes" is positive. If you make a statement that is true or positive, you
will test strong, or you will sway forward. "No" is a negative word. If
you make a statement that is untrue or negative, you will be weak, or
sway backward. Self-testing methods are more subjective than any of the
other methods we have discussed, and are therefore a bit more
challenging to learn. I have found that children can learn these methods
without any trouble in most cases, but sometimes adults take a bit
longer. Some self-testing methods seem to naturally work better for some
people than others. Try them out and see what you like. To become
proficient at any of these self-testing methods takes time and practice.
The main challenge is learning to allow your conscious control to recede
a bit into the background, so your body can respond as it will. Have you
ever used a dimmer switch? You might have one on a wall in your home,
but if not, you have probably used one before. By turning the knob on a
dimmer switch, you can choose exactly how much electricity a light
fixture is getting, and therefore how bright it is. With the exception
of the Sway Test, the key to all self-testing methods is finding the
precise muscle strength setting in your resistance finger. Hand Solo
Method

This method looks a little funny but is actually quite easy to use and
can be done with one hand. It happens to be my personal favorite. You
will use two fingers of the same hand. For most people, the forefinger
and middle finger work just fine, but if for some reason they don't,
then try the middle finger and the ring finger.

Essentially, one finger will assume the role of the arm being tested,
(we'll call this the resistance finger) and the other finger acts to
apply very slight downward pressure to perform the testing (we'll call
this the testing finger).

First of all, decide what two fingers feel comfortable when one finger
is placed atop the other. Whatever feels best will probably work. Now
place your attention on the finger that is going to be pressed down upon
(the resistance finger). Like turning up a dimmer switch all the way,
turn up the muscle tightness in this particular finger all the way, so
it is as strong as you can make it. While maintaining this strength in
the resistance finger, press down gently with the testing finger. You
will find that nothing happens; the resistance finger will not depress.
That's fine. Now, like turning down a dimmer switch almost all the way,
turn down the muscle tone or tightness to the resistance finger, so it
is just strong enough to hold its straight-out, straight-line position.
Now, while maintaining this low level of strength in the resistance
finger, press down gently with the testing finger. You will find that
the resistance finger depresses easily. Again, that's fine. So far, so
good. Here is the important thing to understand. Self-testing works a
little differently than the other types of testing we have learned. The
essential difference is that you have to discover your own
"dimmer-switch" setting. In other words, you have to learn how strong to
make your resistance finger so that congruency will test strong, yet
incongruence will test weak. Ready? Here is how to figure it out. It's
not hard. Start by dialing up the muscle strength to your resistance
finger to 100%. Nice and strong. Now, simply say the word "no", or you
can say, "hatred"and press down with your testing finger. You should
notice, with the strength of the resistance finger dialed up all the
way, that even when you are saying a

negative word, your finger will not depress. Ah. But now let's try
dialing the strength setting on the resistance back a bit. And repeat
the negative word, either "no" or "hatred" (either of these words will
work, but for the sake of consistency pick one and stay with it while
you are learning this). Now press down on the resistance finger, and see
what happens. Nothing? No problem. Try setting the muscle tone on the
resistance finger back a bit more, and repeat the negative word, then
test again. And so on. At some point, you will find a
dimmer-switch/muscle strength setting for your resistance finger that is
just weak enough that it will give way under the pressure of the testing
finger when you say one of these negative words. As soon as this
happens, use that strength setting in the resistance finger and say
something positive, such as "yes" or "love", and immediately test again.
It should test strong. The whole key to this method of self-testing is
to figure out how strong you need to make your resistance finger so that
it will stay strong on a positive word like love, and go weak on a
negative word like hatred. That is all there is to it, really. Some
people can pick up self-testing very easily. The most difficult thing
about this type of testing is its subjective nature. The human tendency
is to question every answer you get when you are testing yourself, but
you need to simply trust yourself and trust your subconscious mind,
where the answers are coming from. I have found self-testing to be
invaluable. It takes practice, and may seem impossible at first, but if
you will stay with it, I think you will find it to be invaluable as
well. Falling Log Method

If you were to use the Hand Solo method of self-testing, but with two
hands instead of one, it would look like this next method. If you are
right-handed, make a fist with your left hand, and extend your left
forefinger straight out. This finger will be your resistance finger, or
the finger that will be tested.

Place your right hand over your fist and grip it firmly, placing the
last joint of your right pinky finger atop your out-stretched left
forefinger in whatever position feels comfortable. If you are
left-handed, just reverse your hand positions.

Now that you have your fingers positioned correctly, you can follow the
same pattern that I gave you in the Hand Solo explanation. For your
convenience, I will give you those same instructions right here: Start
by dialing up the muscle strength to your resistance finger to 100%.
Nice and strong. Now, simply say the word "no", or you can say, "hatred"
and press down with your testing finger. You should notice, with the
strength of the resistance finger dialed up all the way, that even when
you are saying a negative word, your finger will not depress. Now let's
try dialing the strength setting on the resistance back a bit. Now
repeat the negative word, either "no" or "hatred." Try setting the
muscle tone on the resistance finger back a bit more, and repeat the
negative word, then test again. At some point as you continue this
process, you will find a dimmerswitch/muscle strength setting for your
resistance finger that is just weak enough, and it will give way under
the pressure of the testing finger when you say one of these negative
words. As soon as this happens, use that strength setting in the
resistance finger and say something positive, such as "yes" or "love",
and immediately test again. It should test strong. Hole-In-One Method

With one hand, make an OK sign, by touching the tip of your thumb to the
tip of your forefinger. Then slide the thumb and the first two fingers
of your

opposite hand into that ring. The fingers inside the ring will be the
testing fingers. The fingers that are forming the ring will be the
resistance fingers.

Following the procedure I have outlined in the previous two methods, try
varying the amount of resistance in the ring, while saying something
negative or incongruent. As you make the statement, use the fingers
inside the ring to press outward. Try to press hard enough to pull the
ring apart. Resist that pressure with the fingers making the ring. When
you find the strength setting that gives you weakness on a negative or
incongruent statement, and yet remains strong on a positive or congruent
statement, you are there. Linked Rings Method

Make a ring with the thumb and middle finger on one hand. Now, make a
ring with the thumb and middle finger of the other hand, joining the
hands together like two links in a chain. The thumb and forefinger that
are forming one of the rings will be the resistance fingers.

Once again, try varying the amount of resistance in the rings, while
saying something negative or incongruent. As you make the statement, try
to pull the rings apart. Remember that you are simply attempting to find
the strength setting that allows the rings to pull apart on a negative
or incongruent statement, and remain linked on a positive or congruent
statement. Finding One That Works for You

I have found that around 80% of the people in my live seminars will have
immediate success using at least one of the self-testing methods I have
described in this chapter. My advice to you is to simply practice. Don't
give up! While some people seem to pick up these self-testing methods
instantly, most people have to practice. Just stick with it for a while,
and like riding a bike, it will become second nature to you before long.
If one of these testing methods is more comfortable or feels more
natural to you, practice it. By only using words that are clearly
positive or negative such as yes/no or love/hate while you are learning,
you'll be able to refine this skill much more quickly. Learning
self-testing is optional to using the Emotion Code, but mastery of any
self-testing method can make things easier and more efficient for you.

Of course, the simplest self-testing method is the Sway Test, which
takes very little practice for most people. The only drawbacks to the
Sway Test are that you must be standing to use it, and that it takes a
bit more time than the other self-testing methods, as you need to allow
the body time to sway without forcing it. When I became proficient at
self-testing I saw the advantages immediately. I no longer needed
another person to help me test patients who were temporarily untestable.
I could test them on myself now. I could also check myself for trapped
emotions and other imbalances and correct them myself. Self-testing gave
me a very rapid, effective and simple way to get to the answers I was
looking for. If It Hurts, Stop!

If any of these tests begin to cause even the slightest discomfort,
switch to a different test. Discomfort or pain is a sign that you are
using too much force, and if you continue in spite of the discomfort,
you could injure yourself or create inflammation in the tissues. Ideally
you should use the least amount of muscle strength necessary to perform
any form of muscle testing. When I was learning these methods for the
first time, I used too high a strength setting, and the result was sore
fingers. I eventually found that I could use a muscle strength setting
that was barely enough to hold up my resistance finger. These
self-testing methods will work at different resistance strengths, but
the higher the resistance, the more tiring the testing will be for you,
and the more likely your fingers will become sore. If you experience
discomfort in performing any of these tests, stop. Choose a different
method of testing until the soreness goes away, and try using less
resistance. Training Wheels and Intuition

If you use the Emotion Code for very long, you may begin to notice an
odd phenomenon. A split-second before you get an answer through muscle
testing, the answer may suddenly appear in your mind, like a quiet
little voice whispering to you. At first, it might be so quiet that you
might overlook it. You may not be used to listening to this little
voice, but you may find yourself

saying, "I knew that was the answer." Just as you are beginning to do
the test, you'll just feel it and know. This intuitive knowledge flows
into you from the universal database of consciousness, from the sea of
intelligence and energy that surrounds us all. Muscle testing is like
training-wheels for your intuition. As you become more adept at
listening to your intuition, you will find that you can know what the
answer is in this way. You can feel it. The more heed you give to these
subtle promptings, the better you will get at knowing the answers to
your questions.

Nonverbal Communication

The communication that takes place between you as the healer and your
subject does not necessarily have to be verbal. I stumbled across this
phenomenon myself many years ago. I was used to using leg-length testing
as my primary method of evaluating patients, and I had used it
successfully for many years. Leg-length testing takes a bit more time to
learn and master, so I will not be teaching it here, but it can be
learned by going to www.HealersLibrary.com. Leg-length testing is really
just another form of muscle testing, but the answers are given by the
body through changes in the leg-length instead of changes in muscle
strength. I quickly learned that the body would give me answers just as
easily using this form of testing as with any other form. It became my
primary method of getting answers from my patient's bodies. In fact, for
many years the very first thing that I did with most patients was to
have them lie face down and simply ask their body for a "yes" or a "no"
answer, which the body would give through changes in the leg-length. The
legs would be even in length for "yes" and uneven for "no." It always
worked for me, without any trouble, but one day something interesting
happened. I had been working on a patient for a few minutes, and his
treatment was drawing to a close. I looked down and checked his
leg-length, and it was perfectly balanced. I looked up at his back, and
idly turned my attention to his right kidney. I thought about his right
kidney for a moment. Then I looked down and checked his leg length
again. Suddenly his leg-length was dramatically different. I relaxed my
grip, looked up and thought about his left kidney this time. I rechecked
his leg-length, and his legs were balanced.

I again thought about his right kidney for a moment, rechecked, and the
leglength difference was obvious. I was amazed! As you might imagine,
this patient did have something going on in his right kidney. In fact,
it turned out that he had a trapped emotion embedded in that area of his
body, imbalancing his right kidney. Immediately after releasing this
trapped emotion, I could no longer get his leg length to change by
merely contemplating his right kidney, since the reason for the kidney
imbalance was gone. This experience was a bit of an epiphany for me, and
I immediately put this knowledge to use. From that point on, it became
standard procedure for me to ask questions of the body silently. The
results were the same as before. The only difference was that I was now
merely thinking the questions that before I had been thinking and
vocalizing. I never had any problem with this kind of testing for many
years. It seemed to me that there was a full and complete communication
link between my patients and myself that was entirely nonverbal. I found
that any question I could ask out loud could be asked silently with no
difference in the result. By the way, nonverbal communication works with
all forms of testing, from the Sway Test to the Basic Arm Test, to every
other method I have ever seen. The person being tested can simply think
their statement, and the result will be the same as if they had
vocalized the question. By the same token, the person doing the testing
can simply think the question they want to ask the subject, and the
result will be as if they had vocalized the question. I never had any
problem with this kind of nonverbal testing until one particular patient
helped me to learn an important lesson. The Clown from Hell

Bill had come to me for treatment of his low back pain a few months
before. He was doing very well, and on this particular day he had come
in for a routine check up. He laid face down on my adjusting table and I
performed a leg-length test on him. I directed my thoughts toward his
body and thought, "Give me a Yes answer." I checked his leg length. It
was balanced. Then I thought, "Give me a No answer." I checked his leg
length again, but to my surprise, there was no change. This was very
odd. I had been using this type of testing for over a decade, but I had
never seen this happen. His leg length

should have changed, but it didn't. I couldn't understand why it wasn't
working. I repeated the procedure several times with no change. Puzzled,
I looked up from his feet for a moment and noticed what was on his back.
He was wearing a white T-shirt, and on the back was a shockingly evil
image of a clown face, with fangs dripping blood. On a hunch, I got a
piece of paper and covered the image with it. Then I retested his leg
length, and suddenly the testing worked as it should. I was frankly
amazed. I uncovered the image, tried the testing again, and... nothing.
I covered the image with the paper again, and he was testable. So far,
not a word had passed between the two of us since I had begun testing.
After removing and replacing the paper a few more times, each time
confirming the result, I finally told him what was going on. I said, "I
think that the clown picture on the back of your t-shirt is affecting
you negatively and that you might want to think about getting rid of
it." He never returned to my office after that. Everything that exists
radiates vibrational energy that has an ultimate effect on our own
energy field, whether good or bad. Some things will have a more positive
vibrational effect, and others will have a more negative one. For
example, if you look at a picture of Adolf Hitler, you will probably
test weak or sway backward, away from his image and all the negativity
that it connotes. If you look at a picture of Mother Teresa, you will
very likely test strong, or sway toward her picture, toward all of the
positivity of her energy. If you gaze upon a painting of a beautiful
countryside, the positive vibrational energy radiated by the painting
will have a positive effect on you. On the other hand, a painting of a
scene of degradation and evil will vibrate at a much lower frequency,
and your body will find it repulsive. I believe that it is the objects
themselves that radiate these frequencies, positive or negative. Our
personal values and mental associations play a part as well. Here's a
test that you can take that will show you how negativity and positivity
affect your energy. Take a look at this simple figure.

If you hold it one way, it's a positive, smiling face. If you turn it
upside down, it becomes a negative, frowning face. If you fix your gaze
upon the picture when it is right side up, you will find that you will
sway toward it or test strong. If you turn it upside down, you will sway
away from it or test weak. Don't take my word for it. Give it a try and
see for yourself.

Troubleshooting

Your Subject Suddenly Tests Consistently Weak

The mind does an amazing job keeping track of things, and usually you
will be able to clear trapped emotions without the mind needing to take
a break. But once in a while, the brain becomes overwhelmed with the
myriad bits of interconnected data and the connections and reconnections
that need to be made after a trapped emotion is released. This result is
a phenomenon I call "overload", which will make a person test weak no
matter what you do. It is a temporary condition, and usually lasts less
than 30 seconds. On rare occasions, (with more severe trapped emotions,
typically) I have seen patients go into overload and stay in this state
for hours to an entire day. More often, if you just give your subject a
minute or so, their brain will finish processing, and they will become
testable again. By way of explanation, imagine the following scenario.
You find yourself sitting in your car in the middle of the night. The
headlights are on. The

engine is off. The car won't start. You turn the key to start the car,
and the engine turns over and over, RRRRrrrrr RRRRrrrr RRRRrrrr. You
notice that as the engine turns over, the headlights dim. This is
similar to what is occurring in the body during overload. As the mind is
furiously turning over, processing what you have just done, the amount
of energy available for muscle testing is diminished. Your Subject Tests
Strong No Matter What

If you are trying to work with a person that tests strong no matter what
you do, consider that this person may be untestable at present. In my
experience, about one in fifty people are considered to be temporarily
untestable; that is, they will stay strong no matter how incongruent or
untrue their statement. It is not a serious problem, however, nor is it
permanent. I've found that this is usually due to one of two things.
Either they are dehydrated or one or more bones in their neck is out of
alignment. When someone is dehydrated, it directly affects their muscle
strength and their electrical conductivity. Have them drink a glass of
water, then try again. Sometimes, that's all it takes. You may also
drink some water; if you are dehydrated the testing will be affected in
the same way. If they need a neck adjustment, misaligned bones may be
creating interference in the nervous system, inhibiting the nerve
connections and throwing off the messages to their muscles. In that
case, they should see their chiropractor for an adjustment, after which
they should be testable. Please note that it is always possible to test
an untestable person by testing on yourself if you are practiced at it.
You can also work around this problem by using surrogate testing, which
we'll discuss in more detail in chapter 8. Instead of testing the
subject directly, surrogate testing allows you to test a third person
and still tap into the subconscious of the subject to get the desired
answers. If someone is determined not to be muscle tested, they will
usually succeed. But that means they're deliberately being uncooperative
and don't want the testing to work. They've got their own agenda. If
that's the case they're not an

ideal candidate for the Emotion Code. Now and then, I've run into people
who have already made up their minds that muscle testing doesn't work.
And wouldn't you know it? It doesn't work on them! They make sure of
that. As you've seen, these tests are not about sheer physical force. I
have seen cases where a person's muscle went so weak that they literally
could not resist the slightest downward pressure, but that's not usually
the case. More often, what you will detect is a slight change in muscle
strength, the difference between the muscle being 'locked' or 'mushy'.
Muscle testing works on most of the people, most of the time. But other
things can come into play. Sometimes it doesn't work because they're
just not comfortable for some reason. Or they think it's hokey. Or
they're defensive, afraid that something might be revealed about them.
For example, I have found that sometimes people will be untestable in
front of a group of people, yet become perfectly testable when they are
no longer in front of an audience. Always Get Permission

Always explain what you are going to do before you do it. If you are
going to be pressing down on their arm to test them, explain the
procedure beforehand and get their permission. It is possible to test
other people through self-testing without their knowing it, and this is
wrong. It is critical to ask permission of the person you are going to
test, and it is critical that you honor their wishes. Testing people
without their permission or against their wishes is a true invasion of
their privacy and is just plain wrong. It's unethical. Don't do it!
Never test or work on a minor without the permission of their parent or
guardian! Muscle Testing is Not for Winning the Lotto

Muscle testing is a gift from God, to allow us to help each other. It is
not to be used to test for the winning lotto numbers, it is not to be
used to ask if you

should take that job, etc. Asking about anything unrelated to health
probably won't work anyway, in my experience. You can ask about the
present, but do not try to see the future, as muscle testing is not for
that purpose and the results would be unreliable at best. This kind of
testing is for the present, and applies to what is happening now, in the
present, as well as determining trapped emotions from the past. Do Not
Use Testing to Make Big Decisions

You will have to trust me on this one. Speaking from experience, it has
become clear to me that testing is a gift from God that has a specific
purpose, but that purpose is limited. You can muscle test every decision
you make, but you won't get anything but neurotic, in my opinion. Use
muscle testing to find trapped emotions and to help yourself and others
to get and stay physically well and leave it at that. Allow Yourself to
be Guided

Don't be too proud to ask God for help. He already knows the answers you
are looking for, and he wants to help you, but you have to ask. I am
reminded of the famous painting of Christ, where he is standing at the
front door of a home, knocking. The funny thing is, the front door has
no doorknob on the outside. He won't open the door. You have to do it.
And believe me when I tell you that I utter a silent prayer every single
time I test anyone, and I ask God to help me, every single time, and He
always does. Try it! Be Patient With Yourself

Some people grasp these skills very easily while others take more time.
I promise you that if you will persevere, it will become easy for you,
and it will open a whole world of healing to you. The first time someone
looks into your eyes and thanks you with tears in their eyes for what
you have done for them, you will understand what I mean.

There is nothing more addicting than that feeling of helping people.
It's the greatest! And it doesn't happen every time, but it will happen
if you just have it in your heart to help as many people as you can.
Establish a Baseline

Because people are so different, it's crucial to establish a baseline
with every person so that you know what congruency or incongruence feels
like in their particular case. The simplest way to do this is to have
them make a known true statement, then a known false statement, such as
stating their name as their own name, then stating their name as the
name of someone else, or have them say a positive word such as "yes" or
"love", followed by a negative word such as "no" or "hate". Check Your
Work

If during testing I get a strong muscle or a weak muscle three or more
times in a row, I like to re-do the baseline test to make sure the
person is still testable. If your testing is taking more time than
usual, it's a good idea to check your baseline periodically to make sure
you are on track. Sometimes people can go into overload while you're
testing them, and in that case, you would get weakness on every test you
perform until they are done processing. It's good practice to test them
on a negative word if you keep getting strong responses, and vice versa.
Watch Out for Wandering Thoughts

It is possible to influence the outcome of testing by what you are
thinking. If you don't believe me, just see what happens when you muscle
test someone while thinking something negative or derogatory about them.
They will be weak. It is really important to stay focused. If you are
holding negative thoughts in your head about the person you're

testing -- even if that person is you -- the muscles can easily pick
that up and go weak. Positive intentions and clarity are very important
to getting accurate tests. Keep it simple, focus on the statement that
has just been made, and keep other thoughts out of your mind. Instruct
the person you are testing to do the same. Allow love to fill your heart
for the person you are trying to help. Have a sincere desire to help
them. Believe that you can do it and be grateful to God that you are
doing it. That's all it takes. Don't Diagnose Unless You Are a Doctor

If you are a doctor, diagnosing people is what you do. But if you are
not a doctor, never diagnose anyone, as that is known as practicing
medicine without a license, and is illegal. Be aware of what people are
telling you, and if they are having symptoms that seem at all unusual to
you, recommend to them that they seek adequate medical attention. Don't
Worry About Non-believers

Not everyone is open to learning about new methods of healing such as
the Emotion Code. You may have family members who think you are off your
nut, or your dog may leave you. Don't let these things bother you. The
greatest healer in history was Jesus, and very few believed him, so you
are in good company. Who or What Are We Asking When We Test?

We're talking to the subconscious mind. The way I look at it, there is
no difference between this and the spirit or higher intelligence in all
of us. Somehow this part of us is linked to the intelligence of God and
the Universe, and somehow muscle testing seems to tap into these as
well.

The Veil of Memory

When you work on someone, you are really working on a dual-natured being
that has a physical body and a spirit. I believe that when we come into
this world there's a veil placed over our minds, so we have no memory of
our previous existence. We arrive with complete amnesia. Allow me to
share with you a very personal experience about this concept. One day as
I sat quietly in meditation I had a profound spiritual insight. The veil
of memory that divides us from our existence before we came here to this
earth was suddenly broken for me. Every particle of my being was
instantaneously filled with an overwhelming and indescribably powerful
feeling of homesickness. Homesickness to be back in my heavenly home, my
real home where I came from. This impossibly intense feeling only lasted
for a few seconds, and then was gone, leaving me reeling with awe. I've
experienced over the years of my life that feeling that we call
homesickness on a number of occasions, but the homesickness I
experienced in this spiritual revelation was far beyond anything that I
can even describe to you. I realized from this experience that this veil
of forgetfulness is a good thing. If we didn't have it to block us from
the memories of our glorious past when we lived with our Heavenly
Father, I'm convinced we would not be able to endure this earth life for
five minutes. I realized from this experience that we truly are
strangers here; that "trailing clouds of glory do we come from God, who
is our home." The earth is not really our home; we are sojourners here,
sent here to choose between good and evil; sent here to gain faith and
to gain the experience of living in physical bodies. We are sent here to
learn to love and serve one another. By doing so, we serve God. At some
level, your spirit is in touch with things that are beyond the
comprehension of your conscious mind. But your spirit can speak to you
through your physical body. Muscle testing is the conduit that enables
you to tap into that knowledge. I believe that we have always existed,
and that more profound knowledge lies deep within our minds than we can
consciously know. Isn't it great that all we have to do is ask?

FAITH IS TO BELIEVE WHAT WE DO NOT SEE; AND THE REWARD OF THIS FAITH IS
TO SEE WHAT WE BELIEVE. - SAINT AUGUSTINE

6 RELEASING TRAPPED EMOTIONS

Now that you've had an opportunity to learn about and practice muscle
testing, it's time to learn the part of the Emotion Code that deals with
finding and releasing trapped emotions, both from yourself and from
others. You will find that this process is simple and logical. Once you
have been through it a few times, you will become more efficient. With
practice, most people can find and release a trapped emotion in less
than a minute or two. First of all, make sure that you (and your
partner, if applicable) are comfortable in your environment. It's best
to turn off music and television, as they can be distracting and can
have negative or positive energetic effects of their own. The Emotion
Code process can be visualized using the graphic image below.

Step 1: Obtain Permission

If you're working on yourself, you already have permission, so go to the
next step. If you are going to be working with another person, make sure
that you get permission to actually test them and get information from
their body. You might ask, "Can I have your permission to test you for
trapped emotions?" Don't muscle test this response. Let your partner
give you their verbal okay, or at least nod their assent. Once you both
feel comfortable and are relaxed, you can begin.

Step 2: Establish a Baseline Before you begin to ask about trapped
emotions, your first task is to establish a baseline for testing. Choose
the muscle testing method that you are most comfortable using. You need
to determine if your subject is testable. If they make a congruent or
true statement, are they strong? If they make an incongruent or false
statement, are they weak? In addition, since every person is unique,
muscle testing will feel slightly different for each person you test.
Getting a definite strong and weak muscle response from your partner
will immediately let you know just what this particular person's muscle
test feels like in both strong and weak states. Perhaps the most obvious
and widely used method of establishing a baseline is to simply have your
partner state their own name by saying out loud, "My name is
\_\_\_\_\_." Once they have made this congruent or true statement, they
should test strong. Now have your partner make a false statement by
saying out loud, "My name is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_", filling in the blank with
any name that is not their own. The result should be muscle weakness. Of
course, having your partner state the words yes or no, love or hate,
will also work for establishing a baseline. If Your Partner is
Untestable

Remember that part of the reason for establishing a baseline is to
determine if the person you are working with is currently testable. If
their arm stays strong or weak, no matter what statement they make, they
are untestable at present. In this case, you have certain options. If
either you or your partner is somewhat dehydrated it will make testing
more difficult, if not impossible. Mild dehydration is quite common and
is easily remedied. Give them a glass of water, drink a glass yourself
and try again. If this doesn't help, your partner likely has a
misaligned vertebra in their neck. You can use a surrogate to test them,
or you can test them on yourself until they can get an adjustment from
their chiropractor. Some people are untestable because they have a
physical impairment or limitation, and surrogate testing is the best
option for helping them as well. For more detailed information on
surrogate testing, see chapter 8.

Step 3: See if a Trapped Emotion Exists

Have the person being tested make this statement: "I have a trapped
emotion that can be released now." Test for the response by whatever
method you have chosen. Here is a table of the possible methods and
possible results.

If the body's answer is No, there are three distinct possibilities. 1
The first possibility is that the subject doesn't have any trapped
emotions at all. This is very unlikely, since nearly everyone has them.
2 The second possibility may be that the subject has a trapped emotion,
but for some reason their subconscious mind does not want to release it
right now. This was the statement: "I have a trapped emotion that can be
released now." The subject may be willing, but their subconscious mind
may not be. This situation can change, and the answer may be different
later on.

3 The third possibility is that the subject has a Heart-Wall. If this is
the case, the body may say that it doesn't have any trapped emotions,
when in reality it does. The Heart-Wall has the effect of making all
trapped emotions a little harder to find. To avoid confusion, I am going
to devote the entire next chapter to the Heart-Wall. My recommendation
is to go ahead and read through this chapter now, even if the answer you
got is no, as you will need to know the procedure anyway. If the answer
is yes, you can proceed to the next step.

Step 4: Determine Which Emotion It Is

If the answer is yes, there is a trapped emotion to be released. The
next step is to learn more about this emotion. What emotion is this? Is
it anger? Is it sorrow? Is it frustration or depression, or some other
emotion? When did this emotion become trapped? What event created this?
Through a simple process of deduction, you can narrow it down very
quickly. The "Chart of Emotions" shown on the next page is designed to
make your task even easier. Let's take a look at this chart. Notice that
each row contains specific emotions produced by one of two organs. For
example, Row 1 lists the emotions produced by the Heart or Small
Intestine. As you may recall, all emotions emanate from the organs, and
these two organs produce the same emotions in the body. All the other
organs listed on the chart produce the emotions in their respective
rows. For our purposes, it doesn't matter which organ a trapped emotion
originally emanated from, as long as we can identify the emotion and
release it. After you've been through this process a few times, it will
become quite rapid and simple. You will be amazed to see how quickly you
can discover for yourself exactly which trapped emotion you are seeking.
Remember that the subconscious mind knows all along what the trapped
emotion is. The testing you are doing is simply to determine what the
subconscious mind already knows.

In fact, the subconscious mind of the person you are working on can
somehow "see" the chart of emotions without their ever having seen it
physically! It's best, in fact, if the person you are working on cannot
see the emotion list while you are working on them. Otherwise, they may
"choose" an emotion to go weak or strong on, thinking they are helping
you out, when they are just skewing the testing. If you want to show
them the chart of emotions once at the beginning of a session, that's
okay. And even if they have never seen the chart themselves, their
subconscious mind will "read" the chart just fine, because their
subconscious mind is linked into universal consciousness. Try it and
see. Finding the Correct Column

Begin the process of questioning by asking, "Is this trapped emotion
listed in Column A?" and then perform the test. If the answer is "Yes",
you might want to ask, "Is this trapped emotion in Column B?" to get a
"No" answer and check your accuracy. You will always only be searching
for one trapped emotion at a time, and it can only be in one of the two
columns. As a result, only one of these questions can possibly be true.
If the body gives a conflicting response such as telling you that the
trapped emotion is in both column A and column B, you are just not
getting a good answer. Take a deep breath, get refocused, fill your
heart with love for the person you are trying to help, (yourself, if you
are working on yourself ) say a silent prayer to God for help, believe
you can get an accurate response, be grateful that the answer is there
to find, and try again. Note that if the exact emotion is not listed on
this chart, the subconscious mind of the person you are working on will
choose the emotion that is closest to the one that is trapped, and as a
result this chart should be all you will need. Finding the Correct Row

Once you have determined which column the trapped emotion is in, you
have narrowed the list by half. Now let's determine which row it's in.
We could simply start at the top and ask one row at a time, but to speed
it up, I have numbered the rows one through six. So, instead of asking
about each row, we can eliminate some rows right away. Ask, "Is the
trapped emotion in an odd-numbered row?" If the answer is no, then you
know that it must be in row two, four or six. If the answer is yes, you
know it is in an odd-numbered row. For the purpose of our explanation
here, we will assume that the emotion is in an odd numbered row, either
one, three or five. The next thing we must determine is which row the
trapped emotion is listed in. Ask this question: "Is this trapped
emotion listed in row one?" If the answer is no, ask the same question
about row three, and row five if you need to.

Finding the Correct Emotion

Once you have identified the correct row, since you already have
identified the column, you now have narrowed the list of emotions to
five possibilities.

Let's say for example you have determined that the trapped emotion is in
column A row 5. Let's take a look at that particular cell in the table.
Again, the subconscious mind of the person you are testing knows
precisely which one of these trapped emotions you are after. By
determining through muscle testing exactly which emotion it is, you
bring the knowledge of this trapped emotion to the awareness of your
subject's conscious mind. This is a necessary and indispensable step
towards releasing the emotion. It's important for the trapped emotion to
find expression in order to be released. By identifying it and bringing
it to consciousness, we are validating the emotion and bringing a degree
of closure to the situation that created it. We are giving the trapped
emotion a voice, and allowing it to be heard, in a sense. If we don't do
this, the trapped emotion will continue to make its presence felt by
creating physical pain and/or emotional dysfunction. In order to find
out exactly which emotion has become trapped, all you need to do is ask.
For example, in this case you could begin by asking "Is this trapped
emotion blaming?" and then perform a muscle-test. The answer will be
either yes or no. Test each emotion one at a time in this same way until
you feel confident that you have arrived at the correct emotion. If the
very first emotion on the list is giving you a yes answer, you would be
wise to check your work by testing the next emotion on the list, which
should give you a no answer. Remember, you are testing for one emotion
at a time, no more, and only one should be positive at a time.

It is important to be clear about what you are asking. Your intention
and the words that you are saying need to be in synch. This is something
to be aware of, so that you don't confuse the subconscious mind. In
addition, cast away any anxiety you may have about this process. Anxiety
is a form of fear, and faith and fear cannot coexist! How to Ask

It's best to frame things in the form of a statement or a question. To
illustrate what I mean, imagine that the trapped emotion is dread. In
this case, you could say "This trapped emotion is dread." and you would
get a yes answer. If you put it in the form of a question and ask, "Is
this trapped emotion dread?" you would also get a yes answer. Both of
these ways of asking are equivalent, and each form of phrasing will give
you the same body response. If you just went down the list and stated
the word "dread," without formatting it as either a statement or a
question, you may get a confused answer. The body may sway backward or
test weak when you just say, "dread", even in a situation where dread is
the precise emotion that is trapped. If you just throw the word out
there, the subconscious mind may not be reading you correctly and may
simply respond to the negative energy of the word itself. Once the
Trapped Emotion is Identified

Once you have identified the trapped emotion, congratulations! You have
learned a very significant part of the Emotion Code. You have now been
introduced to an entirely different aspect of your awareness, and you
are now learning to tap into your own spirit intelligence, an ability
that will serve you well if you continue to develop it. At this point,
you can simply release the trapped emotion, but would you like to know
more? Even though we can release the trapped emotion at this time with
no trouble, I always recommend that you go back and find out when it
originally occurred. Sometimes this leads to surprising revelations
about the past. Remember that the subconscious mind knows all there is
to know about this trapped emotion, including when it first became
trapped in the body, who

was involved, exactly where this energy is lodged and how it is
affecting your physical body and your mind.

Digging Deeper

Sometimes the subconscious mind has more information it wants to push up
to the conscious level. Engaging the conscious mind in the process is
useful, and can help the subject to grasp the relevance of the emotion
that's about to be released. The easiest way to find out if this is the
case is to ask. You might ask this way, "Is there more about this
trapped emotion that I (we) need to know?" If the answer is yes, dig
deeper. If the answer is no, go ahead and release the emotion. When Did
it Become Trapped?

Asking when this particular emotion became trapped is a good place to
begin digging deeper. There are many ways of asking deductive questions
to get to this information, and if you have a hunch, follow it. For
example, if finding a trapped emotion brings to mind a certain event
from the subject's life, it probably became trapped because of that
event. To find out, simply ask if the event that your partner has in
mind is the same event that helped to create the trapped emotion. Your
partner does not need to share anything about the experience with you if
they don't wish to. They just need to think about the event for a
moment, and then you need to muscle test them after asking if that event
helped to create the trapped emotion. This is one of the nice things
about the Emotion Code. People's private matters can remain private.
They never have to explain or vocalize the circumstance or event that
created the trapped emotion. This allows people to work on very private
issues that are potentially painful or embarrassing to talk about and
still release the emotions that are attached to these events. They can
share us much or as little as they choose to. If no particular event
comes to your partner's mind regarding the emotion,

you can use the process of deduction to determine when the trapped
emotion occurred. Finding out when it occurred often helps in uncovering
why it occurred. In the same way that we divided the Chart of Emotions
into columns and rows to facilitate faster searching, you can divide a
lifetime into different spans to more easily locate the year a trapped
emotion originated. There is no right or wrong way to determine when an
emotion became trapped. You simply ask, and narrow it down to a certain
year or event. One way to do it is to simply divide your subject's span
of years in two, and see if the trapped emotion occurred before the
midpoint of their life, or after. If they are forty years old, for
example, you might ask, "Did this emotion become trapped before age
twenty?" If the answer is yes, you can narrow it down further in this
same way. You might ask, "Did this emotion become trapped within the
first ten years of your (my) life?" If the answer is yes, you can break
it down even further, by asking: "Did this emotion become trapped in the
first five years of your (my) life?" If the answer is yes, you can
continue to refine the answer by asking if the emotion became trapped in
the first year, second year, third year and so on. I have found that the
body is usually accurate within a year plus or minus when identifying
the time frame of a trapped emotion in this way. In other words, if you
get the answer that a certain trapped emotion occurred at age 17, it
could actually have been at age 16 or age 18, but it probably was at age
17. At the moment a trapped emotion is being created your particular age
is apparently not all that important. The mindbody doesn't correlate
trapped emotions with chronological age so much as it correlates them
with specific events, occurrences or circumstances. Let's say an
emotional event that occurred a month after you graduated from college
resulted in a trapped emotion. You happened to be 23 years old at the
time. Muscle testing may produce an answer of 22, 23 or 24 years old for
when this trapped emotion occurred, which would be within the usual
year, plus or minus. If you were to ask if this trapped emotion occurred
before graduation, or after graduation, you would get a more precise
answer. In this way, you would be able to arrive at a more accurate time
of occurrence. It's good practice to periodically ask, "Do we need to
know more about this emotion?" When you've brought enough information
about the

trapped emotion to consciousness, the mindbody will let you know you're
done, and it can be released. Once you've determined exactly when the
emotion occurred, your subject will probably know what event helped
create it and what it was about. Sometimes, determining the time frame
when a trapped emotion occurred can result in a more profound
understanding of what happened, as well as how the trapped emotion is
affecting the mindbody. Here is an account of a woman who developed a
trapped emotion during a stressful time, which led to migraine headaches
later on. Nancy's Migraines

I was always getting very bad headaches and bad neck aches, and I had
even started getting cortisone shots in the back of my head and neck.
When you said that I might have a trapped emotion that was causing this,
I had no clue what you were talking about. You started asking my body
questions like something happened to me in 1994. You narrowed it down to
an emotion of hopelessness in the month of January, 1994. Then I started
thinking, 'Oh my gosh, this is the time Shawn was born when I went into
labor at 33 weeks.' He was in the Hospital for 21 days with a collapsed
lung. After you treated me I feel so much better, and I thank you for
that. What a miracle. I said that you knew I had all this block in the
back of my head because we almost lost Shawn during this time. But if
you see him, you will know he is truly my miracle. -Nancy P. Whose
Emotion Was This?

Sometimes it can help to understand who was involved in the creation of
a trapped emotion. For example, let's say you are hot on the trail of a
trapped emotion that occurred during your high school years. The emotion
is bitterness. But you can't remember anything that might have created
this emotion.

You might ask, "Was this my bitterness?" If the answer is yes, you can
ask if the bitterness was toward a person. If it was, you might ask if
it was a male? Was it a female? Was it a friend? Was it a family member?
Was it your brother? Was it Joe? Use the process of deduction to narrow
down the possibilities. If it was your own bitterness but it was not
about a person, you can ask if the bitterness was about a situation.
Then narrow your scope of questions to figure out what the situation
was, when it occurred, etc. Emotions rarely occur in a vacuum. They
usually involve another person, but can be about a situation regarding
home, school, work, finances, relationships, etc. If you test to see if
it was your bitterness and the answer is no, then ask if it was someone
else's bitterness that you acquired from them. We do take on other
people's feelings sometimes, and that energy can become our extra
baggage. A mother can be feeling bitterness and her child might pick up
some of that energy, or a friend might be going through a difficult
episode, and your empathy for her situation may create a trapped emotion
for you. If you silence your mind for a moment or two, and especially if
you ask God for His help to figure it out, you will. Trust me on this.
Remember, "Ask, and ye shall receive; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you." Where is the Emotion Lodged?

Another fascinating thing to determine is exactly where the trapped
emotion is lodged. Remember that a trapped emotion will always have a
physical location in the body. Figuring out where a trapped emotion is
located is optional, but locating it can be fun as well as very
enlightening. Trapped emotions can lodge anywhere in the body,
regardless of what organ they originated from. Remember that a trapped
emotion is a ball of energy, usually ranging in size from an orange to a
cantaloupe. To determine the exact location of this energy ball, use the
process of deduction. Ask, "Is this trapped emotion stuck in the right
side of the body?" If not, ask, "Is this trapped emotion stuck in the
left side of the body?" Each time you

ask, perform the muscle test of your choice to see what the body's
answer is. If both of these answers are negative, ask, "Is this trapped
emotion stuck in the midline of the body?" Next, ask if the trapped
emotion is above, below or at the waistline. Before long you will have
identified a general area where the emotional energy is lodged. You can
get more specific by simply continuing to query the body. It's easy, and
gets even easier with practice. Don't discount your own ability to
discern where the emotion is trapped. If you simply listen to your
intuition for a moment about the location of the trapped emotion, an
impression may come into your mind. Check that location first, and you
will be surprised at how often it is correct, saving you time and
effort. Once you have found the location of the trapped emotion, think
about any symptoms that may be present in that part of the body. If
there is pain in the area of the trapped emotion, it may suddenly
disappear or dissipate when it is released. Remembering the Trapped
Emotion

Sometimes, you will still not have any idea what event led to the
creation of a trapped emotion. Quite often, trapped emotions can be
created by circumstances that are quickly forgotten. Say for example,
that one day everything just seemed to go wrong. Perhaps you went to
dinner before seeing a show, and the service was terrible. You knew you
were going to be late for the show, and you became upset. When the bill
finally arrived, your credit card was maxed out, and you chose to feel
very angry or humiliated, or both. We can become pretty upset at times
when things aren't going our way. The intense emotions we may be feeling
on an occasion like this may leave us with a trapped emotion or two. But
a year later, you may be hard pressed to remember this event,
particularly if you chose not to dwell on the bad experience. If a
number of years have gone by, the trapped emotion will still be there,
but consciously recalling the event may now become very difficult.
Sometimes trapped emotions are created during an event that was
transitory in nature, and the event itself is lost forever to your
conscious

memory. Even if you don't remember immediately what a given trapped
emotion was about, my experience has been that approximately 50% of the
time you will remember within the next couple of days. Typically, the
following day or during the night, you will be doing something totally
unrelated, when the event will suddenly pop into your mind. You will
remember what happened, because your subconscious mind was searching,
working overtime trying to figure it out and dredge it up out of your
memory bank. There is no limit to how many times you can ask, "Do we
need to know more about this trapped emotion?" Once you get a no answer,
you know everything you need to know about it and you can release it.
Whether or not you actually remember what occurred and what created your
trapped emotion is not critical to the releasing of the emotional
energy. It can be interesting to figure it out, and there may even be
some insight to be gained by doing so, but identifying which emotion is
trapped and bringing it to conscious awareness is all that is necessary
before releasing it. The next step will tell you exactly how to release
it.

Releasing an Emotion from Yourself

To release a trapped emotion from yourself, place your magnet between
your eyebrows on your skin. While you continue to breathe (don't hold
your breath) roll or slide the magnet up the middle of your forehead,
over the top of your head, and down the back of your neck as far as you
can comfortably reach, three times.

The Governing Meridian

You can run your magnet over any part of the Governing Meridian with the

intention of releasing the trapped energy that is in your body. If you
have "big hair" and you can't go over your hair without messing it up,
just use your magnet on your forehead as far as you can. It's that easy.
Just remember to do it three times, and to stay focused on your
intention to let the trapped emotion go.

Releasing an Emotion from Another Person

To release a trapped emotion from another person, place your magnet on
their back at the base of their neck. Instruct your partner to continue
to breathe in and out while you roll or slide the magnet from the base
of their neck to their low back or just beyond, three times. Each time
you reach the bottom of a stroke, lift the magnet off their back and
replace it at the base of the neck.

The Governing Meridian

Each stroke transfers magnetic energy into the Governing Meridian. This
magnetic energy magnifies and carries your intention into all the other
meridians, filling the body with that intention and thought. The result
is that within three strokes, the trapped emotion is released, forever.
It's just that simple.

Confirming the Release

To confirm that the emotion has been released, simply ask, "Did (I) we
successfully release that trapped emotion?" The answer should be yes. If
so, you are done with that trapped emotion, and you can now check to see
if there is another trapped emotion to be released, if you wish. If your
test shows that the emotion was not released, simply reapply the
magnetic energy three times as before. But this time, have a little more
love in your heart for who you are working on, whether yourself or your
partner, believe that you can release this emotion, and allow yourself
to feel gratitude to God that it is being released. Remember that all
things are accomplished by faith and belief, and if you have a little
faith, you'll see great things happen. Remember the words of Jesus:
"...verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed,
ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it
shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you." (Matt: 17-20)
It's Permanent

One of the most beautiful aspects of the Emotion Code is that trapped
emotions, once released, are gone forever. In all the years that we have
worked with patients in practice and at seminars, we have never seen a
trapped emotion that was released ever return. On the other hand, it is
possible for people to have more than one occurrence of a particular
emotion lodged in their body. In this case, you might release the same
emotion from your subject several times, but each emotion will be a
separate and distinct trapped energy, usually resulting from different
emotional events in their past. It's also possible for a person to have
several distinctly different emotions that all became trapped from the
same event.

Dealing With Specific Issues If you are struggling with a specific
problem in your life, it's important to determine if trapped emotions
may be playing an unseen role.

You might suspect that you have a trapped emotion, but it doesn't show
up when you ask the general question, "Do I have a trapped emotion that
I can release now?" Trapped emotions sometimes need to be addressed more
directly for them to unveil themselves. Here are some examples of common
problems, along with ways to ask. This list could go on and on, but this
will give you an idea of how you can ask about your own specific
problems. "Do I have a trapped emotion that is preventing me from losing
weight?" "Is there a trapped emotion that is causing inflammation in my
tissues?" "Do I have a trapped emotion that is blocking me from making
more money?" "Is there a trapped emotion that is preventing me from
selling more widgets?" "Is there a trapped emotion that is contributing
to my (back, neck, shoulder, knee, etc.) pain? "Do I have a trapped
emotion that is causing me to be (depressed, shorttempered, angry,
etc.)?" "Do I have a trapped emotion about my (husband, wife, son,
daughter, boss, etc.)?" "Is there a trapped emotion that is interfering
with the achievement of my goals?" "Is there a trapped emotion that is
making it more difficult for me to quit (drinking, smoking, using drugs,
pornography, etc.)?" "Do I have a trapped emotion about (name specific
event)?" If the answer to a direct question like these is yes, the
subconscious mind has identified the emotion. You would then continue by
asking which column this trapped emotion is in, following the process as
I have outlined previously in this chapter, and as shown on the
flowchart on page 226. Remember that there may be more than one emotion
contributing to any given issue. In addition, trapped emotions will
often come off in layers. If you release a trapped emotion that has to
do with a specific issue today, another emotion about that same issue
may not show up until later. If you are attempting to overcome a
specific issue, it's a good idea to recheck that issue for trapped
emotions from time to time.

Nested Emotions

It's not unusual to find several trapped emotions lodged together in a
particular area of the body, a phenomenon I refer to as "Nesting." You
will sometimes find a significant level of discomfort in your subject
when nesting is going on. Having multiple trapped emotions in one area
seems to create a greater level of tissue distortion and pain. It is
interesting to observe that as nesting trapped emotions are discovered
and released using the Emotion Code, the level of discomfort often
diminishes noticeably as each one is released. For stories that
illustrate nesting, see "Jean's Painful Ovary" on page 73, and "Jack's
Tennis Elbow" on page 75.

Processing the Release As the mindbody processes the emotion that has
been released, symptoms of this processing can arise. Once a trapped
emotion has been brought to the awareness of the conscious mind, and has
been released magnetically as described, at that point a healing process
begins. During this healing process a person may experience echoes of
the emotion that has been released. It is not unusual for people to feel
a bit emotionally up and down during this period of time. The body will
usually be willing to release at least one emotion before wanting to
take time out to process. On the other hand, sometimes the body will
release one emotion after another, and do the processing for a group of
emotions simultaneously. Remember to trust the wisdom of the body
implicitly, and never force it, but be gentle with the body, allowing it
the time it needs to process and heal. If after releasing a trapped
emotion, the body will not release another, you can ask when it will be
ready to release the next one, by asking "Will I (you) be able to
release another trapped emotion \_\_\_\_\_\_\_?" filling in the blank
with words like "in 10 minutes", "in 2 hours", "this afternoon",
"tomorrow", and so on. If processing is called for, it typically lasts
from a few hours to a few days. Be Aware of Processing Ups and Downs

It's very important to let the person you are working with know that
they may experience some slight emotional ups and downs from processing
the release of a trapped emotion. If you let them know about this
possibility in advance, and it actually occurs, it is expected. If some
noticeable processing does occur, such as crying or vivid dreams, and
you haven't told them that they might experience it, they may end up
thinking that the release of their trapped emotion has made them worse,
not better. Processing takes place every time a trapped emotion is
released, but noticeable ups and downs occur about 30% of the time.
Often the mind-body is capable of processing the release of a trapped
emotion without breaking stride; it is a multi-tasking computer, after
all. But sometimes, it just takes some time for the mind-body to heal
from a trapped emotion, and to get a handle on this new state of
affairs. While a person is processing the release of one or more trapped
emotions, they are not restricted in any way from their normal
activities.

Prenatal Trapped Emotions

Sometimes you will find that a trapped emotion did not occur at any age
from birth onward. Trapped emotions can also occur in the womb. In this
case, you can ask: "Did this emotion become trapped in the womb?" "Did
this emotion become trapped during the 1st trimester?" "Did this emotion
become trapped during the 2nd trimester?" "Did this emotion become
trapped during the 3rd trimester?" In my experience, prenatal trapped
emotions usually develop during the third trimester, and will usually be
emotions that the subject's mother was experiencing. In other words,
let's say a woman is in her second or third trimester of pregnancy, and
is experiencing the emotion of grief. Her whole being is vibrating with
this emotional energy, and the infant begins to resonate with that
emotion. As a result, the fetus may get a trapped emotion from its
mother. I have never seen an occasion where a trapped emotion was
created by the

fetus itself, but whether the emotion was generated by the fetus or by
the mother's body doesn't matter. It can be released the same way in
either case, by applying the magnet three times to the Governing
Meridian as previously described.

Inherited Trapped Emotions

In the same way that you can inherit your eye color or the shape of your
nose from your father and mother and other ancestors, you can also
inherit trapped emotions from them. An inherited trapped emotion is
different from a prenatal trapped emotion, or from any other type of
trapped emotion. In the case of an inherited emotion, you actually
receive the energy of the emotion at the moment of conception from the
sperm or the egg. When the sperm and egg unite, one of them is already
carrying an extra passenger in the form of some extra emotional energy.
The now-fertilized egg begins the process of division, and everything
that exists in the original egg is now duplicated. As the fertilized egg
divides this excess emotional energy is duplicated as well. You can
certainly ask "Is there an inherited emotion that we can release now?"
to uncover the existence of this type of trapped energy. But most often,
you will stumble across inherited emotions while you are on the trail of
what you think is a regular trapped emotion. How Inherited Emotions are
Uncovered

Our experience is that the mind-body will lead you to the correct column
and row that an inherited emotion is in, but will not give you a yes
answer on any of the five emotions that are listed in that cell, unless
and until you preface the emotion with the word inherited. For example,
say you have identified that the trapped emotion you are trying to
release is in column B row 2. You have tested each of the emotions
listed in that cell, but the response is no for each emotion. If this
occurs, simply ask "Is this an inherited trapped emotion?" If you
receive a yes answer in response, simply go through the emotions again
by asking "Is this inherited \_\_\_\_

\_\_\_\_\_?" filling in the blank with each emotion listed until you
find the correct inherited emotion. Once you have identified the
inherited emotion, you might want to determine which parent the subject
received this trapped emotion from. To go even deeper, you might ask if
this inherited emotion came from a grandparent or a great grandparent,
etc. Typically, however, you will find that most inherited trapped
emotions will have come from a father, mother or grandparents. I once
had a patient whose ancestors were black slaves. We determined that he
had an inherited emotion of hopelessness that went back several
generations. Testing revealed that this inherited hopelessness had
originally occurred to one of his ancestors in the 1700s, most likely
due to their enslavement. Releasing an Inherited Emotion from Yourself

To release an inherited trapped emotion from yourself, place your magnet
between your eyebrows on your skin and follow the procedure already
described for releasing a non-inherited trapped emotion. The difference
is simply that while you continue to breathe (don't hold your breath)
roll or slide the magnet up the middle of your forehead, over the top of
your head, and down the back of your neck as far as you can comfortably
reach, TEN times instead of only three times. Releasing an Inherited
Emotion from Another

To release an inherited trapped emotion from another person, place your
magnet on their back at the base of their neck. Instruct your partner to
continue to breathe in and out while you roll or slide the magnet from
the base of their neck to their low back or just beyond, TEN times
instead of three times. Each time you reach the bottom of a stroke, lift
the magnet off their back and replace it at the base of the neck.

Pre-Conception Trapped Emotions

On rare occasions, I have discovered trapped emotions that actually
occurred prior to conception, and I am not referring to inherited
emotions. I believe that prior to conception we existed as conscious
entities, but we were without physical bodies. Instead, we existed as
spirit-beings. We could think for ourselves, and we were aware of our
coming journey to earth. That is what nearly all pre-conception trapped
emotions are about; our impending sojourn on earth. It seems that
sometimes, even though we may rejoice in our opportunity to come to the
earth, we become frightened or dismayed by the journey ahead of us. To
leave that place of beauty and love, to come here to this earth, with
all its trouble, violence, and war might make even the stoutest heart
wilt. These trapped emotions are rare, but I have seen them, and you
may, too. They are released like other trapped emotions, with three
swipes of the magnet, once they are brought to conscious awareness. As
you use the Emotion Code to help yourself and others, you will find joy
in seeing the progress that a person can make as they shed their burdens
one by one. You will see lives changed, people healed, and hearts
connected. Don't give up! It takes some time to become proficient at the
Emotion Code. Trust in your own healing abilities. It is well worth the
effort. Believe and be grateful to God that you can do this, and the
outcome will be your reward for believing. In the next chapter you will
learn how trapped emotions can create a wall around your heart, blocking
your ability to give and receive love. For your convenience, I have
included a flowchart and a chart of emotions on the next two pages which
should help you to remember the Emotion Code process and make it easier
as you work on yourself and others. If you'd like to download a fully
printable copy of the two following pages, simply visit my website at:
www.TheEmotionCode.com/flowcharts.htm

The Emotion Code™ Flowchart

Follow this flowchart and the Chart of Emotions on the right to release
trapped emotions.

I DON'T WANNA LOOK LIKE SOME KIND OF FOOLI DON'T WANNA BREAK MY HEART
OVER YOU. I'M BUILDING A WALL. EVERYDAY IT'S GETTING HIGHER. THIS TIME I
WON'T END UP ANOTHER VICTIM OF LOVE. I'M GONNA LOCK UP WHAT I'M FEELING
INSIDE. AIN'T NO WAY YOU CAN BREAK DOWN THE DOOR. -"VICTIM OF LOVE"
LYRICS BY THE GROUP ERASURE

7 THE WALLS AROUND OUR HEARTS

Trapped emotions can create a wall around your heart that can block you
from living life to the fullest. I received this letter from a wonderful
woman, a former patient of mine who had a Heart-Wall, once upon a
time... Living the Fairy Tale

At the time Dr. Nelson cleared my Heart-Wall, I was approximately 51
years old and I had worked at the Walt Disney Company for 22 years. It
was a busy, exciting career, filled with travel all over the world and
bright, creative people. I had a wonderful family and many close
friendships. I had never been married. I wasn't against marriage nor was
I dying to get married. It wasn't an issue. My life was full. Later that
year, two of my friends were planning a trip to China. They asked me to
join them, but I said I was very busy at work. They kept up their
encouragement. It was as if an invisible hand was at my back, pushing me
in the direction of China. Thinking that if I ever did want to go to
China, I may as well go, I went. Travel in China was somewhat restricted
at the time, so we went with a group. There was a wonderful gentleman on
the trip, an attorney who had been divorced for seven years. He lived in
Newport Beach, about 40 miles from my home up the California coast. We
got to know each other in a very unassuming way during our tour of
China. On the airplane trip home, we sat together and he asked me out
for the following weekend. We dated for a year. He popped the question
on Thanksgiving Day and we were married six months later. I was age 53.
As I reflect back on the time after my Heart-Wall cleared, I realize
things weren't the same. I began to open myself to the idea of having
someone in my life "to have and to hold" and to care for as he would
care for me. It happened on the feeling level. Finding someone to share
my life with just felt like the next step. There was a new readiness
that I hadn't felt before. It must have been the removal of that
invisible wall -- that I had

not even known was there -- that allowed me to let this wonderful man
in. So for all of you who think women cannot marry after "a certain
age," get your Heart-Wall cleared, stay open to the possibilities life
has to offer and remember my story. We are now approaching our 5th
anniversary, have just moved into our new home on the California Coast
overlooking the ocean and Catalina Island and are living the fairy tale.
Thank you, Dr. Nelson. Lynn R., California

The Heart-Brain

Your heart generates 60 to 1000 times more power and electromagnetic
energy than your brain, easily making it the most powerful organ in your
body. When you were in the womb, your heart was formed first, before
your brain. Your heart beats about 100,000 times a day, 40 million times
a year, and if its connection to your brain were severed, it would keep
right on beating. Your heart is the core of your being, the core of who
you really are. New research shows that your heart is much more than a
mere pump. In the 1970s, scientists learned that the heart has an
elaborate nervous system, a discovery that has led to the creation of a
new branch of medicine known as neurocardiology. The fact is, we all
have two brains. Much to these scientists' surprise, they discovered
that the brains in our heads are obeying messages sent by "the brains in
our hearts." Your heart is constantly sending out information to your
body. Every beat carries critical messages that affect your emotional
and physical health. When you feel love toward someone, you are actually
sending out a powerful electromagnetic signal to them, using the heart
brain. Medical research experiments have repeatedly shown that there are
measurable positive effects on the body when we feel love and
appreciation toward someone else. The same beneficial affect occurs in
your own body when you are on the receiving end -- when love and
appreciation are being broadcast toward you.1

Scientists have discovered that the electromagnetic signals radiating
from your heart are actually detectable in the brain waves of another
person. This phenomenon is strongest when two people are touching or are
in close proximity but is measurable at a distance as well.2 For several
decades, medical science has had the remarkable ability to transplant
organs from one person's body to another. But remember the story of the
World War II veteran and his blood cells. If a person's individual cells
keep their connection so strongly no matter where they are, think what a
connection an entire organ must retain! We've all heard stories about
transplant recipients who suddenly take an interest in a certain sport,
or who have an unexplained craving for their donor's favorite food.
Heart transplant patients have reported these symptoms from the
beginning, but doctors have had no way to understand it, so they
attributed it to the patients' imaginations. Try telling that to the
transplant patient who has never liked hot dogs or baseball, but who now
can't get enough of them since he received the heart of an avid White
Sox fan. Or the woman who can't keep from crying every time she hears a
certain song, a song which meant nothing to her before her transplant.
The heart has its own unique intelligence. It can think, feel and
remember. There is now considerable evidence that the heart contains
memories and feelings. A large number of heart transplant recipients
have reported new food and drink preferences and cravings, as well as
handwriting changes, musical preferences, and memories that don't seem
to be their own.3

The Discovery of the Heart-Wall

Have you ever felt that you needed to "put up a wall" to protect
yourself in a negative situation? It appears that this common phrase has
a basis in reality. We call this phenomenon the "Heart-Wall", and here
is how we were led to discover it. In March of 1998, my wife Jean and I
were in Portland, Oregon, attending a conference on magnetic healing
where I was one of the guest speakers. Early one morning, she woke me to
say she'd had a powerful dream. She felt strongly that her dream had a
deep meaning, and that it had something to do

with her own health. In her dream, Jean saw a stainless steel order
wheel like those found in restaurants and diners. She explained that the
wheel had three orders clipped to it. She understood intuitively that
each order represented a different issue having to do with her health.
Her subconscious mind knew the meaning of this dream, so I began muscle
testing her, asking questions about the orders attached to the wheel. We
quickly determined the meaning of the first two health issues. When I
turned my attention to the third order on the wheel, something
completely unexpected happened. Suddenly I had a waking vision. I could
see very clearly in my mind's eye a beautiful, highly polished hardwood
floor. Along with this vision came the understanding that Jean's heart
was under this floor! This made no logical sense, but the image of this
gleaming floor, and the perception that her heart was under it, were
very persistent and clear. I determined to figure out what it all meant,
if I could. I told Jean what I was seeing, and asked her if she had any
insight into what this meant. "Well, last night I wasn't feeling all
that well, and Lana told me that she sensed there was some kind of
energy over my heart. I wonder if that is what she was picking up." My
sister-in-law Lana is a Reiki Master, and a very gifted and intuitive
healer. "I really don't know what it means." Fascinated, we began muscle
testing to find out more about this hardwood flood. "First, let's find
out how thick this floor is," I said. "Is it one plank thick?" Her arm
was strong. The answer was "Yes." "Is it two planks thick?" "Yes." "It
is three planks thick?" "Yes." Patiently, we went up by the numbers --
five planks, ten planks, twenty, fifty, 100, 200 ... Before long, I
began asking about the thickness in feet. "Is this floor 100 feet
thick?" "Yes." "Is it 500 feet thick?" "Yes." And on it went -- 1000
feet, 2000 feet, 3000 feet, 4000 ..."Is it 5000 feet thick?" "Yes." "Is
this floor a mile thick?" "Yes."

"Is it two miles, three miles, four miles thick?" "Yes, yes, yes." "Is
this floor five miles thick?" "Yes." "Is this floor six miles thick?"
"No." This was quite strange, and we couldn't imagine what it meant. I
was certain that it had some significant meaning, so I continued
testing. It quickly became apparent that the hardwood floor I could see
so clearly in my mind was exactly five miles thick. I had never had a
waking vision like this before, yet the answers we were getting were
very clear. Three things were certain. I could see the floor vividly in
my mind. I knew that in some symbolic way my wife's heart was underneath
this floor. The floor was very thick, five miles thick to be exact. What
in the world could this possibly mean? I asked, "Is there a wall around
your heart?" "Yes." "Is this wall five miles thick?" "Yes." "Is it made
of wood?" "Yes." What exactly was this that we were in the process of
discovering? Was it something of consequence? Quieting my mind for a
moment led me to ask another question. "Is this wall made up of trapped
emotions?" Her arm was strong. The answer was "Yes." Suddenly the
symbolic meaning became clear to me. I knew how vulnerable the human
heart is to being hurt. I also knew Jean's past. Jean had been a
sensitive and shy little girl. She had grown up in an imperfect,
dysfunctional household like many of us do. While she has some wonderful
memories, and while she loved her parents and siblings and knew they
loved her, she didn't feel safe emotionally. She could never predict
what the emotional tone in her home might be from one moment to the
next. Anger and harsh words frequently and suddenly erupted over things
that should have been inconsequential. She and other family members
would find themselves "walking on eggshells" at times like these. She
never knew when she or someone else in the family might be lashed out at
or blamed for something.

Protecting the Core of You

People deal with uncomfortable situations such as these in many ways.
Some attack, some retreat, and some hide. But usually, we feel the need
to defend and shield ourselves from being hurt. Your heart is the core
of your being. Your subconscious mind knows that it must protect your
heart; it must protect your delicate core in any way it can. Words like
"heartache" and "heartbreak" are so-called because of the peculiar
physical sensation that occurs in the heart under strong emotional
strain. Nearly everyone has felt this sensation at one point or another.
Trapped emotions have substance. They consist of energy, just like
everything else. When trapped emotions are created, they must reside
somewhere in your body, and sometimes they will lodge in and around your
heart. Your subconscious mind -- which knows no limitations -- will
sometimes use the energy of these trapped emotions to create a barrier
or shield around your heart. Literally, it creates a wall of energy
around your heart, to protect it. At first, I puzzled over this process
until I realized that the subconscious mind most likely follows certain
rules. For example, it is not possible to create a wall out of nothing.
In the world in which we live, all things around us are made of energy,
and I believe the subconscious mind understands this concept implicitly.
All walls that exist in the physical world around us, regardless of the
chosen building material, are ultimately made of energy. The Heart-Wall,
created by the subconscious mind, is also made of energy. It just
happens to be made of a specific sort of energy, the energy of trapped
emotions. I believe that to the subconscious mind, the Heart-Wall is as
real as the chair you are sitting in. The Heart-Wall exists, it's just
on a slightly different plane of reality than the world we can see with
our physical eyes. Does that make the Heart-Wall any less real? I don't
think so. Remember that we cannot see ultraviolet light or indeed, the
vast majority of the electromagnetic spectrum, yet no one disputes its
reality. When I asked Jean's body if we could release the trapped
emotions that were making up this wall around her heart, the answer was
"Yes." Gradually, her body was willing to release these emotions. We
found that the procedure for releasing emotions from the Heart-Wall was
the same as for releasing any other trapped emotion. The only difference
was that we had to ask specifically if we could release an emotion "from
her Heart-Wall" in order to gain access to those emotions.

Each time we released a trapped emotion from Jean's Heart-Wall, I would
ask if we could release another emotion. Sometimes her body would allow
us to clear more than one emotion in a single session, but often the
answer was "No." It wasn't surprising that her body needed a certain
amount of time to process each of her emotions as they were released, so
we patiently waited between sessions. We found that we were able to
release a different trapped emotion roughly every other day until they
were all gone, and Jean no longer had a Heart-Wall. The Creation of Her
Heart-Wall

Jean had learned to protect her feelings from childhood. She retreated
to safety inside of herself, shutting down her positive feelings, and
avoiding connection with those that she felt vulnerable toward. When
there were volatile episodes in her home, she chose to feel fear,
resentment and other negative emotions, some of which she expressed, but
many that she internalized. Some of these feelings were never fully
processed, and they became trapped energies in her body. While she was
consciously doing her best to deal with life, at the same time her
subconscious was building a wall, an ultimate protection against her
heart being injured again. Her subconscious mind chose an imaginary
wooden floor for her wall, specifically the hardwood that is walked
upon. Do you see the symbolism there? The room she grew up in had a
hardwood floor, as did much of her house back then, so it was a familiar
sight. Her subconscious mind created her Heart-Wall at an early age, but
it wasn't completed for many years. Each new trapped emotion gave her
wall additional thickness and strength, until it was many thousands of
feet thick. As we released the emotions from her Heart-Wall, we found
that the thickness of the wall decreased. We could never predict how
much of a decrease in thickness might result with the release of a
trapped emotion. Some trapped emotions would result in a large decrease
in thickness, some in a little. When the last trapped emotion was
released, something very interesting happened that helped Jean move
beyond her past and the way that she perceived herself.

Getting Reconnected Again

While Jean's Heart-Wall protected her heart from damage and hurt, this
protection came at a cost. Having a Heart-Wall left her feeling numb and
somewhat isolated. She felt disconnected from others. She wanted to have
close friends, and she tried many times, but something was always in the
way. She was well-liked, but she found it hard to be at ease with
people. She had many associations, but few close friends. In social
gatherings, even with people she had known for many years, she
invariably felt that she was on the outside looking in, and she was
never able to feel like she truly belonged. When the last trapped
emotion was finally released, and her Heart-Wall was gone, there was a
profound shift. "For the first time in my life, I'm not on the outside
anymore," she told me. "I've longed to feel this way my whole life. Now
I know what it feels like to be part of a circle of friends, part of a
group. It's a very different feeling than I've ever had before, and it
feels wonderful and right." Since that day, these feeling have stayed
with her, and have helped her to grow in many ways. We've since
discovered that releasing someone's Heart-Wall is often followed by a
profound experience of connection with other people. Much of our
personal and spiritual growth comes out of our love and interaction with
others. The more open our hearts are, the stronger will be our
connection to one another. The more connected we are, the more we can
give and receive love, and the stronger and richer our lives will
become. I am so grateful for Jean and her dream that day. Without her,
the Heart-Wall might still be completely unknown. When we began to test
other people for Heart-Walls, we found that they are a very common
problem. Our experience is that eight out of ten people have one.
Chances are, you do, too. Joanne's Bad Marriage

One of the first people we tested for a Heart-Wall was a woman named

Joanne. She had been married for twenty-two years and had five children.
Her husband was mentally and verbally abusive. He had created such a
toxic experience in their home that the rest of the family wondered why
she chose to stay in such a bad marriage year after year. Like most
women in her position, Joanne had endured the marriage by creating a
Heart-Wall that helped insulate her tender heart from her husband's
abusive verbal and emotional assaults. I suspected that Joanne had a
Heart-Wall, and her body responded "Yes" when I asked if she did. Next I
wondered what her Heart-Wall might be made of. Were all Heart-Walls made
of wood? I didn't know, but when I asked that question, her body said
"No." Not wood. Well, how about some kind of metal? The answer was
"Yes", some kind of metal. "Is the metal iron?" I asked, trying to
narrow it down. "No." "Is it steel?" I asked. "No." I tried titanium,
aluminum, copper and all the other kinds of metal I had ever heard of,
but the answer was always "No." So I approached from a different angle.
"Is this metal harder than iron?" "Yes." "Is this metal harder than
steel?" Again, "Yes." As I continued this line of questioning, it
gradually became apparent that the metal was harder than all the metals
I could name. Feeling a bit exasperated, I asked, "Is your Heart-Wall
made of metal that is harder than any metal that actually exists on
earth? "Her answer was definitive: "Yes." Wait a minute. What? How could
her Heart-Wall be made of a metal that was harder than any metal that
existed on earth? Something Out of This World

I was so caught up in my concrete questions that I'd forgotten one very
important fact. The Heart-Wall is a creation of the subconscious mind --
where literally anything is possible.

This wall is not physically made of any materials except the energy of a
certain number of trapped emotions. It may not be "real" to us, but I
believe that to the subconscious mind, although it is imaginary, it is
also as real as anything else that exists in the world. Its reality in
the body is a very powerful one. That reality affects the systems of the
body, just as our thoughts do. It has a direct influence on our health.
But remember, the Heart-Wall is an imaginary construct -- it can be made
of literally anything at all. Two years after Joanne was married, the
abuse began. Her highest value was to keep her marriage together, so she
stayed put. Joanne had grown up in an idyllic and serene home, where she
was cherished. According to Joanne, she could not remember her parents
ever fighting, and the number of times that angry words were spoken
could be counted on the fingers of one hand. As the abuse increased in
her marriage, her subconscious mind searched desperately for protection.
Trapped emotions were being formed, so the raw materials were there to
build a wall, but what kind of material would her subconscious mind
consider to be tough enough to protect her heart from Nick's abuse? It
is said that the subconscious mind does not distinguish between what we
perceive to be either "reality" or "non-reality." For example, if you
see a movie that is very frightening, your subconscious mind doesn't
"know" that you are not actually experiencing the celluloid-reality of
the movie. Sure enough, your heart will pound, your palms will sweat,
and your biochemical reactions will be just the same. Adrenalin will
course through your veins, and all the reactions that occur in a fight
or flight situation will be the same as if your viewed reality is,
indeed, reality itself. Essentially, the subconscious mind treats
everything that comes into it from your conscious mind as reality,
whether it is or not. Which brings us back to Joanne, who has a
Heart-Wall made of metal, but a certain kind of metal, stronger than any
metal that exists on earth. At some point, long ago, Joanne had seen an
alien spaceship on a science fiction show. The Army fired missiles at
it. When the smoke cleared, it was still there. They shot cannons at it
-- to no effect. They even launched a nuclear warhead at this alien
spacecraft, but when the smoke cleared, it was still there. The
scientists were stunned; the spacecraft was made of an entirely unknown
substance, a metal that did not exist on earth, one that was apparently
indestructible.

"Yes!" Her subconscious mind said, "That's exactly what I need!" And
this alien, make believe metal from an old sci-fi movie became her
Heart-Wall construction material. So Joanne had a Heart-Wall made of
indestructible metal from an alien spacecraft. What better way to
protect her heart? Remember, the Heart-Wall is from the deep
imagination, from the subconscious mind of the person who unconsciously
creates it. Once we'd found out what it was made of at the metaphorical
level, we began to release the trapped emotions that had been organized
into this wall around Joanne's heart. Because she was still in this
marriage with her abusive husband, we realized that her Heart-Wall had
probably been a very important factor in her remaining married to Nick.
It had protected her heart all these years. Was removing the Heart-Wall
the right thing to do? Was it the right thing for Joanne, at this point
in her life? Her body had created the Heart-Wall for a reason, but there
is always a price that you pay when you have a Heart-Wall, that price
mainly being a diminished ability to feel. We decided that the only safe
route would be to ask her subconscious mind if it was okay to begin
releasing these trapped emotions that were making up her Heart-Wall.
"Can we release a trapped emotion from your Heart-Wall now?" I asked.
Her body said "Yes." It was okay to begin getting rid of these trapped
emotions that were making up her Heart-Wall. In fact, Joanne's body
wanted them gone! So we began to clear them out, finding them one at a
time through muscle testing. Each time we would release a trapped
emotion, we would re-check the thickness of the Heart-Wall, which we had
initially found to be seven feet thick. "Is the Heart-Wall still seven
feet thick?" "No," her body responded. "Is it six feet thick?" "Yes."
Again, with every trapped emotion we released, her Heart-Wall became
thinner. The distance by which the Heart-Wall thickness diminished
varied, depending on the emotion. Sometimes one released emotion would
reduce the Heart-Wall by an entire foot. Other times, a released emotion
would make less difference, resulting in a six-inch change or less. In
Joanne's case, there was no waiting period between releasing one emotion
and the next; her

subconscious mind was ready to release them all in a row, just as fast
as we could find them and let them go. Connecting the Dots

As we identified each trapped emotion, I also asked when that specific
trapped emotion had become trapped. Asking that question helped Joanne
connect the trapped emotions to specific events in her life that had
caused her so much pain. We found that she did not have a Heart-Wall
until the second year of her marriage, when things really started to
become difficult. As we traced back the origins of the individual
trapped emotions, it was easy to see why Joanne had needed a Heart-Wall
that was indestructible. One of her trapped emotions was from the time
her husband had held a gun to his head and threatened to kill himself in
front of her. Another trapped emotion was from the time that he fell
into a fit of rage over her religious practices and literally burned her
Bible in front of her. There were nine different emotions that had
become trapped in her body, each of them having to do with some extreme
experience with her husband, Nick. Feeling Again With Her Heart

It took about thirty minutes to release all nine of these emotions and
completely clear Joanne's Heart-Wall. When her body indicated that the
Heart-Wall was gone, Joanne smiled quietly. "How are you feeling?" I
asked her. "A little dazed," she said. "But good..." Then she went back
home to Nick. For twenty-two years, Joanne had an impenetrable wall
around her heart. Now that the wall was gone, suddenly, she was able to
feel in her heart all the barbs, all the meanness and all the venom that
Nick heaped on her, from the moment she walked in the door. For the
first time in many years, she was really feeling what was going on in
her relationship with Nick. Her Heart-Wall had been shielding her from
the full force of his cruelty. Now that she could experience it for what
it really was, without the protective wall, she couldn't believe she'd
stayed with him

for so long. Who could tolerate this kind of abuse? And why should she
put up with it anymore? Within two weeks she had left Nick for good, and
filed for divorce. Like so many of our body's defenses, a Heart-Wall can
be an invaluable safety measure in the short-term. When something
overwhelming happens, an emergency action can save your life. If you're
being bombed, it's a good idea to hide in a bunker. But you wouldn't
want to live there. If you did, you'd miss out on the joys and wonders
of life. The same is true with a Heart-Wall. No matter how important it
was to your life at the time it was created, you will be able to live a
happier, more connected life as soon as you can tear it down. Sometimes,
it can make the difference between living a life of disappointment and
living happily ever after. Miranda and the Old Boyfriend

Miranda is a perfect example of how a Heart-Wall can interfere with your
love life. She was an attractive 38-year-old nurse who came to me
suffering from neck pain. During the course of the examination, she
mentioned that she had not dated anyone in years and had no interest in
having any kind of a relationship with men anymore. When I tested her, I
was not surprised to find that she had a Heart-Wall. Eight years before,
Miranda's heart had been broken in a relationship with a man she had
deeply loved. In an effort to protect her heart from experiencing that
kind of pain and injury again, her subconscious mind had created a
HeartWall. In Miranda's case, three lingering emotions had been trapped
in her body for all those years, blocking her from experiencing a loving
relationship. She had no idea that these trapped emotions were the major
underlying cause of the pain she was experiencing in her neck as well.
Her neck pain had been going on for some time, and was considered
chronic and even a bit mysterious by the other doctors she had
consulted, as nothing seemed to relieve it. One by one, we cleared each
of these emotions. At the end, I asked her body

if the Heart-Wall had finally been released. Her body said that it was
completely gone. I didn't see Miranda again for about three months. When
I did, she looked incredibly happy. I asked her what had changed and she
excitedly said, "Everything!" She reported that her neck pain was long
gone. But there was even better news than that. "Right after I saw you
last," she said, "I ran into my childhood sweetheart. I hadn't seen him
since elementary school. But it turned out, he'd been living right
around the corner from me -- less than a block away -- for almost eight
years. We started dating and something really sparked between us. We're
in love! I think he's going to ask me to marry him." The woman who had
come into my office complaining of neck pain and swearing off men was
gone for good. She was like a completely new person. "Thank you so much
for helping me," Miranda said. "If you hadn't released my Heart-Wall, I
honestly don't think this would have happened. I was too closed-off
before." When trapped emotions and Heart-Walls are released, people
sometimes say it's like they can finally feel again. They can give and
receive love freely for the first time in a long time. In that state,
very interesting and wonderful things can happen.

How We Are Meant to Live

This is how we're meant to live. We're meant to live vibrant, healthy
lives, filled with love and joy. Of all the emotions, love is the most
pure and has the highest vibration. Love, that most powerful and most
popular of all the emotions, is both generated by the heart and received
by the heart. When you have a Heart-Wall, you are not able to give love
as well as you might, because that love energy that is in your heart
cannot get out as well. At the same time, love that is being radiated
toward you by other people is blocked to some degree. As a result, you
can go through your life somewhat insulated from others, because of the
emotional traumas you've been through and the subconscious wall that
literally exists around your heart. The traumas were genuine enough

and there is no doubt that they caused more pain than your body thought
it could stand to feel again -- that's why the Heart-Wall made perfect
sense at the time. But until you take it down, you'll be trapped behind
it to some degree, less able to reach out and connect with people, even
the people you love most. People's lives and the lives of their children
and their families have been completely transformed when their
Heart-Walls have been removed. About thirty percent of the time, the
effects of releasing a Heart-Wall are very apparent and immediately
noticeable, but most of the time the results are subtle, and the changes
in a person's life appear gradually, in ways that they themselves might
not immediately recognize. Paula and Her Angry Son

One day a woman named Paula came to my office with her son, Rick, who
was 17 at the time. She told me that Rick was having problems with
anger. He was hanging around with the wrong crowd and his grades were
abysmal. She was afraid the next step might be drug use, and was looking
to me for help. She had heard of our work with trapped emotions and was
wondering if some of her son's anger might be due to them. I tested this
very silent and angry young man and found that he had a HeartWall. When
I tested his mother, I wasn't too surprised to find that she had a
Heart-Wall as well. It quickly became apparent that Rick wasn't the only
one suffering from anger. His mother was also filled with anger and
resentment toward her exhusband, Rick's father. She had a rather grim
expression, and her jaw seemed to be set in a determined, angry clench.
It took 5 different sessions to clear Rick's Heart-Wall, each session
taking no more than 10 minutes or so. Sometimes we would release two
emotions during a session, but most of the time, just one. His
Heart-Wall trapped emotions all revolved around his birth father and how
he had felt abandoned by him over the last few years. His parent's
divorce had been terribly difficult for him. He had trapped emotions of
anger, frustration, resentment and feelings of inferiority, among other
negative emotions. As soon as we'd completed the process, Rick started
to change. It was amusing to see that even his hairstyle changed. When I
first met him, Rick had an orange Mohawk; in his case, an expression of
his defiance. Without

the need to express anger and resentment anymore, he went back to more
ordinary hair. Not only that, but his grades improved by several levels.
He had always been a smart boy, but he was blocking his emotions behind
a HeartWall and the pressure had been building up for a long time.
Before we released his Heart-Wall, feelings of rage would well up inside
of Rick when he thought of his father. After we cleared the Heart-Wall,
Rick could think about his father -- even spend time with him -- and be
completely okay. Now that his simmering anger was a thing of the past,
Rick felt happier and more motivated. When he let go of the Heart-Wall,
he got his life back. I will never forget the last time I saw Rick, and
how dramatically transformed he was. I remember him not being able to
wipe the smile off his face as he told me about a recent fishing trip
with his birth-father, and how much his relationship with him had
changed. Curiously enough, when we cleared his mother's Heart-Wall, she
didn't seem to notice any change. About two months after we cleared her
Heart-Wall, Paula came back to the office and complained to me, saying
"What's going on? Rick is like a completely new person. I hardly
recognize him. But I don't feel any different than I felt before!" I
explained that, when a Heart-Wall is removed, it often takes time for
changes to be felt and for things to realign in your life. The body has
to go through a healing process once a Heart-Wall is removed, and that
can take some time. It was hard to tell whether she accepted that
explanation or not. I think she was disappointed that her own life
hadn't changed as dramatically as Rick's. I didn't see either of them
for a while and wondered on occasion how they were doing. Then about a
year later, I ran into Paula in a very upscale department store in
Orange County. She recognized me and waited to see if I would recognize
her. She looked familiar, but I had no idea who she was. As we talked,
it dawned on me who she was, but she looked so completely different that
I scarcely recognized her. Her face radiated happiness. Her whole
demeanor had changed. Since we had last seen each other, she had not
only gotten a wonderful job at this store, but had also found a
wonderful man, and they were happily married. As we talked, I found that
Rick was continuing to do very well both in school and in life. I
reminded her about her Heart-Wall and our conversation of a year before.
"I don't know if having my Heart-Wall cleared had something to do with
this

or not," she grinned, "but my life is so much better now than it was a
year ago I can hardly believe it!" As I walked away from that encounter,
I remembered how deeply angry and unhappy she had been only a year
before and I couldn't help but wonder where she would be if we had not
cleared her Heart-Wall.

Children and Heart-Walls

It's a sad fact of life on this planet, that children often have
Heart-Walls, too. Think how tender and open a child's heart is when they
are little. They are helpless and trusting, and far too often, they are
the victims of predatory or abusive adults and sometimes even cruel
children. In these cases, Heart-Walls are always found. Sometimes life
is challenging even in wonderful homes and under the best of
circumstances. The following letter is from a delightful woman whose son
was diagnosed as being clinically depressed. After developing a trapped
emotion while witnessing the death of a close friend, a Heart-Wall was
formed to keep his poor little heart from entirely breaking. Nine Years
Old, and Depressed

Dear Doctor Nelson, Several weeks ago I brought my nine-year-old son to
see you. He had been exhibiting unusual behavior. He was having
difficulty eating, sleeping, and concentrating. He had become angry,
negative and pessimistic. School was a nightmare! We tried urging,
punishing, rewarding and bribing him to complete his school assignments.
When they were finally completed he would not turn them into the
teacher. He is a very intelligent boy yet his grades suffered because
his assignments were not turned in. I set up an appointment with his
pediatrician to be evaluated. We were then referred to a pediatric
neurologist, and then to a psychologist for further review -- they
concluded that my son was depressed. (Two years ago my son witnessed the
drowning of a very close friend and ten months

later was whisked away to the funeral of his cousin. Four other
relatives were buried within the next six months and I believe these
events had a distressing effect on my son. I tried to help him cope with
these events, but apparently they were still affecting him.) When I
brought him to see you, he was tested and you determined that he had a
"Heart-Wall" causing an emotional imbalance in his body. The MagCreator
was used to roll-out each of the negative emotions associated with the
Heart-Wall. I do not understand all the scientific aspects of this type
of treatment yet I believed I had finally found the answer to the
growing problems with my son. After you worked on him he was a little
lethargic for a couple of days, but the changes I noticed in his
behavior in the weeks that followed were absolutely incredible! By the
end of the first week he was sleeping and eating normally, and was once
again happy and enthusiastic. He now completes every homework assignment
without any nudging on my part. Our home is much more pleasant -- he is
helpful, kind and patient. I feel like my sweet little boy has returned!
If skepticism had kept me away from this type of treatment, I would
still be parenting a very sad and frustrated little boy with no solution
in sight. Instead, I have found a treatment that has literally saved
him. Thank you Dr. Nelson for all your help. Your knowledge and
expertise in this field and your patience and concern have had a
tremendous impact... My heartfelt gratitude to you for all that you have
done to heal my son. Thank you!! -(Name Withheld) Little Jacob's
Heart-Wall

One of the most touching experiences I had with children is told by a
young mother named Meisha. Her three year old son, Jacob had developed a
HeartWall shortly after his birth and the death of his twin brother. I
treated him and released his Heart-Wall in one visit, and later she
wrote this testimonial for you to read. Three and a half years ago I
gave birth to twin sons. Nine days following birth they contracted a
virus, which ultimately attacked their hearts, leaving them in critical
condition for two months. Jordan, the eldest twin, passed away due to
multiple complications leaving Jacob, who then quickly recovered enough
to come home but with continual

problems with his heart. Not only was Jacob left with heart failure, but
with a Heart-Wall made from deep, lasting emotions that were manifested
in excessive anger, destructiveness, unhappiness, insecurity and
aggression. A day or two following treatment my tender hearted son was
back. Friends would comment on how happy he appeared. He was helpful and
kind, patient and pleasant. His behavior was polar opposite from when
his heavy emotions were weighing him down. I know through continued
treatments my dear son will be emotionally healed and allowed to live
the happy life that he is entitled to. - Meisha E., Texas As news of our
discovery of the Heart-Wall spread, other practitioners began to come to
us for training, although the majority of attendees continued to be
lay-people. The following Heart-Wall story was submitted by Gwen Legler,
a counselor in Washington State. The Hated Heart-Wall

I have found that people usually choose a Heart-Wall substance that has
a positive memory or image for them. That is why I was so surprised with
Pearl's negative reaction to her Heart-Wall made of Rhododendron bushes.
She hated rhododendrons and couldn't believe her subconscious chose
them. I double-checked, and it was correct. I found it interesting that
her body would not let me identify her Heart-Wall until the third visit,
and then it would only let me remove a few emotions. It was definitely
protecting her from something. I suggested we continue and maybe we
would understand why. By the fifth visit we began to remove more
emotions -- guilt, heartache, hatred, betrayal, grief, and so on. It
soon became apparent that her Heart-Wall was like a storage unit for one
particular incident in her life. About 16 years ago she had an
extramarital affair for which she felt extreme guilt and self-loathing.
Although she stopped and never had another affair and was forgiven by
her husband, she couldn't seem to forgive herself and put it behind her.
Now we realized her Heart-Wall was a bush she hated because it contained
an experience she hated. We cleared the Heart-Wall and she found peace
and was able to forgive herself.

- Gwen L., Washington The Ring Dream

Pat and her husband Jim attended the first seminar that I taught, which
was held in San Diego in 1996. I received this letter from them about
their experience with a recurring nightmare that was being caused by a
Heart-Wall. I wanted to share my experiences with Heart-Walls with you.
Jimmy and I attended a seminar in San Diego with you, where you
explained HeartWalls, how to find them, and break through them. My
daughter died in 1987, and after a while I began having a recurring
nightmare that we called "The Ring Dream." Nancy had loved rings, so I
always connected the dream with her. I would wake up hysterical and
screaming, clutching my hands looking for my rings. I could never
remember what caused the panic, or why it was so important to find my
rings. After we attended your seminar, we decided to check me for a
HeartWall. Needless to say, we found one! We worked back through the
years, clearing the layers of trapped emotions as we went. At two years
of age, I had a trapped emotion of abandonment. As I had always been
with my family, I did not quite believe what the testing was showing. I
told my mother about the Heart-Wall, and the abandonment emotion. She
told me that when I was two, she had left me with my grandmother and had
gone to stay with my father at an Army camp. My grandmother had said for
her to go, that she would take care of me, that I was just a baby and
wouldn't miss my mother. It was a story that I had never heard before,
but it had left its impression on me when I was 2 years old. Jimmy and I
worked together and cleared all the trapped emotions that were making up
my Heart-Wall. What a relief it was to us to discover that the dream
stopped, and did not return. While we both felt we learned a lot at your
seminar, nothing compared to the joy we felt we received when that
horrible dream stopped. I appreciate the opportunity to share this with
you. We have shared this story with other people we have met, but I'm
glad to finally be able to tell you about it. Thank you so much for this
wonderful program. -Pat S., Louisiana

Finding and Releasing the Heart-Wall

Now let's talk about how you can actually determine if a person has a
HeartWall, and how you can release it. To find a Heart-Wall, you simply
ask. Unless you actually ask the person's subconscious mind if they have
a Heart-Wall, it will not be revealed. The Heart-Wall is made of trapped
emotions, but the subconscious mind no longer categorizes them as such.
These emotions are now part of a wall and are inaccessible until you ask
if there is a Heart-Wall. You have to get the mindbody to admit that
there is a wall, before you can get to the trapped emotions that are
creating it. Once you do that, the trapped emotions once again become
recognizable to the subconscious mind as trapped emotions, and
therefore, are vulnerable to being released. As you release them, one by
one, the wall will come down. It's really simple. Ask, "Do you have a
Heart-Wall?" Then use the muscle test of your choice to get the body's
response. My experience is that about 80% of the general public will
test positive for a Heart-Wall.

Use of the Word "Hidden"

When you ask, "Do you have a Heart-Wall?" and the answer is no, there
might be another phenomenon at work. Quite often, the Heart-Wall will
actually be hidden and will not show up unless you actually use the word
"hidden" in your question or statement. The whole purpose of the
Heart-Wall is to protect one's heart, or in other words, to hide the
heart from those who might do it emotional harm. It seems that sometimes
the Heart-Wall gets a bit too hidden to readily detect, but if you
expressly use the word "hidden" when you ask, it will show up. To check
for this possibility, simply add the word "hidden" to your question or
statement. For example, you could ask, "Do you have a Hidden HeartWall?"
If they have one, and it's hidden, it will be revealed.

It's important to remember this tip. I can't tell you how often I've had
to use the word "hidden" to find Heart-Walls that would otherwise not
have been detectable. A hidden Heart-Wall is not a different kind of
Heart-Wall. It's simply a Heart-Wall that is a bit more difficult to
find. Once the body has opened up to you, to let you know that a hidden
HeartWall is there, you can proceed without having to use the word
hidden anymore, because it's no longer hidden. Is it Ready to Be
Released?

Once you have determined that a Heart-Wall is present, ask "Can we
release an emotion from the Heart-Wall now?" The Heart-Wall is there for
a reason, and while ultimately the effects of having a Heart-Wall are
negative to the health and well-being of the individual, some people are
in situations where they simply are not ready or willing to give up the
protection of the HeartWall for now, and you need to respect that. If a
Heart-Wall is present, but you get a negative response about removing
it, your subject may want to meditate on why the subconscious mind is
giving that answer. Is it unsafe, or are they already processing some
other things that are taxing the mindbody? At any rate, it is important
to listen to their subconscious. It knows what is best for them. If you
get a yes answer to your question, you then simply follow the same
process outlined in chapter six and follow it. For your convenience,
there is a flowchart on page 282 that is specifically for releasing
Heart-Walls. The Emotion Code works the same way to release trapped
emotions whether they are part of a Heart-Wall or not. When you ask,
"Can we release an emotion from the Heart-Wall now?" and you get a
positive answer, the mindbody has a particular emotion in mind that it
is willing to release. You don't get to choose which emotion will be
released first; the subconscious mind of the subject will do that. As
soon as you receive a yes answer to this question, the trapped emotion
has already been chosen. All you need to do now is determine which
emotion it is on the chart, in order to bring it to conscious awareness.
Identify it, determine

any other information that the subconscious wants the conscious mind to
know about it, and then release it. Time to Process May be Needed

As I've explained previously, sometimes you will be able to release all
the trapped emotions that are making up a Heart-Wall one after another,
in one concentrated effort. At other times, the body will allow you to
release a limited number of trapped emotions before needing to take time
out to process what has been released, requiring from a few hours to a
day or more before you can release another one. After verifying the
release of a trapped emotion from the Heart-Wall, you simply return to
your original question and ask, "Can we release an emotion from the
Heart-Wall now?" If the answer is yes, and if you have the time, keep
going. If the answer is no, you may want to check to see if perhaps the
Heart-Wall is gone, by asking again, if they have a Heart-Wall. If they
still have one, ask when you can release the next emotion -- later
today, in an hour, tomorrow, etc.

Determining the Heart-Wall Material Remember that the subconscious mind
is very logical. Since it is patently illogical to have a "wall" made of
nothing, the subconscious mind will always choose a material for the
Heart-Wall to be made of. You don't really need to know what substance
the subconscious mind chose to build the Heart-Wall out of in order to
release it. Ultimately, all Heart-Walls are made of the energy of
trapped emotions, and releasing these trapped emotions is what really
matters. On the other hand, determining the material that has been
chosen is interesting because of the symbolism that is often revealed.
There is no right or wrong way to ask what material has been used, but I
usually start by asking if the material is wood. If it isn't wood, I ask
if it is a material harder or softer than wood. If it is harder than
wood, I may ask if it is made from metal, etc. You can narrow it down
pretty quickly using the process of deduction, and

you'll get some great practice using muscle testing. If you have
determined what material the Heart-Wall is made of, you might then want
to ask how thick the Heart-Wall is. They can range in thickness from
paper-thin to many miles! All I can tell you is that this is what we
have found in testing. Our subconscious minds are not limited like our
conscious minds are, and can have quite an imagination! Yet I believe
that the subconscious mind takes it all quite seriously, and really does
believe that there is a wall there, made of whatever material has been
chosen. Heart-Wall Metaphors

An older couple came to see me. The husband was very grouchy, and was
dismissive and gruff with his wife. She seemed to be a very gentle soul.
They both had Heart-Walls. His was made of solid steel, cold and hard,
miles thick. Hers was many thousands of layers of curtain material,
providing a nice cushion against his toxic personality. A gay man had a
Heart-Wall made of solid diamond, which is the hardest known naturally
occurring material. Incidentally, his subconscious would not allow me to
release this wall. I've seen Heart-Walls made of flowers, quilts,
blankets, earth, stones, vegetation, leather, glass, all kinds of metals
such as steel, titanium, and iron, as well as various construction
materials such as logs, concrete blocks, bricks, and so on. Quite often
there will be a noticeable relevance between the personality of an
individual and their Heart-Wall material. I treated a young child once
who had a Heart-Wall made of yellow plastic, just like her little yellow
plastic toys. Sometimes Heart-Walls will have a door or a window. Often
the door will be locked, and nobody has the key but the owner. While
often a Heart-Wall is spherical, they can be box shaped, or any other
shape you can imagine. Sometimes they have sharp edges or projections on
their surface to keep people out. One young man couldn't seem to form
close attachments with women, although he was very handsome, had
everything else going for him, and had many opportunities. I found that
his Heart-Wall was made of a one-way mirror, which allowed

him to see out, but no one else to see in. I once treated a child whose
most common expression was "I can't!" I found and released his
Heart-Wall. It was made from a single piece of paper. On it were the
words, "I can't!" His parents commented that after his Heart-Wall was
released, he no longer felt that he couldn't do things, and was happier
and more positive. He also stopped whining and saying "I can't!"

Anne Horne's Story

A woman named Anne Horne wrote from Seattle to tell me of a remarkable
near-death experience she had, in which she saw people in the future,
helping others remove their Heart-Walls. Here, in her own words, is her
story, or see the video: www.TheEmotionCode.com#Anne Dear Dr. NelsonI
originally came into contact with your work when a practitioner here in
Seattle named Marguerite used your techniques to balance my body. At the
end of the session, Marguerite turned around and just as an afterthought
said, "Oh, let's see if you have a Heart-Wall..." "What is a
Heart-Wall?" I said. "I don't understand." And she said, "That's okay.
You don't have to know what it is. I'll just test you for it." So she
did, and I didn't have one. Then she said, "Let's test you for a hidden
Heart-Wall." "All right," I said. "But what is it?" "That's okay," she
said, smiling. "You don't have to understand." She checked me for a
hidden Heart-Wall, but I didn't have one of those either. Then she
explained how emotions can put up a wall between yourself and others
around your heart. When she found a Heart-Wall, she would run a magnet
down a person's back to release those emotions and open their hearts. I
couldn't believe what I was hearing. It was like an electric bolt went
through me. Suddenly, an event that had happened to me twenty-five

years ago made sense. It was the realization of a very significant event
that I'd experienced when I was 23 years old. When I was 23, I died. It
was a violent death. I had one of those neardeath experiences that 10
million other people have also experienced. But when I was 23, nobody
talked about this stuff. I'd never heard of seeing a tunnel or white
light or anything like that. It was a very important experience for me.
I left my body and had a life review. I was a young thing and hadn't
done anything particularly exciting or big. But I was going back, home,
and on my way, there was a light, a tunnel. I felt like I was being
pulled by my heart toward a wonderful place. In that moment, I was
encompassed by all this innate intelligence and tremendous love. And I
just wanted to go home. It was fantastic. I found myself facing this man
who was standing in front of me -- we were not on the ground, we were
just floating -- and he said, "It's not your time." I said, "But I want
to go home." He turned away from me and I could see him conferring with
someone else, but I didn't know what they were saying. Then he turned
around and said, "I'm sorry. It's not your time." But apparently, he did
get permission to show me something about my life. And suddenly, I
realized where we were, because we looked down, and there was the earth.
We were way out somewhere in space. And I could see the earth below us.
We were looking at the Americas, specifically the West Coast of North
America. We were looking at the Northwest area, Colorado, Texas, and
down through California. Now, I'm from Virginia and I died in North
Carolina. At 23 years old, I had never even left the state. I was very
young. I could see many people in groups, sometimes large groups of 20
or 30, and sometimes just a few people together. They were in groups
doing a specific training that was very unusual. There would be two or
three people together, with one person lying on a table, or standing up,
and another person who was rolling something down the other person's
back. I knew this was in my future, that I was one of these people. I
could feel the sense of urgency that they were feeling. It was like a
numbers game; we had to treat as many people as possible. We were really
in a rush, really hurrying. It was very, very, very vital. I couldn't
quite understand what was going on, but I noticed we were dressed in
white.

"Are we nurses?" I asked him. And he said "No, you're not nurses." I
said, "Well, what are we doing?" "You're opening people's hearts," he
said. "Not in a physical way. You're removing all blocks from their
hearts so that they can give love and receive love from here." At that
moment, the people doing this work became consciously aware of each
another. It wasn't something planned, it wasn't some kind of harmonic
convergence, or anything else. It just happened. We became conscious of
each other. And at that moment, the meaning of this work became clear to
me. Suddenly a flood of energy was sent to the earth from where I was,
above the earth. It looked like a white bolt of energy that came in
through our open hearts in the back and went out through the front of
our hearts into the world. We were there opening people's hearts so that
they could be anchors for this divine energy to come into this world.
Within three seconds, the world was completely transformed by this
energy. This light went into every crack and crevice, everywhere, and
there was no darkness in this world, ever again. The next thing that
happened was, the doctors resuscitated me and I was brought back to
life. But it was OK because, once I got back, I pretty much thought that
I had a mission from God. And I thought "Oh, my life is going to be so
great!" Well, my life has been a living hell! I have tried to have all
kinds of trainings, looking for something that matched my experience on
the other side, thinking, "Well, where is it? If this is my mission,
when am I going to find out how to get started?" I worked for the Edgar
Cayce Foundation for Research and Enlightenment. I studied Quantum
Physics for 25 years. I took courses in Physics of the Mind. I became
certified as a Neurolinguistic Programming trainer and in hypnosis. I'm
a graduate of the HeartMath Institute. I'm a trained counselor in
chemical dependency, timeline therapy, and core transformation therapy.
All the while, I've been doing my best to help improve people's lives,
but searching for the connection between the work I was doing and what
I'd seen. I hurt my back at work, which made me open to trying the
Nikken magnetic products, and the magnetic I went to Anaheim to a Nikken

event. I And then I met Marguerite. I don't know if you've heard of the
theory of the 100 monkeys. It's about reaching critical mass. There was
an island of monkeys. Scientists came in and taught one monkey to wash
his sweet potatoes. After 100 of them learned how to do it, all the
monkeys on the island knew how to do it. Scientists thought that was
pretty amazing. But that was only part of it. They soon realized that as
soon as these 100 monkeys knew how to do it, the other monkeys
automatically knew how to do it too. But not just the monkeys on that
island. The monkeys on the islands all around that island began to wash
their sweet potatoes, too! It is like Dr. Nelson says, quantum physics
has shown us that information travels instantly. If people's hearts are
opened, we can reach critical mass. During my near-death experience, I
said to the man who met me, "But there are only thousands of us." And he
replied, "Millions will hear, but only thousands will remember." And we
only need thousands. Thank you for giving me a way to fulfill my
mission. -Anne Horne, Washington

Counting the Cost

The price we pay for having Heart-Walls is incalculable. How many people
have led disconnected and lonely lives due to the walls around their
hearts? How many people have not experienced the joy of finding love in
their lives? How many wives and children have been abused? Heart-Walls
can lead to depression, divorce, and abuse. The patterns of abuse that
are created can pass from generation to generation, causing all manner
of pain and destructive behavior. The result of Heart-Walls on a larger
scale leads to misunderstanding, prejudice, hatred and brutality. On a
global scale, Heart-Walls lead to ethnic cleansing, nation against
nation, terrorism, and war.

There is altogether too much of isolation and violence, too much of
sorrow and pain in this world. When I walk down the street, I see so
many people with tight, clenched jaws like Paula had or boys with angry,
resentful expressions, acting out their pain and frustration any way
they can. The news is filled every night with one story after another
about people whose hearts must be barricaded behind strong walls for
them to do the things they do. Widespread depression is another common
side effect of Heart-Walls and trapped emotions. In the United States
alone, it is estimated that between 13 and 14 million people suffer from
depression. It is the leading cause of disability in American women.
Nearly 15 percent of those women will ultimately commit suicide. Among
children and young adults -- between 10 and 24 years old -- suicide is
the third leading cause of death. By releasing trapped emotions and
removing Heart-Walls, we have seen cases of severe depression eliminated
once and for all. We have seen marriages saved, abuse stopped, and lives
turned around. We've seen beautiful, loving relationships begin. We've
seen kids make better choices. We've seen peace restored. I am so
grateful to be able to share what I have learned about trapped emotions
and Heart-Walls, and to be able to bring this information to light.
There is no doubt in my mind that it comes from above, and is meant to
bless many lives in these times that are so trying in so many ways. I
feel so blessed to have been led to discover a method that has such a
powerfully transformative effect on people's lives. It's an exciting
thing to be a part of. If you have a Heart-Wall, can you see how
important it is for you to clear that wall away? Can you see the
importance of helping your own children and your own family? Can you see
how transformational it would be if we could do the same thing for the
whole world? Imagine how this world will change when we can open enough
people's hearts to create a critical mass. As in Anne's near-death
experience, that critical mass, perhaps only thousands of us, will be
enough to help transform this planet forever. Those whose hearts are
open will be the anchors for that divine energy that will transform and
heal the world. Imagine.

I wish I had the power to reach more people with the message of this
book. If you'd like to share what you are reading with someone else -- a
close friend, for example -- you can have this chapter emailed to them.
Just go to: www.TheEmotionCode.com/freechapter.htm On the next two pages
you will find a flow chart for releasing HeartWalls, as well as the
Chart of Emotions. I have placed them side-by-side so you can refer to
them more easily when you are using the Emotion Code. If you'd like to
download a fully printable copy of the two following pages, simply visit
my web site at: www.TheEmotionCode.com/flowcharts.htm

Emotion Code Heart-Wall Flowchart

Follow the Heart-Wall flowchart above and the Chart of Emotions at the
right to release HeartWalls.

OFTEN THE HANDS WILL SOLVE A MYSTERY THAT THE INTELLECT HAS STRUGGLED
WITH IN VAIN. - CARL JUNG

8 SURROGATES, PROXIES AND DISTANCE HEALING

Imagine being able to release trapped emotions on a loved one who is
thousands of miles away. Imagine being able to tap into the subconscious
mind of someone who is in a coma or unconscious and needs your help.
Imagine being able to test your pet for trapped emotions and improve his
behavior. All this and more is possible through two expanded forms of
muscle testing that I refer to as surrogate and proxy testing. Surrogate
and proxy testing are probably the most useful adjuncts to muscle
testing that have ever been discovered. I have taught many people to use
these methods, and they have been able to use the Emotion Code in what
would otherwise have been impossible circumstances. Although I have used
surrogate and proxy testing for many years, I am continually impressed
by how well they work. These forms of testing give you the ability to
test otherwise untestable people, as well as to perform true distance
healing. I believe that we are living in an era when all the knowledge
of past ages is coming back to the earth, and that the Emotion Code may
once have formed part of that body of knowledge. As we continue to
refine our understanding of how the world works, we have made incredible
advances in many areas. Things that would have been inconceivable in the
past are commonplace to us today. Just over a century ago, if you wanted
to capture a likeness of someone, you had to draw or paint it. To create
a full-color rendering usually took lots of paint supplies and many
hours of effort. Now all you need is a tiny digital camera and a split
second to press the shutter. Going to visit a relative 100 miles away
used to be a week-long activity. Now, you can easily get there and back
in half a day. The task at hand is always made simpler when you have the
right tools. Surrogate and proxy testing are powerful tools that can be
used to effectively release trapped emotions regardless of whether that
person is right in front of you or thousands of miles away.

Gifts from Above

I look on surrogate and proxy testing as gifts from above, gifts that
allow us to get the job done even under trying circumstances. For
example, suppose you have a young child with an anger problem and
suspect that a trapped emotion is involved. How do you muscle test a
young child? Suppose your husband who is overseas in the military is
grieving over the loss of a comrade. How can you help him at such a
distance? Your dog becomes lethargic after one of your children goes
away to college. You suspect there may be a trapped emotion involved,
but how can you be sure? Your pet may understand a lot of what you say,
but will they know what it means to "resist" when you do a muscle test?
If so, please call me! Surrogate and proxy testing allow you to use
someone else as a substitute for the person (or animal) you're trying to
test. Both methods are very simple and take two people, plus the person
(or animal) you are testing. These two testing methods differ in that,
while surrogate testing is used to test an untestable person who is
physically present, proxy testing allows you to test a person who is not
present, and who can indeed be literally anywhere in the world.

Surrogate Testing The following analogy will help you to understand how
surrogate testing works. Many small farms and ranches in America have
low-voltage electrified cattle fences around their grazing areas. When a
cow brushes up against the wire in an electrified fence, it receives a
slight shock. These fences have proven to be simple, but effective at
keeping cattle safely within their confines. Not long after the first
electric cattle fence was installed, farm boys made an interesting
discovery. If one boy took hold of the fence, it was a shocking
experience. The mild jolt of electricity pouring through his body was
intense, but not life-threatening. If the boy holding onto the fence
grabbed hold of another boy, suddenly that boy would experience the
shocking discomfort, and the boy touching the wire would feel...
nothing. He would merely be acting as the transmitter of the
electricity, like an extension cord.

It didn't take long for this discovery to make its way around the
farming communities. Just about anyone who grew up on a farm with an
electric fence will tell you that they have tried this. I have spoken to
people who remember being on the end of a long chain of people, and
being continually shocked until they could get a hold of someone else to
be on the end. It works. Surrogate testing works on a similar principle.
You can think of the subject who is actually being tested as the "live
wire." They are the one with the electrical current you are trying to
tap into. Because surrogate testing is always used on someone who is
present, the surrogate simply touches the subject to make the
connection. Then the testing is performed on the surrogate, rather than
the subject. Surrogate testing is the answer in any situation where a
person is present physically, but is not testable. Reasons that a person
may be untestable might include the following: 1. Age, such as testing
an infant, a small child or an elderly person. 2. Physical limitation
such as injury, illness, pain, weakness, dehydration or neck
misalignment. 3. Loss of consciousness such as sleep or being in
comatose state. 4. Inability to reason due to mental retardation or if
you are helping an animal. Suppose you would like to test an infant.
Anyone who is testable themselves, can act as the surrogate for the
infant. In the case of a child, the surrogate could be the child's
mother or father or anyone that the child is comfortable with. Of
course, if someone other than a parent is testing a child, they should
be sure to obtain permission from the child's parents before attempting
to help them. Anyone who is testable can act as surrogate for anyone
else. I've come to regard surrogate testing as an indispensable adjunct
to muscle testing. If you are getting an inconsistent response while
testing someone, my recommendation is to put a surrogate in between, and
perform the testing on the surrogate. The answers will be the same, and
you will often find that using a surrogate will make it easier to detect
the answers you are seeking. You'll find that certain people are
somewhat easier to muscle test than others. For example, my wife Jean is
very easy to test, and since we work together, I

often use her as a surrogate.

How to Do Surrogate Testing

The first step in doing surrogate testing is to make sure that the
surrogate himself, is testable. Do this as we have previously discussed,
by simply having the surrogate make a yes or no, true or false statement
followed by a muscle test. Once you have a testable surrogate, proceed.
Follow these steps: 1 To make the connection, the surrogate simply
touches or holds hands with the subject. 2 Have the subject say their
name in the form of a statement, "My name is ***." Muscle test the
surrogate, who should test strong. 3 Next, have the subject make an
incongruent statement by saying, "My name is***\_," using any name that
is not their own. 4 Muscle test the surrogate. The surrogate should test
weak at this point. If not, repeat step three until they do. Once the
surrogate tests weak when the subject makes an incongruent statement,
the connection has been made and testing may proceed. Within a few
seconds after their initial physical contact, the surrogate and the
subject will be connected and testing will be possible. Once this
connection is made, you will ask questions of the subject or have the
subject make the appropriate statements, but the muscle you're testing
belongs to the surrogate, not the subject.

Go through the questions described in the previous chapters to identify
and locate any trapped emotions. Any change in energy that occurs in the
subject will immediately flow through to the surrogate and become
apparent through testing. To release a trapped emotion, pass the magnet
down the back of the subject, if possible. If for some reason this is
not possible, passing the magnet down the back of the surrogate will
also work, provided they are still connected energetically. The
connection with surrogate testing is easy to break. The surrogate simply
stops touching the subject.

Surrogate Testing Children

Young children are not usually able to be muscle tested reliably.
Surrogate testing provides a simple and efficient way to get the answers
you need to help them. We can inherit trapped emotions, or we can form
them during our time in the womb or during the birth process, and at any
time thereafter. It's not uncommon for children to be born with trapped
emotions. While it is rare for a child to be born with a Heart-Wall, it
does happen. Children are so precious! You can help them in many cases,
simply by using a

surrogate. The Emotion Code works the same way for children as it does
for adults. Children that have stressful and difficult lives are certain
to have trapped emotions, but any child can have trapped emotions, no
matter how much love they receive or how favorable their home
environment may be.

On the following pages is a dramatic story about how removing trapped
emotions helped a very disadvantaged little girl in a very big way.

Julie's Story

Julie was a "crack baby." At one day old she was placed into the custody
of a foster family who hoped to adopt her. Her problems were certainly
not over with. When I first saw her at age two and a half, she had been
diagnosed with Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation, and severe Asthma.
She was also suffering from Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder.
Her behavior was like that of a wild animal.

She was in a state of extreme agitation at all times, and it seemed that
she would have literally "climbed the walls" of my office if she could
have. She could not play with toys or other children, and she could not
sit still for a second. She could not speak at all. She had tantrums
that would last for hours at a time. She had been hospitalized for her
asthma seven times in the month before she was brought to our office,
and had been on machines to help her breathe. Her foster mother was very
patient with her, which I found very admirable. By testing Julie through
a surrogate, I was able to determine that she had a Heart-Wall, as well
as other imbalances. Here are the trapped emotions that were forming her
Heart-Wall, which we were able to release, one trapped emotion per visit
over a month's time. Inherited Love Unreceived from Birth Mother

"Love unreceived" is a fairly common emotion which occurs when someone
feels unloved or when their love for another is rejected. Julie's mother
was suffering from a trapped emotion of love unreceived herself, and
passed this on to Julie at the moment of conception. As a society our
natural tendency is to judge people like Julie's birth mother because of
their addictions. We see the outward behavior and the poor choices that
people like her make, and we tend to look down on them. But what we do
not see is the invisible; the hurt, the sorrow and the grief that make
up their own trapped emotions, their own Heart-Walls. Julie's mother had
such a burden. Inherited Hatred from Her Birth Father

We may never know what Julie's birth father had been through in his life
that created hatred for him. Julie never met her birth father, but she
was definitely affected by his trapped emotion of hatred. When trapped
emotional energies pass from generation to generation, they interfere
with how we would otherwise live. Emotions drive us to make the choices
that we make. Emotions cause us to treat others the way that we treat
them. Is it possible that trapped emotions that are inherited and passed
from one generation to the

next are partially to blame for generational abuse and dysfunction?
Grief and Anger from Her Birth Mother

Both grief and anger had become trapped during the first trimester of
Julie's time in the womb. These two emotions were her birth-mother's
response to being pregnant and had become trapped in Julie. These were
the answers I received as I surrogate-tested Julie. Grief,
Disheartedness and Sorrow, Third Trimester

It is not unusual for a child to develop trapped emotions from the deep
feelings that their mother is experiencing while she is carrying them. I
found trapped emotions of grief, disheartedness and sorrow, all emotions
that her mother was feeling during the third trimester. Trapped emotions
are most commonly produced in the third trimester, but can be created at
any time during pregnancy. Hopelessness From Her Mother at Birth

Julie's mother was apparently feeling the emotion of hopelessness while
she was in labor. Julie was still in her mother's body at this time, and
within her mother's energy field. As her mother's body vibrated at the
frequency of hopelessness, Julie began to resonate at that same
frequency, and she was born with this trapped emotion. Unworthy and
Self-Abuse at Age One

The emotions of unworthy and self-abuse were created by Julie herself,
because she had so much trapped emotional baggage compounded by toxicity
from her mother's drug abuse. Her foster mother told me that when she
was around this age she used to bang her head against floors and walls.

The Results

After Julie's third treatment she slept all night, and her breathing was
no longer audible. By her fourth treatment her asthma symptoms were
gone. Shortly after her asthma symptoms disappeared, Julie's foster
mother received a visit from her social worker. The social worker spent
nearly two hours chatting with Julie's foster mother and filling out
adoption paperwork. During this entire time, Julie sat on the floor and
played quietly with her toys, something that she had never been able to
do before. The amazed social worker asked, "What kind of medication do
you have her on?" Betty replied, "Well, she is off all her medication
now." Betty tells the story here in her own words. We got Julie when she
was a day old; she was a drug-exposed baby, and we planned on adopting
her. She was sick, and in and out of the hospital at least 3 or 4 times
a month with severe asthma, and was on a machine to help her breath, on
prednisone and 2 or 3 other asthma medicines. She had cerebral palsy,
and her behavior was just terrible. We found Dr. Nelson for my mother,
who was not doing well. And after seeing how far along she came, we
decided to bring Julie to him. She has seen Dr. Nelson for 13
treatments, and when we came she was in the hospital 7 times in
December, and she was on a machine. It's been 3 weeks since she has had
any asthma medicine or the asthma machine or anything. She is doing
really well. She is walking much better, and her bad behavior is almost
gone. She is talking now. When we started bringing her in, her speech
was not there. She's talking, counting, and she is doing very, very
well. We are very pleased and very happy with the results so far. She is
just a different child. It was to the point that we didn't know if we
were going to make it through a day with her or not between the asthma
and her fit-throwing; she could have fits that would last for 2 and a
half hours. Now she may get irritated but no fits, she might cry a
little bit, but that's about it. We feel very happy and we feel very
good! -Betty R. Gratifying Results Julie continued to improve, and
before long, Julie's doctors informed Betty that they were withdrawing
their diagnoses of cerebral palsy and mental retardation. Her erratic
and uncontrollable behavior were gone, and Julie was

like a new little girl. Our experience is that many behavioral and
health issues that children have can be greatly improved or alleviated
when the Emotion Code is employed. In Julie's case, her health and
mental development were greatly impacted as well. I can't express how
gratifying it can be to free little children from the grip of trapped
negative energies that have the potential to ravage their young lives.

Surrogate Testing Animals

Surrogate testing is the perfect solution for animals. Many animals
could probably be tested directly-- if they could understand how to
participate in the test! But it's much more effective to enlist a
surrogate on their behalf. Let's say you want to test your horse. Simply
ask the surrogate to touch the horse. Then direct your questions to the
horse and test the surrogate to get the responses. When I test animals,
I always talk to the animal as if it were a human being. The animal may
not understand the words, but they do seem to connect with the emotional
intention that our thoughts convey. Believe me, animals understand what
we're trying to do for them. Their ability to understand human intention
may even exceed our own at times. Surrogate testing works with cats,
dogs and all kinds of animals. There are so many remarkable stories
about using the Emotion Code on animals that I've devoted the next
chapter to the topic. Testing People Who are Unconscious

Surrogate testing also makes it possible to test someone who is
unconscious, or even in a coma. Even if the person is unresponsive or
unable to make verbal contact, their subconscious mind is still at work;
it never sleeps. An unconscious person's bodily functions are still
working. They are still breathing. Their heart is still beating. Their
subconscious mind is still alert to the environment and working to keep
things on track. When you ask the mind-body a question, the subconscious
mind will know the answer, but if the

person is unconscious, they will not be able to actively participate in
the test. So testing through a surrogate is the perfect solution. Muscle
testing should never be used in an emergency situation, when CPR would
be a more appropriate response. A few years ago my father suffered a
massive brain aneurysm and fell into a coma. I was deeply concerned and
eager to help him in any way I could. When Jean and I went to the
hospital to see him, we found it impossible to get close enough to work
on him directly, due to all the tubes and wires that surrounded him. I
asked Jean to act as surrogate for my father. Even though he was in a
coma, we were immediately able to tap into his subconscious mind and
determine the things that we could do to help him the most, in addition
to all that was already being done by the hospital staff. It was an
unforgettable experience that made me grateful indeed, for the gift of
surrogate testing.

Getting Permission

Just remember that you always need to obtain permission before you work
on anyone, whether you are working on them directly, using surrogate
testing or proxy testing. Here are some commonsense guidelines on who to
obtain permission from in different scenarios.

Surrogate testing is such a useful tool that I have found it
indispensable in reaching the full potential of this work. It makes it
simple and easy to work on pets, infants, small children, the
unconscious, and those who are either too weak or in too much pain to be
tested.

Proxy Testing

When someone has been given authority to act for someone else, we
commonly refer to the authorized person as a proxy. A proxy is someone
who acts as a substitute. In proxy testing, the proxy temporarily
"becomes" the person being tested. By voluntarily putting themselves
into the position of standing in for someone else, a proxy can be tested
as if they were the subject of the testing, allowing their body to be
used to benefit the subject. Proxy testing is most useful when you want
to help someone who is not present or who is inaccessible for some
reason. When you release trapped emotions from someone at a distance, it
is literally a form of remote or distance healing. Although remote
healing has not been incorporated into Western Medicine, it has been
practiced both anciently and in modern times by those who practice The
Silva Method, Qigong, GungFu, Reiki and other respected techniques.
Healing Allison in Japan

I once worked with a number of ballerinas from a local dance school near
my practice. Allison, one of the dancers that I had been treating, went
to Japan to dance with a group from Disneyland. Late one night, I got a
phone call from Allison's worried mother. "Doctor Nelson, we have a big
problem," she said. "Allison has hurt her hip and can't dance. She is
supposed to be in a big show tomorrow. Is there anything you can do?" I
told her I'd like to speak to Allison, so she gave me the number of her
hotel in Japan. When I reached her, Allison described the problem with
her hip and said it had started bothering her that day for no apparent
reason, and that she was having difficulty walking. Dancing the next day
was out of the question. Having gotten permission from Allison's mother
and from Allison to test her, I asked Jean to act as proxy. Although
Allison was literally on the other side of the earth, we had no problem
making the connection. We chose to call Allison on the phone in this
situation to get her input, but it's important to note that proxy
testing can be done without having the subject on the telephone while
you are testing them. The energetic connection between the proxy and the
subject is sufficient.

Distance is no barrier to energy. Energy is truly everywhere, and fills
the world, and indeed fills the immensity of space. There is as much
energy in the air between objects as there is in the objects themselves.
Since energy is continuous and everywhere-present, working on Allison
presented no difficulty. We discovered that Allison had two trapped
emotions lodged in the tissues of her hip. The trapped emotions had to
do with loneliness and grief over her trip to Japan. "Do you feel that
you don't want to be in Japan?" I asked Allison on the phone. She
grudgingly admitted it was true. "It's exciting to be here and all," she
said, "but I'm very homesick. I miss my mom and my friends. I just
really don't want to be here, and I wish I could go home." By running a
magnet down Jean's back, we released the two trapped emotions from
Allison. Even though Allison was half-a-world away in Japan, the results
were instantaneous. Before we hung up the phone with Allison, her hip
pain was entirely gone. She went on stage the next day and danced
without any problem. Dorene's Remote Experience

A patient named Dorene wanted to share this story about how remote
healing was just as effective for her as being there in person. I have
seen Dr. Nelson intermittently over the last 10 years or so for various
problems. I had been suffering for several days with the symptoms of a
hiatal hernia, including heartburn and pain. I was really miserable, and
I wasn't getting anything done. My husband, Rick and I were sitting in
our family room when Rick decided to make a phone call to Dr. Nelson to
see if there was anything that he could do to help me. He found through
testing that my symptoms were being caused by a trapped emotion and he
treated it. I can honestly say that the relief was instantaneous as we
were sitting there and the symptoms completely left me before the phone
conversation was over. I

highly recommend that people be open to this type of treatment. There
are wonderful discoveries available to us today through remote
treatments by those who are knowledgeable. -Dorene N.

How to Do Proxy Testing

Let's talk about the actual steps involved in doing a proxy test. Above
all else, you must obtain permission from the subject who is going to be
tested. It's an invasion of privacy and is unethical to test someone
without their permission. Let's say that Ryan Jones would like to be
tested and treated. He has given his permission to you and your friend,
Susan to do so by proxy, since he is out of town. Susan has volunteered
to act as proxy for Ryan, so you will be doing the testing on Susan. 1
As in any other type of muscle testing, you must make sure that the
person who will be acting as proxy is testable, so perform a baseline
test on the proxy first to make sure. 2 To establish an energetic
connection between Susan and Ryan, have Susan make the statement, "My
name is Ryan Jones." Now perform a muscle test. This statement will most
likely elicit a weak muscle response at first. But the connection will
occur if you persist a bit. 3 Simply have the proxy repeat this
statement, (in this example, "My name is Ryan Jones") a few more times,
each time followed by a muscle test. The clearer your intention to
connect Ryan and Susan, the faster it will happen. Generally within a
few attempts, the energetic connection will be made, and the muscle test
will suddenly become strong. To continue with this particular example,
Susan will now test strong when she says, "My name is Ryan Jones." If
Susan makes the statement "My name is Susan" she will test weak
temporarily. Susan is now acting on behalf of Ryan. At this point,
everything that is tested on Susan as the proxy, is actually being
tested on Ryan, however far away he may be. It's important to understand
that when this energetic connection is made between the proxy and the
subject, the connection is very real. In some way that we do not
understand, the needs of the proxy are entirely set aside temporarily in
order to aid the subject.

Any question that you ask the proxy, you are now asking the subject. Any
trapped emotion that you find by testing the proxy, you are actually
finding in the body of the subject. Until the connection is broken,
anything that you want to test on the subject, you will simply test on
the proxy; the answers will be the same. In this same way, any
correction that you want to make on the subject, or any trapped emotion
that you want to release on the subject, you will simply perform on the
proxy. As you can imagine, this is a very useful tool. It allows you to
not only find out what trapped emotions are stuck inside the body of a
remote person, but to release those emotions from afar -- and often,
relieve their symptoms immediately. After the connection is made, you
can use the Emotion Code the same way it has been presented previously.
Ask questions and identify any trapped emotions in the subject, by
testing the proxy. When you identify a trapped emotion by testing the
proxy, you can release it just as you would if the subject were there
with you. Simply use a magnet on the proxy. Remember that energy knows
no barriers of distance. Your intention to heal and your belief that it
can be done make it so.

Breaking the Connection

Once you have completed this process, it is very important to "break the
connection" between the proxy and the person being helped. If the
connection is not broken, the proxy may actually begin to eventually
experience the emotional state of the person they were acting as proxy
for. On one occasion, I had been using the Emotion Code to help a woman
who lived in Cleveland. Her sister had been a patient of mine for some
time at my clinic in California, and would act as proxy for her sister
on occasion. I once made the mistake of not breaking the connection
between the two of them at the end of a session. The next day my patient
came back to the office and said, "Something is wrong. I feel like I'm
turning into my sister. I'm feeling her emotions, I think. It's weird.
Could I still be connected to her?" I immediately realized my mistake,
broke the connection, and she felt like herself again. When you are
finished, thank the person who has acted as proxy. To break the
connection, simply have the proxy state their own name and muscle test
them until they test strong. For example, if the proxy's own name is
Susan, have her say, "My name is Susan." If she tests weak, she is still
connected to the subject. In that case simply ask her to repeat the
statement with her own name in it until she tests strong. That's how you
know the connection is broken. It's just that simple. Something Special

I feel that there is something truly sacred and special about healing
using a proxy. The way that the subconscious mind of the proxy
subordinates the self in favor of the subject is amazing. The knowledge
of how to do this, as well as how to make the connection at any
distance, is hard-wired into us all. I am always thrilled when I work
with someone long distance by proxy and the subject finds an immediate
improvement or release of symptoms. I hope you will give both surrogate
and proxy testing a try. Anyone can do it, including you. Though I am
confident that you can learn to do proxy testing with practice, I

find that some of my readers are interested in having our help. If you
are interested in having me and/or my staff treat you remotely using
proxy testing, please visit: TheEmotionCode.com/proxy.htm At this web
site you will be able to answer questions about your particular issues,
as well as receive more information about the process of receiving
treatment by proxy. Surrogate testing is particularly powerful when it
comes to helping your pets. In the next chapter, you will hear a lot
more about how amazing the Emotion Code can be when used on animals.

ANIMALS CAN COMMUNICATE QUITE WELL, AND THEY DO. AND GENERALLY SPEAKING,
THEY ARE IGNORED. -ALICE WALKER

9 THE EMOTION CODE AND ANIMALS

As any animal lover will tell you, animals have feelings, too. They may
not be able to talk about them, but if you watch their behavior and get
to know them, you will soon be able to recognize their subtle changes of
emotion. Even without words, animals express their emotions clearly.
When emotionally upsetting events occur, animals can suffer from trapped
emotions just as people can.

A Horse is a Horse, of Course... My first experience treating trapped
emotions in animals occurred somewhat by accident. One day, I received a
telephone call from a patient named Linda, a trainer from San Juan
Capistrano. She had come to me a year before with a rather severe case
of asthma that I'd helped her with, but this call was about something
else entirely. "I have kind of a strange request and I'm wondering if
you can you help me," she said. "One of my horses, Ranger, is having a
problem with frequent urination. I've had three veterinarians examine
him, but none of them can find out what's wrong. As far as they can
tell, he's perfectly healthy. But he's causing a terrible problem -- not
just for me, but the adjacent stall owners and horses as well. I know
that you occasionally work on animals, and I'd really appreciate it if
you could come to the stables and see what you can do." When Linda had
come to my office for her own treatments we'd talked about our shared
love of horses. I had grown up around horses in Montana and never missed
an opportunity to ride. Linda had shown me photos of four or five
beautiful horses she kept in her stables, but I'd never been to the
stables to see them. The next day, Jean and I made the trip down to
Linda's stables. We walked into a large, rectangular building with a
peaked roof that covered about forty horses' stalls in two rows. As we
arrived at Ranger's stall, we could see immediately why Linda was so
concerned about him. Unlike all the other neat, clean stalls we had seen
in the building, this horse's stall was a soggy

mess, as he was having a urination problem. Linda brought Ranger outside
so we could work on him on dry ground. Jean volunteered to act as
surrogate, and put one hand on the horse, holding her other arm out for
me to muscle test. We determined that there was something causing an
imbalance in Ranger's kidneys, but after testing him for a few minutes,
I was at a loss as to what the source of the imbalance might be. "Why
don't you test to see if there's a trapped emotion?" Jean said. I
laughed out loud. "Test a horse for trapped emotions? That's really
funny..." I was born and raised in Montana, and had two different horses
of my own while I was growing up. While I loved my horses and took good
care of them, like most people, I never imagined that they might suffer
from trapped emotions. Jean looked at me calmly and repeated, "Just test
and see." Jean is very intuitive, and she was probably sensing the truth
about what was going on with Ranger. So I asked out loud, "Is this
imbalance due to a trapped emotion?" and pressed down on Jean's arm. The
answer was "Yes." As I went through the chart of emotions, we were
surprised to find that the trapped emotion was "conflict." By a process
of elimination, we determined that Ranger felt conflicted in his
relationship with another horse. Linda was able to confirm that a new
horse had been brought into the stables in the past few months. Ranger
and this new horse were at odds from the first day they met and
occasionally had to be separated to prevent them from injuring one
another. They had moved the new horse further away from Ranger's stall,
but the two horses still came into contact with each other almost daily,
if only in passing. Further testing showed that this trapped emotion had
become lodged in the right kidney, and was indeed the underlying cause
of Ranger's kidney imbalance. Once we had verified the trapped emotion,
I released it by rolling a magnet down Ranger's back. When I retested
Ranger through Jean it was apparent that the trapped emotion had been
released. From that moment on, Ranger began to recover. When I talked to
Linda on the phone a few days later, she told me that his stall was dry
for the first time in months. The problem never recurred.

Although I rarely worked on animals, as my practice consisted almost
entirely of people, this experience opened a whole new dimension for me,
and it can for you, too.

Working on Animals

Releasing trapped emotions from an animal is essentially no different
than releasing trapped emotions from a human being. You will use the
same Chart of Emotions that you are already familiar with. The only
psychological hurdle you might have to overcome is that you will be
speaking directly to the animal, or rather to the subconscious mind of
the animal, instead of the subconscious mind of a person. Everything
else is pretty much the same. 1 Since you will be using a surrogate to
test the animal, perform a baseline test on the surrogate to make sure
they are testable. 2 The surrogate will place one hand on the animal and
hold their other arm outstretched, to be used for muscle testing. The
tester will then make sure the animal and the surrogate are connected by
asking the animal a simple question. For example, if you're working on a
horse and the horse's name is "Buck", you might ask the animal "Is your
name Buck?" 3 Muscle test the surrogate, and when the surrogate tests
strong when congruent questions are directed to the animal, and weak
when incongruent questions are directed to the animal, the connection is
made. Once the energetic connection is established, you can test the
surrogate for answers as if you were testing a human being. For all
practical purposes, there is no difference. Your first experience
testing an animal may really surprise you. To suddenly open a line of
communication with an animal is a fascinating experience that is of ten
times quite moving.

Twiggs Gets Dognapped A little Lhasa Apso named Twiggs is a perfect
example. His owners, Brett and Cathy, told me his story when they
brought him in. A few months before, they had all been taking a walk
together in the foothills

near San Juan Capistrano. Twiggs, who was very inquisitive and loved to
go exploring, had trotted off down the trail about 50 or 60 feet in
front of them. Suddenly, there was a rustling of leaves and a coyote
emerged from the brush along the trail. A heartbeat later, the coyote
was running away with Twiggs in his jaws. Brett and Cathy barely had
time to move before he was gone. They chased the coyote into the trees,
but there was nothing they could do. Going back home, broken hearted,
they resigned themselves to the loss of their dog. They were still
grieving four days later, when Twiggs showed up on their doorstep. He
stood there quivering, his hair all matted and bloody, glad to be home.
They rushed him to the animal hospital, where the vet stitched up his
wounds, gave him antibiotics, and saved his life. "It was like a
miracle," Cathy said, stroking Twiggs, as she held him snugly in her
arms. "We were so relieved!" "So what seems to be the problem?" I asked.
"He's just not the same dog any more," Brett explained. "He never barks
or chases anything. He seems to have lost his interest in life." "And he
shakes all the time," Cathy said, holding Twiggs up so I could see how
much he was trembling. "The vet says it might be neurological damage,"
Brett added. "He said there's nothing he can do. It's probably
permanent." Cathy set Twiggs down on the table, so I could examine him.
I checked for misalignments in the spine. I found a few, as I had
expected, and adjusted them. "The thing is," Cathy said, "We're
wondering if we should put him down...." "His quality of life just isn't
very good any more," Brett said. "He never barks or runs around like he
used to. We have to carry him everywhere. His curiosity is gone. He just
seems like he's suffering all the time." We all looked at Twiggs,
sitting on the adjusting table, shivering, with a miserable, frightened
look in his eyes. I could only imagine the terror he must have
experienced when he was attacked and carried off, and decided it was
likely he was suffering from a trapped emotion. After getting permission
from Brett and Cathy, I explained surrogate testing and asked one of
them to act as surrogate for Twiggs. When I asked if he had a trapped
emotion, the answer was "Yes." I assumed that the emotion would be fear
or terror. As I narrowed the list of emotions, what turned up was
surprising. The emotion that filled this little dog's heart and soul at
the time it was being carried off by the coyote wasn't terror, or

anything like that. It was sadness. As he was being carried off in the
jaws of the coyote, all Twiggs could think about was that he was never
going to see Brett and Cathy again, and the thought overwhelmed him with
sadness. Once we identified the trapped emotion, I quickly released it
with a magnet and the treatment was over. When I set Twiggs down on the
floor, he took off like a speeding bullet! He ran down the hall and into
the waiting room. When he had first come into that waiting room, in
Cathy's arms, he'd been shivering so hard, he hadn't seemed to notice
any of the people there. Now, he greeted each patient with several nice,
healthy barks. Then he rushed down the hall and stuck his head into
every room, barking at least once, before he finally ended up in front
of Brett and Cathy, happily wagging his tail. It was an amazing,
instantaneous transformation. We were all astonished and touched by this
miraculous healing. According to his owners, Twiggs stopped shaking from
that moment and his charming, inquisitive personality returned. The
great thing about testing animals for trapped emotions is that what you
see is what you get. Animals don't pretend they're feeling better just
to make you happy. Often the effect is immediate, and quite profound.
Twiggs seemed to know that we were trying to help him. And when he
suddenly felt better, the change was obvious to everyone!

Brandy's Naughty Behavior

We dropped in to visit with some friends at their home one evening, when
I was "greeted" by their dog Brandy in a very enthusiastic, but rather
obscene way. "I'm so sorry!" Skip said. "Every time we have guests over,
he rushes up and starts humping their leg! It's really embarrassing, and
there's nothing we can do to get him to stop, so we finally have
resorted to locking him outside when we have company. We didn't realize
you were going to stop by, otherwise he would have been locked out in
the backyard." As we sat with them our conversation quickly turned to
other topics, but from where I was sitting I could see poor Brandy on
the other side of the sliding glass door, looking forlorn.

Changing the subject of our conversation back to Brandy, I told them
that a trapped emotion could be the cause of his odd behavior. They
hadn't heard of anything like this before, but they trusted me and were
willing to let me check Brandy. It didn't take long to determine that my
hunch was right. Brandy's trapped emotion was grief, and here is how it
happened. The family had recently purchased a cabin in the mountains. At
first, they'd taken Brandy with them in the backseat, but he couldn't
endure the long drive. He kept getting carsick and throwing up in the
car. Soon they started leaving him behind. Brandy would get all excited,
watching them pack up their gear, and then they'd drive away without
him. Brandy was distraught, and didn't understand why he was left behind
when he was so excited to go and be with them. That's when the trouble
started. They had never had any trouble with Brandy before, but suddenly
Brandy was different, and when a visitor would come to the house, Brandy
would rush them and hump their leg, to everyone's disgust. Apparently,
he couldn't express his grief any other way. Once we cleared the trapped
emotion, that behavior totally stopped. The family still didn't take
Brandy to the cabin, but at least he got to be in the house full-time
again.

Boofy the Paranoid Cat

The unique thing about this story is not so much what happened to her
cat, but how a young woman discovered her own gift and found a new
direction in her life. After my friend, Cyrena, and I finished
Dr. Nelson's two-day seminar on trapped emotions, we were eager to try
out our new knowledge. When we got back to my house, we both spotted my
cat asleep on the couch and thought "Aha! Our first victim!" Boofy was a
stray cat that adopted our family when he was about oneyear old. We had
cared for him well and had even given him a collar with a bell, so he
wouldn't get lost again. We tried for a month to find his owners, but
when we couldn't, we decided to keep him because he was so well-behaved.
Although he was always friendly with us, Boofy had a terrible fear of

strangers. Instead of rubbing up against their legs, looking for
attention, like most cats do, Boofy seemed to see all strangers as a
threat. If someone Boofy didn't know came into the room, he would bolt
and run. Using myself as a surrogate, I tested Boofy for trapped
emotions. As we suspected, the trapped emotion was fear. Once we cleared
the trapped emotion by running the Magboy down his back, Boofy rolled
over to have us scratch his stomach, but nothing else particularly
happened. But a few days later, when a visitor came over, we noticed
that he didn't run. In fact, when any new person came into the room,
Boofy now acted like any other cat, sometimes going up to them for
petting and attention. Thanks to Dr. Nelson's training, I've found that
I enjoy working with animals. I've even discovered that I have a special
ability for working with them. Using self-testing, I can identify
trapped emotions quickly and clear them. I have my own pet therapy
business now, and have seen for myself the remarkable changes that come
to animals using the Emotion Code. -Katrina B., Washington

Abandoned Puppies

I received another touching letter from Katrina, who has become very
proficient at using the Emotion Code with animals. Last year, I received
a phone call from one of my friends asking if they could borrow our
boat. They had been at a private park by the Stillaguamish River when
they thought they heard whimpering puppies. After looking around, they
saw the puppies by the cliff across the river, stranded on a small
sandbar. My friend was afraid that the next rainstorm would raise the
river and drown the puppies, so she needed my boat to rescue them. My
brother Ben and I took our canoe to the park and rescued the puppies.
One was already dead, but we took the other four home with us. They were
beautiful black puppies with white markings, a mixed breed of pit bull
and German shepherd. One of them would not stop shivering, even when I
wrapped it up in a blanket and held it next to me. I knew it wasn't
cold, it was in shock. But I got out my emotion chart and started
testing for trapped emotions,

using myself as the surrogate. The puppy's primary trapped emotions were
terror, shock, fear, betrayal and abandonment. As I worked with the
puppy, asking questions about what had happened and testing myself for
the answers, I learned that the puppies had been deliberately abandoned
and left there to drown. It's easy to understand how upsetting that
would be! I carefully cleared all of the trapped emotions from the puppy
and confirmed that they were gone. After less than a half-hour of work,
the puppy had stopped shivering and calmed down. Even though I was happy
to keep holding him snugly in the blanket, he wanted to get up and play.
Knowing the trauma these puppies had been through, I cleared the trapped
emotions from the other puppies, too. I wanted to be sure to give them a
better start with the families that would adopt them when we took them
to the animal shelter. The pound had no problem finding them good homes.
-Katrina B.

A Horse's Sorrow

After I'd worked on Ranger, word started getting around about my unusual
approach to treating animals. An owner asked if I would come to look at
her horse, Valiant, who was having difficulty with his gait, or the
specific pattern of his leg movements. Valiant was an elegant horse used
in dressage, a particular kind of horse training in which the horse
learns to follow very specific movements by the rider. With an abnormal
gait, it's impossible for a horse to work, so Valiant's training had
ground to a halt. A veterinarian had seen the horse, but could find
nothing physically wrong, so Karla, the horse's owner, turned to me for
help. My arrival at the stables caused a bit of a stir. The owners,
horse trainers and stable hands were curious to see this new technique
that purportedly freed horses of their emotional baggage. A small crowd
gathered around the stall as I worked. I asked for a volunteer to act as
a surrogate and a rider named Melissa volunteered. As I tested Valiant
through Melissa, I soon found the reason for his gait problem. There was
a trapped emotion that was imbalancing his hindquarters.

Further testing revealed that the trapped emotion was sorrow. "Is it
sorrow about another horse?" I asked. Melissa's arm went weak, which
meant "No." "Is it sorrow about a human being?" Her arm went weak again.
"No." "Is it sorrow about a dog?" "No." "About a cat?" "No." Knowing it
would help to know the nature of the sorrow, but running out of
possibilities, I kept at it. Seeing a squirrel nearby, I asked, "Is it
sorrow about a squirrel?" "No." "Is it sorrow about a bird?" At this
point, Melissa's arm tested strong, indicating a "Yes." A horse feeling
sorrow about a bird? This somehow struck me as being quite funny, and I
started to laugh, along with everyone else. This was really unexpected.
Suddenly, Karla, the horse's owner, spoke up. "Wait a minute. I think I
know what this is about." I could see from the look on her face that she
was serious. "Last week," she said, "a baby bird fell out of its nest
onto the road, right in front of Valiant's stall. The baby bird
struggled for its life for a time, but it ended up dying." "Is this
sorrow about the baby bird that died?" I asked Valiant through Melissa.
The answer was "Yes." Valiant must have seen the whole thing. As this
baby bird struggled helplessly for its life and eventually died, Valiant
was overwhelmed with sorrow, and a trapped emotion was formed, which was
imbalancing his hind-quarters and affecting his gait. Running a magnet
down his back, I released the trapped emotion. Karla led him out of the
stables and walked him. Lo and behold, Valiant's gait problem was
suddenly gone, along with his trapped emotion of sorrow about a little
baby bird.

Amazing Horse Stories

Our children were taking riding lessons at a local equestrian park and
we

ended up treating the owner's horses for trapped emotions. The owner
tells the story here. I have been involved with horse training and
riding since I was fourteen years old. I now own and operate an
equestrian facility. I regularly compete in National Reining Horse
Association events around the country with my horses. I met Dr. Nelson
and his wife, Jean a year or so ago, and have been privileged to have
the two of them work on some of my horses, with amazing results, and I
would like to share with you what I have seen. All my horses are quarter
horses, and are considered working cattle horses. One of my favorite
horses is Newt. He is now 14 years old, and has been retired for 5
years, which is very unusual for a horse, but Newt has some problems.
About 10 years ago, Newt slept on an anthill, and was bitten repeatedly
by ants in a large area of skin over his left hind-quarter. Within a few
days, all the hair fell out of that area, and he never really recovered
from it. Although the hair grew back, I quit showing him about 6 or 7
years ago, as he just couldn't perform any more, and it was obvious to
me that he was in pain. His energy level was very low, and it seemed
that he was suddenly old before his time. Over the last five years he
has been totally retired, but I have been taking him out about twice a
year to work him just a bit, just to give him something to do. Over the
years I have had vets look at him, chiropractors, and even tried shock
therapy, but nothing worked at all. Newt is a very valuable horse. Both
of his grandparents were from DocBarr twice, from both mother and
father. DocBarr is a very famous quarter horse. His mother's lineage is
in the top 5 reining and cow-horses in the country. As Dr. Nelson and
Jean worked on Newt, they told me that he was suffering from trapped
emotions. Specifically, he had lack of control and nervousness from
around age 2. This dated back to before I had him, when he had been
worked too hard and too aggressively by his former owner/trainer. They
said he had some sort of disconnection going on in the left hindquarter,
dating back to the ant bites as well. Since Dr. Nelson and his wife
worked on him, (he had a total of one treatment that lasted about 30
minutes) Newt is like a new horse. In fact, it's like he has suddenly
gone back to where he was when he was a fouryear-old. I can now use him
to rope cattle, which puts a lot of strain on the horse's back, with no
problem. I can rein him and put him through all his paces, and he
performs at the top of his game. It's amazing to me how

he acts now. He is full of energy, and wants to play all the time. After
being retired and unable to do much of anything at all for many years,
Newt is brand-new. Another horse of mine I call Buck. He is probably the
best horse I have, and is a beautiful little buckskin quarter horse. I
got him three months ago. From the very beginning, he was suffering from
a severe lack of energy and trust, and had no desire to do anything. He
didn't want to work. I happen to know how he was trained, and it was way
too aggressive, to put it kindly. My observation is that you can get a
horse to perform with that kind of harsh training for about a year, and
then you are all done, because the horse finally says, "You can hurt me
all you want, and I just don't care anymore. I'm done." Well, Buck had
reached that point, and he was done. He hated his life, hated his job,
and hated people, because they had mistreated him so much. Dr. Nelson
and his wife checked him out, and found trapped emotions of hatred at
age 3 (he felt that the trainer hated him), depression at age 3, and
other emotions of overwhelmed, panic, and feeling taken for granted.
Since then, Buck has changed in a big way. His cadence has changed, he
is much smoother to ride, and feels much more relaxed, which is how he
should feel to me when I ride him. In addition, he is no longer afraid
of people, and much less guarded. He is now a normal horse in all those
aspects, he loves to work now, and is full of energy. It's really
amazing. He is like a new horse. Last month, I took Buck to the NHRA
show, where he took 3rd out of 30 head in the stallion class event, and
3rd in the trainer horse event. I am happy to say that he beat his old
trainer's best by five points at this show. Training by instilling fear
might work for a while, but trust lasts forever. I'm not sure how
Dr. Nelson's method works, but I am absolutely convinced that trapped
emotions are real. It is truly amazing to see this process done and to
see the results that are obtained. Without Dr. Nelson knowing anything
about a horse's history, the emotions and things that come up are
exactly right on. I have seen this method work, and I can see and feel
the results in my horses. When I try to describe it to people they say
it sounds like Voodoo. All I know is, it works, and that's all I care
about. -Boyd Roundy, Utah

More Amazing Horse Stories

My name is Debbie Spitzenpfeil. I am an FEI level Dressage Trainer and
Clinician, and I have trained in Germany with Olympic trainers. After
having a training barn in San Juan Capistrano, California for 17 years
with 23 horses from Training Level to Intermediare II, I am now
semiretired in Oregon with my Holsteiner Stallion, Revelation. I teach
Dressage Clinics in Oregon, Colorado, and California as well as judging
shows in these states. I attended the first seminar on magnetic healing
that Dr. Nelson held, in San Diego, California, in July of 1998. I have
used his methods of clearing trapped emotions and have found them to be
invaluable in working with horses, as well as people, and I have many
amazing stories that I could share, but here are a couple of great ones.
One horse that was in training with me for several years would go lame
several times a year. We had three different vets look at him, x-rays,
chiropractic, and acupuncture done but nothing seemed to work during
these times. It was very frustrating since we were competing with him
and never knew just when this mysterious lameness would occur. When I
learned the Emotion Code through being a patient of Dr. Nelson's for 10
years, as well as going to his seminars, I began to use energetic
balancing on the horses I had in training with me. Highlander would go
lame in his right hock area. I began to clear his emotional baggage. He
had a Heart-Wall that was 29 stalls thick. I was able to eliminate all
of the Heart-Walls through clearing. He had abandonment issues, anger
and resentment at his owner, and major grief. I was able to trace this
back to when he was 5 years old and was being trailered. He had fallen
down in the trailer. The owner never stopped to help him and he had to
lie that way the entire trip. I asked the owner if this had indeed
happened and she ashamedly admitted that it had. She simply did not know
what to do, so drove with him in the trailer until she got to the show
grounds. Highlander knew that she knew, and he resented her for it. He
also felt abandoned by her. After I was able to clear everything, he
went from being totally lame in the hock to being completely sound
within 10 minutes. He remained sound for the next 3 years while I had
him in training. Only two times did I have to clear him again, and that
was when he saw horses that didn't want to load into a trailer and I
think he recalled his grief. But still he stayed sound and went on to
win several Championships.

Another horse I was training in a clinic came in lame. I had never
taught him before. I asked his owner if I could muscle test him to see
if this was a physical lameness or an emotional one. It was an emotional
lameness. I was able to clear his grief issues over the loss of another
horse that had to be put down in his barn. He was mourning the horse and
shortcircuited in many organs as well as his heart. It took me about 10
minutes to clear him, after which he immediately trotted off sound. He
continued to be sound for many more Clinics until he was sold to another
home. I have used the Emotion Code on horses I plan to purchase to see
if they have emotional short circuits and if they are indeed trainable.
It has helped me enormously in choosing good horses. I am always muscle
testing my horses to do check-ups on their health status. I think they
are physically healthier and happier because of Dr. Nelson's methods.
-Debbie Spitzenpfeil, Oregon Conclusion

We populate this earth along with the animals, and many times we end up
in the position of being their caretakers in a very personal way. They
are our companions and our friends. We sometimes come to love them as if
they were another member of our family, and this is as it should be.
Like our family, it falls to us to make sure the animals in our care are
fed and sheltered, and to do our best to keep them safe and healthy.
Keep an eye on the animals in your care. If something unsettling happens
-- like the baby bird dying right in front of Valiant -- think about how
your animal might feel. When an animal develops symptoms of any kind,
whether they are physical or behavioral, they may reflect a trapped
emotion. You now have the tools to help them on your own. Don't be
afraid to try. Just let your heart be full of love for the animal, have
a prayer in your heart, have a clear intention to help them, believe
that you can do it, and you will be successful.

PART IV A BRIGHTER FUTURE

I AM NOT AFRAID OF TOMORROW, FOR I HAVE SEEN YESTERDAY AND I LOVE TODAY.
-WILLIAM ALLEN WHITE

10 LIFE WITHOUT TRAPPED EMOTIONS

To live a life completely free of trapped emotions would truly be a
wonderful thing. It might be achievable, but from what I have observed,
there is rarely a person that does not get a trapped emotion from time
to time. It seems to be part of the human experience. Life is a mixed
bag, filled with blessings to be grateful for, difficulties to overcome,
opportunities to explore, decisions to make, and grief and suffering at
times. All of these things give us experience. They provide ways for us
to exercise faith, gain knowledge and develop love. All of the human
family is connected and everything that happens to one of us affects
everyone to one degree or another. Through our experiences we have the
opportunity to strengthen our connection by developing understanding and
compassion for one another. The way you decide to feel each day with all
of the many things that you face will determine how life will flow for
you. Your attitude has tremendous bearing on what will present itself
before you, on the opportunities that will come, and on what you will
learn. In reality, you attract much of what you see before you because
of what you believe you can have in your life. Your Focus Determines
Reality

The choice is there each new day, to feel good or to feel bad about the
things that are going on in your life. There are almost always both good
and not-sogood things happening at any given time. What you choose to
focus on is a big factor in the happiness equation. Sometimes people put
too much focus on the past. If you choose to focus your mind on a
negative event from your past and re-experience those emotions, you can
actually create a trapped emotion about that event, even long after it
has happened.

One particular patient named Diane comes to mind in this regard. Diane's
father had died 10 years previously, yet I found a trapped emotion of
sorrow about his death that she had created 4 years after he died. While
she had made it through his funeral without creating any trapped
emotions, she had chosen to allow the negative emotion of sorrow to
overcome her on the fourth anniversary of his death. At that time, she
had made a conscious decision to re-experience her loss and sorrow,
instead of thinking about the wonderful and positive things that her
father represented to her. The result was a negative and potentially
dangerous trapped emotion. Stop for a moment and think about your own
thoughts. During any given day of your life, do your thoughts tend to be
more positive or more negative? Do you choose to dwell on favorable,
positive things and decide to feel grateful, content and joyful or do
you choose to dwell on negative emotions? If you are in a troubled
relationship, for example, there are almost always a number of good
things that you can think of that you appreciate in your partner.
Focusing on the good things about a relationship and giving your
attention to its positive aspects can help to create gratitude and
happiness for you. To do so may even open a way to create positive
change, especially if it is your intention to build and preserve the
relationship. By contrast, whenever we place our focus on our problems
and on the things that are going wrong in our lives, we end up creating
more negativity. I saw a movie once where a wise teacher told his
student, "Remember, your focus determines your reality." How true that
statement really is! You can see a glass as being half-full or
half-empty, but seeing the glass as half-full is more empowering and
will create a more positive reality for you.

The Law of Attraction

Feeling positive emotions about what you want will literally help you to
create your dreams. When you visualize your life the way you want it to
be and feel the way that it feels as if you already had your dream, you
will eventually find opportunities to create the things that make you
happy right in front of you. Focusing on the things that you don't want
and feeling negatively will either create or perpetuate those same
negative problems in your life. For example, if you spend your time
thinking about how you can't seem to

find love, the signal you are sending out to the universe is that you
can't find love. As a result, you won't find it, or it will at least be
more difficult to find. We are constantly radiating our thoughts into
the cosmos. I believe that these thoughts fill the immensity of space,
and that they are not limited by the speed of light or any other
limitation. Our thoughts are powerful, and what we think and feel is
what we create. Remember Proverbs 23:7, "As a man thinketh in his heart,
so is he." Creation is always happening. Every time an individual has a
thought, or a prolonged, chronic way of thinking, they're in the
creation process. Something is going to manifest out of those
thoughts... And so you end up attracting to you the predominant thoughts
that you're holding in your awareness, whether those thoughts are
conscious or unconscious. -Rev. Michael Beckwith1 You may already
understand the importance of controlling your conscious thoughts, and
keeping those conscious thoughts in a positive vein. But what about your
subconscious thoughts? Your subconscious mind can have a very great
effect on the outcomes that you are trying to achieve in your life.
Trapped emotions work their negative influence on you in large part
through the mechanism of your subconscious mind. You may be trying your
best to think positively and see the glass as half-full, while your
subconscious trapped emotions are betraying you by constantly radiating
their own particular negative thought-frequencies into the universe. The
more trapped emotions you have, the more negative thought-energy they
are radiating, and the more difficult it will be to attract what you
really want. The good news is that trapped emotions can be released.
When you make a habit of using the Emotion Code regularly, you will be
able to avoid the damage that occurs on a subconscious level of thinking
and feeling because you will be changing your thought-frequencies. When
you free yourself of negative trapped emotions, you will find it easier
to choose the positive emotions that will help you to attract what you
really want in your life.

You Choose Your Emotions

Have you ever made a statement like, "My husband makes me so mad..." or
"That made me so depressed..." or "That put me in such a bad mood"?
Statements like these are very common. If you listen to yourself more
closely you might catch yourself saying something similar. If you stop
and think about statements like these, you will realize they're quite
ridiculous. The fact is that nobody can make you feel any emotion that
you don't choose to feel. Things that happen to you do not really
determine the emotions that you feel. While you may not have conscious
control over all of the events that affect your life, you do have the
ability to choose how you think, feel, and act. No matter what happens,
you ultimately choose the emotions that you feel. Many of us unwittingly
become victim to our emotions at times. You may not believe that you are
in control of how you feel. Negative emotions can emerge so quickly that
it may appear as if there is no time to choose a different emotion than
the natural reactive emotion that just seems to come out of nowhere. If
you are late for an appointment, you may automatically feel anxious. If
someone treats you rudely, you might automatically feel miffed. When you
are insulted or abused, you may immediately feel resentful or angry in
response. If you are like most people, unacceptable things happen from
time to time. Unless you take control of your emotions, you will simply
react. When you allow yourself to react, your subconscious mind may
offer up a negative emotion for you, based upon the emotions you have
chosen in similar circumstances in your past. While you may have always
responded in a certain negative way to a given situation, your past
negative responses do not have to be the same as your future responses.
You have a choice every time you need to deal with or confront something
negative. You can choose to react how you have always reacted or you can
choose differently. The past does not have to equal the future. The
reality about emotions is that you always choose them. You always choose
how you feel. Always. Becoming aware of this is in itself quite
empowering. You are the author of your own emotional experiences. You
can choose whatever emotion you want in any situation you are faced
with. It takes some practice, and it's not always easy, but it can be
done. The next time you find yourself filled with a negative emotion,
stop and think about the process you went through to arrive at that
feeling. It might seem like the emotion chose you, but you really did
choose the emotion.

Making a conscious choice instead of allowing old subconscious patterns
to run you is choosing to evolve and grow. Using your new knowledge and
awareness of trapped emotions will help you to be able to stop and think
before letting an automatic response get the best of you. The next time
you are faced with a negative situation, don't simply react. Think! Ask
yourself, "Which will serve me better, a negative emotion or a positive
emotion?" My guess is that positivity will usually win. There are all
kinds of great ways you can choose to feel. Here's a list of positive
emotions that you can use the next time you want to choose positively.
Positive Emotions List

About Letting Go In the book "Man's Search for Meaning" the importance
of choosing your own emotions instead of allowing negativity to choose
you is illustrated very well. Dr. Victor Frankl was a psychologist who
was sent to a concentration

camp by the Nazis during the Second World War. As a student of human
behavior, Dr. Frankl naturally began to observe the people around him.
People's reactions to their predicament and the horrors they observed
around them varied widely. Dr. Frankl found that those people that chose
the emotion of hopelessness, and who simply gave up did not survive for
long. To his surprise, Dr. Frankl found that in the midst of
indescribable horror there were still those individuals that chose
emotions of love and hope. He wrote: "We who lived in concentration
camps can remember the men who walked through the huts comforting
others, giving away their last piece of bread. They may have been few in
number, but they offer sufficient proof that everything can be taken
from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms---to choose
one's attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one's own
way."

About Pride

When you hear the word pride, what do you think of? Pride in an
accomplishment? Pride in a job well done? Perhaps you think of pride in
your athletic team or pride in being the citizen of a certain country.
While all of these kinds of pride are probably quite all right, there is
another kind of pride that is insidious and damaging. The kind of pride
that hurts us is sometimes called false pride. It is when we put
ourselves in a state of opposition to others or to God. It is when we
feel hatred, jealousy, resentment, superiority, ill will, or anger
toward another. False pride is selfish. It can be like a temper tantrum,
when our way is the best and only way. False pride is often very
difficult to recognize in ourselves; it has been called "the great vice"
because it is so common among people. One of the real problems with this
kind of pride is that it makes you unwilling to forgive others. Instead,
pride makes you want to hold on to the real or imagined hurts you have
suffered, and leads you to all kinds of negative emotions such as anger,
frustration and resentment. Eventually you may end up wanting revenge on
those who may have wronged you. When we pit our own will in resistance
against others or against God or the Universe, we steal our own power.
The source of all power is God; if we are working against Him we
paralyze ourselves and stop our progress.

In reality, allowing false pride to persist in your life only thwarts
your own progress and hurts you. Pride of this sort leads to the
creation of trapped emotions, because it does not allow you to let go
and forgive; it does not allow you to access a higher path that leads
toward peace. Instead, pride leads down the dark road of negative
feelings, usually beginning with a feeling of resentment. Anger will
never disappear so long as thoughts of resentment are cherished in the
mind. Anger will disappear just as soon as thoughts of resentment are
forgotten. -Buddha.

About Forgiveness

It is so important to realize that letting go of old hurt feelings helps
you. You may think that you are justified in holding on to hurt feelings
because it punishes those that hurt you. In reality, holding on to
negative emotions hurts you, not them. They may or may not be aware of
how you feel, but the way they feel is entirely up to them. Just because
you choose to suffer by holding onto the past doesn't mean they will
suffer along with you. They may have truly done something horrible. It
may seem impossible to let it go. This is where you have power to do
something meaningful that can be life changing, especially for you. You
can decide to forgive them, thus freeing yourself of all of the
negativity associated with the problem. I've always liked this quote by
Lewis Smedes, " To forgive is to set a prisoner free and then discover
that the prisoner was you." So why not set yourself free? Why create
more negativity and more damage by feeding your hurt feelings year after
year? Have a mind to let things go. Forgive. Problems happen so often
out of ignorance. So much human suffering is because we don't know what
we do to one another. If only we could understand that what we do to
others, we do to ourselves. If you've been mistreated, think of the
example left for us by Jesus Christ,

who said these words as he was being nailed to the cross, "Father,
forgive them for they know not what they do." In his extremity, he chose
the emotion of love and forgiveness, and we can, too. A true-life
example of the power of forgiveness made national news in 2005.
Columnist Jay Evensen tells the story: How would you feel toward a
teenager who decided to toss a 20-pound frozen turkey from a speeding
car headlong into the windshield of the car you were driving? How would
you feel after enduring six hours of surgery using metal plates and
other hardware to piece your face together, and after learning you still
face years of therapy before returning to normal---and that you ought to
feel lucky you didn't die or suffer permanent brain damage? And how
would you feel after learning that your assailant and his buddies had
the turkey in the first place because they had stolen a credit card and
gone on a senseless shopping spree, just for kicks? ... This is the kind
of hideous crime that propels politicians to office on promises of
getting tough on crime. It's the kind of thing that prompts legislators
to climb all over each other in a struggle to be the first to introduce
a bill that would add enhanced penalties for the use of frozen fowl in
the commission of a crime. The New York Times quoted the district
attorney as saying this is the sort of crime for which victims feel no
punishment is harsh enough. 'Death doesn't even satisfy them,' he said.
Which is what makes what really happened so unusual. The victim,
Victoria Ruvolo, a 44-yearold former manager of a collections agency,
was more interested in salvaging the life of her 19year-old assailant,
Ryan Cushing, than in exacting any sort of revenge. She pestered
prosecutors for information about him, his life, how he was raised, etc.
Then she insisted on offering him a plea deal. Cushing could serve six
months in the county jail and be on probation for 5 years if he pleaded
guilty to second-degree assault. Had he been convicted of first-degree
assault---the charge most fitting for the crime---he could have served
25 years in prison, finally thrown back into society as a middle-aged
man with no skills or prospects. But this is only half the story. The
rest of it, what happened the day this all played out in court, is the
truly remarkable part. According to an account in the New York Post,
Cushing carefully and tentatively made his way to where Ruvolo sat in
the courtroom and

tearfully whispered an apology. 'I'm so sorry for what I did to you.'
Ruvolo then stood, and the victim and her assailant embraced, weeping.
She stroked his head and patted his back as he sobbed, and witnesses,
including a Times reporter, heard her say, 'It's OK. I just want you to
make your life the best it can be.' According to accounts, hardened
prosecutors, and even reporters, were choking back tears.2

About Charity

The ability to forgive others arises from our own ability to love. The
purest form of love is unconditional love, also known as charity. One of
the most well-known scriptures from the New Testament is 1st Corinthians
chapter 13, which reads in part: 1. Though I speak with the tongues of
men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass,
or a tinkling cymbal. 2. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing. 3. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and
though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth
me nothing. 4. Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not;
charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, 5. Doth not behave itself
unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil;
6. Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; 7. Beareth all
things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. 8.
Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail;
whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge,
it shall vanish away. How can forgiving others and having charity help
you to avoid getting trapped emotions? Charity is love, pure and simple.
Unconditional love for our fellow-beings. I believe it's really one of
the most important reasons we are here on this earth; to learn to
develop this kind of love.

When we feel this way toward others, our hearts resonate at the
frequency of love, and we experience peace and harmony within. This
frequency doesn't allow room for any of the dark feelings that could
create trapped emotions. Charity helps us to get out of ourselves, to
get beyond our own selfcenteredness. It helps us to be more interested
and understanding of the needs of others. It leads us to sacrifice of
our time, service, and worldly goods to give to another in need. It
helps us to become givers and grateful receivers rather than takers. It
creates a bond, a kinship, a brotherhood between us. It gives value to
us as individuals, and gives us wholeness and a sense of belonging.
Charity, this pure love, is a gift from God, and emanates from the
heart. Since it is a gift from God, we can ask Him for this gift, and we
should. When our hearts are filled with charity, we are turned outward,
not inward. We find joy in helping to create happiness for others. Our
concern for the welfare of others becomes as great a concern as our own
happiness. We therefore create our own happiness by making worthwhile
contributions to others and to society. Our hearts enlarge in a
spiritual sense, becoming more capable of giving and receiving love.
Mother Teresa is universally admired for her service to mankind. She was
asked how she could continue day after day, visiting the dying, feeding
them, touching them, wiping their brows and comforting them. She said,
"It's not hard, because in each one I see the face of Christ in one of
His more distressing disguises." When our hearts are full of charity, we
are much less likely to develop trapped emotions. We are forgiving,
patient, and kind. Our tendency is to overlook the faults and weaknesses
of others, rather than to judge them. A life full of charity is worth
striving for and worth living. It is a life of positivity, a life that
is high above the sea of negative emotions below.

About Integrity

When we live congruently with what we know to be right and true, we have
integrity. Integrity is a virtue, an inner strength, an honesty with
one's self.

Integrity drives people to be their best selves. Generally, the more
integrity we have, the less likely it is that we will develop trapped
emotions because the soul is not divided, but is whole. There is no
tearing of the heart, no conflict within. When a person chooses to live
in integrity, he is at peace with his own heart and mind. When he
continues on this path, integrity grows, confidence strengthens and
positivity increases. A person living this way has little room for
negative emotions that might become trapped. Life, by its very nature,
is uncomfortably challenging at times. We must meet those challenges by
growing and going through change, so those with integrity are not exempt
from trapped emotions entirely. Personal growth requires stretching,
adjusting, accommodating the needs of others, refining ourselves, taking
risks, making difficult decisions, and doing more than we thought we
could. Adversity, opposition, and challenge certainly do give us the
opportunity to grow. We can choose to resist and resent those challenges
or welcome them as blessings, and feel gratitude for the growth they
will bring to us. Sometimes the experiences that are the hardest to
face, benefit us the most. When we go through times of opposition, we
may need to check ourselves for trapped emotions that might result, to
stay free from their negative effects.

The Refiner's Fire of Life

Life is a learning and purifying process. There's a story that
illustrates this principle very well. There was once a group of women
studying the book of Malachi in the Old Testament. As they were studying
chapter three, they came across verse three, which says: "He will sit as
a refiner and purifier of silver." This verse puzzled the women, and
they wondered what this statement meant about the character and nature
of God. One of the women offered to find out about the process of
refining silver and get back to the group at their next Bible study.
That week this woman called up a silversmith and made an appointment

to watch him at work. She didn't mention anything about the reason for
her interest beyond her curiosity about the process of refining silver.
As she watched the silversmith, he held a piece of silver over the fire
and let it heat up. He explained that in refining silver, one needed to
hold the silver in the middle of the fire where the flames were hottest
as to burn away all the impurities. The woman thought about God holding
us in such a hot spot -- then she thought again about the verse, that he
sits as a refiner and purifier of silver. She asked the silversmith if
it was true that he had to sit there in front of the fire the whole time
the silver was being refined. The man answered "Yes", and explained that
he not only had to sit there holding the silver, but he had to keep his
eyes on the silver the entire time it was in the fire. If the silver was
left even a moment too long in the flames, it would be damaged. The
woman was silent for a moment. Then she asked the silversmith, "How do
you know when the silver is fully refined?" He smiled at her and
answered, "Oh, that's easy. When I see my image in it." If today you are
feeling the heat of this world's fire, just remember that God has His
eyes on you. -Unknown If the trials of your life seem overwhelming to
you, remember that God has a purpose for you and that you are loved. God
is refining you. He will know you are finished with this process when He
can see his own image when he looks into your face; when you have become
like him in your ability to give unconditional love. I believe that each
of us has a destiny to fulfill, and a mission to perform while we are
sojourning on this earth. Trapped emotions can contribute to illness and
can prevent us from living the life we could be living. It is a sacred
calling to help those who are suffering, not only because of themselves,
but also because the ripple effects of their life, lived fully, can
spread out through time and space to eternity. Some of the greatest
satisfactions in my life have come from teaching people, bringing out
the healer in them and practicing the healing art myself. As I do these
things, I experience the joy that comes from empowering others and
helping them to be well and happy.

About Prayer

When I was a young man, I had a profound spiritual experience, in which
I learned that God is real. I know that He lives and that He loves us
all. We are His spirit children, brothers and sisters in a quite literal
sense. Prayer has been an essential key for me in understanding who we
as human beings really are, how our bodies really function, how to
correct problems and how to heal. It has been my custom to ask a silent
prayer for guidance before attempting to help anyone who has come to me
for help. Many times I have received understanding and inspiration that
was beyond my own. I am grateful for this help, and I give the credit to
God for it. I strongly encourage you to ask God for help in all areas of
your life, and especially in your attempts to help others. He will be
there for you. You have only to believe and be grateful that He is
helping you. In case you are not sure how to pray, or what format you
might follow, I will share with you what has worked for me. I start by
simply addressing God, usually by saying, "Heavenly Father", as I
believe He is my father. I next thank Him for the opportunity I have to
help the person I am trying to help. Then, I ask Him for His help to do
this, and for His insight and guidance. Lastly, I close my prayer in the
name of Jesus Christ, Amen. The word Amen simply means, "so be it." God
bless you on your journey to getting well yourself. I hope that you will
help many others along your way. I know that you can. Dr. Bradley Nelson

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Dr. Bradley Nelson graduated with honors from Life Chiropractic College
West, in San Lorenzo, California in 1988. He has lectured nationally on
the natural healing of chronic illness, and was in private practice
until 2004, treating patients from across the US and Canada who were
suffering from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome, Fibromyalgia and a wide variety
of other chronic ailments. A holistic chiropractic physician and
craniopath, Dr. Nelson is a specialist in the emerging fields of
bioenergetic medicine and energy psychology. This is his first book.
Dr. Nelson is one of the nation's foremost experts in magnetic healing,
and has developed a simple yet powerful self-help method known as "The
Body Code," of which "The Emotion Code" is a part. With the creation of
his "Balancing the Body Electric Seminar," now "The Body Code Seminar,"
Dr.Nelson has taught his healing methods to rave reviews. Widely
renowned as a speaker and a gifted teacher, he is now making his
teachings available online at www.healerslibrary.com, a membership site
providing instructional videos, books and more. Dr. Nelson is married
and is the father of seven children. He lives with his family in
Southern Utah.

HealersLibrary.com Our goal is to provide the knowledge that will help
empower people to become healers. We believe this is everyone's
birthright; to know how to help themselves and their loved ones to heal,
that they might live up to their full potential. Healers Library is
being created for the express purpose of making powerful natural healing
techniques and supplements available to everyone. Please visit us and
see how easy it is to be a member of this online educational library
where you can watch videos, purchase books, CDs, tools and supplements,
ask questions and interact with other students of the healing arts.
Visit us at: HealersLibrary.com

Seminars

We'd like your group or organization to be successful! Dr. Nelson and
his associates are available to teach the Emotion Code to your sales
team, distributors, leadership and management upon request. Please send
an email with your request to: scheduling@BodyCodeSeminars.com If you
are interested in attending a seminar yourself, see our seminar schedule
online at: BodyCodeSeminars.com

Nikken Magnets Dr. Nelson highly recommends the use of Nikken magnets in
your healing work using The Emotion Code. Personally, I prefer to use
the magnets manufactured by the Japanese company, Nikken, Inc., because
they are specifically designed for use on the body, and are very
comfortable to use. The magnets that I use to release trapped emotions
are designed to roll down the back, are easy to hold, and as they spin,
they produce a larger magnetic field. A lot of research has gone into
their development, and I use them whenever I can. I have found numerous
applications for them (for example, as pain-erasers, where a
refrigerator magnet would not have the same effect). I believe that the
Nikken magnets are well worth the modest investment required. Many years
of clinical research in Japan has gone into the design and creation of
Nikken's magnets, and they work very well. The two specific magnets that
Dr. Nelson recommends for practicing The Emotion Code are both made by
Nikken. They are the MagBoy, a small, hand-held magnet that can easily
roll over the governing meridian, and the MagCreator, a larger,
beautifully designed massage tool made with heavyduty roller bearings,
built to last. Either one of these is ideal.

Nikken is now the number one wellness company in the world, with many
high technology products from magnetic mattresses and air and water
purifiers to cutting-edge sports and nutritional products that can
create a true "Wellness Home" for you. If you'd like more information on
any of the Nikken products and how to purchase them, go to:
HealersLibrary.com/magnets.htm

Need Help?

If you are interested in having Dr. Nelson and/or his staff treat you
remotely using proxy testing, please visit: TheEmotionCode.com/proxy.htm
At this web site you will be able to answer our questions about your
particular issues and find out how to receive treatment by proxy from
us. Share Your Stories

We want to hear about your successes using The Emotion Code. If you
would like to share, please send your story via email to:
mystory@TheEmotionCode.com

To Order "The Emotion Code"

To order more copies of "The Emotion Code," visit our website at:
TheEmotionCode.com

Bulk Ordering

To contact the author or to request information regarding bulk rate book
purchasing or book customization for your corporation or group, please
contact: one@wupub.com Wellness Unmasked Publishing 450 Hillside Drive
Ste 225 Mesquite, NV 89027

1 Jefferson Lewis, Something Hidden: A Biography of Wilder Penfield
(Goodread Biographies), (Halifax, Nova Scotia: Formac Publishing Company
Ltd., 1951), 198.

2 Robert Frost, Applied Kinesiology: A Training Manual and Reference
Book of Basic Principles and Practice, (Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic
Books, 2002), 4.

3 Candace B. Pert, Molecules of Emotion: why you feel the way you feel,
(New York: Touchstone Press, 1997)

4 Isaac Asimov, Atom: Journey across the subatomic cosmos (New York:
Penguin Books USA Inc., 1992), 56.

5 William A. Tiller, Walter E. Dibble, Jr. and Michael J. Kohane,
Conscious acts of creation: the emergence of a new physics (Walnut
Creek, CA: Pavior Publishing, 10997), 14.

6 William A. Tiller, Science and Human Transformation: Subtle Energies,
Intentionality and Consciousness (Walnut Creek, CA: Pavior Publishing,
1997), 14.

1 John Iovine, Kirlian photography: a hands-on guide (Victoria,
Australia: Images Publishing, 2000), 24.

2 Ioivine, 25

3 "Fotograferingsteknik som visar en aura runt föremålen. Uppfanns av
ryssen Semyon Kirlian."
<http://paranormal.se/topic/kirlianfotografi.html>

4 Jerry D. Wheatley, The Nature of Consciousness, (Phoenix, AZ: Research
Scientific Press), 668.

5 Dr. Lee Warren, B.A., D.D., Connectedness Part 1,
<http://www.plim.org/Connectedness.htm>

6 P.C.W. Davies, Julian R. Brown, The Ghost in the Atom: A Discussion of
the Mysteries of Quantum Physics (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 668), .

7 Deepak Chopra televised lecture, April 2004.

8 Masaru Emoto, David A. Thayne, The Hidden Messages in Water,
(Hillsboro, OR: Beyond Words Publishing, Inc., 2001) 64.

9 Walter Lubeck, Frank Petter, William Rand, The Spirit of Reiki, (Twin
Lakes, WI, Lotus Press, 2001), 72.

10 Doc Lew Childre, Howard Martin and Donna Beech, The HeartMath
Solution, (New York, NY: Harper Collins Publishers, Inc. 1999) 260.

11 Robert C. Fulford, D.O., Touch of Life: Aligning Body, Mind, and
Spirit to Honor the Healer Within (New York, NY: Pocket Books, 1996) 25.

12 "FDA Launches a Multi-Pronged Strategy to Strengthen Safeguards for
Children Treated With Antidepressant Medications," Oct. 15, 2004
<http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/news/2004/new01124.html>

13 Julie Schmit, Julie Appleby, "FDA calls for pain reliever warning",
USA Today 20 Dec. 2006, national ed.: A.1.

1 Doc Lew Childre, Howard Martin and Donna Beech, The HeartMath
Solution, (New York, NY: Harper Collins Publishers, Inc. 1999) 34..

2 British Medical Journal (Clin Res Ed). 1985
Dec. 21-28;291(6511):1758-9.

3 "Scientists Make a Frog Levitate," New Scientist Magazine, 12 April
1997, 13.

4 Psychiatry Res. 2004 Apr. 30;126(2):123-33.

5 Rosenberg P.B., et al. "Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
treatment of comorbid post traumatic stress disorder and major
depression." Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 2002
Summer;14(3):270-6.

6 Robert Chamovitz, Charles H. Rammelkamp Jr., Lewis W. Wannamaker, and
Floyd W. Denny Jr., "The Effect of Tonsillectomy on the Incidence of
Streptococcal Respiratory Disease and its Complications," Pediatrics
Vol. 26 No. 3 September 1960, pp. 355-367.

7 Journal of Nuclear Medicine. 1992 Mar;33(3):409-12.

1 David R. Hawkins, Power vs. Force: the hidden determinants of human
behavior, (Carlsbad, CA: Hay House, Inc. 1995), 59.

2 Ibid, 34.

1 Rollin McCraty, Ph.D., edited by P. J. Rosch and M. S. Markov. "The
Energetic Heart: Bioelectromagnetic Communication Within and Between
People", Clinical Applications of Bioelectromagnetic Medicine, (2004),
541-562.

2 R. McCraty, M. Atkinson and W. Tiller, The Role of Physiological
Coherence in the Detection and Measurement of Cardiac Energy Exchange
Between People (Proceedings of the Tenth International Montreux Congress
on Stress, Montreux, Switzerland, 1999).

3 Mindshock: Transplanting Memories. Channel4.com, Belfast, Northern
Ireland. http://video.google.com/videoplay?docid=-2219468990718192402

1 The Secret, TS Productions, LLC. 2006.

2 Jay Evensen, "Forgiveness Has Power to Change Future," Deseret Morning
News, 21 Aug 2005, p. AA3).


