Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 1 (row 1, column 1)

The great paradox of the brain is that everything you know about the
world is provided to you by an organ that has itself never seen that
world. -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.46

The brain exists in silence and darkness, like a dungeoned prisoner. It
has no pain receptors, literally no feelings. It has never felt warm
sunshine or a soft breeze. To your brain, the world is just a stream of
electrical pulses, like taps of Morse code. -The Body - A guid s - Bill
Bryson, p.46

e

e

e

ff

And out of this bare and neutral information it creates for you ---quite
literally creates---a vibrant, threedimensional, sensually engaging
universe. Your brain is you. Everything else is just plumbing and sca
olding. -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.46

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 2 (row 1, column 2)

It all starts in the mind. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.38

Every moment of managing your mind is selective. -Cleaning Up Your r
Caroline Leaf, p.38

easy to generate negative changes -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf,
p.38

to generate positive changes in the brain ---this is called the plastic
paradox. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.38

The ability of the brain to change, or neuroplasticity, can occur in a
good or bad direction -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.38

The mind is the force that drives neuroplasticity; this is why I say the
mind changes the brain, and also why we need to take control of the
process like a sailor mastering the wind -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline
Leaf, p.38

di erence between the mind and the brain -Cleaning Up Yo aroline Leaf,
p.39

what a thought is -Cleaning U e Leaf, p.39

how we build thoughts with our mind -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf,
p.39

and the brain, what a thought is and how we build thoughts with our
mind, how we control our thoughts with our mind -Cleaning Up Your r
Caroline Leaf, p.39

how we detox our mind and brain using our mind -Cleaning Up Your r
Caroline Leaf, p.39

You don't have to just let life shift and shape what is between your
ears. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.45

You don't have to just absorb everything you see and hear. -Cleaning Up
Your r Caroline Leaf, p.45

u

p

ff

every functional, chemical, and physical feature of the brain can be and
is transformed as we use our mind. The key is that you can direct this
process. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.45

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 3 (row 2, column 2)

You don't have to just absorb everything you see and hear. -Cleaning Up
Your r Caroline Leaf, p.45

every functional, chemical, and physical feature of the brain can be and
is transformed as we use our mind. The key is that you can direct this
process. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.45

the qEEG (the digital mathematical analysis of EEG data) -Cleaning Up
Your r Caroline Leaf, p.47

EEG (electroencephalogram) -Cleaning U e Leaf, p.46

Neurofeedback therapy is "also known as EEG (electroencephalogram)
biofeedback . . . a therapeutic intervention that provides immediate
feedback from a computer- based program that assesses a client's brain
wave activity." -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.46

The bottom line is this: we cannot improve our lifestyle until we learn
how to manage our thinking. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.47

using their minds (their ability to manage their thoughts, feelings, and
choices) -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.47

Nothing in life is to be feared, it is only to be understood. Now is the
time to understand more, so that we may fear less. MARIE CURIE -Cleaning
Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.50

Any man could, if he were so inclined, be the sculptor of his own brain.
SANTIAGO RAMÃ“N Y CAJAL -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.36

Whatever we plant in our minds and nourish with repetition and emotion
will one day become a reality. EARL NIGHTINGALE -Cleaning Up Your r
Caroline Leaf, p.22

A better and healthier mindset to have when reading about health and
wellness trends is to ask yourself -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf,
p.26

u

p

Why is this one idea resonating with me? -Cleaning Up Yo aroline Leaf,
p.26

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 4 (row 3, column 2)

Why is this one idea resonating with me? -Cleaning Up Yo aroline Leaf,
p.26

Why am I reading about this -Cleaning U e Leaf, p.26

and why do I want to know more? -Cleaning Up ine Leaf, p.26

What underlying issue am I really trying to address? -Cleaning Up Your r
Caroline Leaf, p.26

This toxic idea of "If I just do x then y will happen" is born out of a
distorted view of meritocracy and neurocentricity, where we believe y
will naturally happen if x is done, and x is standard for everyone.
-Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.26

This belief ignores the impact of individual external (environment,
culture, family) and internal (personality, identity) circumstances,
setting you up for failure from the start. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline
Leaf, p.26

This type of thinking can also lead you to internalize failure, as
though there's something inherently wrong with you. You may think
something like I have followed the advice or the path or the way; why am
I not " xed?" -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.26

Happy today doesn't matter a whole lot. It's hope for the future or lack
thereof that's really linked with premature mortality."6 -Cleaning Up
Your r Caroline Leaf, p.27

Fear, isolation, pain, purposelessness, despair . . . -Cleaning Up Your
r Caroline Leaf, p.27

symptoms of a society that is broken and hurting -Cleaning Up Your r
Caroline Leaf, p.27

u

p

fi

A large part of the problem is that we've lost much of our ability to
think deeply. We've forgotten the art of deep and focused
mind-management. We want things fast, quick, now. We often don't want to
put in the hard work that leads to true change, or we've never been
taught what this kind of work looks like. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline
Leaf, p.28

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 5 (row 4, column 2)

A large part of the problem is that we've lost much of our ability to
think deeply. We've forgotten the art of deep and focused
mind-management. We want things fast, quick, now. We often don't want to
put in the hard work that leads to true change, or we've never been
taught what this kind of work looks like. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline
Leaf, p.28

he progression into an information era with easy access to endless
streams of knowledge has changed how people think, feel, and make
choices -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.29

we have entered an era where we've sacri ced the processing of knowledge
for the gathering of data. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.29

We are -Cleaning U e Leaf, p.29

training ourselves to not process but immediately jump to a quick
solution and reactive opinion. -Cleaning Up Your r Caroline Leaf, p.29

We stop making the jump from knowledge gathering to knowledge
application. Gathering information without processing and applying it is
counter to how the mind works and how the brain is structured and has a
deleterious e ect on our mental and physical well- being, creating a
mental mess in the mind and a physical mess in the body. -Cleaning Up
Your r Caroline Leaf, p.29 The brain is wider than the sky, For, put
them side by side, The one the other will include With ease, and you
beside. ---EMILY DICKINSON -The Body - ryson, p.46

an object of pure wonder, the human brain is extraordinarily
unprepossessing. It is, for one thing, 75 to 80 percent water, with the
rest split mostly between fat and protein. Pretty amazing that three
such mundane substances can come together in a way that allows us
thought and memory and vision and aesthetic appreciation and all the
rest. -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.46

Just sitting quietly, doing nothing at all, your brain churns through
more information in thirty seconds than the Hubble Space Telescope has
processed in thirty years. -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.46

e

e

e

ff

p

fi

A morsel of cortex one cubic millimeter in size---about the size of a
grain of sand--- could hold two thousand terabytes of information -The
Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.46

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 6 (row 5, column 2)

A morsel of cortex one cubic millimeter in size---about the size of a
grain of sand--- could hold two thousand terabytes of information -The
Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.46

the hardest-working brains are usually the least productive. -The Body -
A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.47

The parietal lobe manages sensory inputs like touch and temperature.
-The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.48

The occipital lobe processes visual information -The Body - A guid s -
Bill Bryson, p.48

the temporal lobe principally manages auditory information -The Body - A
guid s - Bill Bryson, p.48

the temporal lobe principally manages auditory information, though it
also helps with processing visual information. -The Body - A guid s -
Bill Bryson, p.48

The frontal lobe is the seat of the higher functions of the
brain---reasoning, forethought, problem solving, emotional control, and
so on. It is the part responsible for personality, for who we are. -The
Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.49

Consider how we see---or, to put it slightly more accurately, how the
brain tells us what we see. -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.51

When you "see" something, only about 10 percent of the information comes
from the optic nerve. Other parts of your brain have to deconstruct the
signals---recognize faces, interpret movements, identify danger. In
other words, the biggest part of seeing isn't receiving visual images;
it's making sense of them. -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.51

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

e

fi

the brain does a truly extraordinary thing: it continuously forecasts
what the world will be like a fth of a second from now, and that is what
it gives us as the present. That means that we never see the world as it
is at this very instant, but rather as it will be a fraction of a moment
in the future. We spend our whole lives, in other words, living in a
world that doesn't quite exist yet.

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 7 (row 6, column 2)

the brain does a truly extraordinary thing: it continuously forecasts
what the world will be like a fth of a second from now, and that is what
it gives us as the present. That means that we never see the world as it
is at this very instant, but rather as it will be a fraction of a moment
in the future. We spend our whole lives, in other words, living in a
world that doesn't quite exist yet. -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson,
p.51

"While we have the overwhelming impression that the greenness of the
trees and the blueness of the sky are streaming through our eyes as
through an open window, yet the particles of light impacting on -The
Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.51

the retina are colourless, just as the waves of sound impacting on the
eardrum are silent and scent molecules have no smell. They are all
invisible, weightless, subatomic particles of matter travelling through
space." -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.52

What you see is not what is but what your brain tells you it is, and
that's not the same thing at all. -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson,
p.52

You have probably at some time or other encountered one of those
illusion tests that require you to stare for fteen or twenty seconds at
a red square, then shift your vision to a blank sheet of paper, and for
a few moments you will see a ghostly square of greenish blue on the
white paper. This "afterimage" is a consequence of tiring some of the
photoreceptors in your eyes by making them work extra intently, but what
is relevant is that the greenishblue color is not there and has never
existed anywhere but in your imagination. In a very real sense, that is
true of all colors. -The Body - A guid s - Bill Bryson, p.52

fi

e

e

e

e

e

F

fi

THE BRAIN is wider than the sky, For, put them side by side, The one the
other will include With ease, and you beside. The brain is deeper than
the sea, For, hold them, blue to blue, The one the other will absorb, As
sponges, buckets do. -\_OceanofPD rnolle.pdf, p.10

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 8 (row 7, column 2)

THE BRAIN is wider than the sky, For, put them side by side, The one the
other will include With ease, and you beside. The brain is deeper than
the sea, For, hold them, blue to blue, The one the other will absorb, As
sponges, buckets do. -\_OceanofPD rnolle.pdf, p.10

THE BRAIN is wider than the sky, For, put them side by side, The one the
other will include With ease, and you beside. The brain is deeper than
the sea, For, hold them, blue to blue, The one the other will absorb, As
sponges, buckets do. EMILY DICKINSON (1830-- 1886) -\_OceanofPD
rnolle.pdf, p.10

There is time enough for everything, in the course of the day, if you do
but one thing at once; but there is not time enough in the year, if you
will do two things at a time. The steady and undissipated attention to
one object is a sure mark of a superior genius; as hurry, bustle and
agitation are the never-failing symptoms of a weak and frivolous mind.
LORD CHESTERFIELD APRIL (1694-1773) -\_OceanofPDF.com mpernolle.pdf,
p.10

Your mind is not your brain, just as you are not your brain. -Cleaning
Up Your Caroline Leaf, p.114

When you think, you will feel, and when you think and feel, you will
choose. These three aspects always work together. This is the
mind-in-action. -Cleaning Up Your Caroline Leaf, p.114

A thought itself is the concept, the big idea. Thoughts have memories,
like trees have branches. There are three types of memories in a
thought: information, emotions, and physical sensations. -Cleaning Up
Your Caroline Leaf, p.114

ff

\_

F

F

Thoughts are located in three di erent places: in your brain, in the
cells of your body, and in your mind. -Cleaning Up Your Caroline Leaf,
p.114

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 9 (row 8, column 2)

During the day you think, feel, and choose to build new thoughts into
your mind and brain; at night you think, feel, and choose to sort out
the thoughts you have built during the day, which provides the content
for dreams. -Cleaning Up Your Caroline Leaf, p.114

Your mind is not your brain, just as you are not your brain. The mind is
separate, yet inseparable from, the brain. -Cleaning Up Your Caroline
Leaf, p.114

The mind uses the brain, and the brain responds to the mind. -Cleaning
Up Your Caroline Leaf, p.114

The brain doesn't produce the -Cleaning U e Leaf, p.114

mind. -Cleaning U e Leaf, p.115

The mind changes the brain. -Cleaning U e Leaf, p.115

our brains do not force us to do things -Cleaning Up Your Caroline Leaf,
p.115

there would be no conscious experience without the brain, but experience
cannot be reduced to the brain's actions. -Cleaning Up Your Caroline
Leaf, p.115

The mind is energy, and it generates energy through thinking, feeling,
and choosing. -Cleaning Up Your Caroline Leaf, p.115

we generate energy through our mind-inaction 24/7, -Cleaning Up Your
Caroline Leaf, p.115

p

p

p

When we generate this mind energy through thinking, feeling, and
choosing, we build thoughts, which are physical structures in our brain.
This building of thoughts is called neuroplasticity. -Cleaning Up Your
Caroline Leaf, p.115

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 10 (row 9, column
2)

When we generate this mind energy through thinking, feeling, and
choosing, we build thoughts, which are physical structures in our brain.
This building of thoughts is called neuroplasticity. -Cleaning Up Your
Caroline Leaf, p.115

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 11 (row 1, column
3)

the brain manufactures all the components that make up our senses. It is
a strange, nonintuitive fact of existence that photons of light have no
color, sound waves no sound, olfactory molecules no odors. -The Body - A
guide for occupants - Bill Bryson, p.51

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 12 (row 1, column
4)

Workspace 'Workspace' in 'The Art of Suffering' Page 13 (row 1, column
5)


