A Student's Dictionary of Psychology and Neuroscience

An essential reference work for any student studying psychology for the
first time, A Student's Dictionary of Psychology and Neuroscience
(Seventh Edition) provides over 2,500 definitions of complex concepts in
clear and accessible language alongside helpful diagrams. The dictionary
offers comprehensive coverage of the main contemporary terms in
psychology and neuroscience. This new edition features updated
references which will be particularly relevant to the key areas of
neuroscience and neuropsychology and also to recent concepts of
psychological significance, such as expanded coverage of research
methods, internet psychology, cognitive psychology and social
psychology. The dictionary also features end material with useful notes
for constructing student essays as well as key references and a list of
common abbreviations. Extensive cross-referencing allows students to
follow up and identify further details of a given topic, and
mini-biographies of key psychologists help to provide relevant context.
A Student's Dictionary of Psychology and Neuroscience is the perfect
accompaniment for any student newly encountering this fascinating
subject, those taking related disciplines in the health or social
sciences, or professionals wanting to familiarise themselves with key
terms and ideas. Nicky Hayes is a well-known psychologist, writer and
consultant. She is the Editor of Testing International, the newsletter
of the International Test Commission, is actively involved in the
British Psychological Society, and, at the time of publication, she is
the President-Elect of the BPS. She is a Fellow of the British
Psychological Society, an Honorary Life Member of the Association of the
Teaching of Psychology and a recipient of the BPS Award for
Distinguished Contributions to the Teaching of Psychology. Peter
Stratton is an Emeritus Professor at the University of Leeds, UK.
Following a distinguished career in developmental psychology, his work
in child protection led him to move into systemic family therapy and he
became a founder and director of the Leeds Family Therapy and Research
Centre.

A Student's Dictionary of Psychology and Neuroscience Nicky Hayes and
Peter Stratton Seventh Edition

Seventh edition published 2022 by Routledge 4 Park Square, Milton Park,
Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN and by Routledge 605 Third Avenue, New York, NY
10158 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa
business © 2022 Nicky Hayes and Peter Stratton The right of Nicky Hayes
and Peter Stratton to be identified as authors of this work has been
asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publishers. Trademark
notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without
intent to infringe. First edition published by Hodder Education Group
1989 Sixth edition published by Routledge 2017 British Library
Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this book is
available from the British Library Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data A catalog record has been requested for
this book ISBN: 978-0-367-74647-6 (hbk) ISBN: 978-0-367-71431-4 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-15889-9 (ebk) DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899 Typeset in
Goudy by codeMantra

Contents

About the authors Preface Acknowledgement A--Z of psychology and
neuroscience Appendix 1: Key references Appendix 2: Study notes -- how
to write an essay Appendix 3: List of abbreviations

vii viii ix 1 409 415 421

About the authors

Nicky Hayes is a well-known psychologist, writer and consultant. Her
interests span the psychological discipline, which she sums up as an
interest in the psychology of everyday life. She is the Editor of
Testing International, the newsletter of the International Test
Commission, and is actively involved in the British Psychological
Society. She has recently published specialised books on social
psychology, neuropsychology and research methods, as well as more
general psychology books, all of which are characteristically written in
a clear and accessible style. Her academic career included research into
the psychology of interactive exhibits, growth in small organisations,
and the social psychological aspects of organisational culture. She is a
Fellow of the British Psychological Society, an Honorary Life Member of
the Association of the Teaching of Psychology and a recipient of the BPS
Award for Distinguished Contributions to the Teaching of Psychology.
Peter Stratton is an Emeritus Professor at the University of Leeds.
Following a distinguished career in developmental psychology,
specialising in the learning abilities of neonates, he moved into
systemic family therapy and became a founder and director of the Leeds
Family Therapy and Research Centre. He also established the Leeds
Attributional Coding System, and for many years applied this system in
various contexts through the work of the Psychology Business, alongside
his academic and educational work in the Psychology Department of the
University of Leeds and his work in family therapy at the Leeds Family
Research Centre.

Preface

Times move on, and changes happen fast, so we have updated the entire
volume of this, our latest edition of A Student's Dictionary of
Psychology and Neuroscience. Our coverage of both general psychology and
neuropsychology has been significantly extended, and we have included
many other relevant psychological concepts which have arisen from
socio-technological developments. These include the areas of well-being
and mental health, internet-based research and psychotherapy, and
statistical and methodological developments. We hope that this means
that those studying psychology, neuropsychology, nursing, or any other
related fields will continue to find this dictionary a useful support
for their studies. As ever, our mission to explain rather than simply
define means, we hope, that following up all of the relevant
cross-references to a given topic should allow the reader to acquire a
reasonably full overview of the area. In that sense, we have often
referred to this dictionary as a kind of random-access textbook, rather
than just a dictionary of major terms. Since our belief is that many of
the people who use it in this way will be doing so in order to help them
to write an essay, we have also included useful tips on how to go about
this at the end of this book. Essays are one of the more common forms of
assignment in psychology, but the tips are just as relevant for someone
trying to put together an introduction or a discussion for a research
project. Apart from the inclusion of recent terminology, and the
extension of our coverage of neuropsychology, our older definitions have
been updated: the first edition of this dictionary was published back in
1988, since which time psychology has moved on in many ways. We have
also included some time-tested classic references at the end of the
book, as well as a list of common abbreviations. We hope you will find
all these features useful. Nicky Hayes and Peter Stratton

Acknowledgement

The existence of this dictionary owes much to the support and
encouragement that Helga Hanks has offered the authors during the
preparation of the various editions of this book.

A AA See ambulatory assessment. ABBA design An example of
counterbalancing of experimental conditions. The first condition (A) is
followed by two trials of the second condition (B), then by one of the
first. The effect is to average out order effects, although if all of
the practice effects might take place during the first trial, it is
better to run half of the participants with a BAAB sequence. Alternative
use of the term is for experimental designs in which one group of
participants experiences the experimental conditions in the order A then
B, while the other group experiences them in the order B then A. The two
uses can be distinguished by examining the number of trials that each
participant is obliged to undergo. aberrant Behaviour (or in biology, an
organism) that deviates from what is normal, expected or desirable.
ability A capacity, competence or skill. ability tests Psychometric
tests that are designed to measure what someone is already able to do,
as opposed to what they might be able to learn in the future. See also
aptitude test. ablation The removal or destruction of part or parts of
the brain by means of surgical techniques, usually involving the cutting
or burning away of the tissue concerned. abnormal A term applied to
behaviour or people who have been classed as not normal. It is a
potentially controversial label because of problems in defining

normality. Abnormality can be defined in several different ways: (i)
(ii) (iii) (iv) (v)

as behaviour that is different from the norm (i.e. unusual); as
behaviour that does not conform to social demands; as statistically
uncommon behaviour based on the assumptions of the normal distribution;
as behaviour that is maladaptive or painful for the individual; or as
the failure to achieve self-­ actualisation in the humanistic view.

These criteria bring their own problems because, for example, they lead
to the classification of highly regarded individuals such as artists and
social reformers as 'abnormal'. abnormal psychology An old term for the
psychology of abnormal behaviour. This term has been largely replaced by
clinical psychology when referring to professional practice. abreaction
A process used in some forms of psychotherapy, especially
psychoanalytically oriented ones, which involves the reliving of deeply
hidden emotional experiences. During abreaction, the repressed emotional
disturbance is brought to consciousness, allowing recognition of its
existence and the opportunity for the client to develop new coping
strategies. abscissa The horizontal or x-axis of a graph. See also
ordinate.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

2

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

absolute refractory period The period of a few milliseconds immediately
after the firing of a neurone. During the absolute refractory period,
the neurone will not produce another electrical impulse, no matter how
much stimulation it may receive. See also relative refractory period.
absolute threshold The minimum amount of stimulation required for an
event to be detected. The absolute threshold of a particular form of
stimulus is set at the point where 50 per cent of the signals with that
physical value are detected.

regional group. In some circumstances, accent is taken as an important
signifier of social status, and may thus determine the nature of social
interaction between individuals. This was particularly noticeable in
stratified societies such as that of the UK in the twentieth century but
is gradually being eroded as regional accents become more common in the
media. See also dialect, psycholinguistics, speech register.
accommodation (i)

absolute zero The term is generally used to indicate a temperature of
−273°C, but it can also refer to the lowest possible point on any ratio
scale. abstract thought Thought that uses concepts which do not have an
immediate material correspondence, such as justice or freedom. In
Piaget's theory of cognitive development, the capacity for abstract
thought is only acquired after the age of about 12 years. It is an
essential aspect of Piaget's formal operational stage. abuse (i)

(ii) 

The use of substances inappropriately in a way that is damaging to the
individual (e.g. excessive alcohol consumption, sniffing glue). See also
addiction. Inappropriate and harmful treatment of another person. See
also child abuse, domestic abuse.

acalculia A disorder caused by brain damage in which people are unable
to understand or manipulate number. See also dyscalculia. accent A
distinctive pattern of pronouncing words and phrases that is shared by
members of a social or

(ii) 

In biological terms, the process of adjusting a shape to fit incoming
information (e.g. the process by which the lens of the eye adopts a
different shape when the eye is focused on distant objects than when it
is focused on nearby objects). In Piagetian theory, the process by which
a schema, or cognitive structure, adjusts to new information by
extending or changing its form, or even by subdividing into a set of
schemata with different applications. See also assimilation,
equilibration.

account analysis A research method that involves analysing the accounts
that people give of their experience. Developed in answer to the need
for psychological research techniques that could deal with the
subjective realities of human experience (as opposed to measures of
behaviour), account analysis takes as its starting point the radical
idea that what people say may have meaning. From there, it goes on to
assert that a systematic approach to collecting people's own versions of
an experience or event may be of value to psychologists seeking to
understand human experience. Account analy-

A

sis can take many forms, but generally involves two stages: (i) (ii)

a systematic approach to the collection of accounts, generally through
interviews; and a reflective technique that allows the psychologist to
extract ideas, themes or implications from the data, such as discourse
analysis, attributional analysis or thematic qualitative analysis.

Account analysis forms an important part of the ethogenic approach to
the study of social behaviour propounded by Rom Harré. accounts The
verbal descriptions that people give of their experiences. An
interpretivist approach treats the account as the object of study in its
own right. For example, if someone describes getting angry during an
interaction, the account might be taken as indicating something about
their private emotional state. Alternatively, researchers might study
the description itself as an example of the form and features of
accounts of emotional experiences. See also qualitative analysis.
acetylcholine A neurotransmitter that is found at the motor end plate
and is therefore involved in muscle action. Some military nerve gases
exert their effect by the destruction of the enzyme which breaks down
acetylcholine, causing the latter to build up, producing uncontrollable
muscle spasms. Other drugs prevent the uptake of acetylcholine at the
motor end plate by themselves being picked up at the receptor sites, and
so blocking the uptake of the neurotransmitter. The paralysing poison
curare operates in this way, and nicotine has a partial effect of this
kind.

3

achievement The successful reaching of a goal. Used particularly to
refer to real-life successes and when evaluating a person's life.
achievement motivation The motivation to accomplish valued goals and to
avoid failure. This concept became important in the 1960s as motivation
theory became less dominated by physiological drives. It was generally
studied as need for achievement, commonly abbreviated to nAch. See also
need for affiliation, motivation. achievement test A test designed to
measure what a person has already achieved (e.g. a statistics
examination). See also aptitude test, psychometric test. achromatic
colours A range of hues that are judged to be all of one colour
(e.g. yellows or blues). Their wavelengths occur within a narrow band,
although they may vary in intensity and saturation. 'Achromatic' usually
means 'all of one colour'. achromatopsia A type of specific brain damage
that impairs the perception of colour without damaging other functions.
See colour vision, V4. acoustic To do with sound and sound quality.
acoustic store The part of the working memory system that acts as a
short-term storage device for sounds and spoken words. acquiescence bias
The tendency to respond positively or affirmatively in surveys, no
matter what the content of the question is. See also questionnaire
fallacy. acquired dyslexia Dyslexia that has come about as a result of
an accident, stroke or illness.

4

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

acquisition

action pattern See fixed action pattern.

(i) 

action potential The electrical impulse produced by a neurone when its
stimulation exceeds the threshold level, such that the neurone fires.
See also evoked potential.

(ii) 

A term used to indicate that a particular skill or ability has been
gained by an animal or human being. When applied to language, the term
'acquisition' is used to avoid drawing inferences about whether language
has been learned or inherited. Stating that a skill has been acquired
implies that the actual process by which the skill was obtained is not
the issue being discussed at that particular time. The phase during a
conditioning procedure in which the response is learned or strengthened.
See learning.

acronym An abbreviation which consists of a 'word' made up of the
initials of the set of words in a title or classification (e.g. OCEAN
for the Big Five personality factors of Openness to experience,
Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agree­ a­bleness and Neuroticism).
Working groups or professions often develop acronyms that outsiders do
not understand as a way of excluding non-members and producing a feeling
of cohesion. A common, if slightly pedantic, distinction is between an
acronym and an abbreviation, in that an acronym should form an actual
word, while a group of initials that doesn't form a word is just an
abbreviation. ACTH Adrenocorticotrophic hormone. acting out Expressing a
wish, need or motivation in overt behaviour, particularly when that wish
or need is unrecognised or unconscious. Often the behaviour is
aggressive and self-­ destructive and may be uncharacteristic of the
person, who may have no idea why they behaved in that way. action
disorganisation syndrome See frontal apraxia.

action research An approach to psychological enquiry that challenges the
idealised view of the psychologist as an 'objective' scientist, standing
apart from the subject matter and observing it dispassionately. Action
research takes as its starting point the idea that the presence of other
people will always affect behaviour, so it is naïve to assume that the
activities of the researcher will not influence the behaviour of the
subject. Instead, an action researcher deliberately acts as a change
agent within a given situation and incorporates the effects of these
actions as an integral part of the outcome of the research. Initially
developed in an organisational context by Lewin (e.g. Lewin, 1946),
action research has continued to be popular in organisational
psychology. With the increased emphasis on ecological validity in
psychological research, action research has gradually gained acceptance
in several other areas of psychological investigation. See also new
paradigm research, participant observation. action research cycle Action
research is generally perceived as a cyclical activity, proceeding from
an initial diagnostic or evaluation stage to the development of a change
strategy, to an action and implementation stage, then back to another
evaluative stage, and so on through the cycle (Figure 1). See also field
theory. action-specific energy The energy that is used to perform fixed
action patterns, or innate behaviours. The idea is that the energy is
generated purely as a

A

5

Figure 1 The action research cycle result of an instinctive drive to
perform the activity and will overspill into displacement activities if
it is not used in carrying out the particular action for which it has
been generated.

by which people seek to develop their various potentials and to maximise
their personal growth, once their need for positive regard from others
has been satisfied. See also self-actualisation.

activation An increase in neurological or physiological processing in
one condition, relative to other conditions, or the stimulation of
neural pathways. See also deactivation.

acuity The fineness of discrimination that a sense organ can achieve.
Most commonly used with reference to vision, where visual acuity
indicates the smallest objects that can be distinguished.

actor--observer effect A finding in attribution theory that for unwanted
events, people tend to make dispositional attributions about other
people's behaviour (e.g. if you drop a vase, I conclude that you are
clumsy) while attributing their own behaviour primarily to the effects
of external circumstances (if I drop the vase, it must be because it was
slippery): a situational attribution. Research has found that depressed
people are more likely to make dispositional attributions about bad
events that affect them, while people in a good or loving relationship
extend their situational explanations to their partner's unwanted
events.

adaptation The process of adjusting to an environment in such a way that
maximal benefit may be obtained from it, or at least in such a way that
life may be continued in a reasonably productive manner. The term has
highly specific meanings in the following fields:

actualising tendency A term coined by Rogers (1951) to describe the
process

(i) 
(ii) 

Physiology -- the adjustment of bodily organs to particular
environmental demands (e.g. the adaptation of the heart to living at a
high altitude). Evolutionary biology -- how a species changes in order
to adjust to the opportunities offered by its environment.

6

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

(iii) 

Psychology -- the process by which an individual achieves the best
balance feasible between conflicting demands.

Piaget uses the term more specifically for the processes by which
cognitive structures are made to correspond to reality. See
accommodation, assimilation, evolution. addiction A state of
physiological or psychological dependence on some substance, usually a
drug, resulting in tolerance of that substance such that progressively
larger doses are required to obtain the same effect. Addictions are most
clearly identified by a failure to function adequately when the
substance is withdrawn (see withdrawal symptoms). The most common
addictions are to nicotine and to socially accepted drugs such as
alcohol and caffeine, although illegal drugs (e.g. heroin) and those
initially taken as medical treatment (e.g. tranquillisers) often cause
more public concern. Treatments have covered the full range of
psychological and psychiatric techniques but behavioural and group
methods are most widely used. In everyday use, the term has been
stretched to include needs which have become exaggerated to a degree
that is damaging to the individual (e.g. 'addiction' to television,
violent exercise or food). See also dependency. additive factors method
An approach to analysing reaction time which divides the response to a
stimulus into four stages: encoding, comparing, decision and response.
ADHD Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. A form of attention
deficit disorder in which the person is judged to be showing
hyperactivity.

adipose Fatty, or pertaining to fat. Adipose tissue in the body is the
tissue that stores fat, and adipocytes are cells specifically adapted
for that purpose. adipsia Cessation of drinking. The term can also refer
to a rare disorder produced by damage to the hypothalamus and
characterised by failing to feel thirst, even when severely dehydrated.
adjustment Originally, adjustment was regarded as little more than the
avoidance of maladjustment, but it became a goal for therapy with the
emergence of humanistic approaches to psychotherapy. Modern therapists
accept that many forms of adjustment are possible, thereby avoiding
value judgements about lifestyle. Broadly speaking, adjustment refers to
the individual's achieving a harmonious balance with the demands of both
environment and cognitions. The development of behavioural technologies
to improve individual adjustment raised complex ethical considerations
(e.g. whether conditioning techniques to solve problems of sexual
adjustment could be adopted without consideration of values and morals).
adolescence The developmental period between childhood and adulthood. In
some cultures, the transition is very brief and achieved through some
form of rite of passage, but in Western cultures, it extends from the
onset of puberty around 12 years of age to about 17 or 18 years of age.
Research on adolescence has tended to emphasise the four developmental
areas of competence, individuation, identity and self-esteem. adoption
studies Studies of heredity that compare children with a specific
genotype (e.g. identical twins) who have been brought up in different
adoptive families. The idea is that differences

A

between the twins must be environmental in origin, while similarities
are likely to be genetic. However, a common failing in these families is
to omit control for the similarity of the environment (e.g. in some
cases, the children have been brought up in the same district, and only
a few streets away from one another). There is also some recent evidence
that there can be differences in DNA even between identical twins.
adrenaline A hormone and neurotransmitter produced by the adrenal glands
which is particularly associated with emotional states. Adrenaline is
involved in states of arousal, initiated by the action of the
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system. It is released as
a hormone by the adrenal gland and serves to maintain an activated state
of the body such that a higher level of energy is produced by the
autonomic functions. It also acts within the brain as a
neurotransmitter, where it again is involved in emotional states.
adrenergic pathway A 'pathway' or familiar route in the brain that
involves neurones which release the neurotransmitter known as
adrenaline. aesthetics The study of the nature of beauty, or of pleasing
perceptual experiences. See also positive psychology. aetiology The
study of causation. This term is particularly used to refer to the
causes of illnesses and mental disorders. affect (i)

A term used to mean emotion but covering a much wider spectrum of
feelings than normal emotions. Affect includes pleasurable sensations,
friendliness and warmth, pensiveness, and mild dislike, as well as
extreme emotions such as joy, exhilaration, fear and

(ii) 

7

hatred. Broadly speaking, affect refers to any category of feeling, as
distinct from cognition or behaviour. As a verb: to influence, to have
an effect. Note that the verb 'to affect' means 'to cause'. 'An effect'
is a result. See also effect.

affect display Overt signs such as posture, breathing, pupil dilation
and raising of fur, which indicate the emotional state of the person or
animal. See also autonomic nervous system. affect heuristic The use of
emotional judgements to influence decision-making. affectionless
psychopathy A term used by Bowlby to describe a syndrome in which an
individual does not demonstrate any emotion, either positive or
negative, towards any other human being. Affectionless psychopaths,
according to Bowlby, are characterised by a lack of social conscience
and a high level of delinquency. See also psychopathic personality.
affective blindsight The ability shown by some brain-damaged people who
lack conscious visual perception but can nonetheless detect and
distinguish between different emotional stimuli. See also blindsight.
affective disorder A psychiatric term used to refer to syndromes in
which the person appears to be producing inappropriate emotional
responses. Alternatively, it may refer to a prolonged disturbance of
mood or emotion, as in mania and depression. affective domain The
dimension or domain of the human psyche that is concerned with feelings,
emotions and moods. See also conative domain, cognitive domain,
behavioural domain.

8

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

afferent dysgraphia Additions or omissions of strokes or parts of
writing that happen as a result of failing to utilise visual and/or
kinaesthetic feedback effectively. See dysgraphia. afferent neurone A
nerve cell (neurone) that carries information in the form of electrical
impulses from the sense organs to the central nervous system. Also known
as a sensory neurone. See also efferent neurone. affiliation The sense
of belonging to a group. Nearly everybody feels a desire to belong, so
affiliation has been treated as a need or motive. In everyday use, it
can also describe the process of joining a group. See also affiliative
needs, friendship. affiliative needs Needs that relate to a sense of
belonging with, or friendship towards, other people. This rests on the
idea that the wish for affiliation is a kind of drive, so that the
strength of the need for affiliation (nAff) can be studied in the same
kind of way that other physiological needs are studied. See also
motivation. affordances In J.J. Gibson's ecological model of perception,
affordances are the possibilities for action that are offered by a
particular visual stimulus, or object/ image in the visual field. The
concept is becoming more widely used in other concepts, usually to
indicate the possibilities for action offered by the object or subject
being referred to. See ecological perception. afterimage An image that
remains in the visual field after the original stimulation has ceased.
Afterimages usually occur after particularly intense or prolonged
stimulation of the retina (e.g. after staring at an illuminated light
bulb). See also negative aftereffects. age regression See regression.

agency The sense that we are in control of our own thoughts, actions and
effectiveness. A sense of personal agency has been identified as an
important part of psychological well-being. See also positive
psychology, self-efficacy. agentic state The state proposed by Milgram
in which the individual surrenders personal judgement and conscience to
act as the agent of other people and do what they instruct. See
autonomous state. aggression A term used in several ways, commonly to
describe a deliberate attempt to harm another being. There is no agreed
definition, partly because the term is applied sometimes to behaviour
(hitting), sometimes to an emotional state (feeling aggressive), and
sometimes to an intention (wanting to harm). There are several
classifications of different kinds of aggression, the most useful
distinction being between instrumental aggression, which is an
aggressive act performed in order to achieve some other objective, and
hostile aggression, which is motivated by antagonistic feelings and
emotions. See also amygdala, trolling. agnosia A disorder of cognitive
processing in which the person cannot create any meaning out of their
sensory inputs. See also integrative agnosia, Gerstmann's syndrome.
agonist A drug that causes a neurotransmitter to have an increased
effect. For example, it is suspected that cocaine is an agonist for the
neurotransmitter dopamine and that is why it produces pleasurable
sensations. agoraphobia The most common form of phobia. Literally, it
means fear of open spaces, and it is usually associated with a fear of
interacting with other people. Agoraphobia results in

A

a severe restriction of the sufferer's life, as he or she cannot enter
any crowded area and may become unable to leave the house. Often, it is
possible to recognise some way that this makes it unnecessary for the
person to have to tackle some source of anxiety. Psychological
treatments may attempt either to reduce the symptoms of the phobia using
techniques such as systematic desensitisation, or to resolve the
underlying anxiety. agrammatism A condition in which the person can
produce speech, but it lacks grammatical forms, such as word endings or
function words. See also P600, language areas. agraphia An impairment in
writing ability that results from damage to the language areas of the
brain. agreeableness One of the main factors in the five-factor theory
of personality, which reflects a tendency to be positive and
conciliatory in interpersonal interactions and to seek positive affect
from the company of other people. aha! experience A sudden experience of
enlightenment, in which the solution

9

to a problem is perceived very rapidly, with little prior feeling that
progress is being made towards the solution. An example of insight
learning, the aha! experience was used by Gestalt theorists such as
Kohler to argue against the reductionist approach to human learning put
forward by the behaviourist school. See also creativity. AI See
artificial intelligence. aim The overall purpose of a piece of research
or study. The aim can often become obscured or overwhelmed by the
details involved in research design and statistical analysis, so it is
important for researchers to maintain awareness of the aim throughout
the research process. AIP See anterior intraparietal area. akinetopsia A
type of specific brain damage that impairs the perception of movement
without damaging other functions. See V5. alarm reaction A term used to
describe the series of physiological responses brought about by the
activation of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system.
Investigated systematically by W. Cannon, the

Ainsworth, Mary (1913--1999) Mary Ainsworth was a Canadian developmental
psychologist who was widely influential in the development of our
understanding of infant attachment. In 1967, she published Infancy in
Uganda, which was the outcome of a lengthy African field study that
allowed her to identify some of the cultural variations in the care of
human infants, and also some of the 'universals' of human attachment.
Back in the UK, she went on to investigate detailed facets of
attachment, and developed the strange situation technique, in which a
child is exposed to an unfamiliar situation and its behaviour towards
its caretaker is observed. This and other research resulted in the
concepts of secure and insecure attachment, which have been extensively
used in child therapy ever since.

10

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

alarm reaction involves, among other changes, increased heart rate and
blood pressure, producing an increased supply of oxygen to the muscles,
changes to the digestive system, including rapid digestion of sugars for
increased energy, and alterations in the composition of the blood such
that clotting occurs more quickly. The effective result of these changes
is that the body is prepared for extended and demanding effort.
alcoholic A person who has become dependent on the drug alcohol. Many
problems dealt with by clinical psychologists are caused or aggravated
by alcohol (e.g. some 30 per cent of cases of physical child abuse).
Alcoholism is treated in a number of different ways by different
practitioners, including clinical psychologists, with varying degrees of
success. There is controversy over the question of whether total
abstinence is essential for anyone who has been an alcoholic. Alcoholism
is probably the most widespread and damaging addiction. See also
antabuse, Korsakoff's syndrome. alexia A condition in which written
words cannot be recognised. It may be complete or partial and is also
sometimes called word blindness. It is not a result of poor vision, nor
is it caused by failing to understand words, since they can still be
understood when spoken. See also pure alexia. alexithymia The inability
to read one's own emotional state. algorithm A routine procedure that
will produce a correct answer with enough repetitions or applications.
If an algorithm exists for a problem, you know it can eventually be
solved simply by following the procedure. Algorithms have passed into
common awareness through their use by social media engines to target
information and advertising according

to the individual's past choices. See also heuristics, problem-solving.
alienation A state of feeling or perceiving oneself as separated from:
(i) one's own feelings; or (ii) other people and society. alienist An
early title for psychiatrists, who treated 'aliens' (insane people).
all-or-none principle The principle that a neurone either fires or it
does not, with no variation in the strength of the electrical impulse.
It was originally thought that all nerve cells operate according to the
all-or-none principle -- implying a necessity for digital processing
models of brain functioning, and fostering some computer simulation
approaches to understanding cognition. However, more recent evidence
suggests that allor-none firing is uncommon within the brain itself, and
that cortical neurones use variable coding. allele One of a pair of
genes. Most organisms have pairs of chromosomes, with matching genes
situated on each chromosome. If the two alleles are different in form,
one may be a dominant gene over the other (e.g. in eye colour, brown is
dominant over blue), or both may contribute to the eventual phenotype
(e.g. as in skin colour, where both alleles contribute to the final
result). Partial dominance is also possible. allocentrism A
collectivistic characteristic of personality that involves people
centring their attention and actions on other people rather than
themselves. See also collectivism. allocentric coding Visual coding that
is independent of the observer's perspective (e.g. connecting the
features of two different objects with respect to one another, as
opposed to egocentric coding).

A

11

Allport, Gordon (1897--1967) G.W. Allport exerted a fundamental
influence on the development of trait theory in the psychological
understanding of personality. In an early study, he went through the
dictionary and extracted some 4,500 words relating to personality, which
he argued could be organised into three major types of personality
trait: cardinal (ruling passions or obsessions), central (basic to
shaping behaviour, although not as dominating as cardinal) and secondary
(traits that we only show occasionally or just to intimates). His idea
of personality traits has continued to this day and is fundamental to
many aspects of psychometrics. Allport also went on to study many other
aspects of social psychology, including prejudice, rumour and religion.
allocentric space A spatial map in which the items have been coded
relative to one another. See also egocentric space. allograph A letter
that has been specified for its shape (e.g. by its case, or as print
rather than script). allophone Different versions of the same phoneme,
where the differences relate to individual variations in speech or
acoustics. alpha The first letter of the Greek alphabet, often used to
indicate primacy or importance (e.g. the dominant males in a baboon
troop are sometimes referred to as alpha males). alpha level Also known
as the 'alpha criterion', this is the maximum probability of making a
Type I error, as a result of the statistical analysis of a set of data.
In student research, the alpha level is usually set at p\<.05, but it
can be made more stringent by choosing a different level of statistical
significance. alpha male A term used in ethology to describe a
top-ranking or dominant male in a social group, and also used loosely
about men who display an extreme level of stereotypical male
characteristics. See also dominance hierarchy.

alpha waves Distinctive low-amplitude low-frequency patterns of brain
activity shown on EEG readings, consisting of a wave pattern of between
8 and 12 Hz, characteristic of a state of wakeful relaxation. Also
referred to as alpha rhythms. See also beta waves, delta waves. altered
states of awareness Also known as altered states of consciousness, this
term refers to the idea that there are qualitatively different mental
states that will result in various psychological processes such as
attention and motivation functioning differently. Sleep is an obvious
example, but more subtle changes in the waking state have also been
studied, including hypnosis and agentic state. alternate-forms method A
system for judging the reliability of a psychometric test, which
involves comparing the results produced by two different versions of the
same test, given to the same people at the same time. altruistic
behaviour Acting for the benefit of others without regard to personal
cost or benefit. There has been a dispute about whether truly altruistic
behaviour ever occurs, largely stimulated by sociobiology, but it is now
generally recognised as a human

12

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

­characteristic, with some anecdotal accounts of animal altruism. See
also reciprocal altruism. Alzheimer's syndrome A condition that
resembles senile dementia, but which can occur much earlier in life,
with some sufferers even being as young as 40 years of age. It is
regarded as a specific disease whereas dementia is a description of a
condition. amacrine cells Retinal cells that make cross-communications
right across the retina, linking rod and cone cells and coordinating
visual input. See also visual system. ambiguous Having more than one
possible meaning. An ambiguous stimulus is one that can be interpreted
in more than one way (see Figure 2). ambivalence The simultaneous
existence of two opposed emotions, motivations or attitudes
(e.g. love--hate, approach--avoidance). Each feeling has its own
separate origin, so the two cannot be reconciled, and the person either
alternates between the two attitudes or represses one of them.

ambivert A person who has achieved a balance between extreme
introversion and extreme extraversion, as described by Eysenck.
ambulatory assessment (AA) A general term for a range of data-collection
methods, including self-report, observation, and clinical or biological
data collected in the course of the person's everyday life. It is mainly
used in clinical contexts such as in health services. See also
ambulatory self-report, Experience Sampling Method, Ecological Momentary
Assessment, diary method. ambulatory self-report A form of ambulatory
assessment in which the person keeps a record of how they are feeling or
other clinical data at various points during the course of their day.
See also Ecological Momentary Assessment, diary method. Ames room A
well-known visual illusion in which a room is constructed in such a way
that, when viewed from a particular viewing point, it appears to be
normal, but it actually has one corner much farther away from the
viewer. An appearance of equal distance is achieved by carefully
balancing the perspectives of the room and the levels of the floor and
ceiling. The effect is that people or objects of the same size appear to
be of different sizes (see Figure 3). Ameslan A standardised sign
language used by deaf and/or dumb people in America. A true language in
its own right, several primate studies have involved the teaching of
Ameslan to gorillas or chimpanzees, with a degree of success.

Figure 2 An ambiguous figure: B or 13?

amnesia Loss of memory, normally from physical causes. Retrograde
amnesia refers to loss of memory for events prior to the damaging event
or disease;

A

13

Floor layout

Apparent view

Viewpoint

Figure 3 The Ames room illusion

loss of memory of the few minutes leading up to severe concussion is the
most common example. Anterograde amnesia refers to the loss of
subsequent memory (e.g. impairment of the ability to code new memories
after brain surgery or, as found in Korsakoff's syndrome, through
long-term alcoholism). amodal Not tied to any particular perceptual
system. Amphetamine A drug that stimulates the central nervous system.
It is usually prescribed in order to raise energy levels or to prevent
sleep and is abused (e.g. as 'speed') for the same purposes. Amphetamine
is also used as an appetite suppressant to help dieters and to control
hyperactive children. amphetamine psychosis A state of acute paranoia
that develops as a result of taking large amounts of amphetamine over a
period of time. amusia An inability to process music -- that is, to
perceive the sounds received as making up a musical form. Congenital
amusia occurs when the amusia is a result of brain injury or
misfunction. amygdala The part of the limbic system that is particularly
fundamental to emotion and emotional memory. It is a pair of
almond-shaped structures located deep within the medial temporal lobes
and quite close to the hippocampus.

The amygdala has neural connections right across the brain. It has been
shown to be involved in a wide range -- possibly all -- emotional
experiences, including happiness, fear, empathy, friendship, humour,
prejudice, and bereavement; linking with the insula to regulate and
control negative emotions such as anger, and linking with the
hippocampus in consolidating emotional memories. See also Kluver-Bucy
syndrome. anaclitic depression A depression caused in infants aged
between 6 and 18 months by prolonged separation from their mothers. The
term was first used by Rene Spitz and was an important concept in early
studies of maternal deprivation. anagram A puzzle or problem which
consists of words with their constituent letters disarranged, such that
all of the necessary letters are present but in the wrong order. The
letters may be randomly listed (G AANMRA) or rearranged to resemble
other words (A GRANMA). Anagrams are often used in laboratory
problem-solving tasks in cognitive psychology. anal stage The second of
Freud's psychosexual stages, in which libido focuses on the anus. See
also oral, phallic stage. analogue An object or phenomenon that
corresponds to or resembles

14

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

another in at least some respects. The term is used:

ported by neurological evidence, and in AI it has been largely replaced
by parallel distributed processing.

(i) 

analysis of variance (ANOVA) A statistical procedure used to test
whether groups of scores differ from each other. The principle is that
if the scores are not being influenced in different ways, the variation
(variance) of scores within each group will allow us to predict how much
variation there will be between the means of the groups. If it turns out
that the group means vary more than expected, we conclude that the
groups differ (and have therefore been influenced in different ways).
Several different sources of influence can be tested within a single
ANOVA design, and the complex relationships or interactions between them
can be analysed. See also F ratio.

(ii) 
(iii) 

in theories of memory referring to information stored in the brain from
which a representation or image of an object can be generated; in
biology for different characteristics of different species that have the
same functions; and in electronics for information shown through a
continuously variable quantity, such as analogue (circular) clock faces
as opposed to digital watches.

analogy An image of speech that involves comparison of two objects,
emphasising the similarity between them. analysand That which is being,
or has been, analysed. Used sometimes to refer to student analysts
undergoing psychoanalysis as part of their training. analysis (i)

(ii) 
(iii) 

Identifying the constituent parts or links of a whole so that it can be
better understood and interpreted (e.g. in statistical analysis). A
shorthand term for psychoanalysis. Any detailed exploration or
evaluation of a set of information.

analysis-by-synthesis A term used to describe a cognitive model in which
the brain is seen as combining separate pieces of information about an
event in order to make the best judgement about the nature of that
event. This was a popular model in the early days of artificial
intelligence research, but its summative approach has not been sup-

analytical frame The particular context within which a study is set,
which establishes the boundaries as well as the purpose of the analysis.
See also aim. analytical psychology The system of psychopathology and
treatment devised by Carl Jung after his split from the Freudian school.
It introduces concepts such as the archetype and the collective
unconscious. analytical style The general approach taken to the analysis
of a piece of work. Mainly used in qualitative analysis, the term can
also refer to the level of abstraction of the analysis which is being
carried out. anaphor A pronoun or other word that takes its reference
from a previous phrase or sentence. anarchic hand syndrome Complex
goal-directed movements of the hand that are not voluntarily directed by
the hand's owner. See also split-brain studies.

A

anchoring In social representation theory, the process of making the
social representation easier to grasp by setting it in a familiar
context. In decision-making theory, anchoring refers to the process of
establishing a set reference point or framework, from which an option is
evaluated. androcentrism The view that male behaviour defines normality
and that female behaviour compares unfavourably to this norm. androgens
Hormones produced mainly by the testes. They are responsible for the
physical developments in the foetus that give rise to male
characteristics, including the external genitalia. Later in life, they
influence sexual activity and the expression of genetically controlled
characteristics, such as the growth of a beard. See also testosterone.
androgyny The presence in one person (either male or female) of both
male and female characteristics. In humans, there are no sex differences
that are present in one gender and not the other -- it is more a matter
of the prevalence and strength of each tendency. Therefore, everybody
mixes male and female characteristics to some extent, and the term
androgyny is reserved for people who show both male and female
characteristics to a significant degree. Research indicates that
individuals who are psychologically androgynous tend to be mentally
healthier than those who conform tightly to orthodox gender stereotypes.
anecdotal evidence Information quoted in support of an idea or theory
that has been obtained purely from everyday experience or accounts,
rather than from some form of systematic or controlled study.

15

anencephalic Without a cerebrum. Anencephalic infants usually survive
for only a few days after birth, although some have been kept alive for
up to six months. Anencephalic infants are of interest to students of
neonate functioning, as observable differences between them and normal
infants only seem to emerge after the first few weeks, implying that
cerebral cortex activity may not play an important part in early infant
behaviour. The well-documented case of Noah Wall, an apparently
anencephalic infant who received intensive parental stimulation, showed
significant development of the cerebrum after birth. Since Noah did have
a residual amount of cerebral matter to begin with, it is not known
whether such development would be possible with truly anencephalic
infants. See also plasticity. aneurism A localised region of an artery
in which its membranes have become over-elastic, and can easily become
stretched and ruptured. This produces an interference with blood flow to
the brain, resulting in a cerebrovascular accident, or stroke -- that
is, loss of functioning for key abilities, usually movement and/or
speech. See also plasticity. anger An emotion based on a high state of
arousal, often generated when someone else is judged to have violated a
social norm of some kind. Anger is usually a transient emotion, often
confused with aggression although very different. Partly because of this
confusion and partly because of its transience, there is relatively
little direct research into anger, but it has been shown that it
activates areas in the ventromedial cortex and in the orbitofrontal
cortex, and that its strength is directly affected by adrenaline levels
in the body. Researchers have

16

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

also found that regulation and modification of the expression of anger
involves input from the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex.

or the computer as a living thing), and occurs extensively in the belief
systems of most cultures. See also anthropomorphism.

anger management a form of psychotherapy recently developed in response
to increasing concerns about violence including domestic abuse. See also
nonviolent resistance.

ANN See artificial neural network.

angst A mental disquiet or anguish considered by supporters of
existentialism to be the inevitable outcome of a full appreciation of
the implications of personal responsibility and personal choice.

anodyne A pain-relieving treatment or agent.

angular gyrus That part of the cerebral cortex which is involved in the
decoding of visual symbols. The angular gyrus receives input from the
visual cortex and appears to process that information into a form
equivalent to information which has been processed by the auditory
cortex. The angular gyrus then passes messages on to the area known as
Wernicke's area, where it is processed for comprehension. Accordingly,
the angular gyrus plays an important role in the process of reading, and
it is thought that damage to this area is the root cause of certain
dyslexias. See also language areas. anhedonia A clinical condition in
which the individual finds themselves unable to experience positive
emotions. The condition has been associated with excessive drug use.
animism The attribution of living qualities to inanimate objects or
phenomena, and frequently the attribution of conscious awareness.
Animism is a powerful trend in human thought processes, which has been
studied mostly in the thinking of young children. It is commonplace in
everyday speech (e.g. referring to the family car as a person,

anodal tDCS A form of transcranial direct current stimulation that
increases cortical excitation and results in increased levels of
performance. See also cathodal tDCS.

anomaly A noticeable deviation from what is expected or predicted.
anomia A type of aphasia where the person has consistent difficulties in
producing the names of things they want to talk about. anonymity The
ethical principle of keeping the identity of a research participant
private and concealed. See also ethical issues, confidentiality.
anorexia nervosa A disorder in which the person becomes unable to eat
and may starve to death. Anorexia is most common among teenage girls and
is often initiated by excessive dieting. Anorexia has been thought of
variously as arising from a distorted body image, as a subconscious
attempt to return to prepubertal physique and, by implication, social
role, and as an expression of rebellion against domination by a mother
figure. See also bulimia, eating disorders. anosmia The lack of a sense
of smell: anosmic individuals may be unable to detect smells, or unable
to identify smells despite some form of detection. ANOVA See analysis of
variance. ANOVA interaction diagram A diagram that illustrates the way
that two variables may interact with one another in the data (see Figure
4).

A

17

Figure 4 ANOVA interaction diagram ANOVA model of attributions See
covariance.

­contracts to dilate the pupil of the eye, while a different set
constricts it).

anoxia A reduced supply of oxygen to the brain or other tissues. It is
particularly likely to happen to a baby around birth and can result in
brain damage. See apnoea.

antecedent Taking place before a relevant event. An antecedent may be
the cause of the event, but it cannot be assumed that it was. See also
causality.

ANS See autonomic nervous system. antabuse The commercial name for the
drug disulfiram, which produces an extreme reaction when taken in
conjunction with alcohol. Usually administered by a skin implant that
can last for a month or more, antabuse is used therapeutically in
aversion therapy for alcoholics. The association between extreme nausea
and vomiting and alcohol can sometimes produce a lasting aversion to
alcohol, helping the alcoholic to deal with the problem. antagonistic
Having an opposite effect, working against or competing with something
else. Antagonistic muscles work in opposite ways to one another
(e.g. one set of muscles in the iris

antecedent variables Factors in an experiment that precede (happen
before) some other event. Because of the time relationship, the
antecedent variable cannot have been caused by the subsequent event, and
may even have been a cause of it. See causality. antenatal To do with
the period before birth. anterior Towards the front, or the most forward
area. See also superior, posterior, inferior. anterior cingulate gyrus
An area of the brain in between the frontal lobes and the limbic system,
which has been classified as belonging to either brain structure at
various times. It is involved in evaluating risks and assessing the
value of proposed responses, such as working

18

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

out whether an action is likely to be rewarded or punished. It is also
involved in processing bodily signals which characterise emotions,
particularly disgust, and it is active in detecting errors and
monitoring complex responses, such as those required for the Stroop
test. See also cingulate cortex. anterior intraparietal area (AIP) A
part of the intraparietal sulcus that responds to 3D objects or
manipulable shapes. anterior paracingulate cortex One of the 'social'
areas of the brain -- that is, an area dedicated to making sense of
social interactions. It is particularly concerned with thinking about
decoding and predicting other people's intentions, and is located just
above the cingulate cortex. anterograde amnesia A form of amnesia
(i.e. loss of memory) in which the person becomes unable to store new
information, although memories that were laid down before the
amnesia-producing event remain intact and accessible. See also
retrograde amnesia, amnesia. anterograde memory Memory for events that
happened after brain damage which led to amnesia. See also retrograde
memory, retrograde amnesia, anterograde amnesia. anthropology The study
of different human societies, involving a particular emphasis on social
structures and belief systems. An anthropologist is one who undertakes
such a study, using either non-participant or participant observational
techniques. anthropometric To do with the measurement of parts of the
human body, or typical measures of the human body as a whole.
anthropomorphism The process of attributing human characteristics to
non-human objects or animals. Anth-

ropomorphism, while accepted as a scientific fallacy, is common to all
human societies: even in modern technological cultures, it is common for
human beings to attribute intention (either benign or malevolent) to the
actions of computers, spiders, etc. See also attribution, animism,
social representations, Lloyd Morgan's canon. anticipation A mental
state of readiness for a specific event. See also set. anticipatory
schema A hypothetical cognitive structure which represents likely events
in the immediate future, allowing the individual to adjust their actions
accordingly. The concept was put forward by Ulrich Neisser, who proposed
that the anticipatory schema forms an essential cognitive component in
the cyclic process of perception. An anticipatory schema consists of a
set of cognitions derived from the individual's beliefs and experiences,
based on observations of the situation, and concerning the most probable
outcomes of action. This schema is used to select appropriate behaviour
and actions, which in turn will change or modify the situation,
producing a new sample of observations. The new observations then modify
the anticipatory schema. Neisser considered this continuous perceptual
cycle to be the key to understanding everyday human cognition (see
Figure 5). anticipatory systems theory A branch of systemic sciences
which claims that anticipation of the future is a stronger influence on
behaviour than perceptions of the past. antidepressants Drugs such as
those known as 'tricyclics', which are used to treat severe depression.
antilocution Encouraging social prejudice by using verbal communication
in a

A

19

Figure 5 The perceptual cycle particularly negative way (e.g. by using
emotively loaded words and metaphors). anti-positivism An approach to
research that emphasises the human interpretation of meanings and
implications; introduced as a challenge to hardline positivism. See
qualitative research, hermeneutics. antisocial personality disorder A
personality problem in which the individual shows a chronic disregard
for social conventions or acceptable behaviour, typically acting in a
disruptive or disturbing manner. See also sociopathy. Anton's syndrome
The mistaking of visual imagery as visual perception, which occurs in
some blind people. anxiety A stressful state resulting from the
anticipation of danger. Anxiety has a physiological component (the alarm
reaction or fight or flight response), a cognitive aspect, particularly
in narrowing attention, and a subjective experience of discomfort. Each
of these components may help the person to deal effectively

with clearly recognised, real and immediate dangers, but can be damaging
both psychologically and physically when the anxiety persists, as in
occupational stress or unresolved unconscious conflicts. See state
anxiety, trait anxiety. anxiety disorder A general term for
psychological disorders in which chronic anxiety, with debilitating
consequences, is a prominent feature. Includes panic attacks and
phobias. anxiolytic drugs Drugs used to treat the symptoms of anxiety.
anxious attachment See insecure attachment. apathy A mental state
characterised by lack of interest in everyday or momentous events and
involving a disinclination to exertion or effort in order to effect or
achieve results of any kind. The state is characteristic of depression.
aphagia A lack of eating, which can be induced experimentally by lesions
in the lateral hypothalamus. Animals with

20

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Figure 6 Types of aphasia aphagia show no interest in solid food, to the
point of starvation. Aphagia is believed by some physiological
psychologists (although not all) to be a mechanism in anorexia nervosa.
aphasia A disorder of speaking, sometimes brought about by lesions in
one of the language areas of the cortex which is particularly involved
in speech production (Figure 6). The affected individual has serious
problems in articulating words, although they have no difficulties in
understanding language. apnoea (apnea) Temporary stopping of breathing,
common among premature babies. It is present in some adults during sleep
and is believed to result in the destruction of brain cells through
anoxia in extreme cases. Apnoea is often associated with snoring and can
result in uncontrollable sleep during the day, so being a cause of road
and other accidents. apparent motion A term used to describe visual
illusions that provide an appearance of movement even when no such
movement is actually occurring. Examples of this are found in the phi
phenomenon, the autokinetic effect, the

waterfall effect and stroboscopic motion stimuli. appeasement behaviour
Actions carried out by an animal that serves to stop or deflect
aggressive behaviour from another. The term is particularly applied to
antagonistic encounters deriving from territorial or sexual selection
conflicts. See also instinctive behaviour, sign stimulus. apperception
The conscious awareness of an act of perception, with focused
concentration on its full meaning. apperceptive agnosia A failure to
recognise objects, thought to be due to an impairment in perceptual
processes. See also associative agnosia, agnosia. appetitive behaviour
Behaviour that is directed towards the satisfaction of some kind of
desire, want or need. applied psychology A general term used to classify
areas of psychology in which theories are put to use in dealing with
practical, non-laboratory situations. Applied psychology traditionally
includes clinical psychology, educational psychology, industrial
psychology and

A

­occupational psychology, but also includes other fields where
psychological theories may be put to use, such as environmental
psychology or study skills. appreciative inquiry A model of social
discussion and investigation that is based on the idea of the
'unconditional positive question', exploring possibilities,
opportunities and strengths rather than focusing on problems or
criticisms. Appreciative inquiry involves bringing in large numbers of
people to the discussion and exploring the positive insights they have
to offer. It has achieved some popularity as a management tool and is
promoted as a solution to wider social problems. See also positive
psychology. apprehension (i) (ii)

In colloquial terms, a feeling of unease or dread concerning some future
event. In cognitive terms, the mental grasping or full comprehension of
a concept or idea.

approach--avoidance conflict A pattern of behaviour often seen when an
organism is inclined or required to approach something that has
simultaneously attractive and aversive qualities (e.g. a parachute
jump). The individual tends to oscillate between approach behaviour and
avoidance behaviour, with approach behaviour typically dominant when the
event or stimulus is more distant in time or space, and avoidance
becoming more characteristic when the event or stimulus is closer. See
also ­conflict. apraxia A motor disorder caused by brain damage in the
posterior parietal lobe, i.e. caused by damage to higher brain ­centres,
rather than by failures of

21

sensory feedback or muscle control. It results in the person having
problems with motor planning. They may be willing to perform an action,
but find it difficult to carry out the movements involved. See also
optic apraxia. aptitude The ease with which a person will acquire a new
set of skills or abilities. An individual is said to have an aptitude
for a particular skill if he or she learns that skill more rapidly and
with more ease than other individuals with the same prior knowledge.
aptitude test A form of psychometric test designed to assess someone's
potential or suitability for different types of occupation. See also
attainment test. archetypes Classic, powerful images which, according to
Carl Jung, are held in the collective unconscious and recur frequently
in folk art and mythology. Examples of Jungian archetypes are the earth
mother, the sea as a symbol of rebirth, the omnipotent father, the
inaccessible virgin and the knave. arcuate fasciculus A bundle of white
matter (i.e. myelinated neurone fibres) that connects Broca's area in
the frontal lobes with Wernicke's area in the temporo-parietal region,
and is therefore considered to be a key aspect of ­language processing in
the brain. See also language areas. arousal A state in which the
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system is activated,
producing an alarm reaction, or a longer term response to stress.
Arousal is characterised by very high levels of adrenaline in the
bloodstream and results in a general state of readiness to react in the
organism. Depending on cognitive and environmental factors, this may
result in anger, anxiety, exhilaration, excitement or, if the arousal is
frequent and prolonged and the energy

22

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Argyle, Michael J. (1925--2002) Michael Argyle was a major figure in
British social psychology. His research concentrated on the positive
applications of psychology and its use in helping people with social
difficulties and established the importance of non-­verbal communication.
He developed many techniques of social skills training to help people
improve their social interactions and to provide ways of improving the
social functioning of people with learning difficulties and those with
neurotic and psychotic problems. Later in his career, his interest in
shifting the emphasis of social psychology away from its concentration
on problems led him to develop research into areas such as the
psychology of happiness. is not dissipated by regular demanding
exercise, in long-term stress disorders. arrhythmic Irregular, lacking
in rhythm. artefact (artifact) Anything that has been constructed. Used
particularly about objects that have been made for everyday living by
earlier civilisations. Within psychology, the word is most likely to be
applied to aspects of data that result from the process of the research
and so do not provide any information about the subject of the research,
even though they seem to. For example, when patients are interviewed
about their experience of hospital treatment, if they are still in
hospital with the medical staff around, their reports will be much more
positive than when they are at home. So the positivity of the accounts
becomes an artefact of the situation. articulation (i) (ii)

Clear verbal expression. Free movement through the action of a joint,
sometimes extended to mean the assembly of joints and levers that make
such movement possible (e.g. in robotics).

articulatory loop The part of Baddeley's model of working memory that
performs rehearsal of information held for

short periods of time. The articulatory loop is where incoming
information is rehearsed in order to retain its immediacy, and therefore
its availability for information processing. articulatory suppression A
term used in connection with the working memory model, and referring to
the suppression or blocking of the activity of the articulatory loop.
This is usually achieved by asking the participant to undertake some
other cognitive task instead, such as counting backwards in threes.
artificial insemination The introduction of sperm into the uterus of a
female by technical means rather than by sexual union. As the donor of
the sperm may be unknown to mother and child, the technique has
implications for family relationships and the possible selection of
genetic characteristics. artificial intelligence (AI) An area of
research which aims to develop computer systems that will allow the
computer to develop novel solutions to problems, or to produce other
forms of 'intelligent' behaviour such as gathering relevant information
to aid expert decisions. It is hoped by those involved that computer
systems which can 'reason' will eventually be able to produce the same
kinds of outcomes as those

A

­produced by human cognitive processes. Work on artificial intelligence
has tended to concentrate on: (i)

(ii) 
(iii) 

knowledge-based systems, known as 'expert systems', which are capable of
limited decision-­making on the basis of prior input from a number of
human experts; human--machine interface res­ earch, such as the
development of voice recognition systems; and robotics, involving the
development of sensing and manipulation devices such as might be
suitable for manufacturing processes.

See also computer simulation, parallel distributed processing.
artificial neural network (ANN) See neural network. Asch effect A term
used to describe conformity arising despite awareness that, if the
individual stated their own judgement openly, they would be responding
differently to the rest of the group, and others would become aware of
their dissent. Asch's studies of conformity involved a research
participant placed in a situation in which the other

23

group members had been primed to give obviously wrong answers to a
relatively simple problem, and the real participant had to answer
openly, after the majority had answered. See bandwagon effect.
Asperger's syndrome A condition characterised by difficulties in
non-verbal communication and social interaction, which are generally
accompanied by repetitive patterns of behaviour carried to the extent of
actually interfering with, or restricting, the person's everyday living.
Asperger's syndrome is considered to be a mild form of autistic spectrum
disorder, but it is different from most of the others in that the
person's use of language and intellectual abilities are unaffected.
assertion training A series of therapeutic techniques designed to enable
the person to take an active or dominant role in social interaction.
assimilation One of two processes by which a schema in Piagetian theory
is considered to develop. New information is said to have been
assimilated when it is fitted into an existing schema and so can be
understood in relation to earlier learning. Assimilation and
accommodation are considered to be continuous

Asch, Solomon (1907--1996) Originally a Gestalt psychologist, Solomon
Asch is most widely known for his research into conformity, in which he
made the (then) remarkable discovery that people would be prepared to
lie outright rather than disagree with the majority, even on a
relatively simple task. The Asch effect generated a vast amount of
research, and the basic observation remains fundamentally valid to this
day -- although of course it can be influenced by situation, motivation
and even knowledge of previous Asch studies! One of Asch's most famous
students was Stanley Milgram, who took Asch's work further to
investigate just how far social obedience could extend. The work of
these two psychologists, Asch and Milgram, has become seminal to any
study of social psychology.

24

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

cognitive processes, c­ ontributing to cognitive adaptation. See also
equilibration. association The linking of one thing with another in
sequence. Associative learning is learning that has been acquired as a
result of the connection of a stimulus with a response. During the
period when psychology was attempting to account for all behaviours as
stimulus--response connections, association was seen as the central
psychological process underpinning all others. association cortex An
older term given to those parts of the cerebral cortex that did not seem
to have a specific, localised function. They used to be thought of as
the areas in which basic perceptual information is associated with more
general knowledge, but modern brain scanning research indicates that
there is more localisation of complex cognitive functioning than could
have been detected using earlier research methods. See also
equipotentiality. associative agnosia A failure to recognise objects,
thought to be due to an impairment in memory for those objects, and
possibly linked to impairment of information transmission in the ventral
visual stream. associative learning Learning that in­­ volves making
connections or associations between stimuli. Classical conditioning is
the main example of associative learning, but see also one-trial
learning. associative priming The way that ­reactions to a stimulus are
faster if that stimulus is associated with a stimulus that has been
previously presented. See also priming. assortative mating The tendency
for organisms (including humans) to select those with characteristics
similar to their own as sexual partners.

assumption An idea or set of ideas that is taken for granted in the
formulation of an argument or theory. If made explicit, it is sometimes
called an axiom. astigmatism A disorder of vision in which lines at
certain angles are not perceived with the same acuity as lines of
different orientations. Recent research suggests that astigmatism may
arise from the irregular development of simple cells or complex cells in
the lateral geniculate nuclei of the thalamus -- involved in the primary
decoding of visual information. asymmetrical Lacking in balance or
evenness. ataxia A neurological problem in which the coordination of
muscle movements is impaired. It can arise from several causes but is
generally believed to result from some form of impairment of the
cerebellum. See also optic ataxia. attachment A close, emotionally
meaningful relationship between two people in which each seeks closeness
with the other and feels more secure in their presence. The attachment
between mother and infant has been extensively studied, and some writers
apply the term only to the relationship of the infant to the mother.
Attachment has been the subject of much theorising by John Bowlby. There
is substantial evidence that the quality of attachments in infancy
affects exploration and play in the short term and a wide range of
cognitive and social functions throughout childhood. However, it is no
longer believed that the infant always forms a major attachment
exclusively to the mother. Attachment theory has been extended by Pat
Crittenden and others to become a major theory of adult relationships
and the role of attachment in psychopathology. See also insecure attach-

A

ment, bonding, contingency, imprinting, monotropy, strange situation
technique.

attenuation

attainment test A test designed to assess the knowledge and skills that
an individual has obtained, either through experience or through
following a ­prescribed course of training. See also aptitude test,
psychometric test.

(i) 

attention A directed focus of awareness, such that the individual is
maximally prepared to respond to a signal or other sensory input. See
selective attention. attention deficit disorder (ADD) A classification
of children who are judged to have an inability to sustain attention.
Such children are likely to be disruptive in school or at home, and if
the condition is serious they are likely to have educational
difficulties. The use of this diagnostic label means that the condition
can be treated as a kind of illness. Previously, these children were
labelled as hyperactive or as suffering from 'minimal brain damage'. ADD
is often treated with drugs such as Ritalin, which are related to
amphetamines. Although these drugs are usually used as stimulants, they
also help to maintain attention, which seems to be the effect that is
helpful to those concerned. attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) Those children in which ADD shows itself primarily in the form of
a high level of activity. attentional bias The understandable tendency
to focus attention on potentially threatening stimuli rather than
neutral ones when both are presented simultaneously. See also selective
­attention. attentional blink The inability to report a target stimulus
if it appears soon after another, reported stimulus. See also selective
attention.

(ii) 

25

The shortening or limiting of an object or event. In cognitive theory, a
term used by Triesman to refer to the weakening of a signal being
processed, as an essential part of a model of selective attention. See
filter models.

attitude A 'mental set' held by an individual that affects how that
person regards events and organises their cognitions. Attitudes are
commonly held to have three essential components or dimensions: (i)

(ii) 
(iii) 

a cognitive dimension, involving the beliefs and rationalisations that
'explain' the holding of the attitude; an affective dimension, involving
the emotional aspects of the attitude, such as likes, dislikes, feelings
of distaste or affection; and a behavioural dimension that involves the
extent to which the individual is prepared to act on the attitude that
he or she holds.

However, recent approaches also include: (iv)

a conative dimension, concerned with intentionality.

See also prejudice, stereotype. attitude scale A quantitative technique
for measuring attitudes. Attitude scales can take many forms: one of the
most frequently encountered is the Likert scale, which offers an ordinal
level of measurement usually indicating preferences; but attitude scales
can take other forms as well, such as the semantic differential. The
challenge in attitude

26

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

measurement is in developing scales which can incorporate the affective
and conative attitude domains as well as the cognitive. attribution The
process of ascribing reasons or causes to events. Causal attributions
are often concerned with suggesting the possible motives or
intentionality underlying people's actions, and a number of researchers
have explored how variations in attributions can have wide-reaching
effects. See also attribution theory, covariance, animism. attribution
theory An extensive area of social psychology dealing with the ways in
which people attempt to account for their own and other people's
behaviour. It is most concerned with the kinds of causes by which
individuals account for their experiences -- attributions about negative
life events are considered to be particularly important. Attribution
theory has been used to improve and extend helplessness theory and is
extensively used in cognitive therapy. Strictly, attribution theory
deals with how people come to have their beliefs about the causes of
events and behaviour, while attributional theory deals with the
different forms (or attributional styles) that such beliefs may take.
See also covariance, social attribution. attributional analysis A
research technique that involves analysing the attributions people make
in conversations or written communication, to identify underlying
meanings or patterns. See also Leeds Attributional Coding System,
discourse analysis, covariance. attributional error See fundamental
attributional error. attributional style The theory that individuals
tend to believe in particular kinds of causes for a wide range of
effects. Styles may vary in the extent to which

they incline towards stable causes (ones that are unlikely to change in
the future), global causes (affecting many things), and
internal--external causes (such as character or situation). For example,
of two people who have failed an examination, one may attribute the
cause to the room being noisy (unstable, specific and external), while
the other may believe it is due to their being stupid (stable, global
and internal). Martin Seligman and others have produced evidence that
individuals who incline towards using a stable, global and internal
pattern of attributions may be particularly vulnerable to depression.
See also personal attributions, controllable attributions, Leeds
Attributional Coding System. audience effects The effects produced by
the presence of other people on an individual's behaviour. See also
social facilitation, evaluation apprehension. audition The process of
hearing. Auditory signals are processed by means of a complex auditory
system. The outer ear, or pinna, collects the signals and focuses them
inward, the middle ear amplifies the signals, the inner ear transduces
the signals into electrical impulses, and the auditory nerve transmits
the signals to the brain via a crossover junction with the auditory
nerve from the other ear. Some primary decoding of the signals occurs in
the inferior colliculi of the midbrain, and they are eventually
interpreted in the auditory cortex of the cerebrum. auditory agnosia A
form of agnosia that is restricted to input through hearing. auditory
cortex That part of the cerebral cortex that is involved in the
interpretation of sensory messages received by hearing. The auditory
cortex is located on the temporal lobe of the cerebrum, immediately
below the lateral fissure, and is organised into three areas: the

A

core, which is the primary auditory cortex and responds to
characteristics of the sounds; the belt area, surrounding the core,
which codes content at the front and location at the rear; and the
parabelt area, which deals with complex functions such as speech
identification and auditory memory. See also sensory projection areas,
planum temporale. authoritarian leadership style See autocratic
leadership. authoritarian personality A specific, rigid pattern of
personality characterised by punitive approaches to social sanctions and
high levels of prejudice towards out-group members. Adorno showed that
the cognitive styles of highly prejudiced right-wing conservatives had
two distinctive traits: (i)

(ii) 

rigidity -- maintaining a belief system even in the face of direct
evidence showing that it is untrue or inefficient; and intolerance of
ambiguity -- a tendency to take sides quickly and to be unable to cope
with equivocal positions.

Adorno concluded that this was due to defence mechanisms -- highly
prejudiced individuals had to protect themselves against ambiguities
which might challenge their ideas. Moreover, they had often been brought
up by cold and highly authoritarian parents, producing a reaction
formation whereby the child would displace his or her aggression towards
authority figures onto minority groups in society. Adorno measured
authoritarianism using the F scale (F for fascism). See also prejudice,
social identity theory. authoritative A term used by Baumrind to
describe a style of parenting or a child-rearing style in which children
are

27

encouraged to participate in decisionmaking and to express their
opinions, but the parent nonetheless has the final authority. This was
in contrast with an autocratic approach, in which the child is not
encouraged to express an opinion; or a laissez-faire approach, in which
the parent has little involvement in the process of decision-making. The
model has also been applied to leadership styles. See also authoritarian
personality. authority figure A person who represents power or
established dominance in some way. autism A serious disorder appearing
towards the end of infancy, in which the child withdraws from all social
contact, which seems to be aversive and distressing. Activity is
directed towards inanimate objects and may give evidence of quite high
intelligence, but speech is usually minimal. Although it is often called
infantile autism, or childhood autism, the condition can persist
throughout the person's life. There is little agreement about the cause,
although a majority of those who work in the area probably believe in an
organic predisposition, and there is even less agreement about
treatment. See also theory of mind, broken-mirror theory. autistic
Thought and fantasy determined entirely by the person's needs and wishes
and not constrained by reality in any way. Daydreams are autistic, as is
the isolation from immediate social contact through the absorbed use of
iPhones and portable music, but the term is usually reserved for the
more extreme and permanent removal from reality, such as is found in
schizophrenic thought, and is characteristic of some conspiracy
theories. autistic spectrum disorders The concept of autistic spectrum
disorders was intro-

28

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

duced in the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-V), which groups together a range of developmental
disorders, emerging during early childhood and characterised by four
sets of symptoms: social and communication difficulties, stereotyped or
repetitive behaviours, sensory issues, and cognitive difficulty or delay
in cognitive processing. Autistic spectrum disorders may not include all
of these, but generally include three out of the four. There are
conditions identified as autistic spectrum disorders: autism itelf,
Asperger's syndrome, childhood disintegrative disorders, and PDD-NOS
(pervasive developmental disorders not otherwise specified). It is open
to question, particularly with respect to the last of these syndromes,
whether the classification represents a real problem or a trend to
medicalise untypical or unusual forms of childhood behaviour that in
previous times were regarded as normal but distinctive or unusual.
autobiographical memory Personal memory of the development or
experiences of our own selves throughout our lifetimes. See also memory,
direct retrieval, generative retrieval, ­hyperthymestic syndrome.
autochthonous A term used to describe a state arising primarily from
events within the individual, such as thirst or hunger. autocratic
leadership A style of leadership characterised by lack of consultation
or negotiation, and making frequent use of arbitrary commands. Also
known as authoritarian leadership. See also laissez-faire, democratic
leadership, authoritative. autogenic Originating from the self;
self-initiated (e.g. autogenic training in which the individual is
trained to have internal control of their own relaxation).

autohypnosis Hypnosis that has been self-induced. Many forms of
hypnotherapy concentrate on building up the individual's own skills in
autohypnosis so that they can develop strategies of coping behaviour for
dealing with stressful events. autokinetic effect A visual illusion
involving the apparent motion of a stationary dot of light when it is
perceived in a totally dark environment. The light appears to move in
rapid jerks, because of the minute tremors made by the eyeball.
automatic processing The cognitive processing of information without
conscious awareness or intention. automatic prompts Particularly popular
in diary studies, but relevant in other forms of online research, these
are digital reminders to participants which are set to happen
automatically at preset intervals, without the active involvement of the
researcher. See also diary method. automatic routines Actions or
sequences of actions which have become so habitual that we no longer
need to pay attention to them. Much complex skill learning consists of
developing automatic routines (such as changing gear while driving). One
of the most powerful demonstrations of automatic routines in cognition
is the Stroop effect, which shows how the automatic subroutine of
reading conflicts with the visual identification of colours. See
automatisation. automatic writing Writing that is performed without
conscious awareness by the writer. It is usually elicited under
hypnosis, but it can be produced by sitting undisturbed for a long
period and writing continuously with no attempt to control what is
produced. After several hours, the product may give an

A

­uncensored glimpse into the unconscious. Or it may not. automatisation
The process of learning a skill or technique so well that it no longer
requires conscious thought. See also skill acquisition, automatic
routines. autonomic Resulting from the activation of the autonomic
nervous system. autonomic nervous system (ANS) A network of unmyelinated
nerve fibres running from the brainstem and spinal cord to the internal
organs, which can activate the body rapidly, preparing it for action.
The ANS has two main parts, the sympathetic and the parasympathetic
divisions. Activation of the sympathetic division results in the body
being rapidly prepared for action, producing the alarm reaction. It is
strongly involved in active emotions such as excitement, fear or anger.
Activation of the parasympathetic division involves

Parasympathetic division

more quiescent functioning such as digestion, tissue growth and repair,
the storage of blood sugars and the building up of bodily reserves. The
parasympathetic division is thought to be involved in the passive
emotions such as depression, contentment or sadness. There seem to be
individual differences in the balance between sympathetic and
parasympathetic arousal, and in the overall lability (see labile) of the
autonomic nervous system (see Figure 7). autonomous morality The third
of Kohlberg's three levels of moral development, in which the individual
is considered to have reached a point where he or she arrives at moral
judgements and decisions on the basis of his or her own reasoning,
rather than simply by accepting the ideas laid down by society. In the
first stage of this level, the person accepts social rules and moral
codes because he or she considers

Sympathetic division pupil dilates salivation increases heart rate
increases lungs expand

stomach contracts

adrenal glands are stimulated

Figure 7 Connections of the ANS

29

bladder dilates

30

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

them to have been democratically established for the common good. In the
second stage, a more individual judgement is achieved, and the person
may eventually come to reject some commonly accepted social values that
they feel to be unjust or immoral. autonomous stage of skill acquisition
When a skill has been developed so thoroughly that it doesn't need
conscious attention, but can be performed more or less automatically.
See also skill acquisition, cognitive stage of skill acquisition.
autonomous state A central concept in the theory of obedience developed
by Milgram, in which he proposed that human beings, as social animals,
have two alternative and mutually exclusive 'states' of social being.
One of these is known as the autonomous state, in which people act as
independent, selfgoverning individuals, and in which their personal
conscience and morality inform and direct their choices of action. The
other, known as the agentic state, occurs when people act simply as an
agent for others higher up in the social order.

with the result that the pigeon's behaviour is shaped so that eventually
it will peck the disc despite never having been directly reinforced for
doing so. See also behaviour shaping. autostereogram A complex
twodimensional image that appears to be three-dimensional if looked at
for a prolonged period. Popularly known as 'Magic Eye' images, they
appear at first to be composed entirely of random coloured dots or small
shapes but resolve themselves into apparently 3D images to those with
relatively balanced binocular vision. See also stereoscope. availability
heuristic The 'shortcut' in human decision-making in which information
that is readily available (e.g. as a result of having been recently
discussed) is weighted more heavily than other, equally significant
information. In other words, it is the idea that people make decisions
using the information which comes most readily to mind. avatar A
fictional representation of a character, such as is used in computer
gaming to represent the player.

autonomy A state of independence and self-determination in the
individual, considered to be the ultimate goal of therapies based on
humanistic psychology and existentialism.

average

autopagnosia An inability to localise body parts (e.g. pointing to the
elbow instead of the knee) on oneself, other people or pictures, while
still being able to use these parts effectively. This is one of the
disorders that challenges the sensory-functional distinction.

(ii) 

autoshaping A procedure in operant conditioning in which a neutral
stimulus is associated with a reinforcer, for example, by making a disc
change colour whenever a food pellet is delivered,

(i) 

A colloquial term used to mean 'usual', 'commonplace' or sometimes
'typical'. An everyday term used to describe a statistical measure of
central tendency, normally the arithmetic mean.

aversion therapy A technique of behaviour therapy that involves using
classical conditioning to develop alternative behaviour patterns in the
individual. It is achieved by the association of unpleasant stimuli or
consequences with the maladaptive behaviour, such

A

that the behaviour comes to be avoided. See also antabuse. aversive
Leading to avoidance behaviour. A stimulus or event that is unpleasant
(such as an electrical shock) would be described as aversive. avoidance
learning The training of behaviour through a process of negative
reinforcement, such that an aversive stimulus fails to take place if the
behaviour is demonstrated. Avoidance learning is extremely resistant to
extinction. avoidant attachment A relationship style in which the infant
(or adult) avoids close emotional contact with the parent (or partner).
See insecure attachment. awareness A subjective state of being alert or
conscious; cognisant of information received from the immediate
environment. See also altered states of awareness.

31

axis A line along which objects can be arranged according to some
measure, as when people are given a position along a line that indicates
increasing height. A graph usually consists of more than one axis (the
plural is 'axes'; see x-axis, y-axis, and z-axis). Objects can also be
placed at given distances from an axis, and rotate around it, as the
earth rotates around the North--South axis. axon The elongated 'stem' of
a neurone, by means of which the electrical impulse is passed from one
region of the nervous system to another. The axon is that part of the
neurone found after the cell body, according to the direction of travel
of the impulse. In afferent or sensory neurones, the elongated part of
the neurone found before the cell body is known as the dendron.

B babbling Vocalisation produced by infants, which includes the full
range of human phonemes. In his book Verbal Behaviour, B.F. Skinner
argued that language acquisition occurred as a result of behaviour
shaping, with infant babbling as the operants, conditioned through the
Law of Effect. Babinski reflex A reflex shown by newborn babies in which
scratching the sole of the foot produces extension of the toes. Absence
of the reflex indicates a damaged motor system in a baby. Conversely,
organic damage is indicated if the reflex is present in an adult. baby
talk The style of speech adopted by adults when talking to a baby,
sometimes called motherese. back-propagation A learning mechanism used
in connectionist modelling in which actual responses are compared to
correct ones. backward conditioning A variant of classical conditioning
in which the unconditioned stimulus (UCS) precedes the conditioned
stimulus (CS). There is some disagreement over whether backward
conditioning is really possible. If it can occur, it is certainly
difficult to achieve.

See also delayed conditioning, simultaneous conditioning, trace
conditioning. balance theory The idea that we need to maintain a state
of cognitive equilibrium between the different attitudes that we hold,
and that our social cognitions will, if necessary, become modified in
order to create or perpetuate such a balance. Cognitive dissonance is a
variant of this theory. balanced design An experimental design in which
sources of variation such as practice, fatigue or gender of subjects are
balanced so that they will not be responsible for differences between
groups. See ABBA design. balanced scale A test or questionnaire in which
sources of bias in the items are counterbalanced. For example, half of
the items should be true and half false, so that any preference to
answer 'yes' does not distort the outcome. See also questionnaire.
bandwagon effect The tendency, shown by all people, to believe a claim
or hold an attitude if they believe that most other members of their
group have that belief. See also Asch effect, Barnum effect.

Bandura, Albert (1925--2021) Bandura is, in an understated way, one of
the most influential figures of twentieth-century psychology. He has
been a major figure in the social cognitive aspects of psychology, in
one form or another, for over 50 years. This includes a lengthy period
in which social aspects of cognition were only accepted as a result of
his experimental demonstrations of modelling DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

B 33

and imitation, which ensured that, even during the behaviourist heyday,
there was some recognition that not all learning consisted exclusively
of stimulus-- response connections and conditioning. In later years,
Bandura developed an interest in personal agency and self-directedness,
and contributed greatly to the psychological understanding of
self-efficacy beliefs.

bandwidth The amount of information that a communication channel can
carry. For example, the amount of information that the copper wire of a
phone line can carry is its bandwidth. The term is used about actual
communication channels both in electronics and in the nervous system
(for example, in the optic nerve) and also about hypothetical channels
in models of information processing. bar chart A statistical diagram in
which the frequency, or amount, of two or more discrete variables is
indicated by the length of a bar for each one. A histogram is a
particularly accurate form of bar chart. barbiturate A widely used drug,
generally given to promote sleep or to control epilepsy. Barbiturates
are highly addictive and commonly abused, producing amnesiac disorders
in long-term users.

Barnum effect An effect named after the circus entrepreneur T.P. Barnum,
whose motto in dealing with the gullible public was 'there's a fool born
every minute'. It is used to describe the widespread acceptance of
certain common beliefs, e.g. astrological predictions, which are written
in such general terms that they can be readily applied to anyone, but
which are read by the credulous as being an exact description of their
own individual character or circumstance. In cognitive terms, it refers
to the tendency for people to engage in selective perception, noticing
only what they wish to believe and ignoring that which does not accord
with their expectations. baroreceptors Receptors that detect blood
pressure. BAS The British Ability Scales The British Ability Scales
(BAS) were

Bartlett, Frederic (1886--1969) Frederic Bartlett is known as one of the
pioneers of memory research. Rather than study memory in the abstract,
like Ebbinghaus, Bartlett was interested in the human sense that people
make of the information they are trying to remember. In a series of
famous studies featuring the serial reproduction of a traditional Native
American story called 'War of the Ghosts', he showed how we adjust and
change information in order to make sense of it and to integrate it with
what we already know. Bartlett is also one of the first psychologists to
use the concept of the schema -- a credit which is often erroneously
attributed to Piaget.

34

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

introduced in 1996 to overcome some of the problems with intelligence
tests. It aims to provide standardised tests for assessing a child's
cognitive ability and has had three main phases of development. The
BAS-III, 2011 is individually administered and designed for use by
educational and clinical psychologists for the assessment of children
referred for learning difficulties and behavioural difficulties. It can
assess up to 20 aspects of a child's current intellectual functioning
across the age range from 3 to 17. basal age On tests graded by age, the
highest age level beyond which which all of the items are passed. It may
be called 'basal mental age' in intelligence testing. basal ganglia A
group of cells in the white matter of the frontal lobes which are
associated with movement, cognition, emotions and learning. They link
with nuclei in the cerebral cortex, thalamus and cerebellum. The basal
ganglia are particularly concerned with regulating the action, helping
to organise and inhibit movement by maintaining a balance between
stimulating muscle cells and inhibiting them, to produce smooth action.
They do this through two pathways: an excitatory pathway which
stimulates movement, and an inhibitory pathway which reduces it. They
have also been shown to be active in the brain's reward pathways. See
also Parkinson's disease, Huntingdon's disease. base rate or baseline
The level or frequency at which a function is operating before any
experimental or therapeutic procedures have been started. Measures taken
before an intervention is started may be used as a prediction of what
the level of functioning would have been without the intervention. For
example, baseline heart rate may be measured for

a few seconds before a stimulus and the recordings used to show whether
the heart rate after the stimulus is consistently different; or the
number of cigarettes smoked per day may be recorded for a month before a
treatment starts, to see whether there is any change. basic emotions
Categories of e­ motion that are common to humans in all ­cultures, and
generally considered to be innate. The six generally accepted basic
emotions are happiness, sadness, disgust, anger, fear and surprise.
basic needs The most compelling human needs, such as those for food and
the avoidance of pain. In Maslow's theory, these are at the base of a
hierarchy of needs, and other requirements, even for physical safety,
will be ignored until they are satisfied. basic trust The development in
an infant of total trust that the mother will provide for, protect and
not harm the infant. It is the first of Erikson's eight stages of
lifespan development and is proposed as the most important task that the
infant must complete. It is achieved as a result of the security
provided by good mothering. Erikson also pointed out that a capacity for
mistrust is sometimes useful, too. basilar membrane A membrane that runs
the length of the cochlea, in the inner ear, on which hair cells are
located that effect the transduction of auditory vibrations into
electrical impulses. The impulses are transmitted to the auditory cortex
by the auditory nerve. battered baby syndrome A term coined by C. Henry
Kempe in 1962 in a paper that first alerted the medical profession to
the widespread existence of infants who had been injured by their
parents. See also child abuse.

B 35

Bayley Infant Development Scales Measures of infant development that
assess infants on mental and motor tasks. First developed in the 1920s,
and based on the work of Arnold Gesell, they are still the most widely
used infant assessment. The norms are based on normal infants and rely
heavily on the ability of the infant to perform motor tasks, but the
scale is now used almost exclusively to assess the general development
of children with motor impairments.

Empirical work is particularly concerned with changes in inherited
tendencies as a result of selection pressure, and with environmental
influences on the expression of these tendencies. Practical
considerations result in much of the work being carried out with
organisms with very short breeding cycles, such as fruit flies
(drosophila). Applied behaviour genetics has a history of a few thousand
years in, for example, horse breeding. See also eugenics.

behaviour The movements or actions that a person or animal performs. If
something is referred to as 'behavioural', it means that it is only
concerned with actual behaviour, and not, for instance, with any
cognitive aspects of an action or performance.

behaviour modification The therapeutic technique of treating
psychological difficulties by dealing solely with the maladaptive
behaviour that they produce. The process of behaviour modification
operates from the assumptions that disturbed behaviour consists of
inappropriate responses to stimuli arising from maladaptive learning,
and that new responses may be acquired as a result of new learning. The
therapy is based on conditioning techniques. Some researchers use the
term behaviour modification to refer to those forms of treatment based
on operant conditioning and imitative learning (e.g. token economy), and
use the term behaviour therapy to refer to techniques based on classical
conditioning (e.g. aversion therapy). In practice, behaviour
modification is used for training to create or increase the desired
behaviour, while behaviour therapy is used to treat psychological
disturbance.

behaviour analysis A systematic method of observing behaviour that
generally involves identifying discrete categories of activity, and
taking regular time samples during an observational period. At these
times, the number of occurrences in each category is recorded and noted.
Although somewhat mechanical, the method can be useful in identifying
recurrent patterns of problematic behaviour, which may then be addressed
or challenged by professional therapists. behaviour disorder A general
term used to cover a wide range of psychological disorders in which the
behaviour of the person is the major concern. More specifically, it
applies to conditions such as psychopathic personality, addictions and
hyperactivity. One feature of behaviour disorders is that they usually
involve symptoms that are likely to bring the sufferer into conflict
with society. See also conduct disorders. behaviour genetics The study
of the influence of genes on behaviour.

behaviour shaping The production of novel behaviours through the
systematic adjustment of reinforcement contingencies -- in other words,
by rewarding simple behaviours until they are established in the
organism's repertoire of actions and then rewarding only those variants
of it which produce behaviour that is closer to the desired outcome.
Once that in turn is established as a frequent behaviour pattern, only
behav-

36

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

iour which is even closer to the desired outcome will be rewarded.
Behaviour shaping can be used to produce behaviours that are completely
unlike anything in the organism's previous repertoire, such as pigeons
playing table tennis.

do. See also cognitive domain, conative domain, affective domain.

behaviour therapy The process of treating abnormal behaviour by using
conditioning techniques to modify maladaptive symptoms. Behaviour
therapy includes techniques such as aversion therapy, systematic
desensitisation and implosion therapy. See also behaviour modification,
cognitive behaviour therapy.

behavioural neuroscience The study of cognitive or social neuroscience
in nonhuman animals.

behavioural analysis Part of the procedure in behaviour modification in
which the relevant behaviour is analysed in detail. The idea is that
this analysis will reveal the conditioning processes that sustain it.
behavioural assessment A detailed analysis of the various behaviours,
including indicators of emotions and cognitive processes, that a person
displays in a relevant context. Behavioural assessment is usually
carried out to identify the objectives of a programme of behaviour
modification. It generally depends on careful unobtrusive observation.
behavioural coding A research process in which categories of behaviour
are defined and placed on a grid, as part of a structured observation.
Then the category is ticked or checkmarked whenever that behaviour is
observed. behavioural correlates of attention The changes in behaviour
or physiological state that people show when they are attending to
something, such as turning one's head towards the source of a sound. See
also orienting reflex. behavioural domain One of the four domains of the
psyche. The behavioural domain concerns what people actually

behavioural genetics The study of the relationships between genetic
inheritance and behaviour and/or cognition. See, for example,
imprinting.

behavioural pathogens Factors in a person's lifestyle that produce poor
health and which can be addressed by psychological methods
(e.g. smoking, excessive drinking). behavioural psychotherapy
Psychotherapy in which the emphasis is on getting the person to behave
differently (e.g. by imitating successful models) so that they discover
new ways of coping with their problems and stresses. behavioural
sciences A general term used for those sciences that are concerned with
the understanding of behaviour, such as psychology, ethology and
population genetics. behaviourism The school of thought described by
J.B. Watson in 1924, in which he argued that, to be truly scientific, it
was necessary for psychology to concern itself only with that which
could be directly observed, namely the behaviour of organisms. Watson
considered that a complete understanding of human behaviour would
eventually be developed through the analysis of psychological phenomena
as complex chains of learned stimulus--response connections. The
behaviourist approach, developed especially in America and Britain in
the first half of the last century, proposed that only the study of
measurable behaviour was objective, and therefore scientific, and that
therefore psychologists should study only behaviour and ignore 'mental'

B 37

processes. Behaviourists also considered that all human behaviour
ultimately consisted of links between a stimulus and a response, in much
the same way as living matter consists of cells. This inherently
reductionist argument led to much criticism of the approach, which
eventually resulted in a considerable decline in its popularity.
However, behaviourist assumptions left their mark on accepted
methodology within psychology and formed the dominant background against
which the challenges posed by new paradigm research and qualitative
analysis were evaluated. See also association, conditioning,
stimulus--response learning. belief bias The tendency to accept invalid
but plausible explanations and

to reject true but implausible ones, even when their validity has been
demonstrated. See also problem-solving. belladonna A drug, atropine, is
derived from the plant belladonna, which dilates the pupils of the eye.
Since pupil dilation is a significant non-verbal cue indicating
interpersonal attraction, the drug was used as a cosmetic, especially in
Italy -- hence the name belladonna, meaning 'beautiful lady'. belt
region An area in the secondary auditory cortex, located in the temporal
lobes, which receives information from the primary auditory cortex and
also from the medial geniculate nucleus, and is concerned with coding
the content and location of sounds.

Bem, Sandra R.L. (1944--2014) Sandra Bem was a major figure in the
development of gender role psychology and gender schema theory. Her
pioneering work challenged the common assumptions of gender differences,
highlighting the damaging consequences of single-sex role stereotypes at
a time when these were prevalent in psychology and in society as a
whole. Her early development of the Bem Sex-Role Inventory showed how
men and women can demonstrate both male and female characteristics,
leading on to research which showed how androgeny was a more
psychologically healthy condition for both sexes. Bem's research formed
a significant foundation for social and political change regarding equal
rights and opportunities.

benign Used to describe conditions that do not pose any significant
threat. Its opposite is 'malignant'. benzodiazepines A group of commonly
prescribed minor tranquillisers such as Valium. They are a form of
barbiturate, producing muscle relaxation, decreased anxiety and
sedation, and are widely used to help people to cope with transient
difficulties. Benzodiazepines are not antidepressants, and there is
concern

that their availability may cause people to put up with an
unsatisfactory situation instead of taking positive action to deal with
their problems. bereavement The experience of losing a friend, relative
or acquaintance as a result of their death. Typically, a person who has
lost someone very close will pass through several emotional states,
often starting with a period of shock and numbness, often accompanied
with

38

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

cognitive disorganisation, and then cycling through anger, denial,
depression, guilt and anxiety before eventually a state of resolution or
acceptance becomes dominant and the individual adapt to their new lives.
See also attachment. beta waves A wave pattern observed in EEG
recordings characteristic of an alert, wide-awake individual. See also
alpha waves, delta waves. between-group design A form of experimental
design that compares the results obtained from two separate groups of
participants. Because this makes results vulnerable to distortion
arising from individual differences in the participants concerned, data
of this kind need to be analysed using independent-measures statistics.
See also within-subjects design. between-group variance A measure of the
variation found among the means of a number of samples. The measure is
divided by the within-group variance to give an F ratio. These measures
are usually computed within an analysis of variance. See also variance.

selected, which results in that sample not being representative of the
population as a whole. The classic example was a survey of American
electors that was conducted by randomly selecting respondents from the
telephone directory, thereby excluding all of the voters who could not
afford telephones at that time. See also representative sample, WEIRD
sample. Big Five personality factors See fivefactor theory. bilateral
Occurring on both sides. In neuroscience, this usually means both sides
of the cerebrum, but the word is also used in many other contexts.
bilateral transfer The demonstration of a skill learned by one side of
the body (e.g. the right hand) by the other half (demonstrated by the
left hand). Bilateral transfer can be demonstrated with many motor
skills -- practice with one side will usually produce an improvement in
performance by the other side.

bias A systematic distortion. The term is used in two related ways in
psychology, either as bias when making judgements (see prejudice), or as
distortion of a statistical result because some factor was operating
that had not been accounted for in the research design (see artefact).

bimodal distribution A set of scores that, when plotted as a frequency
distribution, shows two separate peaks. Usually, this indicates that the
scores do not all come from the same population, but from two binomial
distributions, although it may mean that the source population itself is
bimodal (see Figure 8).

biased sample An error in the way in which a particular sample has been

binary A term used when there are two separate aspects of something, for

mode A

Figure 8 A bimodal distribution

mode B

B 39

­example, hot or cold. Binary is sometimes used for the claim, or wish,
that there are only two distinct sexes, male and female. It is also used
in computing for systems that can only take the value 0 or 1, making the
information they deal with binary digits, abbreviated to bits. binaural
cue An indication of the direction of a source of sound arising from
differences in the sounds reaching the two ears. For example, a sound
which originates from one side will reach the ear on that side
marginally sooner than it reaches the other ear. A crossover point for
the auditory nerve means that the difference can be detected and the
direction of sound analysed. binding problem A problem encountered by
those working in cognitive

psychology, and particularly in knowledge representation, which has to
do with linking together particular concepts or features, in order to
perform mental operations. For example, if one wanted to exclude the
rich and famous from a simulated model of personality and consumerism,
it would be necessary to bind together the two features 'rich' and
'famous', so that the two features were treated together. In everyday
language, we use conjunctions, such as 'and' or 'but' to do this, but
computer simulations require specialist symbols or instructions to make
the connections clear in the context; and the way these connections
should be represented has become known as the binding problem.

Binet, Alfred (1857--1911) Alfred Binet was a major figure in
developmental psychology. Like Freud, he had studied mesmerism and
hysteria under the neurologist Charcot, and he became Director of the
Sorbonne Psychological Laboratory in 1894. His major contribution to
modern psychology was the concept of age-related intelligence and the
first intelligence test, developed with Theodore Simon in 1905, in order
to identify children who required more educational assistance than
standard French schools could provide. Binet insisted that the new tests
should not be regarded as measuring fixed ability, but rather as an
indicator of the current development of the individual. He was deeply
concerned that they should not be used as any kind of social label, but
as a guide for educational assistance. This was somewhat ironic in view
of the IQ test's subsequent history.

binocular convergence See binocular disparity.

eyes than for objects further away). See also depth perception.

binocular depth cues Indicators of distance that depend on the use of
both eyes. The main binocular depth cues are binocular disparity and the
convergence of eye muscles (convergence is greater when looking at
objects closer to the

binocular disparity The difference in the retinal image received by the
two eyes. The disparity between two images is greater for objects close
to the eyes, and the difference is used to judge the distance of nearby
objects. See also stereoscope.

40

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

binocular rivalry When two different stimuli are presented at the same
time, one to each eye. For an auditory equivalent, see cocktail party
effect. However, unlike the auditory version, in binocular rivalry, the
perceived stimulus will alternate between the two eyes, unless one eye
is significantly dominant over the other.

20

binocular vision Vision obtained by comparing the images received by two
eyes, such that depth perception can be achieved by comparing the
disparity between the two images. See also autostereogram, binocular
disparity.

12

binomial distribution This applies to data that have two mutually
exclusive outcomes (heads/tails, adult/child), and it indicates the
proportion of each ratio of scores which would be expected for each
sample size. For example, if a coin is repeatedly tossed in sets of 20
times each, the distribution will indicate how often you would expect to
get 20 heads, how often you would expect 19 heads and one tail, and so
on. The actual proportions obtained can be compared with the expected
proportions, to see whether it is reasonable to suppose that the scores
came from the specified population (in this example, whether the coin is
unbiased) (see Figure 9). With large samples, the binomial distribution
becomes very similar to a normal distribution.

6

biodiversity A measure of the variety of animals, plants and
microorganisms. Greater biodiversity in a given habitat is generally
regarded as an indication of the health of that environment. There is
concern that human activity is having significant effects of reducing
biodiversity. biofeedback A term used to describe a process by which
control of autonomic functioning can be learned if the individual is
provided with information about

19 18 17 16 15 14 13 11 10 9 8 7 5 4 3 2 1

Figure 9 A typical binomial distribution how the body is working
(e.g. blood pressure or galvanic skin response readings). Typically, the
person engages in relaxation exercises while being provided with such
feedback, and it has been demonstrated that an effective reduction of
blood pressure and heart rate may be achieved in this way. Biofeedback
is sometimes cited as an example of the practical application of operant
conditioning, although this has been disputed on the grounds that the
reward -- knowledge of results -- is a cognitive rather than a
behavioural reinforcement. biogenic A term applied to behaviours or
characteristics with a biological origin. biogenic amines A group of
chemical compounds that are known to be particularly important in the
functioning of the nervous system. They include catecholamine and
histamine.

B 41

biological anthropology The study of the behavioural and anatomical
evolution of human beings. biological clock The idea that organisms
contain a mechanism which maintains a fairly constant rate and which is
responsible for controlling biological rhythms such as the sleep/wake
cycle. See also biorhythm, circadian rhythm. biological determinism The
argument that human nature or human characteristics arise as an
inevitable consequence of biological characteristics. See also
reductionism. biological motion The ability to detect the presence of
animal or human bodies from motion cues alone. Studies showing movements
of limbs and joints through light-emitting diodes as points in an
otherwise dark environment show that human beings are remarkably good at
this. The perception of biological motion has been associated with
activity in the superior temporal sulcus. biological preparedness A
state of readiness for a particular kind of learning, which comes about
as a result of genetic factors. For example, a young gosling is
biologically prepared to learn to identify and follow its mother soon
after birth (see imprinting), bees are biologically prepared to learn to
identify flower-like scents, and humans are biologically prepared to
respond preferentially to other humans, as opposed to other animals or
objects, from birth. This form of learning is achieved much more easily
than the learning of other information. biological reductionism The idea
that everything can be explained purely by reference to biological
functions. See also reductionism. biological therapy The treatment of
psychological disturbance or mental

illness by physical methods such as drugs, brain surgery or
electroconvulsive therapy. biomedical model A way of looking at health
problems or psychological disorders that attributes them primarily to
disturbances in biological functioning, which can be adjusted using
medical techniques. See also biopsychosocial model. biopsychology The
study of the biological sources of individual functioning. The term
usually has a slightly different emphasis to psychobiology, but there is
no universally agreed meaning for either label. biopsychosocial model
The idea that health-related behaviours such as healthy lifestyles or
addictions arise through a combination of biological, psychological and
social factors, rather than being caused by any one of these alone
(Figure 10). The term applies to the view that conditions such as
depression are not simply a consequence of disturbed brain functioning
that should be treated just with medication. See also biomedical model.
biorhythm General swings or fluctuations of biological functioning, such
as circadian rhythms or the menstrual cycle. Longer-term biological
rhythms, such as annual variations, have been demonstrated in many
animals, but evidence for their existence in human beings is not clearly
established. The term has also been adopted by an industry that claims
to calculate variations in functions such as creativity from the
individual's date of birth. See also Barnum effect, zeitgeber. bipolar
Having two ends. bipolar cells Cells that pick up information from one
source and pass it on to another set of cells without apparent
modification, such as are found in the second layer of the retina, or in
some parts of the auditory system.

42

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Figure 10 The biopsychosocial model bipolar constructs or concepts The
claim that, in human thought, concepts are defined in terms of opposite
poles. For example, the concept of honesty entails the opposite pole of
dishonesty. The most well-known theory constructed on this basis is
George Kelly's theory of personal constructs. bipolar depression A
disorder of affect that involves swings between the two extremes of
mania and depression. The condition is regarded as having a biogenic
origin, and the swings can be halted by continuous treatment with
lithium. The disorder has also been called manic depression or
manic-depressive psychosis.

proposed by Otto Rank in the early days of psychoanalysis, but was
largely abandoned. It has been revived more recently in relation to
concern about the technological nature of some methods of managing
birth. bisexual A person whose sexual preference includes people of the
same sex as well as those of another sex.

birth rate The annual number of live births per 1,000 people in the
population.

bit A term used in information theory to define a unit of information. A
bit of information is not a vague amount, but is precisely defined as
the amount required to choose between two equal alternatives -- it
halves the uncertainty. For example, if you were searching for a
randomly chosen word in this dictionary, one bit would tell you which
half it was in, two bits would narrow it down to a quarter, and three
bits to an eighth. Fourteen bits would identify a specific word out of
166,917. The word 'bit' is a contraction of 'binary digit'.

birth trauma An attempt to explain psychological disturbance as
resulting from the trauma of being born. It was

black box A term used to describe an early approach to psychological
theory in which the internal workings of the

birth cry A reflex cry that signals the start of breathing immediately
after birth. It is possible for breathing to start without a birth cry.

B 43

organism were regarded as unknowable as if they were taking place inside
a 'black box'. This leaves the options of either: (i)

guessing what is going on in the box by observing the relationships
between inputs to the box and its consequent behaviour; or

(ii) 

claiming that it is not important to know what is going on in the box,
and that only the relationships between input and behaviour should be
studied.

The second approach was the one chosen by the supporters of
behaviourism.

Blackmore, Susan (1951--) Susan Blackmore is known for her work on
consciousness, and has been a significant influence on the establishment
of memetics -- the idea that some ideas are 'infections', and follow
Darwinian principles as replicators in popular culture. She is also a
vigilant sceptic in the field of parapsychology, having conducted
experimental work in the field, and is has been a frequent contributor
to newspapers and other media on that subject.

Blaint's syndrome Severe difficulty in spatial processing usually
arising from bilateral lesions of the parietal lobe. It consists of a
group of symptoms including simultanagnosia, optic ataxia and optic
apraxia. blank slate See tabula rasa. blind scoring When the observer is
unaware of the status of the event that is being scored (e.g. which
condition of an experiment has produced the behaviour being observed).
blind spot A specific location on the retina of the eye where the neural
fibres of the ganglion cells in the retina bunch together to form the
optic nerve. The blind spot is so named because this part of the retina
contains no photosensitive cells, but it is not normally noticed because
the brain 'fills in' the area such that it appears to be continuous with
the general background. blindsight A condition of some people who are
completely blind in the sense of having no visual awareness but who can
still make some use of visual i­nformation

-- for example, they may dodge to avoid an object thrown towards them.
See also affective blindsight. block design A method of designing the
presentation of experimental material in which the same or similar
stimuli or conditions are presented together, or in a clear sequence.
See also event-related design, counterbalancing. blood pressure The
force with which blood travels through the arteries and veins of the
body. High blood pressure is a reliable indicator of long-term stress
and a precursor to many stress disorders. blood--brain barrier A
characteristic of the blood supply to the brain that prevents many
substances from passing from the blood to the brain tissues. It not only
protects the brain from many poisons but also prevents some potentially
useful drugs from being used in the brain. bodily-kinaesthetic
intelligence One of Gardner's seven forms of intelligence. This type
deals with the ability to learn and execute complex physical skills.

44

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

body image The idea held by each individual of what their body is like.
There is evidence of a physiological basis for a body image at birth,
but each infant has to learn which parts of the universe are not part of
its own body. Later, the body image extends beyond a representation of
the body and comes to reflect an evaluation of bodily characteristics.
The 'normal' pattern is to overestimate such characteristics as head
size and attractiveness. Body image is an important part of self-image.
See also phantom limb, body-schema. body language A general term used to
describe those aspects of non-verbal communication (NVC) that involve
direct use of the body, such as gesture, posture and proxemics.
body-schema The body-schema is the internal representation that an
individual has of his or her own body. According to Piaget, the very
first schema formed by the infant develops from the first 'me -- not me'
distinction. For the older person, it includes ideas and memories of how
the body is, has been and could be, which is the main way it is
differentiated from the body image. body-size effect An illusion in
which inaccurate perception of one's own body size results in
misjudgements of the size of perceived objects. BOLD Acronym for blood
oxygen level-dependent information, used in MRI scanning. bonding The
formation of a strong relationship (attachment), usually applied to
mothers and their infants, and usually during the period immediately
following birth. Some claim that a strong bond may be formed at first
contact between mother and baby, a view that has been called the
'Araldite theory' of bonding.

Obstetric practices in many Western hospitals have been changed to
facilitate bonding, but the significance of contact between mother and
baby immediately following birth is still a matter of controversy. Some
writers reserve the term 'bonding' for the mother's feelings for her
baby, and 'attachment' for the infant's relationship to the mother. This
usage assumes that there are two different, one-way processes, rather
than a transactional shared relationship. See also postpartum
depression. borderline disorder A disorder of personality. The term was
originally applied to people judged to be on the borderline between
neurosis and psychosis, particularly those believed to have an
underlying psychotic disorder but who were coping reasonably well. It is
now used much more broadly when describing people who show instability
in their emotions and interpersonal relationships, but whose symptoms do
not fit any diagnostic system. boredom effects False research results
obtained from a psychological study as a result of the participants
becoming bored with carrying out tedious, predictable or repetitive
tasks. See also practice effect. bottom-up An approach to research or
theorising which begins with the smaller known details of the issue
concerned, and attempts to build them into a meaningful whole. See also
top-down, reductionism. bottom-up approach An approach to research that
sees theorising as a kind of jigsaw puzzle, in which the pieces are
factual information about the subject under study, obtained through
narrowly focused research. Bottom-up theories ignore higher-order levels
of functioning, in contrast to top-down approaches, which take those as
their starting point. Inevitably, each approach has its advantages and
also its disadvantages.

B 45

See, for example, emergent properties, reductionism.

­processing, and the term can also apply to Gibson's ecological
perception theory.

bottom-up processing Perceptual processing that is initiated by the
characteristics of the stimulus and leads on to higher forms of
cognitive activity, as opposed to top-down processing, which begins from
the higher levels. Marr's computational theory of perception is a
classic example of bottom-up

bounded rationality The idea is that people are rational within their
own environmental and cognitive bounds -- in other words, that the
decisions we make or the arguments we put forward are valid for our own
personal worlds, even if not in an objective sense. See also personal
constructs.

Bowlby, John (1907--1990) John Bowlby originally trained as a
psychiatrist and later became interested in the effects of separation on
the development of the child. With James Robertson, he created some
upsetting films of the effects on children of being separated from their
parents for periods of over a week, which had a powerful effect on the
ways in which children are treated in hospital and in temporary care.
His theory of maternal deprivation was taken as saying that even brief
separations from the mother during infancy can cause permanent damage,
but there is still controversy as to whether Bowlby really made this
strong claim. He did, however, include 'mother working full-time' on a
list of situations that might damage children, producing a social debate
which has not died down since the 1950s. He then turned to ethology as a
source of understanding and developed his theory of attachment, which
has become one of the more important theories in developmental
psychology.

Boyd-Franklin, Nancy (1950--) Nancy Boyd-Franklin is a psychologist and
writer who has been active in the development of family therapy and
identity theory, specialising in issues affecting the assessment and
treatment of black Americans experiencing mental health difficulties.
She contributed to the development of new therapeutic approaches in both
individual and family therapy. She has published several books, which
have emphasised the need for therapeutic approaches to be culturally,
socially and economically sensitive. box whisker diagram See box-plot
­diagram. box-plot diagram A form of statistical diagram that indicates
the median and semi-interquartile ranges of sets of scores,

by using a square shape to indicate the median with lines (whiskers)
coming out from top and bottom (or left and right) to indicate the range
(Figure 11). See also dot-plot diagram.

46

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Figure 11 A box-plot diagram bracketing Systematically identifying and
setting aside preconceptions, beliefs and opinions that might influence
the interpretation of qualitative data. See phenomenological research.
brain A general term used to describe the complex of neural structures
developed at the forward or top end of the spinal cord (Figure 12). In
casual usage, however, many psychologists refer to the 'brain' when in
fact they mean the cerebrum or the cerebral cortex (e.g. splitbrain
studies). Whether the whole brain

Figure 12 The brain

or simply the cerebrum is meant must be deduced from the context. brain
scan A general term used to describe a non-invasive method of studying
the living brain. There are many types of brain scans, but they tend to
fall into three main categories: CAT or CT scans, PET scans, and fMRI
scans. CAT scans map the brain by taking a number of X-ray photos that
form 'slices' of the whole brain and combining them to build up a full
image. PET scans (positron emission tomography)

B 47

work by ­monitoring a small amount of radioactive chemical that is put
into the blood supply and indicates the increased uptake of blood by
active brain cells. The third main approach is functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), which works by identifying the responses of
water molecules in the brain to magnetic stimulation, and is a rapid
procedure that can be used to monitor cognitive processes as they
happen. It is a popular method for researchers, partly because of its
accuracy, but also because there are no X-rays or radioactive substances
involved. See also False Discovery Rate, magneto-encephalography,
transcranial direct current stimulation. brainstem See medulla.
brainstorming A technique for developing new ideas, commonly used in
advertising work and other problemsolving situations. A group engages in
a period of intensive concentration in which any idea at all that comes
to mind -- regardless of how inappropriate it might seem -- is noted.
There is an agreement not to reject or ridicule any suggestion at this
stage. At the end of that period of time, all of the ideas so generated
are examined for their potential value as a solution to the problem at
hand. Some recent research indicates that a group may produce more ideas
if the individuals work on their own and then pool their suggestions.
The term has become common in everyday usage for any type of
idea-generating session, but the distinctive and most important aspect
of brainstorming as a technique is that the idea-generating stage should
be entirely separated from the evaluation stage. See also lateral
thinking, groupthink brainwashing The technique of operating total
control over a person's environment, with a consistent

­application of deprivation, debilitation and dread (the three Ds), so
that the victim becomes amenable to adopting a completely new belief
system or ideology. The process may depend on some form of
identification. brainwaves Overall electrical activity of the brain that
can be detected outside the skull by an electroencephalogram. Or, in
colloquial use, a good idea. bridging inferences In reading, these are
inferences made to link the current and preceding parts of a text, in
such a way as to increase their plausibility and coherence. brightness
The intensity of light stimulation. brightness constancy The perceptual
adjustment by which we perceive objects as being of similar brightness
despite seeing them in widely varying light intensities. Brightness
constancy arises because of the capacity of our perceptual system to
work in context and to deal with relative differences in intensity
rather than with absolute ones. For example, we perceive a piece of
paper in a dark cellar to be brighter than a piece of coal in daylight,
even though the latter actually reflects more light. Broca's aphasia The
inability to formulate speech, resulting from damage to Broca's area.
Broca's area An area of the cerebral cortex at the base of the frontal
lobe, usually on the left hemisphere, which is mainly concerned with the
production of speech and the formulation of words. Damage to Broca's
area can produce aphasia. See also language areas. Brodmann's areas
Brodmann developed a technique for dividing up the

48

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Broadbent, Donald E. (1926--1993) Donald Broadbent was a key figure in
the development of cognitive psychology during and after the Second
World War. His dual interest in engineering and the developing subject
of psychology led him to study with Bartlett at Cambridge, where he
became concerned with designing technological environments that were
suitable for human use. His early research into selective attention was
a major stimulus to information-processing models of human cognition.
Although his subsequent research led him to reject this approach and
emphasise the importance of probability and motivation in cognition, it
was never as influential as his early work had been.

cerebral cortex for the purpose of mapping its different areas.
Brodmann's areas consist of 52 regions of the cortex, labelled
BA1--BA52, which are based on the relative distribution of cell types
across the cortical layers.

broken-mirror theory A theory of autism which proposes that the social
difficulties encountered by autistic people are the result of
dysfunction of the mirror system.

Bruce, Vicki (1953--) Vicki Bruce has been a major contributor to the
psychological understanding of perception in general, and face
recognition in particular. Her perceptual research has contributed to a
variety of different social applications, ranging from the design of new
coins to raising awareness of the legal shortcomings of eyewitness
testimony. She is acknowledged as an international authority on the
neuropsychology of face recognition and person memory, is a Fellow of
the Royal Society and was made a Dame of the UK in 2015.

Bruner, Jerome S. (1915--2016) Bruner was a major figure in the
cognitive revolution of the 1960s and 1970s, representing the 'human'
side of cognitive psychology, as opposed to more mechanistic,
information-processing approaches. His work emphasised the active nature
of human cognition and the role of meaning and intentionality. He
regarded cognitive development as being closely linked to culture, and
his research included studies of the role of cultural amplification in
the child's cognitive development, as well as research into the
development of representation. Bruner was also instrumental in
introducing the Western psychological community to the work of Vygotsky,
and in developing the concept of cultural input as scaffolding,
supporting and structuring cognitive development.

B 49

bulimia or bulaemia A disorder of eating involving phases in which very
large quantities of food are consumed, followed by vomiting, taking
laxatives, or intense exercise. The victim therefore gains little
nutritional value from the food and may lose weight rapidly. Bulimia is
considered to be closely related to anorexia. burnout A condition that
develops when a worker has been under continual stress. In this state,
people suffer from fatigue, lack of motivation and depression. The most
common outcome is to leave (or lose) the job in which burnout occurred.
Burnout is seen as a particular risk in the helping professions and can
be extremely difficult to reverse. bystander apathy A somewhat
moralistic label applied by social psychologists to the phenomenon
whereby onlookers fail to help in emergencies, even though they may be
upset by what is happening. Concern about bystander apathy was aroused
by the case of Kitty Genovese, who was stabbed to death in New York in
1964. About 40 people heard her screams for half an hour, but

news reports stated that none of them called the police (although this
may not be true). Much research has been conducted on the factors that
determine whether onlookers will intervene or not, and the area has come
to be known as bystander intervention. bystander calculus model A theory
for interpreting the behaviour of bystanders that sees people as
calculating the perceived costs and benefits of helping versus not
helping, and responding accordingly. See also bystander intervention,
social impact theory. bystander intervention The involvement of
onlookers in situations where, for example, help is required by another
person. The likelihood of bystander intervention has been shown to
depend on several factors, such as the onlooker's definition of the
situation, the presence of other people who might be expected to provide
the help needed and, to a lesser extent, the characteristics of the
victim. The most powerful factor influencing the decision as to whether
to intervene appears to be diffusion of responsibility.

C CA See conversation analysis. CAL See computer-assisted learning.
calibration Adjusting a scale to provide appropriate measures. Once a
scale has been set up, for example, of non-verbal expressions of
increasing anger, data can be gathered to give a measure of the strength
of feeling at each point of the scale. cancellation task A form of
visual search task in which the person has to identify all the instances
of a certain type of stimulus presented as part of an array, and cancel
them out. It is often used to diagnose visual neglect. cannabis See
marijuana. Cannon--Bard theory A theory of emotion put forward in the
1920s, in which it was stated that the psychological experience of
emotion and the physiological reactions produced by the body (see
autonomic nervous system) were completely independent of one another.
Compare interactionism, James--Lange theory. See also alarm reaction.
Capgras syndrome A syndrome which is thought to result from a deficit in
the emotional component of face recognition, in which the person reports
that their partners, family members or friends have been replaced by
imposters or 'body doubles'. cardiac muscle Heart muscle. The term
'cardiac' refers to the heart. caregiver/caretaker A general term used
to refer to the person who looks after a child, thus avoiding the
­assumptions DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

inherent in the use of terms such as 'mother' or 'parent', and allowing
for a wider range of possibilities. Despite being apparent opposites,
the two terms are used with identical meanings. carpentered environment
An environment in which there are many straight lines and right angles
(e.g. in modern buildings). Carpentered environments are highly
characteristic of Western society, and this has been cited by some
researchers (e.g. Gregory) as a possible explanation for some cultural
differences in perception (e.g. that some geometric illusions are
perceived more or less strongly by people from different cultures) (see
Figure 13). Cartesian dualism The ­philosophical position proposed by
Descartes that the mind and the body are separate entities, each with
its own way of ­operating. Cartesian dualism formed the fundamental
assumption of Western medicine, which sees the body as a machine and the
mind as being almost entirely separate, and it has also influenced (or
distorted) many other areas of knowledge, including psychology. Gilbert
Ryle described it as believing that the human mind is a 'ghost in a
machine', and was influential in showing that dualism is an unhelpful
assumption. Although the position is no longer widely supported when it
is stated explicitly, it continues to be an assumption of much
scientific research. Everyday language, too, makes it easy to slip into
assuming a separation of mind and body. See also dual-aspect theory.

C

51

Figure 13 A carpentered environment cascade model In cognitive
psychology, this is a form of information processing in which
information passes from one level to the next before it has been fully
processed at the first level. In general research contexts, it is a way
of obtaining a sample whereby each person asks several others to
participate in a study, and they in turn ask several more -- an approach
also known as snowball sampling. case history A detailed account of the
background and previous experience of a single patient or client, which
may be important in therapy or in the understanding of a particular
psychological phenomenon, such as anterograde amnesia. case-series study
A form of research method that involves investigating several people
with similar cognitive impairments. This allows the researcher to make
meaningful comparisons, to identify symptoms in common and also to map
out some of the variation between individuals. case study A
psychological study involving the detailed investigation of

one particular case or individual. Case studies are extremely important
in many areas of psychology, as they allow for an in-depth analysis of
unusual circumstances and their outcomes, which may in turn throw light
on more normal psychological events (e.g. the outcome of localised brain
damage may serve to highlight the functions of a particular area of the
brain). They are also used in situations where a detailed account rather
than a limited set of standardised measures is required. However, the
method has its own problems (e.g. subjective decisions about which
aspects to describe) and difficulties of replication. castration threat
anxiety A Freudian concept, referring to the anxiety experienced by the
young boy during the Oedipus complex. In Freudian theory, the young
boy's sexual interest is directed towards his mother, and his father is
perceived as a rival for the mother's love. As a result, the child
supposedly develops a fear that the father (being bigger and more
powerful than he is) may deal with the competition by castrating him.

52

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

CAT scan Computed axial tomography, often referred to as a CT scan: a
noninvasive technique for examining the structure of the brain, which
consists of building up a three-dimensional picture of the brain. This
is achieved by taking multiple X-ray photographs or ultrasound images of
the brain in a series of sections. The sections are then combined using
a computer. The resulting image shows up deformed or damaged tissue, and
also blood clots or areas where the blood supply has been interrupted.
See also brain scan, ­magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission
tomography. catastrophe theory A mathematical theory that deals with
changes of state which are sudden, substantial and not easily reversible
(e.g. walking off a cliff). Many psychological phenomena look like this,
with examples ranging from the spontaneous reversals of perception of a
Necker cube, through experiences of insight (aha! experience), to the
sudden onset of a phobia. It is always difficult to record significant
psychological phenomena in a form that can be entered into a
mathematical equation, and it is uncertain how useful catastrophe theory
is to psychology. catatonia A state in which the muscles are extremely
tense. The person may stay in a fixed posture for several hours, and in
some cases, if one moves a limb to a different position it will stay
there. It is usually seen in people diagnosed as schizophrenic. If it is
their major symptom, they are classified as suffering from 'catatonic
schizophrenia'. catecholamines A group of biogenic amines, including
adrenaline and dopamine, which play a role in neural transmission in the
brain. It is suspected that an excess of catecholamines may be involved
in schizophrenia.

categorical perception In cognitive psychology, this is the term used
when a sound which is in between two phonemes is perceived as being
either one or the other of its neighbours, rather than being perceived
as the intermediate sound that it really is. categorical variable A
variable that can only vary by fitting into one category or another --
in other words, nominal data. See levels of measurement, nominal scale.
categorisation Classifying things, events or people into categories, or
sets. In social identity theory, categorisation involves grouping people
into categories on the basis of chosen characteristics. If the category
is one that the observer wants to see as indicating inferiority (e.g. a
different class or race), social categorisation forms the basis for
stereotyping. The term is also used for the process, fundamental in much
qualitative research, of grouping basic codings into higher-order
concepts. For example, references in the data to playing sport, dancing
and watching television might be grouped under the category of 'leisure
activities'. See also grounded theory. category specificity The idea
that the brain represents different categories of information in
different ways, or in different areas. category-specific deficits
Disorders resulting from certain types of brain damage, in which memory
for some semantic categories but not others is impaired. catharsis The
sudden release of tension or anxiety resulting from the process of
uncovering repressed trauma or ideas during psychoanalysis. In a wider
context, the process of catharsis is seen as the satisfying release of
built-up emotional energy, often through displacement (e.g.

C

53

an enthusiastic support of team sports). Compare cathexis.

and other organelles specific to the cell's general functioning.

cathexis A term used in psychoanalytic theory to refer to the investment
of intense energy, desire or meaning in a person, object or event. In
many ways, cathexis can be thought of as being the opposite of
catharsis.

centile The point on a scale such that a given percentage of the
relevant population would score at or below that point. For example, if
the 60th centile for height in a given population is 1.75 metres, 60 per
cent of those people will be of that height or shorter.

cathodal tDCS A form of transcranial direct current stimulation that
decreases cortical excitation, and results in decreased levels of
performance. See also anodal tDCS. caudal To do with the tail or rear
end. See also cephalo-caudal. causal attribution A reason given for why
an event or characteristic occurred. See attribution. causal
relationship A connection between two variables in which changes in one
are the direct initiator or cause of changes in the other. causality The
process by which an event such as the action of a person or thing brings
about some kind of effect. A fundamental cognitive process is to be
alert to causal effects, or contingencies. Among other implications, the
recognition of contingencies is essential for operant conditioning to
occur. Attribution theory is the study of how people decide which cause
of an event to pay attention to. CDS See child-directed speech. ceiling
effect An effect that occurs when a test is too easy, such that most
people score near the top (or ceiling) of the scale. The result is that
the test is unable to distinguish between individuals. The opposite
situation is known as a 'floor effect'. cell body The part of the
neurone that contains the nucleus, the ­mitochondria

central coherence The ability to use all of the information involved
when interpreting a situation or spoken communication. central dyslexia
The disruption of reading that results from difficulty in accessing
meaning or translating to speech, occurring after the visual word form
has been pro­cessed. See also deep dyslexia, pure alexia. central
executive The core component in the theory of working memory. The
central executive controls the interactions between the long-term memory
and the currently active visual and phonological processors. central
fissure Also known as the central sulcus or the fissure of Rolando, this
is a deep groove which runs from the top of the cerebrum downwards,
separating the frontal and parietal lobes of the cerebrum. The motor
projection area is located on the frontal edge of the central fissure,
and the somatosensory projection area is located along the parietal
edge. central gray See periaqueductal grey. central nervous system (CNS)
The general name given to the network of nerve fibres and supporting
cells that form the brain and the spinal cord. The central nervous
system coordinates and regulates the major functions of the body, and
links with the other systems of the body, such as the endocrine ­system
and the autonomic nervous system, to

54

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

maintain integration and effective functioning of bodily and cerebral
processes (see Figure 14). central sulcus See central fissure. central
tendency See measures of central tendency. centration A Piagetian term
that refers to the preoperational child's tendency to focus on one
central characteristic of a problem to the exclusion of other features
(e.g. judging the volume of a jar of liquid purely by a single dimension
such as height, rather than taking into account other dimensions such as
width). Centration is considered by Piagetians to be a manifestation of
egocentricity, which can lead to the inability to perform the process of
decentration,

brain

spinal cord

spinal nerves

Figure 14 The central nervous system

and the inability to conserve number and volume. cephalo-caudal
Literally 'from head to tail'. A description applied to the development
of motor coordination in infants by Gesell, who undertook some of the
first systematic observations of infant development, and who proposed
that infant development was largely maturational, and therefore always
consistent in direction. See also proximo-distal. cerebellum A structure
at the back of the brain, which is responsible for the mediation of
voluntary movement and balance. Part of the midbrain, it has been
described as a 'mini-brain', forming a distinctive wrinkled bulge under
the back of the cerebrum. The cerebellum is highly convoluted, has two
distinct lobes and its major function appears to be the coordination of
physical movement. It receives sensory input from the kinaesthetic nerve
fibres and from the organs of balance in the inner ear as well as input
from the motor and sensory areas of the brain, and coordinates actions
into smooth sequences of behaviour. See also pyramidal motor system.
cerebral cortex The outer part of the cerebrum, which has six or seven
layers of neurones, and which covers the whole of the surface. The
cerebral cortex consists of grey matter, and it is in the cortex itself
that the informationprocessing functions of the cerebrum are believed to
take place. The remainder of the cerebrum, below the cortex, consists of
white matter, which is made up of myelinated nerve fibres that transmit
information from one part of the brain to another. Parts of the cerebral
cortex have highly localised functions, such as the language areas or
the sensory projection areas. Historically, some areas

C

of it appeared to have a generalised information-processing function and
were referred to by the term association cortex. Such areas used to be
considered to conform to the principle of equipotentiality (i.e. they
operate 'en masse', with the overall amount of cortex involved being
more important than the specific location of that cortex). This model is
no longer current as a result of information from brain scans which
imply that there is more specificity to the cortex than was previously
thought. See also cerebral hemispheres, cerebrum. cerebral hemispheres
The two halves of the cerebrum, which are joined by a band of nerve
fibres known as the corpus callosum. In general, the left hemisphere
mediates the functioning of the right side of the body, while the right
hemisphere is concerned with the left side. Split-brain studies
indicated that the two cerebral hemispheres, while ­similar in their
general structure and in the p­ rojection areas, were concerned with
different aspects of 'higher' mental functioning, the left hemisphere
being more concerned with language, logic and mathematical functioning,
while the right hemisphere was thought to be more concerned with
spatial, artistic and musical abilities. However, these differences have
been considerably exaggerated in popular culture, and evidence from
brain scans shows that both hemispheres are involved in both types of
function, although not necessarily to the same extent. It has also been
shown that one hemisphere can take over the functions of the other in
the event of severe lesion or hemispherectomy. See also cerebral cortex.
cerebral palsy A condition in which there is difficulty in motor
control, resulting from brain damage and usually incurred around the
time of birth. The most common form is spasticity, in which

55

the muscles become stiff or paralysed. Intelligence may be unaffected,
but people with cerebral palsy often have their cognitive ability
underestimated because of their uncontrolled movements. cerebrospinal
fluid The fluid that fills the ventricles of the brain and the central
canal running through the spinal cord. It carries nutrients to the
neurones of the central nervous system. cerebrovascular accident (CVA)
See aneurism. cerebrum A structure of the brain that forms the largest
part of its mass in human beings and cetaceans. The cerebrum is
concerned with the processing of information and the coordination of
voluntary responses, and as such, it is also concerned with thinking and
other cognitive functions. The cerebrum is divided into two cerebral
hemispheres, each of which has specific areas that deal with localised
functions, such as the sensory projection areas. Anatomically, each
hemisphere of the cerebrum is divided into four lobes -- the frontal
lobe, the parietal lobe, the temporal lobe and the occipital lobe (see
Figure 15). See also cerebral cortex. chameleon effect The spontaneous
mimicry of gestures or facial expressions during positive interpersonal
exchanges. See also mirror neurone, postural echo. change blindness A
failure to notice the appearance or disappearance of objects in two
alternating images. See also attention. Charles Bonnet syndrome A
condition resulting from an eye disease, in which people form extremely
vivid and explicit visual hallucinations, which they may sometimes
mistake for reality. chartjunk Irrelevant and unnecessary data and/or
information included in the presentation of statistical results.

56

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

parietal lobe frontal lobe

occipital lobe

temporal lobe

Figure 15 Lobes of the cerebral hemispheres chemotherapy The treatment
of a ­disorder or clinical problem by means of drugs. Chemotherapy became
a popular method of treatment for psychiatric disturbances during the
1950s when psychoactive drugs such as chlorpromazine (Largactil) and
diazepam (Valium) were introduced. The stronger drugs allowed the
treatment of people with extreme behavioural disorders to p­ roceed
without physical restraint, and as such became widely used very quickly.
Nowadays, the spectrum of psychoactive drugs available is extremely
wide, including such groups as antidepressants, anti-anxiety drugs,
tranquillisers, amphetamines, barbiturates and several more. There is
considerable debate as to the ethics and usefulness of many forms of
chemotherapy for psychiatric or psychological disorders. See also
benzodiazepines. chi-square (χ2) A non-parametric statistic that is
applied to nominal data. The expected frequency of each event is
compared with the frequency obtained in the

research, and the chi-square indicates how likely it is that the
differences could have resulted from chance variation. child abuse A
general term for all forms of abuse of children. Physical injury was the
first form to be widely recognised (see battered baby syndrome) and is
still the most common form to be reported. However, it is now recognised
that other forms of child abuse may be at least as common, though they
are often more difficult to identify. The major forms of abuse can be
grouped under the headings of physical, emotional and sexual, See
emotional abuse, failure to thrive, physical abuse, neglect, sexual
abuse. child-directed speech (CDS) A special form of speaking that
parents and other adults use with small children. While not the same as
baby talk, it is characterised by simple sentence structures and an
emphasis on relevant nouns. child-rearing styles A generalised term used
to refer to characteristic ways of

C

handling or dealing with one's children. Between the 1940s and 1960s,
there was a considerable amount of research into the effects of
child-rearing or parenting styles, much of which proved inconclusive.
One problem seems to have been that no account had been taken of the
effects of the child on the parents. See transaction, authoritative.
childhood amnesia The way that early memories become lost as the child
grows older. Five-year-olds often have quite clear memories of being 1
or 2 years old, but these fade with time, and have usually completely
disappeared by the time the child is 11 or 12. chlorpromazine A widely
used antipsychotic drug, which is a derivative of phenothiazine.
Chlorpromazine has a sedative effect, caused by raising the threshold
for sensory information in the brainstem, reducing sensory input to the
reticular formation of the brain, blocking the uptake of the
neurotransmitters adrenaline and noradrenaline in the sympathetic
division of the autonomic nervous system, and also blocking the uptake
of acetylcholine by nerve fibres of the parasympathetic division.
Chlorpromazine is sold under the trade names Largactil and Thorazine.
See also chemotherapy. choice reaction time The time someone takes to
respond to a signal when experimental conditions require a choice to be
made. In general, reaction time increases as the number of choices
increases, in such a way that, if the reaction time is plotted against
the square root of the number of choices, a straight line will be
obtained. chromatic adaptation Changes in the sensitivity to colour when
the background lighting is altered. See also colour constancy.

57

chromatic colours Colours of varying wavelengths, which are perceived as
having different hues (e.g. blue, red, ­yellow). See also achromatic
colours. chromosome Strings of DNA that appear as thread-like
structures, arranged in pairs, in the nucleus of a cell shortly before
division. Chromosomes carry the genes that determine the physical
characteristics of the individual, and as such are large-scale units of
heredity. chronic Continuing over a period of time. The term is usually
applied to illnesses to distinguish persisting conditions (such as a
depression that has been going on for years) from those that are not
expected to last, or at least that have only just started and had a
sudden onset. Those conditions are described as acute. chronological age
The age of an individual measured by standard units (e.g. in months or
years). In the original formulation of the intelligence quotient by
Binet, the measurement was obtained by comparing the chronological age
of the child with its mental age. In this way, a comparison could be
made as to how the child compared in learning skills with its
contemporaries. Chronological age is measured from birth, and so may be
misleading when applied to premature babies, who are biologically
younger than infants born at full term of the same chronological age.
The age counted from the date of conception is called the 'gestational
age'. See also mental age. chunking The process by which shortterm
memory can be extended. Miller's 1956 theory stated that short-term
memory was of limited capacity, able to deal with only 7 plus or minus 2
items at a time. However, by grouping items of information into
meaningful 'chunks', that capacity could be extended considerably
(e.g. the figures 1, 0, 6, 6 would form

58

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

four units treated separately, but just one 'chunk' if perceived as the
date 1066). cingulate cortex This is a large area of the brain located
immediately above the corpus callosum (Figure 16). It is often
considered part of the limbic system and has complex functions. The
anterior cingulate cortex is involved in pain perception: both in terms
of the direct experience of pain and also through the regulation of pain
as a result of the release of opiates and enkephalins. It is also active
in meditation and mindfulness states. Other areas of the cingulate
cortex are actively involved in emotions such as happiness, disgust, and
social emotions such as embarrassment; and also with memory, learning
and risk evaluation. The ridge which forms the cingulate gyrus has also
been found to be involved in the detection of emotional and cognitive
conflicts. See also multiple-demand network, anterior cingulate gyrus.
circadian rhythm A term used to describe bodily cycles that last for
approximately 24 hours (e.g. cycles of temperature and

Figure 16 The cingulate cortex

of alertness). Many individuals show pronounced circadian rhythms,
becoming 'attuned' to their daily cycle. Disruption of these cycles,
such as occurs when travelling from one time zone to another, can
produce an uncomfortable period of readjustment known as jet lag.
Extensive research by Kleitman and others has investigated natural human
periodicity in cue-free environments, such as caves in which lighting
and temperature are kept constant. Physiological correlates of diurnal
rhythms (e.g. fluctuations in body temperature) and the relationship
between circadian rhythms and performance have been studied in this way
(Figure 17). Circadian rhythms are also known as diurnal rhythms when
referring to functions that occur during the day, and nocturnal rhythms
for night-time activities. See biological clock, zeitgeber. circular
reactions These were considered by Piaget (e.g. Piaget, 1959) to be an
essential mechanism of cognitive development during the sensorimotor
stage. In circular reactions, the result of an action triggers a
repetition of that action, or

C

59

Figure 17 Circadian rhythms

some variation of it. As a result, actions are repeated and become
practised, and so competences are acquired and schemata are developed.
At first, such reactions involve only the infant's own body and are
called primary circular reactions. Later, the child progresses to
secondary and tertiary circular reactions. clairvoyance Seeing or
perceiving without being physically present or receiving direct sensory
input from the target. A considerable amount of research in
parapsychology has been devoted to investigations of clairvoyance,
particularly in the form of 'distance viewing' -- identifying scenes
from a distance of several hundred miles away. The military potential of
the research meant that it attracted more funding than most
parapsychology topics, but the outcomes were hotly disputed and remain
equivocal. Other studies of clairvoyance include investigations of the
actions of mediums and other 'psychic' practitioners. clandestine
recording The process of generating secret or hidden recordings of
events, unknown to the participants. See also deception. classical
concept A term referring to the classification of human concepts
following work by J.S. Bruner and others on the development of thinking.
Classical concepts are those in which the identifying properties of the
concept are shown by every member of that class. For instance, all the
cards of the

'diamonds' suit in a pack will show the diamond symbol, will be
rectangular, etc. By contrast, although 'having four legs' would be an
identifying property of the concept 'tables', not all members of the
class would possess that identifying property. 'Tables' would therefore
be a probabilistic concept rather than a classical concept. classical
conditioning The procedure of pairing an originally neutral stimulus
with a stimulus that reliably produces a response, so that the neutral
stimulus comes to produce a version of the response on its own. In
Pavlov's original experiment, the neutral stimulus, called the
conditioned stimulus or CS, was a bell which rang at the same time that
the effective stimulus of food, called the unconditioned stimulus or
UCS, was presented. Eventually, the bell on its own came to produce some
of the responses that food had elicited, such as salivation. These
responses are called the conditioned response or CR. The original full
response to food was called the unconditioned response or UCR. Pairing
an arbitrary CS with a UCR may require over 100 trials before
conditioning becomes established. However, when the UCR is a strong
emotional response, such as fear, classical conditioning can be achieved
in a single trial. Although it has been studied in the laboratory, there
are many everyday situations in which stimuli are paired in such a way
that classical conditioning

60

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

will occur (see Figure 18). See also eyeblink response. claustrophobia
An anxiety disorder in which a person experiences intense anxiety about
being, or imagining being, in enclosed or tight spaces such as lifts and
locked rooms. Claustrophobia can severely restrict many aspects of a
person's life. Treatments range from a psychoanalytically based therapy
which looks for the origin of underlying fears to cognitive-behavioural
therapy (CBT) which works directly on the symptoms. See desensitisation,
agoraphobia. claustrum This is a thin layer of interneurones, only two
or three centimetres long, which is located below the deepest part of
the lateral fissure. It has connections right across the brain, linking
with many areas of the cerebrum and limbic system, particularly those
concerned with attention and sensation. It appears to be a major brain
structure -- if not the major brain structure -- ­associated with human
consciousness. client-centred therapy A form of psychotherapy developed
by Carl Rogers, based on a humanistic approach, in which the individual
is considered to be the only person who can develop solutions or
approaches to his or her problem, and the role of the therapist is to
facilitate such development. Because the therapist is frequently dealing
with highly approval-seeking individuals, the onus is on the therapist
to use non-­directive therapy and to develop a

Figure 18 Stages of classical conditioning

genuine and warm relationship with the client, which will allow that
individual to explore possibilities and options freely. See also
actualising tendency, positive regard, unconditional positive regard.
clinical interview An approach to interviewing children that is less
­formal than a research interview, and is designed to allow them to
display their modes of thinking. Clinical interviewing was a major
component of Piaget's research. clinical neuropsychology The study of
how the brain and nervous system function, in psychological terms, using
information gained from investigating clinical cases. These include
people with head injuries, brain tumours or disease, or people with
specific mental deficits such as the inability to recognise faces or
recall names. In recent years, advances in brain scanning technology
have led to significant developments in clinical neuropsychology.
clinical psychology The branch of applied psychology that is concerned
with the use of insights and methods obtained from theoretical
psychology, research and clinical experience to assist people with
problems in living, or with psychological difficulties. Over the last 60
years, the profession has shifted from providing assessments as
requested by psychiatrists to functioning as independent therapists.
Clinical psychologists may use a range of techniques, such as cognitive
therapy, behaviour therapy, psychotherapy, family therapy and
biofeedback. The major specialisms are defined

C

in terms of client groups (i.e. general adult, child, mental handicap,
neurology and the elderly). However, clinical psychologists are
increasingly to be found as independent practitioners, working in
community bases or working alongside general medical practitioners, and
they are also sometimes employed in industry. cloning A technique which
makes use of the fact that the genetic 'blueprint' for a whole animal is
reproduced in the genes and chromosomes of each cell nucleus in its
body. By culturing small groups of undifferentiated cells, it is
possible to develop a complete individual of the same species, which is
genetically identical to its parent animal. Successful cloning has been
achieved in many different species of animal, ranging from frogs to
sheep. The cloning of human beings to create a tightly stratified
society forms a favourite theme of science fiction writers but is
unlikely to catch on in a big way, as the production of new human beings
by traditional methods would appear to be both popular and effective.
closed questions Questions that may be asked during a research or a
therapeutic interview that can be answered using simple categories. An
example would be: 'Have you gained insight into your own behaviour as a
result of studying psychology?' See open questions for a more productive
version of this question. Closed questions can be responded to in a way
that closes down that part of the conversation, and so are regarded as
bad practice in interviews. However, in

Figure 19 Closure

61

practice, participants are well aware of the social requirements of an
interview, and will usually only give closed answers (such as just
saying 'no' in response to the question above) if they want to make some
point. See also questionnaire fallacy. closure A tendency to perceive
incomplete objects as being complete. A triangle with its corners
missing will, at a glance, be seen as the more familiar complete
triangle (see Figure 19). The term is also used to refer more generally
to the preference for completeness so that, for example, an unfinished
emotional task like expressing dissatisfaction -- not 'getting something
off the chest' -- leaves us with a wish to complete the process. cluster
sampling A method of obtaining a research sample that uses a 'natural'
group (e.g. all the children in a class, or all of the PE teachers
working for Highland Council). CNS See central nervous system. coaching
A form of personal development in which the individual is supported by
another person, or coach, whose role is to provide training, advice and
guidance. It is most commonly used in work or organisational contexts,
but a similar approach known as life coaching involves individuals
providing the same roles to people to help them deal with their everyday
lives and problems. coaction A term used to describe the process of
acting jointly with another person (e.g. working together on a task).

62

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

coarticulation The way that someone's production of a specific phoneme
is affected by the phonemes immediately preceding and following it.
cocaine A drug obtained originally from the coca plant and used as a
local anaesthetic. Freud is credited with reporting the first medical
use. The drug also produces a sense of euphoria if taken internally, and
is often used as a recreational drug. It can produce dependency. cochlea
The coiled tube in the inner ear that transduces sound vibrations into
electrical impulses (see Figure 20). See also organ of Corti. cocktail
party effect A term given to one of the well-established phenomena of
selective attention -- the way that individuals are able to monitor
unattended information subconsciously, such that they pick up highly
sensitive information (e.g. their own name) even when attending to
entirely different stimuli, and when they are unaware of the rest of the
unattended message. code of conduct A set of binding rules concerning
appropriate behaviour and procedures, which must be observed by
practising professionals. Agreement to

(endolymph)

bone

conform to the relevant code of conduct is the basis for the issuing of
licences to practise professionally. codes of language A description of
styles of language use that distinguishes two main 'codes' of language:
elaborated codes, which involve a wide vocabulary and extensive use of
nouns and explicit descriptions; and restricted codes, involving a more
restricted vocabulary, a preference for pronouns, and the use of
implicit in preference to explicit description. These codes were first
described by Bernstein, who argued that: (i) (ii)

elaborated codes were used far more by middle-class than by
working-class families; and the language code used would facilitate or
inhibit cognitive development, owing to elaborated codes being less
dependent on context, and therefore more amenable to abstract
conceptualisation.

Bernstein's work was heavily criticised, notably by Labov, as being
elitist. coding Also referred to as encoding, the term is generally
taken to refer to ways

tectorial membrane

hair cells basilar membrane

auditory nerve

Figure 20 Section through the cochlea

(perilymph)

C

in which information is represented cognitively (e.g. for storing in
memory or for association with other information). Memories may be coded
in a variety of ways, using many different modalities (e.g. kinaesthetic
or enactive coding, visual coding or coding by iconic representation,
auditory coding). Coding is also an essential part of qualitative
research techniques such as grounded theory when a hierarchical set of
codes is applied to interview material. See also schema, representation.
codon A sequence of three nucleotide bases which make up an amino acid.
It is used to summarise a specific genetic instruction produced by the
activity of DNA. coefficient A numerical value that indicates the
strength of a relationship, as in correlation coefficient. More
generally, a coefficient indicates how much a variable is modified. For
example, a ball with a coefficient of elasticity of 0.9 keeps 90 per
cent of its momentum when it hits a hard surface, and so will bounce
more than a ball with a coefficient of 0.4. coefficient of determination
A number that expresses how much of the variation in a data-set can be
accounted for by a particular correlation. It is normally calculated by
multiplying the correlation coefficient by 10, then squaring it to
obtain a percentage (e.g. a coefficient of 0.6 would account for roughly
36 per cent of the data). coevolution A concept which acknowledges that
natural selection is not a one-way process. While a species is adapting
to its environment, the presence of that species will be having effects
on the environment, including other plants and animals. In this way,
evolution needs to be seen as a progressive mutual

63

­accommodation between species. The concept is similar to that of
transaction in development. cognition A general term used to refer to
the 'higher' mental processes. Cognition would generally be taken to
include such forms of mental activity as thinking and conceptualisation,
memory, representation and mental imagery, perception and attention,
reasoning and decision-making. cognitive Referring to cognition.
cognitive architecture The overall framework being used to represent
human cognition, or to model it in the case of computer systems.
cognitive behaviour therapy A method of psychological therapy derived
from behaviour therapy but extended to take account of the patient's
cognitions. The objective is to modify both maladaptive behaviours and
maladaptive beliefs. See also cognitive therapy. cognitive bias
modification Cognitive training (e.g. of memory or problem-­ solving)
that is typically designed to reduce bias, either from attention
processes or from patterns of interpretation. cognitive development The
way in which cognitions develop during childhood. The major and most
detailed theory of cognitive development is that produced by Piaget,
although his theory is largely restricted to the ways in which thinking
and understanding change through childhood. One of Piaget's most
important contributions was to establish that the thought and logic of
young children is not an inferior version of adult thinking, but has its
own rules and is well adapted to the needs of the child. Cognitive
development is not just a process of getting better at adult modes of
cognition but is a ­complex

64

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

progression through different kinds of thinking and understanding. Other
approaches to cognitive development include research into metacognition,
social cognition and the child's theory of mind. See also genetic
epistemology. cognitive dissonance A concept put forward by Festinger,
in which the main proposal is that people strive to maintain consistency
between their differing cognitions. Should a noticeable inconsistency
arise, this will produce a state of cognitive dissonance, which the
individual experiences as uncomfortable and attempts to correct.
Dissonance is reduced by adjusting one of the beliefs or attitudes
involved in the inconsistency so that the conflict disappears. See also
balance theory. cognitive domain One of the four domains of the psyche,
this one being concerned with reasoning, thinking and understanding. See
also behavioural domain, conative domain, affective domain. cognitive
map An internal representation of a specific or general area that forms
a plan or outline which can guide behaviour. The idea of cognitive maps
was put forward by Tolman following work in which he demonstrated that
rats which had been allowed to explore mazes freely would perform better
when subsequently reinforced than rats which had not had such an
experience. Tolman used the concept of cognitive maps to illustrate one
of the ways in which cognition might be involved in learning, at a time
when learning was largely conceptualised as a reflexive,
stimulus--response process. Later research on cognitive maps in humans
demonstrated, for instance, the way in which areas familiar to an
individual would be perceived as larger and more complex than distant
ones. Some cognitive theorists, including Tolman,

have argued that cognitive mapping forms the basis of all internal
representation. See also hippocampus. cognitive miser Someone whose
thinking patterns characteristically involve minimal levels of time and
effort. See also principle of parsimony. cognitive model An attempt to
outline the theoretical mechanisms involved in a particular cognitive
process, such as problem-solving or selective attention. A cognitive
model is particularly likely to emphasise the role of information
processing, as opposed to, say, habits or emotions. cognitive
neuropsychology An approach to cognitive psychology that focuses on
combining neurological information with knowledge about cognitive
processes. This includes the study of brain structure and functioning as
it relates to psychological ability (e.g. the study of acquired dyslexia
as a result of brain injury). cognitive neuroscience An approach to
research that aims to explain cognitive processes in terms of
neurological mechanisms. cognitive processes Mental activities such as
thinking, reasoning, memory, the understanding and interpreting of
language, perception, decision-making, and so on. The term is also used
to describe specific activities within these areas, such as the way in
which textual information is processed and interpreted during the act of
reading. cognitive processing The act of working on cognitive
information by altering its structure, changing its form or exploring
its meanings and implications. cognitive psychology The branch of
psychology that is concerned with the study of cognition. Cognitive
psychology is generally taken to include the

C

study of perceptual processes, attention, memory, imagery, language,
concept formation, problem-solving, creativity, reasoning,
decision-making, cognitive development and cognitive styles, but has
often been assumed to exclude learning. cognitive revolution The period
between the 1950s and the 1980s in which mental information-processing
displaced behaviourism as the major focus of research interest in
psychology. See also behaviourism, social revolution. cognitive skill
Competence in a defined cognitive task. The term is used in the study of
skills to separate those skills such as verbal fluency and chess
playing, in which the cognitive component is most important, from motor
skills, in which the physical activity is what matters most. cognitive
stage of skill acquisition The initial stage of skill acquisition, in
which the individual is consciously aware of all of the procedures
involved and how they should be connected. Behaviour or understanding at
this stage tends to be slow and relatively clumsy until the skill
becomes more practised. See also autonomous stage of skill acquisition.
cognitive styles Distinctive patterns of cognition that characterise
individuals. Work on cognitive styles has included investigations of
convergent and ­divergent thinking, field dependence and forms of
intelligence. cognitive therapy In its narrow sense, an approach to the
treatment of depression developed by Aaron Beck. Beck sees depression as
resulting from a combination of a negative evaluation of the self, a
negative view of present experiences and events, and negative
expectations of the future. The sufferer then uses faulty logic to
maintain this outlook. The therapist

65

must be very active to modify the way in which the patient thinks,
insisting on correct logic and challenging unrealistically pessimistic
assumptions. Beck described specific techniques for use in cognitive
therapy, but the term is now being used for a wider range of less
welldefined approaches based on similar principles but applicable to a
wider range of conditions. See also attributional style, cognitive
behaviour therapy. cognitivism A way of looking at psychology that sees
information processing as being the core and source of all behaviour.
See also computer metaphor. Cohen's d A measure of effect size.
coherence A measure of validity used in discourse analysis. It is
concerned with the way that new information relates to previous work,
either by confirming or challenging it. cohesion The tendency of members
of a group to stick together rather than separate as individuals. See
also social identity theory. cohort Any grouping of people or animals.
The term is most often used in psychology to refer to people of similar
age, although the interest may be that they share some common
experience. For example, European people who were born between 1935 and
1945 share the fact that their early childhood would have been affected
by the Second World War. cohort design A form of research design in
which a group of participants is selected and then followed up at
intervals (e.g. the children born in a particular year, or the members
of a class of students graduating on one particular occasion). cohort
effect The effect of belonging to a particular cohort. The cohort effect
is usually seen as a complication in

66

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

­developmental studies, because it may produce a difference between
people of different ages that has nothing to do with ageing. For
example, differences in IQ between 40-year-olds and 60-year-olds in the
year 2000 may have been affected by the different ways in which children
were fed in the 1940s and 1960s. cohort model The idea that word
recognition begins by the initial sound triggering off a cohort of
possibilities, which is then narrowed down as more sounds are produced,
or by the context. collective unconscious The concept, proposed by Carl
Jung (e.g. Jung, 1964), that the human race has developed a shared
unconscious mind which contains universal images called archetypes.
collectivism This is the moral or epistemological stance that emphasises
the group and the importance of its interests above those of the
individual. See also allocentrism, individualism. colour blindness The
inability to detect certain wavelengths of light. Most colour-blind
individuals are red/green colour-blind, that is, they are unable to
distinguish between particular shades of red and their equivalent shade
of green, but occasionally individuals are blue/ yellow colour-blind.
Colour blindness is found in about one in ten males, and it is much
rarer in females. It arises from a faulty gene carried on the
X-chromosome, which in women is usually counteracted by the normal
equivalent allele on the other X-chromosome. However, males have only
one X-chromosome, and the Y-chromosome is shorter, so there is no chance
of a 'healthy' gene to correct the fault. colour constancy The process
by which the perceptual system compensates for the appearance of objects
seen under

light of differing wavelengths. Colour is detected by the analysis of
the wavelength of the light reflected from an object. In normal white
light, the light reflected will show the true colour, but under coloured
lights an object may reflect the light of a very different hue, owing to
the mixture of colours. However, the brain compensates for this by using
its prior knowledge of the object and by adaptation to the viewing
conditions, so the object is perceived as keeping its true colour.
colour vision The ability to detect the specific wavelengths of light
reaching the eye, which facilitates fine discrimination of detail and
the use of colour as a signalling medium. Colour is detected to some
extent by the cone cells of the eye, but the full mechanisms by which
human beings detect colour are complex and not yet fully understood. See
V4, opponent processing, Young-- Helmholtz theory. commisurectomy A
surgical process of cutting the corpus callosum that connects the two
hemispheres of the brain. After the operation, the two hemispheres can
no longer communicate and so the functions that are localised within
each can be studied. The operation is only ever carried out for medical
purposes, usually of reducing epileptic seizures, but studies of these
patients have provided valuable information about the different
specialisations of the hemispheres. See split-brain studies.
communication The process of transmitting information to another
individual or group of individuals, and having it received and
interpreted by them. Communication may be voluntary or involuntary --
the individual who unwittingly signals that they are nervous by
fidgeting, etc., is communicating this

C

to the observer, although not voluntarily. Communication in human beings
is complex and varied, and can be roughly classified into three general
types: (i) (ii)

(iii) 

verbal communication (using language or codes which stand for language);
personal non-verbal communication (such as the use of dress, posture,
gesture or gaze to communicate); and ritual (the use of highly
structured events or environments, or familiar patterns of activity, to
communicate).

It is also possible to regard social networking and other forms of
internet activity as a fourth category, particularly given the extensive
use of imagery in such communication. communication channel The vehicle
by which information is carried to its recipients. This could be
television, a computer, a magazine, a mobile phone or other external
devices, but could also be a part of the nervous system. See also
bandwidth. community psychology The application of psychology to
improving life for members of the community. The focus of community
psychologists has been mainly on people whose capacity is reduced in
some way (e.g. those who have lived in institutions for a long time).
The term is used particularly for setting up environmental conditions
such as sheltered housing, which will make it possible for such people
to engage in some participation in the ­general community. See social
exclusion. co-morbidity The diagnosis of more than one psychological
disorder in the same individual.

67

comparative psychology The branch of psychology that involves drawing
comparisons between different species to gain insight into the
mechanisms of behaviour. Some psychologists see the value of comparative
psychology as being to shed light on human functioning, while others
regard an understanding of animal behaviour as a legitimate goal in
itself. Much early comparative psychology was in fact the study of a
single species of artificially bred laboratory rat, but the increasing
popularity of ethological observation has broadened its scope to include
the study of the abilities and cognitive capacity of many other species.
Comparative psychology includes many branches of learning theory
(especially those in the behaviourist tradition), ethology, and any area
of psychology that has been influenced by studies of animals (e.g. early
theories of attachment). comparison groups These are groups in a
research study which are used as the baseline for comparison with those
particular groups or conditions which are of direct interest to the
researcher. In experiments, they are referred to as control groups, and
there are rigorous requirements for the control groups in randomised
control trials. The more general term is used in other research methods
as well, to describe groups from which data have been collected, and
which are used to interpret observations from the group which is the
main focus of interest. compensation Using other resources to make up
for a deficit (e.g. when a blind person makes exceptional use of sound
stimuli). In psychoanalytic terms, it is a way of overcoming, or at
least concealing, a defect in personality, particularly in Adler's
theory of compensation for feelings of inferiority. Note that
compensation does not necessarily mean

68

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

overcompensation. In neurophysiology, compensation refers to the process
in which an intact part of the brain may take over the functions of a
damaged part. competence The ability to perform tasks or carry out
procedures in a way which means that they are likely to be completed
successfully. competitive drugs Drugs that compete for the same
neurotransmitter receptor site as the 'natural' neurotransmitter -- for
example, nicotine, which is taken up by acetylcholine receptor sites,
inhibiting their function and producing feelings of lethargy.
complementary needs hypothesis The idea that people form relationships
with one another because qualities in each person satisfy unmet needs in
the other. This is the psychological version of the lay principle that
'opposites attract', and acts as a counterbalance to the matching
hypothesis. complex (i)

(ii) 
(iii) 

description implying that the phenomenon in question is complicated,
probably having many influencing factors. A noun used to describe a
­complicated mass (e.g. 'a ­complex of reasons'). In terms of
psychoanalytic theory, a noun used to describe a set of emotionally
charged phenomena and feelings (e.g. the Oedipus complex).

complex cell A type of neurone found in the visual cortex of the brain.
Discovered by Hubel and Wiesel in 1968, complex cells form part of a
hierarchical arrangement of cells that serve the function of coding
incoming visual information

into simple shapes and patterns. For a full description, see simple
cell. complex correlation a correlational relationship between more than
two variables. Using complex correlations a researcher can explore
relationships among several variables all in the same study. They might
be using partial correlation to see how two variables correlate once you
remove the statistical relationship with a third variable. Complex
correlational research can be used to explore possible causal
relationships among several variables using techniques such as multiple
regression which can take a chosen outcome variable and see which of the
others correlate most strongly with it. Factor analysis will find out
how variables group together in a way that suggests there is an
underlying factor to which they contribute. compliance Conforming to
accepted patterns of behaviour, or aquiescing in decisions. Kelman draws
a distinction between conformity to others or to social norms arising
from compliance, and conformity arising from the internalisation of the
group norms or values. Compliance is perceived as an outward conformity,
with the individual reserving opinion or inwardly disagreeing.
componential intelligence The part of Sternberg's triarchic theory of
intelligence that deals with mental processes and aptitudes.
Componential intelligence is considered to have three main elements: (i)

(ii) 

metacomponents, which are the higher-order processes involved in, for
instance, planning and decision-making; performance components, which
are involved in actually carrying out a task, such as the ability to

C

(iii) 

count or calculate, or reason logically; and knowledge-acquisition
components, which are concerned with how we go about acquiring or
learning new information.

See also intelligence test. compulsion A repetitive, stereotyped
behaviour that is both unnecessary and unwanted, but which the
individual still feels they have to carry out. It is usually associated
with obsessions. See also obsessive--compulsive disorder. compulsive
personality disorder See also obsessive--compulsive disorder.
computational modelling The construction of computer programs designed
to replicate a function or process observed in animals, humans or
society in general. computational theory of perception A theory
developed by Marr, who proposed that we are able to identify objects
because of various computations or calculations applied by the brain to
the visual image received by the retina. Computational theory emphasises
the characteristics of edges and boundaries in the visual image, and
suggests that the brain uses these to build up an increasingly complex
series of representations of the object, until eventually a
three-dimensional picture can be produced. computed axial tomography See
CAT scan. computer-assisted learning (CAL) The use of computer programs
written to enable students to learn at their own pace. The user works
through factual material and exercises, with corrective feedback from
the computer. Also known as 'computer-­assisted instruction' (CAI).

69

computer metaphor Thinking of the brain as if it were a computer. Using
what we know about computers as a metaphor in this way was especially
useful in the early days of information theory because it provided a
whole language in which to talk about the brain as an information
processor. However, it also distorted some areas of cognitive psychology
by de-emphasising the human side of cognition. computer simulation The
use of computers to replicate human thought strategies and patterns of
behaviours. Research on computer simulation has involved the study of
the use of heuristics in reasoning, and of probabilistic judgements in
decision-making. It is hoped by those involved that such research will
eventually shed light on human cognitive processes. In industrial
psychology, computer simulation often provides a safer, cheaper or more
ethical way of examining what will happen to the process being simulated
under a variety of conditions. See also artificial intelligence.
conative To do with intentionality. The conative domain was one of the
three domains of the human psyche outlined by Galen in the
second-century BC, the other two being the affective domain and the
cognitive domain. This distinction was maintained in attitude theory,
where a given attitude was considered to have three components: (i) (ii)
(iii)

an affective or emotional component; a cognitive or rationalised
component; and a conative or behavioural component, which is concerned
with the individual's tendency to act on the attitude in question.

70

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

However, in more recent years, it has been recognised that conation is
not the same as behaviour. Conative means 'to do with will and
intention', and as such is a fourth domain. In many ways, this
represents a seriously neglected area of human psychology. conative
domain The domain of human personality or human nature that is concerned
with intentionality, will, decisions and planning. In early models, the
conative dimension was seen as acting in conjunction with the affective
and cognitive domains of personality. With the advent of behaviourism,
and its determinist view of human nature, the conative domain
disappeared and a behavioural domain was substituted. More recently,
psychologists have begun to investigate conative aspects of human nature
again, and the term is beginning to reappear. concept A set of ideas and
properties that can be used to group things together. It is a
generalised idea that may be abstract (e.g. 'justice') or concrete
(e.g. 'furniture'). Human cognitive processes are often considered to
progress by the formation and elaboration of concepts, resulting from
increased experience. See also classical concept, construct,
probabilistic concept, schema, mental model. concept formation The name
given to the process by which an individual comes to develop mental
categories that will allow objects and events to be classified and
grouped together. A considerable amount of research into cognitive
development has emphasised concept formation. See also classical
concept. conceptual priming A form of priming that is based on the
meaning of the stimulus.

conceptualisation The process of organising information into specific
concepts or categories. Also used to describe the first stage in speech
production, when ideas are first formed. concordance interval A way of
expressing where the mean is likely to fall in 95 per cent of a set of
samples. See also variance. concordance studies Family studies which aim
to assess genetic similarity within families and so calculate the
probability that a member of the family will develop an inherited
psychological or physiological disorder. concrete operational stage This
is the third of Piaget's four stages of cognitive development,
characterised by the child's fascination with the material world and
strong inclination to collect facts and statistics. Children in the
concrete operational stage were considered unable to deal fully with
abstract concepts, and able to deal only with those aspects of
experience that had a material equivalent or which could be represented
in a concrete fashion, although recent research suggests that this may
have been overemphasised. The stage was considered to last from
approximately 7 to 11 years of age. See also genetic epistemology,
formal operational stage, preoperational stage, sensorimotor stage.
concurrent Occurring at the same time. concurrent validity The degree to
which a test or measurement agrees with another measure of the same
thing, taken at the same time -- for example, personality test results
for an interviewee, and their interview data. Evaluation of a newly
constructed test may include investigating whether it gives similar
results to a well-established test. See also validity.

C

conditional positive regard A concept introduced by Carl Rogers, which
refers to the satisfaction of the basic need for positive regard in
human beings. The term refers to approval, love or respect which is
given only as a result of the individual behaving in 'appropriate' or
socially acceptable ways. A person who has encountered nothing but
conditional positive regard throughout their life will, according to
Rogers, become unable to satisfy their need for self-actualisation.
Autonomous action, or exploration of their own potential, involves
taking a certain amount of risk, in that it could conceivably result in
social disapproval. Having, or forming, a relationship that provides
unconditional positive regard for the individual provides the security
for such self-­actualisation to take place, and this is the goal of
Rogerian client-centred therapy. conditioned reflex A physiological
reflex, or autonomic response, produced in response to a stimulus that
would not normally produce such a reaction, but has come to do so as a
result of the process of classical conditioning. conditioned reinforcer
An event or stimulus which has acquired the property of strengthening a
learned (conditioned) response, such that the learning is less likely to
become extinguished. See also secondary reinforcement, conditioned
response. conditioned response (CR) A response that is produced under
specific conditions as a result of being associated through a training
process with a conditioned stimulus. The training process consists of
repeatedly pairing a novel stimulus with one that will elicit the
desired response automatically. After a while, the new stimulus will
come to elicit the response

71

independently, at which point the response is said to have become a
conditioned response. See classical conditioning. conditioned stimulus A
stimulus that brings about a response as a result of repeated
association with an unconditioned stimulus. See also classical
conditioning, conditioned response. conditioning A term used to describe
the process of learning. Learning is considered by behaviourist
psychologists to be the process of acquiring and reproducing specific
behavioural responses under specific conditions -- hence the term
'conditioning'. There are normally considered to be two major forms of
conditioning: classical conditioning and operant conditioning.
conditions Different organisational features of a study, designed to
generate outcomes which can be compared with one another. See also
control condition, control groups, comparison groups. conditions of
worth A concept proposed by Carl Rogers concerning the way the
individual's self-concept is affected by the conditional positive regard
that they have experienced throughout life. Conditions of worth are an
internalised set of values by which individuals assess their own
behaviour. In people who have experienced only conditional positive
regard throughout life, such conditions of worth may have come to
represent unrealistically high standards of conduct, giving the
individual a constantly negative self-concept through a sense of
personal failure, and inhibiting the expression of their need for
self-actualisation. conduct disorders A group of behaviour disorders in
children in which aggression or the breaking of rules is involved.

72

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

conduction aphasia The inability to repeat spoken language, or to read
aloud. See also aphasia. cone cells Cone-shaped cells found in the
retina of the eye that effect the transduction of light waves into
electrical impulses, which are subsequently transmitted to the brain for
interpretation. Cone cells contain iodopsin, which breaks down on
exposure to light, and are particularly concentrated in the fovea, the
central area of the visual field, so colour perception is better there;
while rod cells, sensitive to light and dark, are more prevalent towards
the edge of the retina. Different cone cells are maximally sensitive to
light of different wavelengths. The two major theories of colour vision,
the theory of trichromatism and the opponent processing theory, are both
based on the fact that there are three types of cone, which are
sensitive to different wavelengths of light, and therefore responsive to
three different colours, but the theories disagree as to how colours are
combined. confabulation The process of constructing memories so that
they fit with an opinion or view of what the memory should be about.
Through confabulation, a memory becomes adjusted or changed, often as a
result of discussions that have reshaped the meaning of the event. See
constructive memory. confidence level See statistical significance.
confidentiality The ethical principle that details concerning
individuals who have participated in research projects should be kept
private and not made available to anyone other than those researchers
who need to know. See also anonymity, ethical issues. confirmation bias
A tendency in decisionmaking to accept only information

that confirms what the person already believes or wishes to believe.
conflict The result of opposed motives applying simultaneously. Most
conflicts (e.g. between the desire to stay and finish an essay versus
the duty to go out with friends) are easy to resolve. Some are much more
difficult and result in an inability to act and the abandoning of both
objectives. (If you really could not decide whether to write or go out,
you might solve the problem by sitting in front of your computer and
daydreaming about going out.) Difficult conflicts of various kinds have
been studied experimentally, often with rats. Approach--avoidance
conflicts in which a goal is both desired and feared are the most
common, and readily result in inaction. Avoidance-- avoidance conflicts
(choosing between the frying pan and the fire) can easily occur and are
very stressful if a choice has to be made. Usually of less concern are
approach--approach conflicts, when going towards one desired goal means
leaving another (the mythical donkey that starved to death halfway
between two piles of food). conformity The social process by which
people in a group or in a social situation act in a certain way purely
because it appears to be socially acceptable -- that is, they go along
with the social expectations apparent at the time. Conformity is often
divided into compliance (conforming while inwardly disagreeing) and
internalisation (conforming as a result of internal agreement with the
behaviour). The three main types of conformity are: Normative conformity
-- ­conforming as a result of the existence of strong social norms
directing the accepted behaviour. Informational conformity -- conforming
with others on the grounds that

C

they are better informed about the situation. Ingratiational conformity
-- conformity with the specific purpose of achieving social approval, or
a feeling of 'belonging'. The classic experiment in the field was
conducted by Solomon Asch, who instructed groups of people to pretend to
misjudge the length of a line, and found that members of the group who
had not received this instruction felt under strong pressure to conform.
Conforming to group pressure is sometimes called the Asch effect.
confounding Confusing research data or the research question by
introducing additional factors or influences. See also confounding
variables. confounding variable A factor or variable in a study that
causes a change in the dependent variable (the measures being obtained),
but which is not the independent variable or main condition of the
study. Many of the techniques of experimental methodology are ways of
dealing with confounding variables. If, for example, the sex of the
research participants is likely to influence a result, this may be dealt
with: (i) (ii) (iii)

by eliminating the factor (use only female research participants); by
controlling for sex (equal numbers in each group so that the effect
cancels out); or incorporating it as a variable in the design (record
male and female participants separately and examine the effect of sex on
the dependent variable).

congenital A characteristic that is built into the person. Congenital
characteristics may be genetically specified (e.g.

73

eye colour) or caused during gestation (e.g. hearing impairment due to
rubella during foetal development). congenital amusia See amusia.
congruence A general term used to refer to behaviour, attitudes or ideas
that are in accord and not in conflict with other behaviour, attitudes
or ideas. See also balance theory. conjunction fallacy The mistaken
belief that a combination of two events is more likely to happen than
those events happening singly. See also decision-­making. connectionism
The theory that learning is achieved by processes in which the
connections between neurones are reinforced by use. As a result, neural
networks are set up that in some way represent the experience of the
organism. Connectionism is the fundamental principle of many approaches
to computer simulation inherent in the use of parallel distributed
processing systems to simulate human reasoning. The ability of such
systems to produce novelty, in the form of unexpected or unanticipated
outcomes (emergent properties), has been hailed as a major breakthrough
in the development of artificial intelligence. See also Hebb.
connectionist models Theories based on the principle of connectionism.
connector neurone Neurones found in the grey matter of the brain and
spinal cord that link and pass impulses on to other neurones. Connector
neurones are also known as relay neurones or multipolar neurones. They
are spidery in form, having several dendrites that enable the
transmission or receipt of information to or from many other neurones
(see Figure 21). connotative meaning The meaning that is implicit in a
particular term or

74

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

dendrite

cell body synaptic button

Figure 21 A connector neurone phrase, although possibly not made
explicit. See also denotative meaning. consanguinity Literally, 'being
of the same blood', it means that two people have genes in common, being
descended from the same parent or member of a previous generation. The
word usually appears in the context of marriage. Most societies forbid
marriage between close relatives -- inbreeding -- as such pairings are
more likely to produce genetic defects in any offspring. conscience An
acquired mental framework for making judgements about the moral
'rightness' or 'wrongness' of actions. The idea of conscience contains
strong overtones of duty and obligation. Doing things that conflict with
the conscience causes internal anxiety or distress. See also moral
development, superego. conscientiousness One of the main factors in the
five-factor theory of p­ ersonality, which reflects a tendency to
undertake tasks in a systematic and responsible manner, to respect
social obligations and to value moral and ethical principles highly.
conscious Available to awareness. Mental activities or contents that are
not available are called unconscious when it is thought that they are
being actively suppressed in ways originally described

by Freud, and non-conscious when they are simply processes which are
carried out without awareness. Processes that can be brought into
consciousness, but only with difficulty, are said to be preconscious or
subconscious. conscious process A mental process of which the individual
is aware, as it is happening. consciousness The awareness of one's own
mental processes. The state of being aware of one's perceptions,
thoughts and feelings is vivid and undeniable, but extremely difficult
to study. The major issue is whether consciousness has any function or
whether, as the behaviourists claim, it is just a by-product of
behaviour. As developments such as information theory have provided a
language for describing private mental events, psychologists are
returning to the study of phenomena such as consciousness. There is some
suggestion from brain scanning research that the part of the brain known
as the claustrum may be a crucial neurological structure in the
experience of consciousness. See also unconscious. consensus A common or
generalised agreement, usually concerning social norms or acceptable
behaviour, but also used to refer to agreement between the-

C

ories or ideas. In the covariance model of attribution theory, consensus
is one of three factors believed by Kelley to influence the kind of
attribution made for a specific situation or event. If a person is
observed shouting, a relevant question is whether everybody else is
shouting. If so, then the condition is one of high consensus and it is
assumed that there is something about the situation that is responsible
for the behaviour. If nobody else is shouting (low consensus), then the
behaviour will tend to be attributed to some characteristic of the
individual. See also consistency, distinctiveness. conservation The
ability to recognise that volume, number or mass does not change when
the physical appearance of the way in which they are presented changes.
In Piagetian theory, the ability to conserve is developed towards the
end of the preoperational stage. Prior to that time, if the child is
presented with, for example, two identical balls of clay and one of them
is rolled into a sausage shape, the child will say that the longer one
contains more clay. Piaget considered this to arise from the process of
­centration -- the child's tendency to focus on a single, central
attribute of objects rather than taking several different aspects of its
appearance into account. However, more recent studies (e.g. by
Donaldson) have demonstrated that the language used to the child and the
social situation of the experiments may have produced the result, and
that children may be able to conserve at a much earlier age than Piaget
suspected. See also naughty teddy, social cognition. consistency One of
three factors in Kelley's covariance model of attributions. The more
consistently a person produces the observed behaviour, the more likely
we are to see it as arising

75

from their disposition, and not the situation. See also consensus,
distinctiveness. consolidation The process by which momentary or
ephemeral changes in brain activity are altered into permanent
structural changes in either the brain or in cognitive processes such as
memory or learning. See also reconsolidation. conspecific Applying to or
including other members of the same species. constancy See perceptual
constancy. constancy scaling The process by which the perceptual system
adjusts to distance, by mentally 'scaling up' objects that are far away,
such that they are not perceived as being smaller. It is considered that
constancy scaling may provide an explanation for certain visual
illusions (e.g. the Ponzo illusion). constitution The inherited
physiological structure of an individual. There have been attempts to
relate psychological tendencies to the physical type of the individual,
notably in Sheldon's somatotype theory of personality, but relationships
are weak and inconsistent. construct A term used in George Kelly's
personal construct theory to define concepts or mini-theories in a
precise way. It is proposed that each person's cognitive system uses a
limited set of bipolar constructs (e.g. illness--health and
honest--­dishonest) to understand and make sense of their worlds. A large
part of the theory is concerned with the relationships between
constructs (e.g. a particular individual may have the idea that honest
people tend also to be healthy). See also core construct. construct
validity A test of the validity of a psychometric test or measurement
that involves seeing whether it makes

76

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

sense in terms of accepted theory. See also validity. constructionism
See social constructionism. constructive memory The general term given
to memory for meaningful material that has been affected by the
individual's own pre-existing schemata, values or attitudes. Since
Bartlett, it has been observed that people rarely remember events or
information accurately, but instead tend to adapt their memories to make
more sense and accord with their own cognitions and cognitive styles.
This is known as constructive memory. There is a case for arguing that
most human memory for social events and experiences is constructive
rather than factual. See also confabulation. constructive perception A
theory of perception spearheaded by Richard Gregory that emphasises how
perceptions are organised, structured or developed as a result of
cognitive processes such as expectation, emotion or memory. In other
words, our perceptions are not simple 'snapshots' of reality but express
and reflect our cognitive processing, even though they may feel
perfectly 'real' as images of the external world. Gregory proposed this
theory as an explanation for visual illusions, and it is often
contrasted with the theory of direct perception spearheaded by J.J.
Gibson. constructivism The view that cognition is about constructing a
coherent system of meaning within the person, rather than about
understanding reality. Constructivists are likely to regard reality as
unknowable, and also of less significance for the social sciences than
the meaning systems that people create. However, they do not claim that
reality does not exist, just that it is a more effective strategy to
explore how we construct meanings. The theories of

Umberto Maturana, Kelly and Piaget are major examples of constructivist
theories in psychology. Lev Vygotsky rejected Piaget's approach, arguing
that the meanings a person holds have been created through interaction
with others. See also positivism, social constructionism, discourse
analysis, zone of proximal ­development. consultative register A
reasonably formal type of speech register often used when speaking with
strangers. consumer psychology The application of psychological
principles to understanding consumers or customers. The marketing
industry was an early user of behavioural principles, but psychoanalytic
concepts dominated by the middle of the twentieth century. Today, there
is a much broader range of psychology to draw on, and consumerism has
become a more important component of Western society. Psychology is used
extensively in market research both for research techniques and for the
interpretation of findings on consumer behaviour. In advertising, the
areas of perception, memory, habituation, humour and aesthetic judgement
are crucial. Decision-making is relevant to how people decide to
allocate their incomes, while consumer activities in areas such as
choice of organic foods, fashion and health are not yet well understood.
Other areas could benefit from much more attention to psychological
knowledge. For example, 'relationship marketing' pays little attention
to psychological research into human relationships. Consumer psychology
seems likely to continue to grow as a user of psychology and a source of
employment for psychology graduates. contact hypothesis The idea that
prejudice can be significantly reduced if two groups have sufficient
everyday contact with one another. Unfortunately, while the contact
hypothesis has some

C

­validity, history shows that it is not proof against the manipulation of
social identification by others (e.g. politicians). contagion The
communication of a disease by direct or indirect contact. In psychology,
the term is also used to describe the involuntary repetition of innate
behaviours such as yawning. contaminating variable An unplanned aspect
of the experimental situation or experience which has a random and
undesired effect on the data. See also confounding variables. content
analysis The quantitative analysis of verbal material, such as
information obtained during interviews, from openended questions in
questionnaires, or from reference material (e.g. children's reading
books). Content analysis initially involves the identification of a
number of defined categories -- usually predefined by the researcher,
but sometimes developed as a result of an initial inspection of the
data. Once the categories have been defined, the number of times that
each category of information occurs throughout the material is counted.
In the case of more active data, such as the content analysis of video
recordings, simple counting may be replaced by timing the duration of
the activity of interest. See also qualitative analysis. contention
scheduling The idea that when several schemas are activated at one time,
the most appropriate one will be selected. Damage to the contention
scheduling mechanism has been proposed as an explanation for action
errors made by patients with prefrontal lesions. See also prefrontal
cortex, lesion. context The general setting or environment in which an
event or a phenomenon occurs. There is evidence to suggest that memory
is highly context-

77

dependent, and that re-establishing a context will provide cues which
facilitate the retrieval of memories. Similarly, the context of a
communication or an utterance may be an important influence on how it is
understood. See also state-dependent learning. context-bound Limited to
one p­ articular setting and not applicable to others. The phrase
'context-bound' is particularly used to refer to Bernstein's
descriptions of restricted codes of language. He argued that the
restricted code preferred by working-class language users is closely
tied to the specific situation in which the utterance is made, owing to
its reliance on pronouns rather than nouns, and on nuances of the tone
of voice. This, Bernstein argued, serves to inhibit abstract thought and
conceptualisation in the restricted language code user. context-specific
Relating only to that particular situation or environment and not
applying in other circumstances. contextual intelligence The part of
Sternberg's triarchic theory of intelligence, which emphasises that
intelligent acts always take place within a context. Something that is
an intelligent thing to do in one context may be stupid in another.
Contexts range from being very specific, such as the demands of the
immediate circumstance or situation, to very broad, such as the
assumptions made by an entire culture or society. contiguity How close
two stimuli are together in time. For example, in classical
conditioning, this would mean the closeness in time of the conditioned
stimulus (CS) and the unconditioned stimulus (UCS). contingency Any case
in which one event has a raised probability of following another. In
such circumstances, an

78

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

observer is likely to assume that the first event caused the second.
Reinforcement schedules are examples of contingencies that have been
experimentally manipulated. Research with infants has shown a high
degree of alertness to events that are contingent on an action of the
infant. For babies, contingent events are only likely to be provided by
caregivers, and so this alertness is believed to play an important part
in orienting babies towards members of their own species. More
generally, providing infants with contingent events has been suggested
as a basic process of attachment and of the development of self-efficacy
beliefs. See also transactions. continuity The expected consistency of
various characteristics as the individual develops. Most developmental
psychologists expected the intelligence quotient to stay reasonably
constant as the child grew older, but it is now recognised that its
continuity has been overestimated. In fact, there is remarkably little
continuity in any kind of measurable characteristic over anything more
than short time periods. Most psychologists, like most other people,
seem to believe in continuity, and some are producing more sophisticated
models of development to account for the lack of continuity in their
data. See also transaction. continuity hypothesis The belief that later
functioning can be predicted from a knowledge of that individual earlier
in their life. There are two forms of continuity hypothesis: (i)

That characteristics such as ­personality and intelligence are relatively
stable so that if they are measured at a certain age, they will predict
the strength of equivalent characteristics later in life.

(ii) 

That significant events early in life will have permanent consequences
(e.g. Freud's belief that early trauma is responsible for later
psychopathology). This is known as the 'main effects' model. It can be
contrasted with transaction as an alternative explanation for lasting
effects.

Continuity is a major issue in developmental psychology because the
evidence for either form of continuity has been very weak, despite good
theoretical reasons and common-sense assumptions which suggest that it
should be true. continuous variable A variable, such as height, that can
take any value within a range; as distinct from a discrete variable such
as being pregnant, which can only be one of a set number of values. A
continuous variable can take any value, including fractions, so with
enough data, it is always possible to find a score between any other
two. contralateral On the other side. This term is of interest to
psychology because most of the brain's relationship with the rest of the
body is contralateral (e.g. the left cerebral hemisphere controls the
right side of the body). control condition One of the conditions in a
research study in which the independent variable does not operate.
Participants in the control condition give a basis for comparison with
the experimental condition. For example, in a study of the effects of
inducing stress, the control condition would be the one in which
participants were not subjected to stress. See also experimental group.
control group A group in an experiment that is used for comparison with
an experimental group. The control

C

group experiences all of the conditions of the study in the same way as
the experimental group, with the sole exception of the independent
variable. In this way, by comparison of the results produced by the
control group and the experimental group, the effects of the independent
variable may be observed without contamination from the experimental
situation itself. control processes Processes that use feedback in order
to keep the functioning of a system within defined limits. The term has
its clearest use in engineering and physiology, and has been extended to
psychological functions by analogy. See also homeostasis. controllable
attributions Attributions of a kind which imply that the person believes
they have control or at least influence over an event or situation
(e.g. believing that you passed an exam because of your hard work is a
controllable attribution). In attributional analysis, it is not always
clear whether the controllability is intended to apply just to the
cause, just to the outcome, or to both. convention A general term
sometimes used for a large gathering or conference, but more commonly
used to describe established ways of doing things -- for example, the
usual modes of procedure or behaviour in experiments or in everyday
life. conventional morality This is the second of the three levels of
moral development proposed by Kohlberg. Individuals at this level
consider that society's rules are moral by definition. In the first
stage of this level, the individual adopts moral codes in order to avoid
social sanctions. In the second stage of this level, such moral codes or
rules are seen as intrinsically right because they facilitate the smooth
operation of society, and

79

­therefore should not be challenged. See also autonomous morality,
pre-moral stage. conventional norms Accepted rules of conduct that are
approved by society in general. See also social norms. convergent
evolution Sometimes referred to as parallel evolution, this is a process
whereby the same or similar evolutionary pressures produce an outcome
that is extremely similar to an outcome produced in an entirely
unrelated species. The classic example here is the octopus eye, which
bears a number of structural similarities to the human eye despite
having evolved independently in a species (almost) unrelated to human
beings. See also evolution. convergent thinking Problem-solving that
works consistently towards a defined solution; a way of thinking that
assumes there is a single right answer and that the way to reach that
answer is to work directly towards it. It has been pointed out that
within the educational system, students are trained in convergent
thinking, and that intelligence tests depend entirely on convergent
thinking ability. Rather less justifiably, it is then assumed that
convergent thinking is opposed to creativity and is inferior to creative
or divergent thinking. It could be argued that the reason why most
people use convergent thinking most of the time is that it works for
most problems. converging operations An approach in which several
methods with differing strengths and weaknesses are used to tackle a
given research problem or issue. See also triangulation. conversation
analysis (CA) An aspect of the study of discourse in which attention is
paid to the ways that people operate their conversations. The research
process is to collect naturally

80

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

occurring conversations and produce a very detailed transcript in which
pauses, intonation and stresses are indicated along with the words. CA
then investigates how people manage aspects of the conversation such as
coordinating taking turns, and the 'repair processes' by which people
correct misleading impressions. conversion effect When a change in
public or private attitudes occurs as a result of minority influence.
coordinates The number on each axis that indicates how an event scores
on that variable. On a graph, the coordinates of the event on the x- and
y-axes together show exactly where it is positioned. coping behaviour A
general term given to behavioural strategies or techniques that allow an
animal or human to reduce the amount of stress experienced in a given
situation. core analysis The main analytical process involved in
grounded theory, which involves exploring concepts that have emerged
from the data and using these to reinterpret the data in an iterative
cycle. See also qualitative analysis. core constructs A term used in
personal construct theory to describe those constructs that are most
closely associated with a person's self-concept. Core constructs are
ones with which the individual identifies strongly, and tend to be
utilised in a wide variety of situations. core principles The principles
of respect, integrity, competence and responsibility that form the core
of the ethical guidelines operated by researchers and practitioners in
psychology. See also ethical issues. corpus callosum The band of neural
fibres that connects the two cerebral hemispheres. Split-brain studies
involve the study of behavioural and learning changes produced when the
corpus callo-

sum is cut, such that the two hemispheres operate independently and
cannot pass information to each other. correlated-measures t-test See
dependent t-test. correlated-subjects design See repeatedmeasures
design. correlation A statement of a relationship between two variables,
such that changes in one tend to be accompanied by changes in the other.
In a positive correlation, when one variable increases, the other
increases (e.g. tall people tend to be heavier, while shorter people
tend to be lighter, so there is therefore a positive correlation between
height and weight). If two variables show a negative correlation, then
as one increases, the other decreases (e.g. reaction times get longer as
the visibility of the stimulus diminishes). A perfect positive or
negative correlation will show changes in the two variables that are
exactly proportional to one another, whereas a weaker correlation will
show more variability in the extent to which the two measurements match
up. A common mistake is to assume that if two variables are correlated,
the changes in one must be causing the changes in the other. For
example, if there is more crime in a locality where many residents are
of a particular ethnicity, it is easy to assume that the ethnicity is
the cause of the crime rather than some third factor which correlates
with both such as unemployment or poverty. See also correlation
coefficient, scattergram, coefficient of determination. correlation
coefficient This is a numerical statement of the extent to which two
variables vary together. A correlation coefficient is expressed as a
number between +1 and 1, with +1 representing a perfect positive
correlation (i.e. when one variable increases, the other shows

C

81

correspondence bias Another name for the fundamental attributional
error.

an increase which is precisely proportional to it) and −1 representing a
perfect negative correlation (i.e. one where a decrease in one variable
shows a precisely proportional increase in the second). In situations
where there is little or no relationship between the two measurements,
the correlation coefficient will be close to zero. See also Pearson's
product--moment correlation, Spearman's rank--order correlation
coefficient.

correspondent inference theory A form of attribution theory that uses
the three characteristics of consistency, consensus and distinctiveness
to attribute blame or responsibility. See also covariance, fundamental
attributional error.

correlation matrix A way of presenting a number of correlations between
a set of variables. The variables are listed at the head of the columns
and the start of the rows, with the correlation between the two
variables being recorded at the intersection. The matrix has the same
form as the mileage grid in a road atlas. Statistical packages allow
users to display significant correlations so that it is easy to see how
the variables relate to each other (see Figure 22).

cortical blindness A form of blindness that results from damage to the
visual cortex rather than to the eye or optic nerve. See also
hemianopia, blindsight.

correlation test A statistical technique used to assess the degree to
which two or more variables vary with one another. See correlation.

Figure 22 A correlation matrix

cortex A general term which is used to refer to the outer layers of
biological structures, and in particular the brain. In psychology, it is
generally used to mean cerebral cortex, and its associated adjective is
cortical.

cost--benefit analysis A process in which an attempt is made to quantify
the costs and the benefits of a given course of action. If it is
possible to compare the estimates of cost and benefit, a decision can be
made about which action will produce the best ratio of benefit to cost.
cot death See sudden infant death ­syndrome.

82

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

counselling The term has two rather opposed meanings: (i)

(ii) 

A form of therapy derived from the non-directive therapy of Carl Rogers
in which the client is supported while they gain insight into their
problem and work on finding their own solution. Guidance on practical
personal problems such as vocational choices and problems in studying.
These counsellors take the position of expert and are much more active
in providing information, offering advice, etc.

counterbalancing A strategy used in the design of those experiments in
which it is possible that the order of presentation of the conditions of
the study could produce an unwanted effect, such as a practice effect or
a fatigue effect. Counterbalancing involves systematically varying the
order of presentation of the conditions such that, for example, half of
the participants would have condition A followed by condition B, while
the other half would have condition B first, followed by condition A.
See also order effect, ABBA design. counter-conditioning In behaviour
therapy, the conditioning of a response that is incompatible with an
existing undesirable behaviour. Someone who is afraid of spiders might
be trained to relax whenever they think of a spider, so that their first
reaction prevents them from feeling fear. See also systematic
desensitisation. counterfactual reasoning The ability to argue or reason
about non-existent connections or events. counter-transference In
psychoanalytic therapy, but presumably occurring in

many other contexts as well, the feelings produced in the therapist by
the patient. These are regarded as a valuable clue to aid understanding
of what is happening to the patient and the effect that they have on
people in their outside relationships. If the therapist notices feelings
of irritation or a wish to protect the patient, this can be used to help
the patient to understand what is going on in the session and to clarify
the effects that they have on other people. It will also help the
therapist to identify the nature of the patient's transference.
covariance An approach to attribution theory that identifies blame and
responsibility in terms of consistency (whether the person always acts
in that way), consensus (whether other people act in that way) and
distinctiveness (whether the person only acts that way towards that
particular target). covert Hidden or disguised; non-­ apparent. covert
attention Internal shifts of attention that do not involve external
physical signs such as changes in eye movement or breathing. covert
orienting The change of attention from one location to another without
involving movement of the eyes or the body. See also orienting. covert
research Research in which the person who is carrying it out remains
hidden from the participants, or at least their role as a researcher is
concealed. As a result, the participants are unaware that any research
is taking place. While covert research was regarded as acceptable and
even desirable in the first half of the twentieth century, the
subsequent emergence of ethical issues such as informed consent as
important principles in psychological research meant that it

C

became less routine and more explicitly justified by researchers. CR See
conditioned response. creative intelligence A form of intelligence that
is concerned with novelty and developing creative or new forms of output
rather than simply solving preexisting problems. creativity The ability
to produce novel products or solutions to problems. Creativity has been
studied as a counterpart to intelligence, represented by divergent and
convergent thinking abilities, respectively. However, it is difficult to
devise relevant tests as a creative response is by definition
unpredictable, so correct answers cannot be specified in advance. In
fact, there is no agreed way of measuring how creative any particular
achievement may be. Moreover, it is probably even less appropriate than
with intelligence to think of creativity as a quality of which an
individual has a certain measurable amount. Despite these difficulties,
E. Paul Torrance produced a test of creativity which includes classic
items such as 'How many uses can you think of for a brick?' and claimed
that results obtained from the test showed that school education reduces
a child's creativity. The classic theory of creativity is that it
requires preparation (doing the groundwork), an incubation period (a
period of unconscious processing), inspiration (a sudden insight) and
verification (checking that the solution works). Subsequent theories,
for example, those of Edward de Bono, often involved claiming that
creativity results from a random element in thinking. It seems unlikely
that Leonardo da Vinci's output could be accounted for in this way. The
present state of the field is that we have no plausible theory of how
creativity happens, no reliable way of measuring the creativity of a
person, and

83

no real idea of whether creativity happens because of characteristics of
the individual, or because of particular kinds of circumstances. We
clearly need a creative solution to these problems, but we do not have
much idea of how to achieve this. credibility The extent to which
something can be believed. In research terms, credibility indicates the
plausibility or authenticity of a document or statement and can be a
relevant issue in qualitative research. cretinism A severe congenital
condition caused by a lack of thyroxine, sometimes because of a lack of
iodine in the pregnant mother's diet. The result is severely stunted
physique and brain development. crib death See sudden infant death
­syndrome. criterion A standard or yardstick by which a judgement or
evaluation is made. One use of the term is for the level of probability
required for a statistical result to be regarded as statistically
significant. The usual criterion for student projects is a probability
level of less than 0.05. See alpha level. criterion validity A way of
assessing the validity of a test by comparing the results of the test
with an existing measure, or criterion. Often a test is easier to apply
than a real-life example of the thing being measured. So if the test
appears to give results that are close to the criterion measure, then it
is assumed that it can be used instead. For example, a pen-and-paper
test of aggression might give results that are close enough to a
criterion of violent behaviour to be used instead of observing the
person in situations where such behaviour is likely. Unfortunately,
there are not many cases in psychology in which there is

84

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

a ­measurable absolute criterion. For example, we cannot say what the
'real' intelligence of a person is, and so we cannot check the validity
of a new IQ test in this way. The best we can do is to compare its
results with well-established tests such as the WAIS. critical period A
time period during the development of the individual in which a
particular function can readily be acquired. Outside that specific age
range, it will be difficult or impossible to acquire the function. The
function may result from physical development (maturation) or from
prepared learning. Imprinting in ducklings is a well-known example, and
in human infants if threedimensional vision is not achieved by the age
of about two years, then it may never be acquired. According to a strict
definition, a critical period is a welldefined time during development,
and the function should be impossible to achieve either before or after
this period. However, outside of physical growth processes, examples of
strict critical periods are rather rare. It is now known that even
imprinting can be achieved well after the end of the normal critical
period. In human development, it is now more common to speak of
sensitive periods, but even this looser term has often been applied too
enthusiastically. For example, it is not very helpful to refer to a
critical or sensitive period for language acquisition when language can
be acquired at any time during a period of at least 12 years, and
possibly longer. critical value The value of a test statistic which must
be obtained in order to state that the results have achieved statistical
significance. For some significance tests, the value obtained has to be
higher than the critical value, while for others it has to be less -- it
depends on which test is being used.

Cronbach's alpha A correlation measure of a scale's reliability. To be
considered acceptable, a psychometric scale should usually have a
reliability measure somewhere between 0.7 and 0.8. cross-cueing The
process observed in patients in split-brain studies, by which one
hemisphere of the brain transmits information to the other. In a typical
experiment, an object may be shown to one side of the person's brain
only. Later, the object is shown to the other side of the brain, and the
person is asked questions about it. Although in such patients the corpus
callosum has been cut so no direct transmission of information between
the cerebral hemispheres is possible, people may produce feedback on the
correctness of the answer offered by an imperceptible nod, frown or
other physical signals. This is recognised by the other side of the
brain, so the question can be answered correctly. Cross-cueing of this
nature can often be extremely rapid and subtle. cross-cultural study A
study that involves comparing people from different cultures.
cross-modal transfer The transfer of information from one sensory mode
to another. For instance, figure-ground ­perception learned as a result
of experience with touch may also be applied when the subject is using
vision. This kind of transfer is frequently found with those who have
acquired a new sensory function (e.g. people blind from birth who have
obtained their sight through an operation performed in adulthood).
cross-sectional study A method of research in developmental psychology
that involves comparing individuals of different age groups
(e.g. measuring the moral judgements of 6-year-olds, 10-yearolds and
14-year-olds). Such an approach is cheaper and easier to carry out than

C

a longitudinal study, in which the same children would be repeatedly
measured at different ages, but it may present other problems. One
example is post-war studies of psychological decline with ageing. Older
people were found to have lower intelligence quotients than a younger
sample. However, this was probably due to a cohort effect, because their
diet and education as children in 1920 were inferior to the diet and
education available to the younger sample who were children in 1970.
Thus, age differences found through cross-sectional samples may not be a
direct result of the ageing process, and subsequent longitudinal studies
showed a very different picture, with mental practice emerging as a
major factor in the decline or otherwise of intelligence. crystallised
intelligence A form of intelligence that reflects how good the person is
at dealing with clearly structured, predictable types of problems. It
draws on existing knowledge such as vocabulary, arithmetic or general
information. See also fluid intelligence, multiple intelligences. CS See
conditioned stimulus. CT scan See CAT scan. cue Something that gives an
idea or a hint about something. More specifically, a cue is a piece of
information that activates a schema. A cue in memory theory, for
instance, is a remembered item that connects with further information,
allowing the individual to retrieve more. In perception, a cue is the
item of information that is used by the brain to direct the
interpretation of specific stimuli. A depth cue, for example, is that
part of the information which is used to calculate how far away
something appears to be. cultural neuroscience An interdisciplinary
approach to knowledge that links cultural psychology, neurogenetics and
neuroscience.

85

cultural psychology The branch of psychology that is concerned with
explaining how societies and cultures influence, shape or even determine
psychological processes. Cultural psychology has been particularly
concerned with challenging the ethnocentricity apparent in much
psychological research, wherein the white North American culture has
been used as the norm or standard for all of humanity. The idea that the
rest of the world does not automatically share the same values or
principles, while a revelation to some, is producing a muchneeded
balance in modern psychological research. See WEIRD samples. culture A
general term used to describe the set of accepted ideas, practices,
values and characteristics that develop within a particular society or
set of people. Although most modern societies are multicultural to some
degree, the word 'culture' is often, although not accurately, used
interchangeably with 'society'. culture-free and culture-fair tests
During the 1960s and early 1970s, ­considerable efforts were made to
develop psychometric tests (e.g. IQ and personality tests) that would
avoid cultural bias by being free from reference to culture altogether.
In practice, the diversity of cultures was so great that such tests
proved impossible to develop. Researchers had to content themselves with
an attempt to establish tests that, instead of being completely free of
cultural influences, allowed a fair assessment of those from other
cultures. Such culture-fair tests are psychometric tests that do not
provide an advantage to members of one culture over another. In
practice, however, culture-fair tests are also extremely difficult to
achieve, owing to cultural diversity that produces differences not only
in background knowledge and skills but also in motivation and attitudes
to tests. It is also very difficult

86

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

for those compiling the tests to be fully aware of their own cultural
assumptions. It could also be argued that, since the culture itself is
not fair, a biased test will give more accurate predictions (e.g. a test
that gives an advantage to middle-class academic values will more
accurately predict which children will do best in school).
culture-specific Occurring in, belong­ing to, a particular culture.

or

cumulative frequencies Ways of counting nominal or ordinal data in which
sets are arranged in order and the quantities in each set are added to
the sum of those in the previous sets. For example, graphs which plot
the totals to each weekly date of cases of Covid-19. The steepness of
the curve at any stage, and whether the curve is rising or falling are
easy to recognise and interpret. cumulative record or cumulative curve A
graph in which each successive point shows the total number of responses
up to that time. It can be used to show the progress of operant
conditioning and has the advantage that the steepness of the curve gives
a direct indication of the rate of responding. curare A paralysing
poison used in blowpipes by some South American Indians for hunting.
Curare achieves its effect by being picked up at receptor sites in
muscle fibres, thus blocking the uptake of acetylcholine such that
messages from the central nervous system are not received. Curare
therefore prevents voluntary

muscle action, but does not affect the actions of i­nvoluntary muscles.
Animals that have been injected with curare die from suffocation but, if
respirated artificially until the curare has worn off, will stay alive.
Consequently, curare has proved useful in several psychological studies
investigating, for example, the effects of muscle actions on cognitions.
cutaneous To do with the skin. cybernetics A general theory of active
systems in terms of processes of control and communication. Cybernetic
systems identify goals and use negative feedback to find ways to reduce
the distance from the goal. Since its introduction by Norbert Wiener in
1948, it has been central to developments in artificial intelligence and
attempts to explain human functioning in terms of information
processing, and is an essential process in maintaining a stable state or
homeostasis in biological, social and psychological systems. It has
become abbreviated to 'cyber' in many current uses such as
cybersecurity, and as cyborg in the combination of human and artificial
in a single organism. In psychology, cybernetic processes have been
proposed as the basis for the Big Five personality factors and as
explaining psychopathology, while family therapists discuss families and
other interactional groups as cybernetic systems. There is now a
Cyberpsychology section of the British Psychological Society. See
fivefactor theory, family therapy, systems theory.

dark triad A group of three personality traits that represent unpleasant
or malevolent personal qualities. The three traits are narcissism,
Machiavellianism and psychopathy, each of which incorporates minor
undesirable traits such as egotism, selfishness and the tendency to
manipulate others. Some researchers have argued that the Dark Triad
traits can be mapped onto the five-factor theory of personality traits
but as polar opposites. For example, psychopathy might be regarded as a
polar opposite of agreeableness, while Machiavellianism would be an
opposite of conscientiousness, and narcissism an opposite of
extraversion. Other researchers have found a less clear one-to-one
relationship between the five factors and the Dark Triad, although there
is a general consensus that some kind of negative correlation between
them does exist (Figure 23). data A general term for all forms of
recorded information. Usually, the term is used for the scores obtained
in a survey or an experiment. Note that 'data' is a plural word, the
term for a single score being 'datum', so it is wrong to write

ism ian ell iav ch Ma

dark adaptation The process by which light-sensitive cells in the retina
adjust their sensitivity to light, such that they will fire even in
response to very faint stimuli. Full dark adaptation in the human being
takes approximately 20 minutes, beginning with a rapid period of
adaptation while the cone cells adjust, followed by a longer period for
the rod cells to achieve maximal sensitivity.

Na rci ssi sm

D Psychopathy Figure 23 The dark triad 'the data is ...'. Unfortunately,
there is no standard singular word for a collection of data, but
'result' or 'information' will often suffice. data-driven technique Any
approach to analysing data in which the form of the analysis is shaped
by the data rather than by fitting the data into an existing structure.
For a major example, see grounded theory. data scaling Ways of adjusting
data such that meaningful comparisons or statistical tests can be
performed, such as in the use of T scaling or stannine scores. data-set
The set of scores or other data obtained from one group of participants
in a study. database An organised collection of data such as research
papers or other documents, usually presented in digital form and
structured so that individual elements can be readily accessed. datum A
single score or other item of data. Datum is the singular of the word
data. DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

88

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

daydreaming The activity of engaging in fantasies or imaginative
speculations during quiescent waking periods. Some research suggests
that daydreaming may be instrumental in promoting positive mental health
for the individual, possibly through the clarification of goals and
ambitions. db See decibel. deactivation A decrease in neurological or
physiological processing in one condition, relative to other conditions.
See also activation. debriefing A verbal summary of the nature and
purpose of a study or activity, given to participants once the study has
ended. See also ethical issues. decay Reduction in the size or strength
of something over time. Using the word decay implies that there is no
specific cause of the reduction -- for example, in the decay of a memory
trace. The output of a sensory nerve that has been briefly stimulated
will decay rapidly. Habituation is a process in which response strength
decays over repeated exposure to the stimulus. decentration The process
by which an individual is able to step out of their own mental
perspective, and to take another person's point of view. According to
Piaget, the ability to 'decentre' only emerges during the preoperational
stage, and forms a part of the gradual reduction of egocentricity which
Piaget saw as central to cognitive development. deception Deliberately
misleading people or causing them to believe what is known to be untrue.
In psychological research, this refers to misleading experimental
participants as to the purpose of a particular study. Deception used to
be the norm in psychological research and was even considered to be
absolutely necessary in order to avoid

volunteer effects. However, the growth of ethical concerns in psychology
means that deception can only be used where it is absolutely
unavoidable: alternative strategies must be adopted wherever possible.
See also double-blind control, ethical issues. decibel (db) A measure of
sound levels. The decibel scale involves a progression which is nearly
logarithmic, such that a doubling in perceived intensity is represented
by an increase of approximately three units on the decibel scale.
decision-making The study of how people go about making decisions, and
the factors which may mislead them into making decisions that are not
optimal. Research into decision-making includes the study of the
knowledge frame of the decision and the heuristics that lead to sources
of bias such as anchoring, entrapment, hindsight bias and groupthink.
See also satisficing, own-age bias, affect heuristic, availability
heuristic. decision support system A computerised system constructed in
order to help people make decisions in situations where the problem
cannot be clearly specified. decision theory Any theory that attempts to
explain how decisions are made. In practice, the term is most often
applied to theories that apply mathematical models to human decision
processes. See also receiver-operating characteristic curve. declarative
knowledge Factual knowledge about the world. See also procedural
knowledge. declarative memory A form of long-term memory that involves
memory for both facts (semantic memory) and events (episodic memory),
and is essentially about knowing. It is also sometimes described as
explicit memory.

D

deconstruction The process of identifying how scientific theories,
literature and social science reflect the social assumptions and
conventions of their time, or of those propounding the theories. For
example, in deconstructionist terms, the association of Konrad Lorenz
with the German Nazi party would not be seen as unconnected with the
theory of aggression that he propounded. deduction Drawing conclusions
about specifics from general principles. As one of the major forms of
reasoning, deduction has been studied by psychologists interested in
cognitive areas such as problem-solving. See also induction. deductive
methodology The approach to research that has been dominant in
psychology, and which uses research to test predictions from theory. See
also hypothetico-deductive method, induction. deductive reasoning
Reasoning that is based on the principle of establishing a set of
premises, or statements which will automatically produce a particular
conclusion. See also induction. deep dyslexia Dyslexia in which the
person's comprehension of words is affected. See also surface dyslexia.
deep dysphasia A condition that produces significant difficulty in
repeating spoken words, or non-words. The difficulty may involve both
lexical and semantic errors. deep structure A term coined by the
linguist Noam Chomsky to describe the universal properties of basic
grammar, supposedly common to all languages. It was the similarities of
deep structure which allowed for Chomsky's proposed innate language
acquisition device, a theoretical construction by which he explained the
infant's readiness to acquire human language.

89

default mode network A group of neural networks in the brain that are
more active when the brain is at rest than when the person is engaged in
an active task. See also resting state paradigm, functional integration.
defence mechanism A strategy that protects the ego or self-concept from
real or imaginary threats. First proposed by Freud, defence mechanisms
may take many forms, of which a few of the most common are: repression,
reaction formation, projection, rationalisation, identification with the
aggressor, intellectualism and denial. Although Freud classified defence
mechanisms as neurotic or psychotic, the fact is that everybody uses
them sometimes as a way of avoiding unwanted information about
themselves or the outside world. However, they all have the disadvantage
of distorting one's understanding of reality. defensible space An
approach to housing design that emphasises perceived ownership of open
areas and has been shown to reduce crime and vandalism. See also
environmental psychology. deficiency motive A motivation that arises
because of a perceived deficiency of some kind. The deficiency can range
from physiological needs (e.g. food) to higher needs, such as the desire
for recognition. Deficiency motives are distinguished from 'abundancy
motives', in which it is judged that the organism is trying to acquire
more of the material than is needed for comfortable survival.
degeneration In neurophysiology, the deterioration of neural tissue that
occurs through lack of stimulation, injury or lack of nutrients. In
stimulus deprivation studies, some damaged perceptual functioning that
was originally thought to result from cognitive deficits

90

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

was later found to be caused by neural degeneration. degrees of freedom
(df) The number of possible options for variation that exist in a
data-set. For example, if a set of two scores have a given total, then
the first score can vary, but if it does, the other one must be fixed in
order to reach the desired total. This gives one degree of freedom. A
set of three scores producing a fixed total would have two degrees of
freedom, and so on. The size of the score on a statistical test needed
for a given level of significance will depend on the number of degrees
of freedom, so tables of significance are generally arranged
accordingly. degrees of freedom problem A term used in neuroscience to
describe the way that there are potentially an infinite number of motor
solutions which can come into play to produce a single action on an
object. deindividuation The process by which individuals come to feel
that they are simply part of a corporate entity, such as group or crowd
members. Deindividuation involves the individual surrendering their
immediate perception of independence and autonomy, and feeling as though
they have merged anonymously with the other people involved. It is
commonly found in military units in action and is often believed to be
common in mobs. See also diffusion of responsibility.

alograms of people in deep sleep. Delta waves begin to appear during the
third level of sleep and are most common during level 4 sleep. See also
sleep cycles. delusion A belief that is mistaken yet firmly held,
despite contradiction by evidence and logic. Delusions of grandeur may
occur in schizophrenia, and delusions of persecution are common in
paranoia. delusions of control The sense or belief that one's thoughts
and actions are under external control, and not subject to personal
volition. The opposite of agency beliefs. demand characteristics Those
features of an experimental or similar setting that elicit unusual or
situation-­dependent forms of behaviour from subjects participating in
the study. These would include factors such as experimenter effects
producing bias, expectations held by the participant as to the 'correct'
way to behave in a psychological study, the effects of trivialised or
meaningless tasks that necessitate uncommon strategies to deal with
them, and the wish to give the experimenter the result they want. See
also implacable experimenter.

delayed conditioning A form of classical conditioning in which the
conditioned stimulus is presented several seconds before the
unconditioned stimulus, but with both coming to an end at the same time.
By comparison with simultaneous conditioning or trace conditioning,
delayed conditioning is considered to be the most effective.

dementia A neurocognitive disorder that results in a gradual impairment
of a person's ability to think and remember, until the cognitive
abilities of that person are so damaged that they are no longer able to
function independently. The term is now used almost exclusively for
permanent physical deterioration of the brain. The most common form is
senile dementia, which can occur in old age (but is less common than
many believe) and has a variety of causes. See also Alzheimer's
syndrome.

delta waves Long slow wave patterns that can be observed in the
electroenceph-

democratic leadership An approach to leadership in which the leader
consults

D

with team members, and decisions are generally taken on the basis of
consensus. See also laissez-faire. dendrites The branched structures at
the end of the axon of a neurone that are used for the transmission or
reception of neurotransmitters, and so contribute to either the
excitation or the inhibition of the electrical impulses through synaptic
transmission. A dendrite characteristically ends in a swelling, or
synaptic knob, which carries vesicles containing a neurotransmitter.
Receptor sites on the dendrites of the adjoining neurone pick up the
neurotransmitter. See synapse. dendron That part of the elongated stem
of a neurone that is found before the cell body, taking the same
direction as that in which the impulse travels. See also axon. denial A
defence mechanism or aspect of one's own psychological functioning in
not acknowledging the existence of a threatening event or utterance.
Denial is most commonly found in children, although it is not uncommon
as an adult defence mechanism. denotative meaning The specific or
symbolic meaning of an utterance or term. The denotative meaning of
something is that which is simply and necessarily contained in the use
of that term, without any of the additional associations or implications
which a listener may understand. See also connotative meaning.
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) The compound that forms the basic units of
chromosomes and is therefore fundamental to reproduction. dependency (i)

A term used to express an unbalanced relationship in which one
individual relies consistently on

(ii) 

91

the support or aid of another. In this sense, the term was formerly used
to describe the relationship of an infant to its mother but has now
largely been replaced by attachment. A term used to describe reliance on
a particular drug or therapy, which falls short of physiological
addiction but is characterised by a psychological reliance such that the
individual feels unhappy or uneasy in its absence.

dependent t-test A two-sample statistical test for interval scale and
ratio scale data, where the two samples consist of paired data sets
taken from the same individuals under differing conditions. It is also
known as related-measures t-test, repeated-measures t-test or
correlated-­ measures t-test. See also t-test, independent t-test.
dependent variable The variable that is measured as an indicator of the
outcome of an experiment. If an experiment is set up to assess the
effect of coffee on the speed of essay writing, the dependent variable
would be the measure of writing speed. The dependent variable is so
named because, if the experimental hypothesis is valid, its value will
depend on the condition of the independent variable that has been set
up. depictive representations Cognitive representations which are
similar to images or pictures, in that they organise information
spatially and graphically. See iconic representation. depolarising
Reducing two conditions or positions from their extremes to something
more moderate or similar. For example, depolarising an argument involves
getting both participants to modify their positions slightly so that

92

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

they can find room for agreement, or can agree to differ. depressant A
drug that reduces or depresses physiological functioning, particularly
central nervous system activity. Alcohol is the most widely available
depressant, although its effects may be concealed temporarily by its
capacity to induce euphoria. The term may also be applied to
psychological influences that have the effect of lowering mood. See also
stimulant. depression A reduced state of both physiological and mental
functioning, usually associated with feelings of unhappiness. The most
common symptoms are a loss of interest and inability to enjoy any
experiences, sadness, loss of appetite, sleep disturbances (especially
early in the morning), passivity, and suicidal thoughts or intentions.
However, even very severe depressions may only involve a few of these
symptoms. The term is used for a very wide range of conditions,
extending from 'ordinary unhappiness' through to psychotic disorders.
Psychologists will therefore indicate when they are using the term to
refer to a serious clinical condition either by the context or by
attaching further labels -- either 'clinical depression' or a specific
term for a particular form of depression. The more common of these are
bipolar depression, endogenous depression (thought to be caused
internally), exogenous or reactive depression, and psychotic depression.
Other forms of depression are 'agitated depression', in which the
individual is agitated, restless and irritable, and 'retarded
depression' when they are slow, apathetic and difficult to get moving.
depressive attributional style An attributional style in which people
are likely to explain bad events in terms of causes that are stable,
global and internal. Some would add personal and

­uncontrollable to this list. There is evidence that habitually
explaining things in this way is associated with depression, especially
for people who encounter a significant number of negative life events.
The work on depressive attributional style grew from Seligman's theory
of learned helplessness. deprivation Having some important resource or
positive environmental condition removed, usually producing distress or
at least discomfort. See also privation, maternal deprivation. depth cue
A perceptual factor that gives an indication of how far away an object
or image is. See also depth perception, monocular depth cue. depth
interview A technique of generating data for qualitative research.
Participants are interviewed individually in a way that is designed to
get them talking in detail about significant issues in their lives.
Depth interviews are used extensively in qualitative research. See also
focus group, interview, semi-­ structured interview. depth perception The
interpretation of distance from sensory information. Depth perception
relies on two main sets of depth cues, namely binocular depth cues and
monocular depth cues. Binocular cues include retinal disparity,
binocular convergence of the eye muscles and accommodation of the lens,
while monocular cues include height in the plane, superposition, shadow,
gradient of texture and colour, relative size, and motion parallax.
Auditory depth perception involves the interpretation of attenuated
signals, such that sounds which are further away are fainter, binaural
comparisons, and phase shifts in the wavelengths of sound, such that
sounds which come from further away appear to be muffled compared to
nearer ones.

D

descriptive statistics Statistics that summarise or illustrate data sets
(e.g. as summary tables, measures of central tendency or diagrams). See
also inferential statistics. desensitisation A procedure that will
reduce the responsiveness of the person concerned. It is used mainly for
behavioural techniques that reduce or eliminate inappropriate emotional
responses, usually anxiety. The basic procedure is to present weak forms
of the feared stimulus while using stronger forms of a stimulus that
produces a response incompatible with anxiety. The strength of the
feared stimulus is then gradually increased without triggering the fear
response. This is called systematic desensitisation and is an example of
counter-conditioning. determinism The belief that everything that
happens is the result of an identi-

93

fiable cause. This assumption leads to a definition of science as being
about finding causes. Within psychology, determinism is strongest among
behaviourists and Freudians. Both approaches were attempts to account
for all of human behaviour in terms of fundamental causes. The
assumption has been undermined by physicists deciding that at the basis
of all matter, the principle in operation is indeterminism. More
broadly, the shift against determinism has taken the form of
postmodernism. In practice, most psychologists seem to regard themselves
as freely choosing (non-deterministically) to study the (deterministic)
causes of behaviour. This is yet another example of the actor--observer
effect. See also existentialism. development The processes of change and
growth over the lifespan. One aspect is physical development, which

Deutsch, Diana (1938--) Diana Deutsch is famous for her research in the
psychology and neurology of music perception. She established the neural
and experiential foundations of absolute pitch, showing that it was more
common in speakers of tone languages such as Mandarin and Vietnamese,
and arguing that it could be acquired with appropriate infant
experience. She also identified a number of music and speech illusions,
which gave key insights into aspects of neural organisation relating to
hearing.

is strongly influenced by genetic tendencies. The other is psychological
development, which is much more directly influenced by environmental
factors. See also lifespan. developmental disorders Disorders that
appear to result from a failure of developmental processes, and which
can be expected to distort future development. developmental dyslexia
The basic form of dyslexia, shown by children who

have difficulty with reading and make mistakes in a characteristic form
(e.g. getting words and letters in the wrong order). The term
'developmental' is added primarily to distinguish it from acquired
dyslexia, in which the difficulty starts later in development.
developmental norms The expected level of performance of children at a
specific age. For example, in a given population, the norms for the
number of words spoken might be 50 at age 18 months, 400 at age

94

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

3 years, etc. Developmental norms can be used to give a precise
indication of how uncommon any unusual performance by a child may be.
Identifying a level of performance as being exceptionally poor is only
the first step in deciding whether any further action is desirable. See
also intelligence. developmental psychology The psychological study of
development. Some distinction is made between developmental psychology,
which is the study of the laws and processes of development, and child
psychology, which is more focused on empirical techniques for studying
children at specific ages. However, the terms are often used fairly
interchangeably, and the phrase 'experimental child psychology' has come
into use to preserve the distinction. Major theories of development have
been propounded by Freud, Gesell and Piaget, among others. All of the
large-scale theories were established in the first half of the twentieth
century, and most are restricted to childhood. However, there is reason
to believe (or at least hope) that development continues throughout
adulthood. The field of lifespan developmental psychology has therefore
become active in recent years, but as yet has no major theory as a
basis. In fact, developmental psychology in general seems to be
proceeding quite adequately at present without much reliance on overall
theories of development. Instead, there are theories to deal with
restricted areas such as attachment and language, and a focus on a
number of more or less practical issues. The areas of greatest interest
include the growth of cognitive and social competence, the
nature--nurture or genetic--environment debate, the question of
continuity, the way in which a child develops a theory of mind,
applications to education and to parenting, the

importance of play and creativity, and, more recently, the family.
deviant-case analysis A measure of validity used in discourse analysis,
in which deviation from or the breaking of a pattern provides important
information to the researcher. deviation In everyday terms, an
expression of how different a particular behaviour is from accepted
social norms or assumptions. In statistics, it refers to how much a
particular score differs from the mean for that group. See also standard
deviation. diagnosis The process of applying a label to a medical or
psychological condition. Because it evokes the epistemology of medical
conditions there is a move in clinical psychology to replace diagnosis
with formulation as a newer alternative. This shifts the focus from
labelling the patient towards deciding what treatment is needed.
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V) This is
produced by the American Psychiatric Association, and is subject to
periodic reviews. It is generally referred to as DSM, followed by the
version number: the version at the time of writing being DSM-V,
published in 2013. The manual was produced as an attempt to standardise
diagnosis, and it can be a useful way of finding out what is currently
regarded as good practice in diagnosis in the United States. However,
the empirical evidence for its reliability and validity have been
disappointing, although perhaps not less so than for any other
psychiatric technique. DSM-V generated considerable debate about its
reclassification of some conditions, e.g. combining several previously
specified problems under the general heading of 'Autistic Spectrum
Disorders', and

D

also about its inclusion of new psychiatric disorders, such as
'Oppositional Defiant Disorder', to classify teenagers who challenged
their parents' or teachers' authority. Psychological therapists have
challenged DSM's increasing tendency to assume that human problems are
medical conditions caused by brain dysfunction, and there is a growing
preference for use of the International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problems instead. dialect A distinctive
pattern of grammatical forms and vocabulary that originates from a
particular region. The point at which a dialect becomes distinctive
enough to be seen as a language in its own right is largely a matter of
social and political judgement, rather than of any linguistic criteria.
Some linguists, for instance, regard the West Indian Creole dialect or
Hong Kong English as distinctive languages in their own right, since,
although they may have originated as forms of English, they contain
their own distinctive grammatical forms and vocabularies. The same
situation pertains to a number of European languages, such as Flemish,
where considerable social action was required in order for it to be
regarded as a separate language rather than a regional dialect. It may
be observed, therefore, that the social recognition of an extremely
distinctive shared form of speech as a language rather than a dialect
has everything to do with the acknowledged social status of the group
which uses that form of language, and relatively little to do with the
linguistic structure of the form of speech itself. See also accent,
psycholinguistics, speech register. dialectics A form of argument or
theorising in which one argument (referred to as the thesis) is combined
with another, apparently opposing argument (referred to as the
antithesis), to produce an

95

entirely new outcome (referred to as the synthesis). The synthesis
combines elements of both arguments, and so avoids seeing the issue as
an 'either/or' conflict. The clearest example of dialectics in
psychology is the modern perception of the classic nature--nurture
debate. While the two were seen to be opposing influences for many years
(development as produced by either genetics or environment), they are
now viewed as working together in a dialectical relationship in which
each contributes to the other's functioning, and also to the final
outcome. The end result is a synthesis of both genetics and
environmental experience that amounts to more than just the sum of the
two processes operating independently. For example, some aspects of the
environmental experience might not occur if the individual did not have
the genetic attributes that attracted them, while some aspects of
genetic potential may never become fully realised without the
environmental circumstances that bring them out and encourage them to
develop. dialogical self This is a theoretical approach that is
concerned with how the internal sense of self and the external dialogue
with society interconnect. The idea is that the internal self actually
comprises a number of different 'selves', each of which has different
social connotations and connections. It also includes our awareness of
significant others and our ideas about their own minds and how they
work. These internal personas provide the basis for a continual dialogue
concerning the self and the external world, and they shape our
communications and interactions with the external world. What it all
boils down to is the idea that the inner self is not simply individual
and separated from society, but extended into its society and
inextricably linked

96

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

to it, and the 'other' is not external or separate, but also part of
ourselves. dialogism In literature, this means the representation of the
author's thoughts through a dialogue between two or more characters. In
psychology, it has to do with the way that we incorporate different
'selves' or the viewpoints of different people, in dialogue with each
other, as part of our own sense of self. diary method A research method,
often used in developmental psychology and increasingly in clinical
contexts, in which a detailed written record of chosen aspects of
behaviour is kept over time. In child research, the diary is often
written by parents, which not only makes life easier for the researcher
but also means that information can be recorded about times and events
that are not available to the researcher. More recent research has seen
diaries take the form of online blogs, which allows for closer
monitoring by the researchers concerned. See also qualitative research,
Ecological Momentary Assessment, Experience Sampling Method.

attended ear

"So this is a lovely place for a holiday for young and old alike ... etc
etc"

Figure 24 A dichotic listening task

diaschesis When a brain lesion in one location disrupts the functioning
of other areas of the brain that are structurally intact.
diathesis-stress model Also known as the vulnerability model, this is a
way of looking at mental illness which emphasises that although the
person's vulnerability to the problem may come from genetic factors, it
is their lifetime experience and social stresses which result in the
mental illness actually developing. So the origins of the problem lie in
the interaction between genetic vulnerability and environmental factors.
Contrast with nature--nurture debate. dichotic listening task A method
for investigating selective attention by presenting two different
messages through the two sides of a set of headphones, and asking the
research participant to attend to one message only. Dichotic listening
tasks are usually monitored by asking the person to engage in ­shadowing
-- that is, speaking the attended message out loud as they listen to it
(see Figure 24).

non-attended ear

"David, your house

D

dichotomous variable A discrete v­ ariable, such as being pregnant, which
can only take one of two values. dichotomy The division or distinction
which has been achieved by separating an object, principle or process
into two parts or aspects. dichromatism A term used to describe forms of
colour vision in which the individual is lacking in sensitivity to
specific wavelengths of light. Normal colour vision is trichromatic in
that three major wavelengths make up any given colour, but some
colour-blind individuals use dichromatic vision (i.e. using two major
wavelengths only) to interpret specific hues. See also colour blindness.
DID See dissociative identity disorder. diencephalon Also sometimes
referred to as the forebrain, this is a group of subcortical structures
in the grey matter which includes the thalamus, hypothalamus, the pineal
gland, the mamillary bodies and the pituitary gland. difference
threshold See relative ­threshold. diffusion of responsibility The
process by which individuals may fail to act in a situation requiring
bystander intervention as a direct result of the presence of several
other onlookers. The perception is that this implies that the
responsibility is shared, which reduces the pressure on each separate
individual to act. diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) A technique that
measures the differences in concentration of white matter and grey
matter using MRI imaging. digit span The number of unrelated digits
(numbers or letters) that a person is able to recall accurately after
just one hearing. In most people, it is usually within the range of 7 ±
2 and shows a (relatively weak) correlation with

97

measured intelligence. See also short-term memory. digital Coded in
simple on--off (binary) units, as in computerised information. This is
also the traditional view of the firing of neurones. See also
all-or-none principle. digital records A general term used to refer to
electronic records which have been converted into binary code. It
therefore applies to all information stored in computers and also to
information stored in other electronic forms, e.g. on CDs and DVDs.
diglossia The ability to speak more than one version of one's own
language (e.g. being able to converse freely in a regional dialect and
also in formal 'received pronunciation' English). diploid Having a full
complement of chromosomes (i.e. a pair of each kind). Different species
have different numbers of pairs of chromosomes. See also haploid, gene,
meiosis. dipole A pair of positive and negative electrical charges,
separated by a short distance. dipole modelling A method of dealing with
the inverse problem by making assumptions about how many regions of the
brain are actually critical in producing observed scalp potentials.
However, these are probabilistic judgements, and if accuracy is required
it is preferable to use fMRI or another scanning technique. direct
perception A model of perception developed by J.J. Gibson which
emphasised that in the real world, most if not all of the information
required for accurate perception is actually present in the visual field
(e.g. gradient of texture or superposition). Even if it is not

98

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

apparent from a static viewpoint, this information becomes evident
through movement and interacting directly with the world. Consequently,
there is no need for inference or hypothesis testing in real-world
perception. See also ­bottom-up processing, ecological perception,
compare top-down approach. direct reciprocity The idea that we provide
help to others in order to receive help from them at some future date.
See also altruistic behaviour. direct retrieval A form of
autobiographical memory in which information is recalled involuntarily,
as the result of some environmental or social cue. See also generative
retrieval. directed forgetting Forgetting that happens because of a
deliberate intention to forget -- either by the person or, for example,
through a hypnotic instruction. See also denial. directed retrospection
A research technique in which people are asked to categorise, pretty
well immediately, the thoughts they have just had. See also protocol
analysis. directed thinking Thinking that is directed towards a
particular goal (e.g. problem-solving). discontinuity A break in a
sequence or set of actions. In most psychological contexts, this implies
that earlier and later characteristics (i.e. those separated by the
break) are entirely independent and will have nothing to do with one
another. discounting principle The idea that the existence of other
possible causes reduces the role or importance of another specific
cause. discourse Deliberate or conscious forms of communication.
Discourse is usually taken to mean words, but some e­ xamples of
discourse analysis have included anal-

yses of photographs, murals or even toothpaste packaging. discourse
analysis A general term covering various ways of analysing spoken or
written communication. The term 'discourse' avoids the assumptions built
into terms such as 'conversation'. Many discourse analyses adopt a
constructivist approach, but this is not inevitable. There are a number
of techniques of discourse analysis, such as identifying the recurrent
semantic themes of a discourse, or its use of metaphor. Linguists apply
a more specific meaning to the term, relating to natural breaks in the
discourse. See also content analysis, social representations,
conversation analysis. discourse markers Spoken words or phrases that do
not contribute directly to the literal content of what is being said,
but enhance the communication in other ways (e.g. by indicating the
speaker's attitude towards it). See also discourse analysis. discovery
learning A form of educational practice studied particularly by J.S.
Bruner, in which students operate mainly by deduction and inference,
with guidance and resources being provided by the teacher. Discovery
learning emphasises the student's own activity and enquiry, rather than
the teacher's transmission of information. See also schema. discrete
variable A variable such as the total of scores on a questionnaire, that
can only have one of a set number of values, as distinct from a
continuous variable such as height. If it can only take one of two
values, it is called a dichotomous variable. discrimination (i)

The skill of distinguishing one stimulus from another, possibly learned
through selective instrumental learn­ing or classical conditioning.

D

(ii) 

The practice of drawing arbitrary distinctions between one set of people
and another, such as is found in a group of highly prejudiced
individuals taking steps to limit or restrict access to privileges or
resources by a minority group. See also prejudice, social
identification.

discriminatory stimulus A stimulus in operant conditioning that provides
a cue to indicate when a particular response is appropriate or not.
discursive To do with discourse. Also used to describe an explanation
that is elaborate rather than being concise. disembedded thought
Thinking that is not applied in a relevant context, but is required to
take place independent of context. Many of the criticisms of Piagetian
approaches to the understanding of the child's cognition centre around
the idea that the child was required to engage in disembedded tasks.
When these tasks were put in an appropriate social context, children
were noticeably more successful at them. See also naughty teddy.
disengagement A theory of ageing proposed by Cumming and Henry in the
early 1960s, according to which the elderly undergo a process of
systematic disengagement or withdrawal from society, reducing their
amount of participation in and integration with society. The process was
thought of as a way of coping with the deaths and illnesses of partners
and friends and as a possible preparation for approaching death. Cumming
and Henry proposed that this behaviour had a possible biological origin.
The theory was heavily criticised, mainly on the grounds that the social
pressure on old people to withdraw from society was high, and that, for
many, society traditionally offered few

99

alternatives. It is now largely regarded as a product of its time, with
the modern model of ageing emphasising activity, engagement and the
adoption of different social roles. disgust A negative emotion
containing strong elements of rejection and repulsion. Disgust is one of
the universal emotions, found in all human societies, and it is thought
that it might have its evolutionary origins in avoiding the ingestion of
contaminated foodstuffs. There are two major brain areas involved in
disgust: the insula and the anterior cingulate gyrus, both of which link
with other brain areas involved in emotions. See also moral disgust.
dispersion The way that a set of scores is spread out or scattered. See
measures of dispersion. displaced aggression Aggressive behaviour
directed towards a target that is not the original source of
frustration. Typically, aggression becomes displaced because the
original target is unreachable, or because it would be inexpedient for
the individual to direct aggression towards the original source. For
instance, it may be risky for someone to express directly the aggressive
feelings generated by an unpleasant boss, and such feelings may become
displaced on to family members instead. displacement The process of
channelling undesired or inexpedient impulses to alternative outlets. An
example would be the application of aggressive tendencies to becoming
the best chess player in the college. When the outcome of displacement
is regarded as socially desirable, the process is also called
sublimation. display rules The amount of self-control or regulation of
emotional expression that is expected in the presence of other people.
See also face.

100

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

disposition A tendency to behave in a particular way. When used by
developmental or clinical psychologists, the term implies an inherited
tendency and is used interchangeably with predisposition. When used in
the context of motivation and personality, it is a general term for any
relatively stable behavioural tendency, and no genetic basis is implied.
dispositional attribution Believing that a person's behaviour is caused
by their character or personality, rather than the situation that they
are in. People are usually more likely to make dispositional
attributions about the behaviour of other people, and to account for
their own behaviour in terms of the situation they were in -- the
actor--observer effect. See also covariance, fundamental attributional
error, situational attribution. dissociation (i)

(ii) 

A separation of two parts of an individual's mental life so that each
can function separately or even in contradiction to the other. Extreme
forms are amnesia and dissociative identity disorder, but milder forms
are more common (e.g. when someone is competitive at work but not at
home). In neurology, the term is used to refer to impaired cognitive
functions that have arisen as the result of localised brain damage,
while other similar or related cognitive functions have been left
intact. Double-dissociations occur when two apparently independent
cognitive functions have been impaired by the same localised injury (in
more than one individual). While dissociations are useful for indicating
possible localisation of function, it needs to be borne in mind that the
cortex has multiple connections, and that simple

reverse inference is not always an appropriate explanation. dissociation
of function The idea that cognitive functions are separate and distinct,
such that when one cognitive function is damaged or impaired, others
continue to work appropriately and are unaffected. dissociative
disorders A group of disorders in which the usual connections between
memory, identity and consciousness have been broken. dissociative
identity disorder (DID) A rare condition in which a person functions
with two or more distinct personalities. The personalities may
alternate, and each has their own memories and social life, while
seemingly quite unaware of each others' existence. Contrary to popular
belief, DID is not a form of schizophrenia, but a development of a
phenomenon that is quite common and normal in childhood. It was
previously called multiple personality disorder. See dissociation.
dissonance A state in which a cognitive discrepancy is produced between
two events, such that one cognition is in direct contradiction to
another. Typically, cognitive dissonance results in an attitude change,
such that the dissonance is reduced. distal stimulus A stimulus that is
out there in the real world. Contrast with proximal stimulus. distance
cues See depth cue. distance effect The observation that people find it
easier to determine which of two numbers is the larger if there is a
significant distance between them, while they take more time to process
a judgement about two adjacent or similar numbers.

D

distinctiveness A concept in attribution theory that concerns how unique
an event or behaviour is. Distinctiveness is one of three major criteria
used to formulate attributions for any given situation based on their
covariance. The other criteria are consistency and consensus. If a
person is shouting on a particular occasion, we might ask whether they
usually shout in other contexts as well. If not, the condition is one of
high distinctiveness, and we would tend to assume that there is
something about the situation that is producing the behaviour. If other
occasions produce shouting (low distinctiveness), then we would
attribute the behaviour as a characteristic of the person. distraction A
strategy for emotion regulation that involves diverting attention away
from the emotive stimulus or situation, and focusing on information
which is neutral or positive. distributed practice A procedure during
learning in which time gaps are interspersed during the practice. For
example, if you were trying to learn the contents of a chapter, you
might take a short break at the end of each section. This approach has
been found to lead to more effective learning than massed practice, in
which no breaks are taken. distribution The pattern made by a set of
scores when grouped according to frequency. Theoretical distributions
are the pattern that would be produced by scores that conformed
precisely to a mathematically defined function. The most important of
these in psychology is the normal distribution, but each statistic has
its own distribution.

101

divergent thinking Thought that ranges far more widely than is
conventional. Tests of divergent thinking are often included in
creativity tests, as it is assumed that highly creative individuals will
be able to utilise novel frameworks more readily than those with a more
conventional style of cognition. See also convergent thinking. divided
attention A situation in which two tasks are performed at the same time.
See also selective attention, dichotic listening task, multitasking.
dizygotic twins Twins who have developed as a result of the simultaneous
production of two ova by the mother, both of which have subsequently
been fertilised and developed fully. Unlike monozygotic twins, they
resemble each other genetically only to the extent that ordinary
brothers and sisters do. Dizygotic twins are also known as fraternal
twins. DLPFC See dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. DNA See
deoxyribonucleic acid. document analysis Research that is carried out by
examining written or online records or other forms of documentation.
dogmatism A personality trait involving rigid adherence to a chosen
point of view, and intolerance of people who hold alternative positions.
See also authoritarian personality. domain specificity The idea that a
given neural node or cognitive module will respond specifically to one
type of input (e.g. colours or faces) but not to others.

distribution-free tests See non-­parametric statistics.

domestic abuse abuse that takes place within the home, usually between
adults as child abuse can be seen as a separate category.

diurnal rhythm A biorhythm in which activity and alertness peak during
the daytime. It is a form of circadian rhythm.

dominance A term used loosely by ethologists to refer to privileged
access to resources, rights of way, or the

102

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

­generation of appeasing treatment by other members of a social group.
dominance hierarchy A concept first proposed in 1922 by
SchjelderuppeEbbe after observation of a consistent order of precedence
(the pecking order) among hens when the latter had been given restricted
access to food supplies. Dominance hierarchies became popular as
ethological concepts throughout the 1950s and 1960s and were considered
to present a basic model of social organisation for most animals, but
the common assumption of linear dominance hierarchies has been
increasingly challenged by ethological research in recent years.
dominant gene A gene that is more likely to be expressed in the
individual's development than a matching gene (allele) with a different
physical implication. For example, if an individual inherits a gene for
red hair and a gene for dark hair from their parents, the dark-haired
gene, being dominant, will be the one that is expressed. ­Red-hair genes
are recessive and will only be expressed in the phenotype if both
alleles code for red hair. dominant hemisphere The half of the brain
that controls language function and usually other aspects of dominance
such as handedness. For most people, the left hemisphere is dominant,
and they are right-handed. See also hemisphere bias. dopamine A
neurotransmitter involved in reward and motivational pathways in the
brain, and possibly implicated in some psychiatric disturbances. The
tranquilliser chlorpromazine (Largactil) seems to work by blocking
dopamine receptor sites, while amphetamines produce an increase in the
levels of dopamine and noradrenaline. The symptoms of Parkinson's
disease can be alleviated by the drug L-dopa,

which increases dopamine levels in the brain. The implication here is
that a dopamine deficiency may be causing the problem. dopamine
hypothesis The hypothesis that schizophrenia is caused by an excess of
dopamine in the limbic system. dopaminergic Involving the actions of the
neurotransmitter dopamine. dorsal Towards the top. See also ventral,
lateral, medial. dorsal auditory stream The dorsal auditory stream is
concerned with the location of the origin of sounds and preparing for
auditory guided action. It passes along the upper (dorsal) side of the
auditory cortex and makes connections with the motor cortex in the
parietal lobe, and with areas of the frontal cortex. It is known as the
'where' route for sound information, and helps to prepare the body for
movement (e.g. towards or away from the sound). Compare ventral stream,
ventral auditory stream. dorsal stream There are two neural pathways
which are described as the dorsal stream: the dorsal visual stream and
the dorsal auditory stream. While the term usually refers to a neural
pathway in the visual system, it is also used for a neural pathway in
the auditory system, so it is important to establish the relevant
context if using or reading the term. dorsal visual stream The dorsal
visual stream is involved in attention and visually guided action. It is
known as the 'where' route for visual information, concerned with
locating objects and events no matter what they actually are. It is a
neural pathway that goes from the visual cortex to the parietal lobes.
See also ventral stream, ventral visual stream. dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (DLPFC) An area of the cortex that is involved in

D

manipulating information in working memory. For example, it becomes more
active if someone is presented with a recognisable sequence of numbers
rather than a random set. dot-plot diagram A way of bringing together a
group of data sets for comparison, in which the mean of each set is
represented by a dot, and the extent of its standard deviation is
indicated by a line on either side of that dot. Dot-plot diagrams deal
with ratio or equal-­interval data, while box-plot diagrams are used for
ordinal data. See also box-plot diagram, meta-analysis. double bind A
situation in which the individual appears to be confronted with
alternatives, but in fact whatever they do will be wrong. For example, a
father might forbid his son to climb a tree. If the boy climbs the tree,
he is punished for disobedience, but if he does not, his father
indicates that he is disappointed at the boy being so 'soft'. Double
binds seem to be particularly common in families, and Gregory Bateson,
who invented the term, initially proposed that schizophrenia was caused
by g­ rowing up in a family in which double binds were used frequently.
This theory has now been abandoned, but systemic family therapists
recognise that double binds are a common and destructive feature of many
disturbed families. double-blind control An experimental control in
which neither the person conducting the experiment nor the research
participants in the study are aware of the experimental hypothesis or
conditions. Double-blind controls are precautions against experimenter
effects, and are considered essential in tests of new drugs or
assessments of therapeutic procedures. But see also deception.
double-dissociation The observation that some people with brain damage

103

may show normal ability on one task but impaired ability on another,
while someone else with apparently the same problem shows the reverse
effect. double obligation dilemma The ethical issue involved when the
use of deception would make a very significant contribution to our
social knowledge or awareness but might involve distress or anxiety on
the part of individual research participants. See also ethical issues.
Down's syndrome A congenital disorder in which the individual possesses
an extra chromosome, giving rise to a series of distinctive
physiological characteristics, often accompanied by mental retardation
and language difficulty. It was once called 'mongolism', a term that
originated because of a (very) slight resemblance of children with
Down's syndrome to people of Mongolian descent, but that term is no
longer used in psychological literature. dream analysis Finding hidden
meanings in disguised symbolic form by interpreting the content of
dreams. Dream analysis is an important tool of the psychoanalytic
schools of thought proposed by Freud and Jung. It is considered to form
an important set of clues to the unconscious mind because dreaming is
thought to express unconscious wish fulfilment expressive of the
individual's deepest conflicts and desires. dreaming Mental activity
that occurs during sleep. Dreams typically have vivid imagery, an
emotional content, and usually occur in a particular sleep phase (REM
sleep). They also have the characteristic of being rapidly forgotten on
waking. It seems that all humans dream, but most dreams are not
remembered. Freud proposed that the function of dreams was to preserve
sleep by seeming to fulfil wishes that would otherwise

104

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

disturb the sleeper. More recent theories propose that dreams are the
by-product of the processing of information that has come in during the
day and needs to be incorporated into the cognitive system. See also
lucid dreaming. dreamwork A term used by Freud to refer to the complex
process by which unconscious wishes and fantasies are disguised in
dreams, appearing in symbolic form. It is a fundamental aspect of dream
analysis. See also latent content, manifest content. drive An energised
state in which the person or animal is motivated by the need to satisfy
some lack or want (usually physiological in nature). drive-reduction
theory The theory that motivation occurs, and behaviour is energised,
mainly or entirely as a result of the need to alleviate or reduce
drives. It is a rather negative theory in that it assumes that all
drives produce tension or arousal so that the organism is always
motivated to minimise drive states. The failure to encompass enjoyment
and activities that deliberately increase arousal (such as horror
movies, exploration and skydiving) was one reason for

Figure 25 A dual-memory model

the decline of the theory. See also secondary drives. drug A chemical
substance, usually non-nutritive, which exerts an effect on the body.
See also recreational drugs. DSM-V See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders. DTI See diffusion tensor imaging. dual-aspect
theory The idea that mind and brain are two aspects of the same thing,
but described at different levels of analysis. dualism See Cartesian
dualism. dual-memory theory A model of memory first proposed by William
James in 1890, and later developed by (among others) Miller, and
Atkinson and Shiffrin. Dual-memory theory postulates two independent
memory systems, namely a limited-capacity, immediate or short-term
memory (STM), and a large-capacity, long-term memory (LTM). The Atkinson
and Shiffrin model proposes that STM forms a first stage to LTM storage,
and that material is transferred from STM to LTM by means of rehearsal
(see Figure 25). See also levels of processing.

D

dual-process dependency model A way of analysing social influence by
separating normative social influence coming from knowledge that has
been directly learned from others about norms and socially accepted
standards, from informational social influence, which has been learned
more indirectly from the media, etc. The dual-process dependency model
assumes that these two forms of influence are entirely separate, and
exert different pressures on the individual. Dunning-Kruger effect The
finding that people who are less skilled are

105

more likely to overestimate their abilities than people who are more
skilled. See also self-efficacy. dyad A pair, usually of people, who are
engaged in some kind of interaction. dyadic interactions Interaction
between just two people, usually but not inevitably face to face, with
no one else involved. dynamic equilibrium A state of a system which is
unchanging, not because all of its components are locked into fixed
positions (static equilibrium), but

Dunn, Judy (1939--) Judith Frances Dunn specialised in social
developmental psychology and pioneered a number of methods for studying
the natural, everyday behaviour of pre-school children. Her ethological
studies of young children formed a significant part of the Oxford
Pre-School Research Project, spearheaded by Jerome Bruner, and showed
how pre-school children were far more socially sophisticated than had
previously been thought. The research revealed how such children applied
their social knowledge in family interactions such as teasing,
comforting, and emotional play. Dunn also showed how some toddler
tantrums appeared to be directly related to the child's feeling that
their personal rights or entitlements had been abrogated in some way.
Her research paved the way for a greater understanding of pre-school
children's social awareness, including research into TOM (theory of
mind).

Dweck, Carol (1946--) Carol Dweck is primarily concerned with the
relationship between learning, achievement and intelligence, arguing
that the beliefs people have about where their intelligence comes from
are key to their achievement. She was an early researcher into
self-efficacy beliefs and achievement in children and is most known for
developing Mindset theory. This distinguishes between a growth mindset,
which contains a developing or incremental idea of intelligence and
emphasises success based on perseverance and hard work; and a fixed
mindset which sees intelligence as originating from innate and
unchangeable ability. The theory has been successfully applied in many
contexts and is increasingly popular with educators and trainers.

106

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

because the components are continually changing in relation to each
other in such a way that the system as a whole is stable. It can be a
useful metaphor for human systems that are much more likely to become
stable (or stuck) in this way. dynamometer A device for measuring
muscular strength, particularly of hand grip. dys- A prefix which is
generally used to mean faulty or presenting a problem. dysarthria
Impaired ability to contract the muscles, resulting in difficulty in
movement. It is associated with lesions to the cerebellum and the left
basal ganglia. dyscalculia A difficulty with performing arithmetical
calculations, similar to dyslexia and generating many of the same
debates. When caused specifically by brain damage the disorder is
generally referred to as acalculia. There is general agreement that the
developmental disorder dyscalculia does exist, but debates centre around
whether observed problems in many instances actually arise from the
disorder or have other causes, such as emotional reactions acquired from
inappropriate learning experiences. dysexecutive syndrome A cognitive
impairment that affects the ability to

plan and organise deliberate behaviour. It is thought to arise from
damage to the prefrontal cortex. dysfunctional Working or operating in
such a manner as to be a positive handicap to the individual or
originating body. dysgraphia A type of learning difficulty that involves
difficulty in writing (i.e. with performing the physical actions
involved in writing). It often overlaps with other disorders such as
difficulties in writing at speed but does not seem to be related to
difficulties of comprehension. Dysgraphia has been associated with the
misfunctioning of a specific writing area, known as Exner's area, in the
frontal lobe. See also phonological dysgraphia, dyslexia, suface
dysgraphia. dyslexia A general term for disorders involving a failure to
learn to read, or specific difficulties in the interpretations of words
or letters, despite adequate general intelligence. Dyslexic problems may
take many forms, and there are a number of theories as to origins, and
various therapies. See also developmental dyslexia, phonological
dyslexia, phonological mediation. dyspraxia An impairment in the ability
to perform deliberate actions. See also orofacial dyspraxia.

E eardrum The part of the ear that forms a barrier between the outer ear
and the middle ear. The eardrum, or tympanic membrane, is a taut
membrane that vibrates in response to sound. These vibrations are
transmitted to the middle ear, where they are amplified by three small
bones known by their approximate shapes as the malleus (hammer) incus

(anvil) and stapes (stirrup). They are then passed on to the cochlea for
transduction into electrical impulses (Figure 26). eating disorders A
general term for disturbed behaviour involving food. Such disorders
include anorexia nervosa and bulimia. EBA See extrastriate body area.

Figure 26 Structure of the ear

Ebbinghaus, Hermann (1850--1909) Hermann Ebbinghaus is famous for
pioneering the systematic study of ­memory, and for establishing rigorous
laboratory methods to ensure standardisation of both subject matter and
research procedures. He did this by using lists of nonsense syllables
(consonant-vowel-consonant groups with minimal prior meaning) and
carefully standardised procedures, and identified a number of consistent
memory processes, such as the four Rs (recall, recognition,
redintegration and relearning savings), which described different
degrees of remembering. Although not the first, he is often credited
with being one of the most influential of the early experimental
psychologists, partly because of his vigorous defence of the
experimental approach. DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

108

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

echoic memory A very brief form of immediate or short-term memory for
sound information, which fades quickly. We may, for instance, be reading
or concentrating on something else, and only become aware that the
doorbell has rung because of the brief echoic memory it has left behind.
echolalia The repetition of the last heard item of speech, sometimes
exactly and sometimes with what appears to the listener to be a mocking
intonation. It is sometimes, though by no means always, a symptom of an
underlying psychiatric disorder such as schizophrenia. See also
echopraxia, mirroring. echopraxia The automatic and often uncontrollable
copying of other people's actions or movements, sometimes, though not
always, a symptom of an underlying psychiatric disorder. See also
postural echo, mirroring. Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) A form
of diary method that involves sampling what the person is doing in their
everyday lives at random moments throughout the day. It has four
distinct characteristics: (i) events or phenomena are recorded as they
occur; (ii) the recordings depend on careful, usually randomised timing;
(iii) the recordings will often involve repeated events, which can be
usefully compared; and (iv) they are made in the person's own
environment. The method has become more widely used with the
availability of mobile phones. See also Experience Sampling Method,
ambulatory assessment. ecological perception The approach to perception
proposed by J.J. Gibson, who argued that it is not possible to
understand perceptual processes outside the context of the person's (or
animal's) active engagement with the physical world. When that context
is taken into account, many of the problematic aspects of visual

perception disappear. For example, many visual illusions are based on
'snapshots' of a scene or image and result in hypothesising about the
likely implications of the visual stimulus. In the real world, however,
perceivers move around, which means that other aspects of perception
such as gradient of texture, superposition and motion parallax become
relevant, and an apparent illusion disappears. Gibson argued that
perception does not involve hypothesising when it is studied in its
ecological context rather than as a decontextualised phenomenon. See
also direct perception. ecological validity Validity is concerned with
the question of whether a given psychological technique really assesses
that which it purports to measure. Ecological validity is, as its name
suggests, concerned with whether a given technique truly corresponds to
its equivalent in an everyday 'natural' setting. The issue centres
around whether artificially controlled laboratory simulations of human
situations can really be considered to be equivalent to the behaviour
that human beings display during the course of their everyday lives,
given what we know about demand characteristics and self-fulfilling
prophecies. For example, it is questionable whether minimal group
studies of social identification are really examples of the same
psychological processes as social identifications produced by belonging
to a given ethnic or occupational group since they are highly confined
and restricted laboratory studies that deliberately exclude all the
complexities of social life. The term is particularly associated with
J.J. Gibson's approach to studying perception in realistic settings. See
ecological perception. ecology The study of the interactions between
organisms, other organisms, and their natural environments. ECT See
electroconvulsive therapy. edema See oedema.

E

educable mentally retarded An American term corresponding to the
obsolete British category of educationally subnormal, and implying a
delayed mental development such that the child cannot cope with normal
schooling, but is still educable if special help is provided.
Specifically, the category is applied to children with an IQ between 50
and 69. Below 50, the American term is 'trainable mentally retarded'.
See also educationally subnormal, mental handicap. educational
psychology One of the major professions of psychologists. In the UK,
practitioners are employed within the educational system to deal with
psychological issues concerning children in school and to assess and
monitor the progress of children with special needs. They are usually
based in School Psychological Services or Child Guidance Clinics. In
some areas, the work is largely taken up with assessing children who are
having difficulties in school and making recommendations about which
kind of educational setting they need. Other areas have been able to
develop much more varied work, ranging from therapy with individual
children and their families, through curriculum development and teacher
training, to consulting with the school on more effective management
structures. Training courses usually last for three years and award a
doctorate, but require the applicant to have a good psychology degree,
training as a teacher and two years of teaching experience before
starting the course.

Figure 27 EEG patterns in waking

109

educationally subnormal (ESN) A classification for children who are
­unable to cope with normal schooling. A Government Act in 1981 ruled out
the use of all of the terms which had been set up to label children with
mental or physical handicaps, so these terms are now obsolete. When a
child has 'special needs' a report is prepared by an educational
psychologist which defines the strengths of the child and the areas in
which special help will be required. It is hoped that this will prevent
children from experiencing labelling which inevitably becomes derogatory
and difficult to remove. See also special child. EEG The
electroencephalogram, which is a recording of changes in the overall
electrical activity of the brain. EEGs are taken by attaching several
electrodes to different parts of the scalp and using these to detect
neural activity in the different regions of the brain. A polygraph
converts these fluctuations into a graphical record and/or sends them
for computer analysis so that particular patterns of activity or
responses to specific stimuli can be identified. Specific frequencies
(alpha, beta and delta waves) are reliably associated with different
mental states (Figure 27), and patterns of EEG response can be used to
identify a disposition to fits (seizures) and other forms of brain
dysfunction or levels of sleep (Figure 28). More recently, it has been
shown that people can control their EEG output to some extent given
appropriate

110

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

waking level I level II level III level IV

Figure 28 EEGs in sleep biofeedback, which has opened the door to the
development of prosthetic devices which can be controlled by mental
activity. See also error-related negativity. effect (i) (ii)

When used as a noun, an effect is a result or outcome (e.g. 'the effect
of his or her action'). When used as a verb, it means to bring about a
consequence (e.g. 'I may effect a change in your understanding'). This
is an entirely different meaning from 'affect', and students need to be
careful not to confuse the two, as the entire meaning of a sentence may
be changed by such a mistake.

For more detail, see affect. effect size The extent to which a
particular variable being investigated has produced a result. In studies
with human beings, because of the complex range of factors that are
always involved, effect sizes are rarely large, but even small ones can
be statistically significant. The effect size supplements probability
assessments, indicating how much importance should be attached to the
statistical significance of the findings given the size of the sample.
efference copy A representation or copy of a motor signal that is used
to

predict the sensory consequences of an action. For example, the reason
why we are unable to tickle ourselves is that the efference copy of the
action is sent to the sensory projection area, so we know what to expect
and therefore the unpredictability in the stimulation is lost. efferent
neurone See motor neurone. effort after meaning A term used by Bartlett
to describe the ways in which individuals attempt to organise their
memories, and to make sense of them, if necessary altering the content
of the specific information in order to do so. efMRI See event-related
functional magnetic resonance imaging. ego In Freudian theory, the part
of the personality structure that deals with external reality and
balances the pressures coming from the id and superego. Literally, the
word means 'I', and its more general use is to refer to the sense of
identity or self. ego-defence mechanisms See defence mechanism.
ego-ideal The image an individual holds of the person they would like to
be. Also known as the ideal self-image. ego-state A term from
transactional analysis that describes the basic structures of feelings
which lead to a person adopting particular ways of relating to someone

E

during an interaction. At any one time, a person may be relating as a
parent, an adult or a child. egocentric coding Visual coding that is
entirely dependent on the person's individual perspective, by comparison
with allocentric coding. egocentric heuristic A strategy commonly used
when listening to others, in which what is said is interpreted entirely
with respect to idiosyncratic, personal knowledge rather than with
respect to knowledge that is held in common with the speaker. egocentric
space The map of the immediate (or distal) environment that is coded
entirely in respect to the person's awareness of the position of their
body. egocentric speech Speech that is simply involved in monitoring and
directing the child's internal thought processes and has no
communicative function. According to Piaget, this is a significant part
of the child's acquisition of speech. It forms a valuable tool of
thought, with which the child performs mental operations on the external
world. egocentricity or egocentrism A central concept in Piagetian
theory, egocentricity refers to the idea that children take their own
perspective as central, assuming that other people have the same
understandings, motives and needs as themselves. It is not a moralistic
concept and has nothing in common with selfishness or egotism, but
instead is concerned with the child's perception of association and
causality. The process by which the child gradually comes to
differentiate itself from the external world, through the development of
the body-schema, to recognise that objects have permanent existence, and
to be able to achieve decentration and see things from another's
viewpoint are, for Piaget, significant milestones in the

111

reduction of egocentricity. When used of adults, the term has
implications of selfishness, although perhaps it should just imply a
delayed cognitive development. See genetic epistemology. egoism A
tendency to give an excessively high priority to one's own needs and
wishes, and a correspondingly low priority to those of other people. For
a comparison, see egotism. egotism A consistent tendency to overvalue
oneself, and therefore to undervalue other people. It differs from
egoism in that egotists tend not to be interested in other people,
whereas egoists need a good understanding of others in order to exploit
them. Egotistical attitudes tend to be clearly displayed, whereas egoism
may need to be concealed to be effective. See also Dark Triad. eidetic
imagery Commonly referred to as photographic memory, eidetic imagery is
a memory that has been encoded by means of a particularly detailed
visual image, such that the individual is sometimes able to identify
details from the image which are unlikely to have been noticed on first
exposure. Eidetic imagery is relatively common in children, occurring in
about 10 per cent of cases, but tends to disappear around late
adolescence, and is rare in adults. See also iconic representation.
eigenvalue A quantity calculated in multivariate statistics which
indicates the contribution of one factor, or independent variable, to
the variance of the dependent variable. Its most common use is in the
appraisal of factors in psychometric tests, as it can describe the
variance of each factor in a factor analysis. Einstellung A term coined
by the Gestalt school of psychology to refer to mental sets that
influence problem-­ solving by inducing a rigidity of thought. This then
precludes the perception of alternative strategies or solutions.

112

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

elaborated code A term used by Bernstein to refer to the form of
language commonly used by middle-class families, characterised by
extensive use of nouns, explanations and synonyms. Bernstein's use of
the term 'code' is contentious, as are many other parts of his theory.
This is mainly due to the theory having been associated with the verbal
deprivation hypothesis of class differences in language use, which
argues that restricted language use implies restricted cognitive
possibilities. See also codes of language, restricted code. elaboration
In cognition, the addition of information to a representation or schema
that already exists in the cognitive system. This may involve absorbing
new information (through assimilation) adjusting the schema to encompass
new information (through accommodation) or linking the representation to
other stored information. See also elaborative inference. elaboration
mnemonics Ways of storing information by deliberately expanding each
item of information to be stored. This is done by exploring relevant
related information and adding details (e.g. images) or working to
transform the information in some other way. Elaboration is thought to
work because it encourages cognitive processing of the information. See
also mnemonic, levels of processing. elaborative inference This is the
adding of detail to an existing memory or cognition by drawing on prior
knowledge or theories. See also elaboration mnemonics. Electra complex A
term introduced by Jung as a female counterpart of the Oedipus complex.
Most theorists, including Freud, rejected use of the term. See also
penis envy. electrical impulse A short burst of electricity. In most
psychological contexts,

this refers to the electrical impulse produced by a neurone when it is
stimulated. See also all-or-none principle, synaptic transmission.
electrical potential A term often used to refer to the electrical
impulse, or spike of electrical energy, that is generated by a neurone
when it fires. electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) See ESB.
electrocardiogram (ECG) A recording of the electrical discharges that
appear on the surface of the body as a result of the activity of the
heart. In psychology, the ECG is used mainly as a way of recording the
rate at which the heart is beating, as changes in heart rate may
indicate the presence and strength of a number of processes such as
stress and the orienting reflex. electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) A
treatment for endogenous depression that involves passing an electrical
current through the brain, thus simulating a severe epileptic fit. This
controversial treatment induces temporary amnesia and can result in the
alleviation of some forms of reactive depression. However, there is
considerable concern both as to how appropriately it is actually used in
the psychiatric context, and with regard to the possibility of long-term
damage to memory and concentration. electrode A device that will pick up
or transmit electrical activity wherever it is placed on the body or
scalp. Traditionally electrodes used for psychological research have
taken the form of a small metal disc, coated with a jelly to improve
electrical contact, and fitted to a larger adhesive disc so that it can
be securely attached to the skin. However, improvements in technology
have resulted in more sensitive elec-

E

trodes that can be used more simply, e.g. attached to a net which can be
­fitted over the scalp. electroencephalogram See EEG. electromyography
(EMG) A method for measuring the amount of electrical activity
associated with muscle ­movement. electroshock therapy (EST) American
term for electroconvulsive therapy. EMA See Assessment.

Ecological

Momentary

emblems A category of non-verbal signals identified by Ekman and
Friesen, which involves those non-verbal cues which have a direct and
culturally understood meaning, and which stand for something. Gestures
with specific meanings, or uniforms denoting specific role functions,
are examples of emblems. embodied cognition The idea that the movement
or internal state of the body can be used in cognition. See also
enactive representation. embodiment The sense that the self is located
within the body. embryo An organism in the earliest stages of
development following conception. In lower species, the animal is called
an embryo until hatching or birth. In humans, the period of the embryo
extends to two months after conception, by which time different organs
are becoming visible, and the term foetus is then used until birth.
emergency reaction See alarm reaction. emergent properties Properties or
characteristics that appear in groups or complex combinations, and which
could not have been predicted from the characteristics of the individual
elements which make up that group. One of the chief arguments against
reduction-

113

ism as a form of argument concerns its assumption that complex
behaviour, whether it be social or individual, can be explained simply
by reference to its component parts. This does not take into account the
emergent properties that become apparent when elements are combined into
a higher-order whole. For instance, it would not have been possible to
predict that group decisionmaking can result in highly polarised
decisions simply from looking at the decision-making patterns of
individual group members (see group polarisation), or to have identified
the phenomenon of groupthink from research into individual cognitive
processes. EMG See electromyography. emic approaches Approaches to
knowledge that address indigenous local phenomena or experiences which
are culture-specific rather than universal. See also etic approaches.
emojis or emogees Small images of faces, symbols and objects used to
express information or emotion in text. They are self-contained keyboard
characters which work across different platforms. Compare emoticon.
emoticon Punctuation marks, letters and numbers usually read sideways
and arranged to represent an emotion or sentiment, e.g. ;) as a winking
face. Compare emoji. emotion Subjective feelings that have a positive or
negative value for the individual. Beyond this statement, the definition
must depend on the particular theory of emotion being held. Most current
theories regard emotions as a combination of physiological responses
with a cognitive evaluation of the situation. The idea that emotions are
the source of action has become less popular,

114

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

and in fact, the term has only a remote link with any idea of motion,
having come into English from the French word emouvoir, meaning 'to
excite'. Some definitions would reserve the term emotion for fairly
intense and fairly brief experiences. It is certainly useful to
distinguish emotions from states (such as hunger, sexual desire and
frustration), which may give rise to emotions, and also from behaviours
such as aggression, which may indicate the presence of an emotion, but
which are not themselves emotions. See also basic emotions, mood.
emotion generation A term used to describe a spontaneous emotional
reaction to a situation or event. emotion regulation The use of
deliberate strategies to change or adjust emotional or mood states, most
commonly used to minimise negative emotions. Regulation of emotional
expression involves activation of the amygdala and the orbitofrontal
cortex in the brain. See also mindfulness. emotional abuse Emotional
abuse is the persistent emotional maltreatment of another person,
thereby causing severe and persistent adverse effects on their
well-being. It is often associated with physical abuse. It can be
inflicted on both adults and children and when the victim is another
adult it is classed as a form of domestic abuse. When someone
manipulates situations in order to undermine their partner's mental
state it may be called gaslighting. Emotional abuse of children may take
the form of conveying to them that they are worthless or unloved,
inadequate, or valued only insofar as they meet the needs of another
person. It may feature age or developmentally inappropriate expectations
being imposed on children. These may include interactions that are
beyond the child's developmental

capability, as well as overprotection and limitation of exploration and
learning, or preventing the child from participating in normal social
interactions. It may involve seeing or hearing the illtreatment of
another such as a parent. It includes serious bullying (including
cyberbullying), causing children to feel frightened, or the exploitation
or corruption of children. Some level of emotional abuse is involved in
all types of maltreatment of a child, though it may occur alone. See
child abuse. emotional disorder A set of disorders in which children
show high levels of shyness, anxiety and dependency. The term is also
used more broadly to refer to a wide range of psychological disturbances
that involve inappropriate emotional experiences, such as mania and
depression. For this sense, an alternative term is affective disorder.
See also conduct disorders, affect. emotional intelligence (EI) A term
used to describe social and emotional sensitivity, which is a
combination of complex skills essential for smooth social interaction
and maintaining social harmony. Although previously overlooked, they are
now considered to be a basic form of intelligence in their own right.
While those who score highly in emotional intelligence tests generally
tend to promote social harmony, high scores in some aspects of EI are
also apparent in those high in machiavellianism and similar traits. See
also dark triad. emotional stability A more neutral term used to
describe the trait of neuroticism in the five-factor theory of
personality. emotive A description of behaviour as expressing an
emotion. Usually, use of the term implies a strong emotion, though the
actual emotion may not be identified.

E

empathy A feeling of emotional understanding and unity with another,
such that an emotion felt by one person is experienced to some degree by
another who is empathic to them. The term is sometimes used when
indicating how much capacity an individual has to be empathic towards
others. It is thought to be important for psychotherapists to be
empathic. Neurological studies have shown that empathy involves a
complex of brain areas, including the paracingulate cortex, the medial
prefrontal cortex and the superior temporal sulcus, as well as other
parts of the limbic system. The prevalence of mirror systems in the
brain is thought to reflect the importance of empathy in human social
evolution. See also WEG. empathy-altruism model The idea that altruistic
behaviour is motivated by empathic concern for other people.

115

the child. As the child develops and its world widens, further forms of
representation are added to its repertoire, such as iconic
representation and symbolic representation. See also embodied cognition.
encoding The processing of information in such a way that it can be
represented internally, for memory storage. The term is also used when
data are transferred into a standard form such as a computer file. See
also encoding specificity. encoding specificity The idea that retrieval
from memory will depend on the overlap between the information available
at the time of retrieval and the information stored in the memory trace.
For example, if someone is trying to remember a sentence such as 'the
girl was dancing', then 'music' might form an effective cue to stimulate
retrieval, whereas 'coat' probably would not.

empiricism A philosophical school of thought, highly influential in
psychology, which argued that only that which can be directly observed
or measured can be meaningfully studied. See behaviourism.

encounter group A therapeutic technique devised by Carl Rogers, in which
clients are placed in a situation which facilitates openness and honesty
about their self-concept and their feelings concerning the others in the
group. Once the initial barriers were down, Rogers considered that such
a group would provide the emotional support and unconditional positive
regard needed for each member to deal with their problems and to explore
their options for personal growth. See also client-centred therapy.

enactive representation According to Bruner, this is the first mode of
representation developed by the young child. Enactive representation
involves the storing of information in the form of kinaesthetic
sensations, such as the way that most adults recall the sensation of a
fairground waltzer or helter-skelter. In the world of the infant,
'muscle memories' would be adequate to cope with most of the information
encountered by

endocrine system This is the general term for a system of glands,
distributed throughout the body, which release hormones into the
bloodstream. The endocrine system is generally involved in the
maintenance of specific conditions of the body, such as pregnancy or
aroused states, rather than in particular acts or behaviours. The main
gland of the endocrine system would appear to be the pituitary gland,
which is located in the

empirical Such as can be measured. Empirical observations are those that
can provide a level of objective data which can be assessed in one form
or another. Using the term 'measure' loosely, almost all psychological
forms of investigation may be considered to be empirical.

116

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

brain and directly connected to the hypothalamus. The pituitary sends
messages to many of the other glands of the system and is closely linked
to the homeostatic mechanisms of the body. Some of the other glands of
the endocrine system are the pineal gland, the thyroid and thymus
glands, which are involved in growth regulation and immune mechanisms,
the testes, and the adrenal glands (Figure 29). endogenous Within the
body. Compare exogenous. endogenous depression Depression that has come
about without any apparent cause, and which persists over an extended
period of time. The term implies that the depression originates within
the individual, rather than being a response to external circumstances.
See also reactive depression, depressive attributional style. endogenous
orienting Attention that has been directed by the aims or goals of the
person doing the perceiving. See also selective attention, exogenous
spatial attention. endogenous spatial attention Attention directed
towards a particular location,

Figure 29 The endocrine system

which has been directed by personal goals or intentions. See also
exogenous orienting. endorphins A group of neurotransmitters, mainly
found in the limbic system, which were originally termed 'endogenous
morphine'. This later became contracted to endorphin, and the group
includes the similar enkephalins. They are substances with chemical
structures closely resembling morphines, produced in the brain in
response to demanding exercise, pain, anxiety or fear. It is considered
that the feelings of euphoria that often accompany strenuous exercise
are produced by the actions of endorphins, and that the similar
experience produced by the opiates heroin and morphine occurs as a
result of their being picked up in receptor sites specific to
endorphins. engineering psychology The application of psychology to
human--machine interaction. It includes the selection and training of
people to operate machines, and advice on the design of machines so that
they can be efficiently used by human operators. See also applied
psychology.

E

engram An outdated expression, the physical form in which an experience
is recorded in memory. See memory trace. enkephalins A specific set of
neurotransmitters belonging to the general group of endorphins that are
produced in response to pain or demanding exercise. entorhinal cortex
The area of the brain immediately surrounding the hippocampus. It has
been shown to be involved in transferring memories for long-term
storage. See also perirhinal cortex, rhinal sulcus. entrapment The
process in decision-­ making whereby it becomes difficult to make the
decision to get out of a bad situation because too much has already been
invested in trying to make it work. The American war in Vietnam was a
classic example of entrapment and carried on for many years even after
it was apparent that America could not win. A more mundane example would
be that of feeling unable to scrap an old car because of the money that
has already been paid out to keep it on the road -- the owner feels
obliged to try to keep the car on the road, even at additional cost,
because otherwise the money that has already been spent is seen as
wasted. See also heuristics. environment The total external context in
which an individual operates. The concept of environment is usually used
to include both physical surroundings and their characteristics and
social contexts and interactions. However, it may be used more
specifically to include all the different facets of the physical but to
exclude the social aspects. See also ecology. environmental determinism
The view that behaviour, personality or psychological characteristics
originate as a direct consequence of individual learning and
environmental influences, and are not significantly influenced by innate
factors.

117

environmental psychology The study of how the environment influences and
channels individual behaviour. Environmental psychology includes the
study of such factors as territoriality and personal space, ergonomic
design, and the physical attributes of surroundings. environmentalism
The doctrine that all significant determinants of behaviour are to be
found in the environment. Strict behaviourism is one version of
environmentalism. EPI The Eysenck Personality Inventory, a questionnaire
designed to assess people on the two personality traits of extraversion
and neuroticism (see neurosis). These were proposed as the two main
traits underlying individual differences in personality, each
representing several second-order traits. epidemiology A research
technique in which the distribution of the events or other features
under study is plotted in order to identify patterns or regularities.
Distributions are usually plotted geographically (e.g. studying whether
identified cases of incest are more prevalent in some areas of a city
than others). Alternatively, other forms of distribution may be applied
(e.g. as in epidemiological studies of the incidence of Covid-19 in
subgroups within the population). epigenetics Changes to the way that a
gene is expressed which have been driven by the environment. For
example, it has been shown that early abuse or neglect can influence
glucocorticoid receptors, such that they respond differently from those
in animals or humans who have not experienced early stressors of this
type. epilepsy The most common serious neurological condition, usually
symptomatic of an underlying brain disorder. Everyone

118

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

has a seizure 'threshold' (i.e. a potential to have epileptic seizures,
which are unpredictable but transient abnormal electrical discharges in
the brain). Seizures can manifest themselves in different ways,
depending on which area of the brain is involved. Generalised seizures
involve both hemispheres of the brain simultaneously, producing a
temporary loss of consciousness, whereas partial seizures begin in a
localised area of the brain and may produce few visible symptoms.
Epilepsy can be managed by medication, with reasonably high success
rates, and in some very extreme cases, it can be treated by surgery,
most commonly the removal of the temporal lobe of the brain. Earlier
treatments involved severing the corpus callosum -- see split-brain
studies. epinephrine The American name for adrenaline. epiphenomenalism
The kind of account or theory in which a phenomenon is seen as an
emergent property of some more fundamental process, and therefore to be
studied in terms of the more basic process. An epiphenomenal approach
would see the mind as being just a direct outcome of brain activity.
episode analysis According to Harré, it is episodes, rather than acts or
actions, that should form the basic unit of social analysis since that
is the more meaningful unit in human experience. Harré proposed that
episodes could be viewed using a dramaturgical metaphor, which would
encourage the researcher to consider social roles, social scripts,
non-verbal signals, discourse and social meaning, and many other facets
of social psychology, providing a more rounded view of what is happening
than conventional approaches. See also ethogenics. episodic buffer A
passive and rapidly decaying component of working memory,

which acts as a brief store of integrated information about an event or
situation. episodic memory Memory for specific events, episodes or
phenomena. See also semantic memory. epistemology The study of
knowledge, and the ways in which what counts as knowledge may vary from
one discipline or field to another. For example, a similarly worded
question about the family might occur in both sociology and psychology
examinations, but different epistemological demands would be applied in
the evaluation of the answer. In the sociology examination, the student
would be required to consider the relationship of the family to society,
while in the psychology examination a consideration of interpersonal
processes and roles would be more appropriate. What counts as knowledge
in each subject is different, and it is the consideration of such
differences that is the subject matter of epistemology. See also
postmodernism. EPQ Eysenck Personality Questionnaire. See Eysenck
Personality Inventory (EPI). equal-interval scale A system of
measurement in which the difference in value between consecutive units
is consistent throughout. For example, in an equalinterval numbering
scale, the difference between 30 and 31 is of exactly the same magnitude
as the difference between 36,005 and 36,006. Equal-interval scales with
a fixed zero are known as ratio scales. Children are introduced to ratio
scales from a very early age, as they first learn to count, and adults
continue to use them (e.g. in dealing with money). See levels of
measurement. equilibration In Piagetian theory, the process by which
schemata are developed to take account of new information. If new
information that is encountered fails to fit into an existing schema,
the

E

individual is thrown into a state of cognitive discomfort known as
disequilibrium. Through the two processes of assimilation and
accommodation, the schemata are adapted or adjusted such that the new
information can be handled and the cognitive balance is restored. This
is the process of equilibration. equilibratory senses The kinaesthetic
senses based on receptors in the semicircular canals of the inner ear,
such as equilibrioception and proprioception. equilibrioception The
sense of balance. equipotentiality The now outdated principle outlined
by Lashley after his investigations of the cerebral cortex, that those
areas termed association cortex, concerned with learning and memory,
seemed to be equal in their potential to carry out these functions -- in
other words, that such functions were not

119

localised but were organised across the whole of the association cortex,
and it was the overall amount of cortex involved, not its location,
which determined effective function. See also Law of Mass Action. equity
theory The idea, from social exchange theory, that people choose
relationships in which they will benefit to about the same extent as
they contribute. There is some evidence that if people feel either
disadvantaged or over-advantaged in a relationship, they will be
dissatisfied. ergonomics The study of the relationship between energy
expenditure and work. As such, ergonomics includes the study of design
and physiological limitations, and of other factors influencing
efficiency in both mechanical and human--machine systems.

Erikson, Erik (1902--1994) Erik Erikson was a developmental
psychoanalyst most widely known for coining the term 'identity crisis',
and for his lifelong development theory. Developed at a time when much
psychoanalytical theory focused only on childhood, Erikson's assertion
that psychological development continued throughout adulthood and even
into old age was radical, and resulted in his influence extending into
mainstream psychology, as well as within the psychoanalytic world. His
idea was that each stage of life required the resolution of certain
psychological conflicts, and the way that these were resolved formed the
foundation of how that person went about resolving later ones. See also
lifespan, psychosocial stages. ERP See event-related potential. Error
(i)

In cognitive research, the term used to describe mistakes or slips, for
example, memory failures or the omission of an action in a sequence. A
psychotherapist or

(ii) 

spouse might judge that errors are not random mistakes but are
informative about some underlying emotion or motivation. In statistics
an 'error term' is not a mistake, but a measure of how far away a
particular observation is from the mean. If the mean height in a
particular population

120

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

is 1.5 metres and a specific person is 1.8 metres tall, the error term
for them is 0.3 metres. error bars Ways of indicating how much variation
is associated with any given point on a graph. Error bars form the
'whiskers' on a box whisker or boxplot diagram. error-related negativity
A distinctive pattern in EEG recordings that shows up when a mistake is
made. error variation The amount of variation that occurs within the
groups in an analysis of variance (ANOVA) calculation. ESB The usual
abbreviation for a form of direct electrical stimulation of the brain
that appears to function as a powerful reinforcer of behaviour, and to
give highly pleasurable sensations. Experiments conducted in the 1960s
seemed to imply that there was a direct pleasure centre in a particular
region of the hypothalamus. Stimulation of this area in rats, given as a
reward for lever-pressing, produced an extremely high response rate, and
in terminally ill cancer patients produced reports of feeling
'wonderful' or 'happy' (Campbell, 1973). It was thought that this might
be the root of all motivational states. However, the 'pleasure centre'
concept presents some difficulties. For instance, unlike other forms of
learning, it extinguishes very quickly. The effect is also not linked to
one particular location in the brain: animal studies show that
self-stimulation can occur from electrodes implanted in the amygdala,
the lateral hypothalamus and the orbitofrontal cortex, and appear to tap
into wider reward pathways in the brain. ESM See Experience Sampling
Method. ESN See educationally subnormal. ESP See extrasensory
perception.

EST See electroshock therapy. esteem needs One level of the hierarchy of
human needs proposed by Maslow. Esteem needs include the need for
achievement and social recognition and are considered to achieve
importance once physiological, safety and social needs have been met.
See also self-esteem. esthetic See aesthetics. ethical Concerned with
rights and wrongs. Owing to the scope of psychological interests and the
potential for psychological damage, ethical issues have become of great
importance in modern psychology. They include such aspects of
psychological practice as the use of deception in experimental work, the
investigation of characteristics that are potentially threatening to the
self-concept (cf. Milgram's work on obedience), the use of animals in
research, and questions of confidentiality in professional practice.
Professional psychological associations and academic departments have
special committees that evaluate and provide guidance on ethical issues,
and it is now an automatic requirement that any new research project
must be scrutinised and approved by an ethics committee. ethical
guidelines A set of rules drawn up by a professional body that set out
the principles which should be observed in conducting research. Ethical
guidelines are used to inform the work of ethics committees, which give
permission for research to be carried out. See also ethical issues.
ethical issues The set of concerns about the conduct of research and the
treatment of research participants that resulted from an increased
awareness of the social responsibility of science in the latter part of
the twentieth century. Ethical issues became particularly influential as
a reaction to the manipulative and often

E

damaging research conducted from the 1930s to the 1970s, in which
participants' rights were often disregarded, and many suffered distress,
pain or even lasting damage. See also ethical guidelines, ethics
committee, informed consent, deception, debriefing, confidentiality,
double obligation dilemma, presumptive consent. ethics committee A group
of knowledgeable people brought together to evaluate proposed research,
in order to ensure that it will conform to the appropriate ethical
guidelines. Ethics committees became necessary as a reaction to many
research projects carried out in the first two-thirds of the twentieth
century, which disregarded the rights of, or consequences to, research
'subjects' including other animals in the name of 'science'. The growth
of the social responsibility of science movement from the 1970s onward
eventually saw the demise of this attitude and the acceptance of ethical
issues in research. The complexity of ethical issues and problems such
as the double obligation dilemma makes committee involvement rather than
individual judgements necessary. ethnocentricity A condition in which
the perceptual framework and social assumptions of an individual are
entirely bounded by, and defined in terms of, the experience of their
own social, ethnic or national group. Ethnocentricity is therefore a
form of cognitive (or rather sociocognitive) set, which leads to
assumptions about one's own group's practices, beliefs or assumptions as
setting the standard of 'rightness' or objectivity and thus leads to
undervaluing, or even failing to recognise, alternatives. Probably
deriving from mechanisms of social comparison, ethnocentricity appears
to be a fundamental and extremely common aspect of human thinking. It is
clearly recognisable when we are look-

121

ing at the arguments of those belonging to different social groups,
although difficult to recognise when we are looking at our own. Arguably
the most powerful benefit of education, travel, contact with others of
different backgrounds, etc., is that it can sometimes have the effect of
reducing the extent of the individual's ethnocentricity. Regrettably,
however, this is not an inevitable consequence of any of these
experiences. See racism. ethnography A set of research tech­ni­ ques first
developed by anthropologists for the study of other cultures. It was
then taken up by sociologists in studying subcultures within their own
societies (e.g. the study by Whyte, 1934) of urban gang culture,
reported in his book Street Corner Society. Because it is difficult to
recognise the rules and processes of a culture when you are living in
it, the techniques of ethnography are essential for social psychologists
who want to analyse how a culture works. The first step is to gather
data, usually by observation and interview, but the researcher may join
the people being studied in participant observation, and may also use
other material such as letters, internet activity, diaries, and cultural
products such as magazines and television. A rich description is then
created and checked back with well-informed members of the cultural
group. Finally, the insider's form of description is converted to a
psychological or 'expert' account. See also netnography.
ethnomethodology The study of the common-sense knowledge by which social
actors know how to behave. We are usually not fully aware of the
knowledge we draw on to operate socially, in which case it is called
'tacit knowledge'. Discussed extensively by the sociologist Garfinkel in
1967, the method involves making social assumptions apparent by

122

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

taking action which directly challenges them. While sociological
research of this kind often involved performing acts which were
considered to be socially unacceptable or even outrageous, psychological
examples tended to be less extreme; but the principle of disturbing a
system in order to identify its elements and processes has been used
very effectively, for example by family researchers. One useful research
technique used to uncover this tacit knowledge is conversation analysis.
ethogenics An approach to social enquiry outlined by Rom Harré in an
attempt to identify some of the more meaningful aspects of social
interaction. Properly speaking, ethogenics is a philosophy rather than a
methodology, but there are two outstanding methodological implications
of the ethogenic approach. The first of these is that it is the episode,
rather than the act or action, which should constitute the basic unit of
social enquiry since social life is experienced in real life as a
succession of meaningful episodes. Harré suggests that a dramaturgical
metaphor may be helpful in episode analysis. If an episode is thought of
as being similar to an act in a play, then a number of features of the
situation become significant in interpreting it -- characters, setting,
scripts, non-verbal communication, prior episodes, plot and so on.
Analysis of these different aspects of the episode would therefore link
diverse areas of psychological knowledge to provide an insight into what
is going on. The second methodological implication of the ethogenic
approach is that the accounts which people give of their experiences
should be taken to have equal validity to an external 'objective'
analysis, since the way in which we perceive and experience social life
is just as important in

determining social interaction. Account analysis, in Harré's model, has
two stages, the first being the process of collecting the accounts
themselves, and the second consisting of a critical reflection of the
meanings contained in those accounts. See also emergent properties, new
paradigm research, qualitative analysis. ethological observation
Observing behaviour in the natural environment. ethology The study of
behaviour in the natural environment. Ethological studies of animal
behaviour have been conducted throughout the twentieth century, and were
systematised by the work of Konrad Lorenz and Niko Tinbergen. More
recently, the ethological approach has been applied to the study of
human behaviour, most notably in the fields of mother--infant
interaction and non-verbal communication. etic approaches Approaches or
forms of knowledge which are considered to be valid across cultures,
aiming to address the universality of traits or characteristics. See
also emic approaches. eugenics A set of political beliefs based on the
idea that intelligence and personality are fixed inherited
characteristics determining role and position in society. Eugenicists
believe that breeding should be restricted among those of the 'lower'
classes of society, and that those of subnormal intellect or undesirable
personality should be sterilised to prevent the spread of such genetic
characteristics. Eugenic ideas were widespread in Western Europe and
America before the Second World War, mainly as a result of the work of
Francis Galton, and formed the basis of the Nazi policy of
'exterminating' those considered to be of inferior racial
characteristics. Eugenic laws were also enacted (and in some cases are
still current) in several states of the USA,

E

and there are many cases on record of individuals classified as mentally
subnormal having been involuntarily sterilised as a result of these
laws. In the UK, they were more likely to have been kept in
institutions, and so prevented from engaging in procreative sexual
activity. euphoria Extreme happiness; a feeling of being elated or
'high'. European social psychology A school of thought in social
psychology that derived from theories developed by European
psychologists, particularly through the 1970s and 1980s. One of the
central theories in this approach is that of social identity theory,
particularly associated with the work of Henri Tajfel (e.g. Tajfel,
1981). Social identity theory is concerned with how people internalise
social group membership and interact as representatives of their social
group, rather than as individuals. Another core theory in European
social psychology is that of social representations, developed by the
French psychologist Serge Moscovici (e.g. Moscovici, 1984). This is
concerned with the shared beliefs that emerge in society and which serve
to legitimise and rationalise social action. The third area of interest
is research into social and collective attributions, for example in the
work of Miles Hewstone (e.g. Hewstone, 1989). European social psychology
can therefore be perceived as a body of theory spanning several
different levels of explanation in social life. It emerged particularly
with the foundation of the European Journal of Social Psychology in
1971, and has been proposed as a marked contrast to the individualistic,
largely problem-centred and, some say, reductionist approach represented
by much of American social psychology. See also social attribution.
evaluation apprehension Also known as 'test anxiety', this is the fear
of being

123

assessed or appraised by others, which can distort research results by
causing people to act in ways that are different from their usual
manner. See also audience effects. event sampling An observational
technique in which the occurrence and form of specified events are noted
each time they occur. The technique is used for observational studies of
relatively rare events such as quarrels between children in a
playground. See also time sampling. event-based prospective memory A
form of prospective memory that involves remembering to do something or
perform an action when the situation becomes appropriate (e.g. to buy a
needed item of stationery when shopping). event-related design A method
of designing the presentation of experimental material in which
different stimuli or conditions are intermixed together. See also block
design, order effect. event-related functional magnetic resonance
imaging (efMRI) A form of functional magnetic resonance imaging that
compares the patterns of electrical activity resulting from two or more
different events (e.g. giving correct or incorrect responses on a memory
test). event-related potential (ERP) The amount of change in the
electrical activity of an area of the brain, measured at the scalp,
which is linked to the timing of a particular cognitive event or the
response to a stimulus. See also inverse problem, P600, N400. evoked
potential A measure of brain activity obtained by taking an EEG reading
at the same time as exposing the individual to some form of stimulation
-- usually visual. The resulting changes in the EEG record are known as
the evoked potential. In practice, the stimu-

124

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

lus is u­ sually applied repeatedly and the responses averaged so that
the signal can be distinguished from the background noise of general
brain activity.

See also coevolution, sociobiology.

evolution A gradual process of genetic change in which the genetic
characteristics of a whole species are altered over many generations,
effecting a physical change which serves to adapt the individuals of
that species more fully to their environment. Individuals in a species
do not change, but owing to the genetic reshuffling that occurs as a
result of sexual reproduction, or to mutation, each individual varies
genetically from its parents. If the variation is one that confers an
advantage in terms of the adaptation of the animal to its environment,
then that individual is likely to become stronger and healthier, or in
some other way more likely to breed and to pass on its favourable
genetic characteristic to its offspring. Gradually, over time, weaker
members of the species become less efficient at surviving, and so the
'new' genetic characteristic becomes more widespread in the population.
This process is known as natural selection. Over millions of years, this
results in the development of whole species that are specialised to
their environment.

excitation The process by which a neurone is rendered likely to fire.
Excitation of neural impulses occurs either through direct stimulation
of sensory neurones from sense receptors receiving information from the
environment, or through the stimulation of a number of excitatory
synapses making connections with that particular neurone.

Although evolutionary arguments are frequently voiced to explain
relatively recent changes in modern humankind, these are unlikely to
have much substance, owing to: (i) (ii)

the relatively few generations involved in 'modern' life styles; and the
tendency of humankind to modify its environment to suit itself, thus
obviating the need to alter the species to suit the environment.

exchange errors Errors of speech in which words or parts of words swap
places.

excitation transfer When the arousal caused by one set of stimuli
becomes transferred to another (e.g. when the arousal caused by economic
anxiety becomes transferred into aggressive behaviour towards out-group
members, as in scapegoat theory). excitatory synapse A synapse that,
when stimulated, renders the neurone receiving the neurotransmitter more
liable to generate an electrical impulse. Although stimulation from a
number of excitatory synapses is usually required to set off the nerve
impulse, reception of the appropriate neurotransmitter serves to lower
the threshold of response of the neurone, thus contributing to the
eventual production of the impulse. executive functions Functions that
are concerned with bringing together and coordinating information from a
range of other sources, usually for the purposes of decision-making. A
central executive with this type of role is a feature of current models
of working memory. In neuropsychology, the term refers to the control
processes, usually cortical in origin, needed to coordinate the
operation of more specialised areas or components of the brain.
existentialism A philosophical approach which argues that individuals
can only

E

be understood in terms of their existence in the world and the choices
with which they are faced. Existentialists emphasise self-determinism
rather than environmental or developmental determinism and stress the
responsibility that each individual has for his or her actions within
society, on the grounds that we are always free to act differently, to
say 'no', and to accept the consequences. Existentialism was extensively
propounded by JeanPaul Sartre and has been taken up by many
psychological theorists. Probably most notable of these was R.D. Laing,
who, in The Divided Self, proposed an existentialist theory of
schizophrenia that directly challenged orthodox psychiatric approaches
and stimulated investigation of several alternative forms of therapy in
cases of psychological disturbance, such as family therapy. Exner's area
An area of the brain located towards the base of the frontal lobe, just
above Broca's area, and in front of the primary motor cortex. Damage to
this area has been shown to produce ­difficulties in reading and writing.
See also dysgraphia. exogenous Outside the person. Compare endogenous.
exogenous depression A depression that is believed to have been caused
by external events, usually called a reactive depression. exogenous
orienting Attention that is externally guided by a stimulus. See also
endogenous orienting, selective attention. exogenous spatial attention
Attention directed towards a particular location, which has been
directed by an external stimulus, such as a sudden sound or flash of
light. See also exogenous orienting. expectancy effect An improvement
appearing to result from therapeutic

125

techniques, but really caused by the fact that the client expected to
feel better as a result of the treatment. See also ­placebo,
self-fulfilling prophecy, YAVIS. Experience Sampling Method (ESM) A type
of diary method in which participants are asked to stop and make a note
of what they are doing at specific intervals during the course of the
day, week or relevant research period. experiential intelligence The
part of Sternberg's triarchic theory of intelligence that is concerned
with what the individual has learned from their own personal experience.
experiment A form of empirical investigation or study in which variables
are manipulated in order to discover cause and effect. An experiment
will involve at least one independent variable, which will be set up in
such a way as to produce changes in a dependent variable. experimental
control The organising of the conditions of an experiment in such a way
that unwanted variables are unable to exert any influence over the
outcome. Total experimental control is generally recognised as an
unachievable goal in psychological research, largely owing to the
inconvenient habit possessed by human beings of consciously reacting to
and thinking about their situation. experimental design The process by
which an experimental study is organised so as to allow for
investigation of the possible effects of the independent variable upon
the dependent variable, with as little contamination as possible by
confounding variables. See also counterbalancing, experimenter effects,
matching. experimental group A subgroup of the research participants in
an experiment who all receive the same version of the

126

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

experimental condition. When there is only one experimental condition,
the experimental group is compared with the control group. In more
complex designs, there may be several experimental groups, each
experiencing a different condition. experimental hypothesis Also known
as the alternate or alternative hypothesis, this is the prediction that
the outcome of an experimental procedure will occur as a result of the
variables under investigation. In reality, the experimental hypothesis
can never be fully proven; instead, the null hypothesis can be refuted
with varying degrees of certainty. See also statistical significance.
experimental method The use of controlled experimental situations to
test hypotheses. The term is rather vague, largely because there is no
agreed definition of what constitutes an experiment. experimental
neurosis It is possible to induce apparently neurotic behaviour in
laboratory animals by training them to perform a task and then gradually
making it impossible. Experimental neurosis was first studied by Pavlov
and presented as a basis for the controlled study of neuroses in humans.
Subsequently, doubts were raised about whether the mental states of the
animals were really similar to those of neurotic humans, and the
research was abandoned. A similar process occurred more recently with
the study of learned helplessness. experimental philosophy The branch of
philosophy that, during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, became
increasingly concerned with the study of the human mind, and which drew
on empirical observations for its conclusions. Experimental philosophy
became transmuted into psychology towards the end of the nineteenth
century. The 'founding fathers' of psychology, Wilhelm

Wundt, Herman Ebbinghaus and William James, were simultaneously the last
of the experimental philosophers. experimental psychology Those branches
of psychology that are firmly based on laboratory experimentation. The
term was used to cover such areas as learning, memory and perception,
but it has now been largely replaced by the wider area of cognitive
psychology. experimenter effects Experimental problems producing a
biased result brought about by the influence of an experimenter
(e.g. through research participants responding to the person who
conducts the experiment). Experimenter effects may occur indirectly,
because of the personal characteristics of the experimenter (e.g. their
age, sex or other such feature), or directly, as a result of the beliefs
or unconscious bias being transmitted to the research participants, and
producing a self-fulfilling prophecy. The latter is usually controlled
by using the double-blind control technique. See also demand
characteristics. expert systems Artificial intelligence systems which
are designed to carry out tasks of organising information in ways that
support human decision-making. expertise A high level of competence
produced by a considerable amount of practice, and resulting in
extremely skilled knowledge and/or behaviour. explicit memory Memory
that involves the conscious retrieval of information. See also explicit
memory bias, declarative memory. explicit memory bias The tendency of
explicit memory to retrieve more negative information than positive or
neutral information. See also impact bias, implicit memory bias.
exploration Activity undertaken in order to gain information. Vigorous
exploratory

E

127

behaviour is characteristic of the young of many species and is often
studied in conjunction with play. Daniel Berlyne proposed a major
distinction between diversive exploration, in which the environment is
investigated to identify sources of possible interest, and specific
exploration, in which attention is focused on a specific object or
phenomenon. Specific exploration is usually more systematic in
investigating the properties of the object. Some research has
investigated which properties of objects are most likely to elicit
exploration, but a major reason for being interested in exploration is
that it appears to originate largely within the child or animal. It is
therefore a potential source of self-motivated learning. Creating the
conditions for exploration is an important process in self-directed
education, creativity, and systemic therapies.

expressed emotion can be high or low and may be evaluated by a taped
interview known as the Camberwell Family Interview. Expressed emotion is
a specific diagnosis and is very different from the positive of being
emotionally expressive.

exposure therapy A general term for treatments of phobias or anxiety
disorders that deal with the problem by exposing the person to the
relevant stimulus, either gradually as in systematic desensitisation, or
in a concentrated episode as in implosion therapy.

external validity A subjective technique used in phenomenological
research in which the participants evaluate themes emerging from the
analysis. If the theme is judged to be appropriate by the participants,
it is considered to be a valid representation of the phenomenal process.
In that sense it is very different from assessments of validity in other
research methods.

expressed emotion Emotion that is apparent to an observer by being shown
in facial expression, posture, gesture or other non-verbal cues.
Expressed emotion is often genuine, but can be simulated such that it
does not reflect an underlying emotional state. The profession of acting
is based on such simulation. In family therapy, expressed emotion is a
somewhat misleading label for a form of family interaction which is
critical, hostile, and emotionally over-involved. It has been shown to
be a major factor in worsening the condition of a member who is trying
to cope with any of a large number of disorders such as depression,
schizophrenia or social anxiety. The

extended cognition The use of technology of various kinds to amplify
cognitive capacity (e.g. the use of print for storing knowledge,
computing to increase the capacity for calculation, or web resources to
search for information). external attributions ­attributions.

See

internal

external locus of control An aspect of locus of control which refers to
a tendency to believe that control of events, or more specifically of
reinforcements, is outside the person. See also internal locus of
control.

extinction (i)

A term used in both classical and operant conditioning to refer to the
dying out of a response as a result of lack of reinforcement. In
behaviour therapy, learned associations, such as phobias, are treated by
procedures designed to effect extinction of the stimulus--response
connection, by organising circumstances in such a way that it will not
be reinforced (see Figure 30). See also spontaneous recovery.

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

likelihood of response

128

spontaneous recovery

number of trials since last reinforcement

Figure 30 Extinction In neurological contexts, this term is sometimes
used to describe an outcome of damage to the parietal lobe that produces
a lack of awareness of a stimulus in the presence of competing stimuli.
For example, if a stimulus is presented to either the right or the left
side of the area being fixated on, the person will perceive its
presence. But if two stimuli are presented simultaneously, one to the
left and one to the right of fixation, someone with a parietal lesion
may only perceive one and be completely unaware of the presence of the
other. See also neglect.

in the control of movement. Compare pyramidal motor system.

extraneous variables Additional influences or factors that can affect
research results, and which cannot be or have not been completely
controlled by the research design (e.g. the state of the weather, or the
participant's family interactions prior to the study).

extraversion A term originally coined by C.G. Jung to describe
individuals who are outward-directed and sociable in their behaviour.
Extraversion as a personality trait was adopted as one of the main
personality dimensions by Eysenck in his two-factor model of
personality, in which he included such second-order factors as
risk-taking, impulsiveness and sociability. See also EPI.

(ii) 

extrapyramidal motor system A system in the brain which processes
unconscious, automatic movement. It consists of a linking neural pathway
between the cerebellum and the basal ganglia that connects a set of
brain structures involved

extrasensory perception (ESP) Perception that does not depend on the
usual sensory processes. ESP is one of the classes of paranormal
phenomena and, in common with other forms, evidence that it actually
happens is contentious. There is also the rather odd scientific status
that if it could be explained in terms of known laws, it would cease to
qualify for the title. See also parapsychology, telepathy. extrastriate
body area (EBA) An area of the visual cortex that responds more to whole
bodies and body parts than to faces or objects.

extreme scores Scores that occur at the outer edges (upper or lower, or
in the case of modal data most or least

E

­common) of distribution or data-set and in this respect are
substantially different from the rest of the data-set. Where they are
substantially different they can make the calculation of the mean
misleading. For example, a mean for average income which includes a few
people who earned around a million will be higher than what the majority
of people earn. See mode, semi-interquartile range. extrinsic External,
or deriving from sources outside the individual or situation. Contrast
with intrinsic. extrinsic motivation Motivation that comes from outside
the person, such as working to receive gifts or payments. Extrinsic
motivation is generally regarded as less desirable than intrinsic
motivation because the performance is likely to stop rather quickly as
soon as the motivator is withdrawn. However, Allport believed that a
process he called the 'functional autonomy of motives' operated so that
eventually an extrinsically motivated behaviour becomes valued for its
own sake. eye contact Mutual gaze, or the amount of time that two people
spend looking at each other simultaneously. Eye contact is sometimes
taken as an indicator of intimacy; eye contact with unknown individuals
tends to be avoided. Prolonged eye contact with neutral or hostile
facial expression is taken as a threat gesture and tends to be responded
to by either aggressive or avoidance behaviour. It is a powerful signal
in all primates, including human beings. eyeball test The process of
visually examining a data-set, usually when the raw data have been
reduced to a manageable form by some kind of processing. While the
process is open to bias, and cannot lead to statistical conclusions, it
does make use of human capacities to

129

identify patterns, including those that are unexpected. Such patterns
might be missed by more formal techniques of analysis that specify in
advance what comparisons should be made. An eyeball test may also detect
artefacts and gross errors in the data. It is therefore useful in
checking that the data are not badly corrupted (see GIGO), and in
choosing which statistical tests will be most appropriate. eyeblink
response This term is commonly used in two contexts: (i)

(ii) 

To describe the tendency to blink more rapidly when under stress or in
conditions of anxiety, which means that it has been used as an indicator
of lying. See also polygraph. To describe a reflex reaction to a puff of
air at the corner of the eye. This reflex is easy to condition and has
been used in many classical conditioning experiments. Research using
this form of conditioning has indicated the involvement of both the
cerebellum and the hippocampus in the formation of memory.

eyeblink startle response A blink that has been elicited by a sudden and
unexpected stimulus such as a loud bang. See also eyeblink response.
eyebrow flash A recognition signal that consists of rapidly raising the
eyebrows as a greeting to the individual who is recognised. The eyebrow
flash seems to be common to all human cultures, and to some other
species. It is therefore considered to be innate. eyewitness testimony
Evidence given in court by witnesses to an event or crime. This is a
major area of research

130

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

in psychology, largely owing to research led by Elizabeth Loftus, who
showed how vulnerable such testimony is to external influences such as
the phrasing of questions or other forms of suggestion.

Research into eyewitness testimony draws on theories and research into
perception, memory and thinking. See also own-age bias, misinformation
effect, false memory.

Eysenck, Hans Jurgen (1916--1997) One of the more controversial figures
in psychology, Eysenck studied psychology under Cyril Burt, whose belief
in inherited intelligence was absolute. Eysenck adopted a similar
position, from which he vigorously joined in the nature--nurture debates
of post-war psychology. His work at the Maudsley hospital in London
generated an interest in personality, which he also saw in terms of
fixed, inherited traits, and in conditioning processes. Despite
obtaining his data mainly through self-report questionnaires such as the
Eysenck Personality Inventory (EPI), and despite his nativist stance,
Eysenck identified himself as a behaviourist. Perhaps the most valuable
manifestations of this identification were his many challenges to
psychoanalysis, which began in the 1950s and continued through to the
1980s. Eysenck Personality Inventory (EPI) A personality assessment
created by Hans Eysenck. The EPI presents a rating scale from which the
dimensions of introversion--extraversion and

neuroticism--­stability can be measured. A later version, called the
Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (EPQ), also aims to measure
psychoticism. See also five-factor theory, Dark Triad.

F 5-hydroxytryptamine See serotonin. F ratio The statistic obtained when
one measure of the variance of a set of scores is divided by a second
measure of variance. When the degrees of freedom of the two sources of
variance are known, tables can be used to judge the probability that the
ratio could have arisen by chance. The main use of F ratios is in
analysis of variance. Another use you may encounter is because the
t-test relies on the two groups that are being compared having been
drawn from populations with the same variance. You can test this
assumption by dividing the smaller variance by the larger and checking
the tables to see whether the ratio is significantly greater than 1 (1
is what it will be if the two variances are identical). Note that
whether or not your two groups have different means, finding that one
has a significantly higher variance than the other may be important in
its own right. For example, imagine two teaching techniques that produce
the same average result for a group of students but the first has much
lower variance than the second. You would use the first method for
training in which it is essential to minimise mistakes, but the second
if you were hoping to produce a few students with exceptional abilities.
F scale A measure of authoritarianism developed by Adorno as part of his
authoritarian personality theory. It mea­sured authoritarianism through
nine sub-traits: (i) conventionalism; (ii) auth­oritarian sub­missiveness;
(iii) ­authoritarian aggression

(hostility towards those who challenge authority); (iv)
anti-intraception (a tough-minded punitive approach); (v) superstition
and stereotype (a belief that events are externally controlled rather
than controllable by the individual); (vi) power and 'toughness' (a
tendency to behave in a dominating manner); (vii) destructiveness and
cynicism; (viii) projectivity (a tendency to project unconscious
impulses onto others); and (ix) sex (an exaggerated concern with sexual
misbehaviour). The F in the name of the scale refers to Fascism. See
also prejudice. face (i) (ii)

The front part of the head, important in non-verbal communication. A
concept of self-esteem and respect, particularly important in Asian
cultures, in which competition is seen as less important than a
resolution to a deal or agreement that allows both parties to gain
esteem and maintain 'face', during and as a result of the transaction.
See also unconditional respect for persons.

face inversion effect The finding that faces are much harder to
recognise when seen upside down, whereas other objects are relatively
easy to identify. face recognition The way that we identify familiar
faces as belonging to people that we know. A major model in this area
was proposed by Bruce and Young (1986), who proposed that face DOI:
10.4324/9781003158899

132

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

­recognition is a distinct cognitive skill, and that the brain has
specific face recognition units, which come into play when we encounter
people that we have met before. Lesions to or deficits in these units
can produce prosopagnosia. See also other-race effect, Capgras syndrome.
face recognition unit (FRU) Neural units proposed by Bruce and Young
(1986) in their model of face recognition, which contain stored
knowledge of familiar faces, including their threedimensional structure.
An alternative model based on neurological research (Haxby et al., 2000)
suggests that these neural units might not exist as independent
entities, but that the superior temporal sulcus processes the dynamic
aspects of faces while the fusiform face area is involved in recognising
familiar faces. Other parts of the brain may also contribute input to
face perception. See also person identity node, part-whole effect. face
validity An assessment of the validity of a test obtained by inspecting
the items and judging whether they are likely to generate a measure of
what you want the test score to measure. It is entirely possible for a
test with good face validity to be a poor measure, and for one with low
face validity to be effective. But it can still be a useful preliminary
indication. facial affect programme A strategy for inducing behavioural
change by making the individual aware of the sensations arising from
facial expressions that are different from those they use habitually. It
is thought that encouraging the continued use of positive facial
expressions will provide positive feedback, both through social
interaction and through muscular interpretation. See also facial
feedback hypothesis. facial electromyography A technique for measuring
the degree of tension in

facial muscles by recording the electrical discharges of the muscles.
The aim is to obtain a systematic and objective measure of facial
expression by mapping the muscle tensions occurring in different
expressions. facial expression Characteristic patterns of arrangements
of the muscles in the face, which provide important nonverbal cues in
social interaction. Facial expression may be used either to express
understanding, attitudes and emotions, or as specific cultural signals
with clearly defined meanings. Some researchers have found that basic
emotional expressions seem to be common to all human cultures, and are
also found in blind babies, which would seem to imply that they are
innate. However, other facial expressions show cultural variability and
seem to be acquired through social interaction. facial feedback
hypothesis The idea that our experience of emotion arises at least in
part from our interpretations of the arrangement of our facial muscles.
The effect is used in studies of mood when people are asked to make,
say, a depressed face as part of a procedure for changing their mood
through muscular feedback, as in a facial affect programme. facilitator
A person whose role in a therapy or research group is to help the
process go in the right direction. It is used to describe the person
running a group, in order to avoid using a label such as 'leader' or
'trainer', which would imply that they are controlling the process --
even if they are, really. factor analysis A statistical technique much
loved by psychometricians, which involves the analysis of large and
complicated sets of data in such a way as to draw out the underlying
pattern of correlations. Groups of measures that all intercorrelate are
identified as a 'factor',

F

and the researcher can then examine the measures to see what they all
have in common, and then speculate about the cause of or reason for the
grouping. The technique requires a large amount of calculation, usually
undertaken by computer. It also requires an ability to interpret the
results provided. See also eigenvalue, psychometrics, mediating
variable, moderating variable. factors Variables that can affect the
item being researched. In factor analysis, each grouping of variables is
called a factor. See also independent variable, confounding variable.
failed studies Studies which have not achieved the expectations of the
researcher, usually by generating nonsignificant results, and are
therefore not put forward for publication. See filedrawer problem.
failure to thrive (FTT) A condition of poor growth in infants, usually
defined as being in the bottom 3 per cent for that age, sex and
population. In some cases, there is a physiological problem that
accounts for the poor growth, but in the majority of cases there is no
organic cause and the condition is called 'non-organic failure to
thrive'. FTT was once believed to be a direct result of emotional
deprivation, and in its extreme form was called 'deprivational
dwarfism'. It is now widely recognised that the basic problem is that
the child does not receive enough food to sustain appropriate growth,
although this in turn is likely to result from emotional or other
difficulties of the parent, the child, or both. See also child abuse.

133

otherwise of a theory of mind (TOM). In a typical false belief task,
Child A watches while Child B hides an object. Child B then goes out of
the room, and Child A continues to watch while the researcher moves the
object to a different hiding place. Child A is then asked where Child B
will look for the object when they return. Children who have developed a
theory of mind will recognise that Child B is unaware of the
researcher's activities, and will therefore look in the original hiding
place. Those without a theory of mind, such as very young or autistic
children, will predict that Child B will look in the place where the
object really is. See also mindblindness. false consensus effect The
tendency to assume that one's own attitudes or actions are typical of
most people (i.e. to overestimate their frequency in the general
population). False Discovery Rate (FDR) A tech­ni­ que for correcting
statistical comparisons which is about identifying the important few
measures from among many others. It has the effect of producing a more
conservative estimate than might be observed without this correction,
reducing the likelihood of a Type 1 error, and was developed
specifically to deal with cases where there might be a large number of
measures from a relatively small sample -- e.g. aspects of the genome,
or measures of the random activity of neurones in research based on
brain scanning. See also family wise error.

fallacy A false assertion used as the basis for a sequence of logical
argument, or for a belief. See questionnaire fallacy.

false memory A memory that feels real to the individual experiencing it,
but has arisen as a result of suggestion or other factors distorting the
original stored information. See also eyewitness testimony.

false belief task A research procedure used in order to identify the
presence or

falsifiability The idea that a scientific prediction can be shown to be
untrue

134

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

by empirical investigation. Karl Popper argued that falsifiability lies
at the heart of scientific research, and conventional experimental
design is based on this principle. See also hypothetico-deductive
method. family therapy An approach to psychological treatment in which
the whole family is the focus, rather than an individual patient.
Recently, methods have been developed from systems theory which
recognise that, while the behaviour of a component may seem strange when
it is seen in isolation, it will make much more sense in the context of
the complete system. Applied to individuals, and recognising that
families are one of the most significant systems within which most
people function, this approach has led to a new way of looking at
psychological disturbance. It assumes that in many cases, the 'symptoms'
shown by an individual are a meaningful response to their circumstances.
More specifically, disturbed behaviour is likely to be an attempt to
regulate relationships, or solve problems, within the family. So if a
person is sent for treatment the therapist works with the family to find
solutions that free the individual from their symptoms and help the
family members to support each other in the future. The literature
contains many examples of spectacular success using 'systemic family
therapy', but rather fewer systematic evaluation of the techniques. See
also Leeds Attributional Coding System. Family Wise Error (FWE) A
statistical technique used to correct for errors in statistical
comparisons. It is based on the number of tests which have been
conducted and assumes that sufficient tests will show a smoothness in
their collated outcomes, as a result of the

summation of random processes. See also false discovery rate. fantasy
The conscious mental construction of images of events or objects. It is
generally a pleasurable activity that may indicate psychological health
and may be useful in creatively exploring possible courses of action.
The content of fantasy, like that of dreams, may reflect major
unresolved conflicts, and excessive investment in fantasy may indicate
the existence of psychological problems. See also daydreaming. FAS test
A test of verbal fluency in which people are asked to generate as many
words beginning with F as they can, in a limited period of time. It is
sometimes used to detect people with lesions in the left lateral area of
the prefrontal cortex, who often show particular impairment in this
task. fatigue effect An experimental effect brought about by the person
being tired, bored or otherwise affected by the duration of the
experimental procedure. It can contaminate experimental results because
it may appear that people are less good at later tasks when in fact they
are just getting tired or fed up. See also counterbalancing, order
effect. FBA See fusiform body area. FDR See False Discovery Rate.
feature detection theory The idea that we recognise objects by comparing
them with a stored 'list' of distinctive features. See also pandemonium
model. Fechner's law A principle in psychophysics which states that the
sensation experienced by an individual increases as a logarithmic
function of the stimulus intensity. In other words, the physical
increase in stimulation required for a perceived increase in intensity
is

F

not constant but is systematically greater for higher intensities. For
example, switching a light on may be perceived as a substantial increase
in brightness when the room was previously dark, but may be hardly
noticeable during bright sunlight. See also absolute threshold, just
noticeable difference, relative threshold, Weber's law. feedback
Information that enlightens the individual about the effect or outcome
of a course of behaviour which has been enacted by that person, thus
allowing a sequence of actions or behaviour to be modified if necessary
or desirable. See also biofeedback, negative feedback. FEF See frontal
eye field. feminist research A term used for research that aims to be
compatible with, and to advance, feminist concerns. Some feminists
insist that the term also implies a specific kind of methodology, which
rejects rigid, positivistic assumptions and is more reflexive and
respectful of its sources. Others do not see this as a necessary
characteristic of feminist research as such but see its focus as
providing a counter to implicit patriarchal assumptions in traditional
research. See also deconstruction. feral children See wolf children.

135

field dependence/independence An aspect of cognitive style concerned
with whether a person is dominated by context when making judgements
(field dependence), or whether they can ignore distracting contextual
information (field independence). It may be tested by the accuracy with
which a person can judge the orientation of a line when it is surrounded
by a frame at a different angle, or when the person is in a chair that
can be tilted away from the vertical. Large individual differences have
been found that seem to relate to other areas of cognitive functioning,
and have been explored extensively in educational research. field
experiment Experiments conducted in the real-world environment but
involving some experimental manipulation of the natural setting. field
study Research carried out in the natural setting in order to achieve
ecological validity. A field study may involve simple observation,
participant observation, or may be a field experiment. field theory An
approach to psychology originated by Kurt Lewin in 1936. Lewin's field
theory emphasised that human behaviour should be analysed in

Festinger, Leon (1919--1989) Leon Festinger is perhaps most famous for
his theory of cognitive dissonance, which showed how people will reduce
the tension arising from incompatible beliefs and actions by changing
beliefs that contradict behaviour, rather than changing behaviour to fit
in with beliefs. Festinger also developed social comparison theory,
which formed an important backdrop to Tajfel's later development of
social identity theory, and also identified the importance of
propinquity (i.e. physical closeness) in the formation of relationships.
His emphasis on real-world research was developed as an outcome of
studying under the social psychologist Kurt Lewin.

136

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

terms of the situation as a whole, taking into account its various
contexts, e.g. psychological, social, economic and physical contexts.
and not simply in terms of individual acts. Lewin's work originated from
Gestalt psychology and was strongly influential in the work of later
social psychologists, particularly in Europe. See European social
psychology fight or flight response See alarm ­reaction. figuration A
form of objectification in which an idea becomes attached to a specific
image, concept, or concrete item (e.g. the way in which the concept of
'green' has become used to represent ecological activities of various
types). See also social representations. figurative language Language
that involves imagery, metaphor or idiom, and is not expected to be
taken literally. figure-ground organisation The tendency of our visual
perception to organise incoming information (which arrives in the form
of light waves of varying intensities and wavelengths) into meaningful
units or figures set against a background (see Figure 31). Figure-ground
organisation was intensively studied by the Gestalt psychologists, who
identified sev-

eral principles of perceptual organisation that served to make up
figure-ground discrimination. These were collectively known as the Law
of Prägnanz, and included the principle of closure, and the principle of
'good Gestalt'. figure-ground perception This is a general term used to
refer to those aspects of perception that derive from figureground
organisation. For instance, it includes areas such as pattern
perception, which is dependent on the organisation of visual information
into figures against backgrounds. file-drawer problem The recognition
that the criteria used by journals, and the profession of research
psychology generally, can result in bias in reporting research findings.
Specifically, dozens of researchers could have attempted replication of
an important finding, each one discovering that their research failed to
produce the same results. Knowing that journals do not generally publish
negative findings, most of the researchers will not write the research
up, and the others may find their paper rejected by the journal. So all
the negative findings end up in filing cabinet drawers or their modern
digital equivalents, while the original report remains unchallenged. The
technique of metaanalysis can produce estimates of whether a file-drawer
bias might be significant, and recent attempts to counteract this
problem have contributed to the replication crisis in modern psychology.
filial imprinting Imprinting on siblings rather than the mother. See
also imprinting.

Figure 31 Figure-ground organisation

filter models Theoretical models of plausible cognitive mechanisms. The
best-known filter models were put forward to explain the process of
selective attention by psychologists such as Broadbent, Triesman and
Deutsch. Each of these rep-

F

resented a more or less complex attempt to explain how incoming
information is channelled such that only a selected part of it is
received, rather than the overwhelming whole (see Figure 32).
first-order intentionality A degree of intentional stance which makes
the

137

inference that the individual acting has beliefs and desires, and is
acting accordingly. See also second-order intentionality. fissure A deep
groove or channel. In psychology, this generally refers to the grooves
on the surface of the brain. See also cerebral cortex.

response control right ear (attended) left ear

short-term memory long-term memory

perceptual set

right ear (attended)

short-term memory

attenuating

semantic

response control

left ear own name recognition unit for own name

long-term memory

Figure 32 Filter models of selective attention

Fiske, Susan (1952--) Susan Fiske's research was initially concerned how
prejudice and discrimination are influenced by social relationships --
positively by cooperation, and negatively by issues of competition and
power -- but later moved more exclusively into the question of sexism
and gender relations. She developed the idea of ambivalent sexism,
showing how sexism could be either hostile, reflecting negative gender
stereotypes, misogyny and so on, or 'benevolent', reflecting gender
stereotypes which actually acted to disempower those of the other sex --
e.g. the idea that women need to be protected by men.

138

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

fit (i)

(ii) 
(iii) 

Statistically, how specific data match up to general sets (goodness of
fit), or to measures of central tendency. In evolutionary terms, fitness
refers to how well an organism is adapted to its environment. In
everyday use, the term has two meanings: whether a person or animal is
generally healthy and able to engage in demanding physical activity, or
how well something conforms to or completes another.

five-factor theory The five-factor model of personality, also known as
the Big Five, reflects the major personality traits measured by
psychometric tests. It was first developed in response to the
proliferation of personality traits being measured by numerous tests.
Factor analysis showed that responses to these traits clustered around
five major groups, reflecting higher-order factors which were named
extraversion, neuroticism, conscientiousness, agreeableness, and
openness to experience. The first three traits to be identified were
neuroticism, extraversion and openness to experience, often summarised
as NEO. Conscientiousness and agreeableness were added to make the Big
Five, as those traits reflected sets of factors that didn't seem to be
covered by the first three. See also personality trait, EPI, Dark Triad.
fixation In psychoanalytic theory, the failure to progress from an
earlier stage of development (e.g. oral fixation) or an earlier
relationship (e.g. mother fixation). The term is also used more broadly
with reference to any relationship that is seen as inappropriately
intense and dependent. fixed action pattern A complex sequence of
behaviour that is genetically

­pre-programmed so that all members of the species show the behaviour
when it is needed. In theory, neither learning nor practice is needed
for the behaviour to be performed perfectly, although in reality it can
be disturbed by unusual environmental situations -- in other words, if
the researcher tries hard enough. Fixed action patterns have been
intensively studied by ethologists, and involve sequences of behaviour
that have been inherited as a complete unit. See also sign stimulus.
fixed-interval reinforcement A rein­force­ment schedule in which
reinforcements, or rewards, are given only after a set period of time
since the last reinforcement became available. After a suitable
acquisition period, this method of administering reinforcement tends to
produce a high level of responding around the time of the reinforcement,
and a low rate of responding at other times. It has a low resistance to
extinction. fixed mindset A belief that intelligence derives from innate
ability and is not susceptible to improvement through experience. The
idea is that the individual's ability to learn or develop is therefore
limited, and achievement or success depends on innate capacity rather
than on effort. Compare growth mindset. fixed-ratio reinforcement A
reinforcement schedule in which reinforcements, or rewards, are given
only after a set number of responses has been made since the last
reinforcement. Fixed-ratio reinforcement schedules produce a very rapid
response rate but have a low resistance to extinction. fixed-role
therapy A method of treatment derived from personal construct theory in
which the client agrees to adopt particular ways of behaving that are
clearly different from (although not opposite to) their usual style. The

F

139

method seems to be particularly effective in undermining a belief that
only one kind of behaviour is possible.

deal with unusual or unpredictable circumstances. See also crystallised
intelligence, triarchic intelligence, intelligence.

flashbacks Intense emotional memories of specific events or situations,
often traumatic, that come back to the person suddenly and
involuntarily. They are often associated with post-traumatic stress
disorder, but may also result from the inappropriate use of
hallucinogens.

fMRI A type of MRI scan that provides a dynamic image of blood
oxygenation in particular areas of the brain, often as the person
undertakes particular activities. It is particularly useful because it
shows which areas of the brain are being used at any given time for a
particular function. For more detailed information, see functional
magnetic resonance imaging. See also PET scans.

flashbulb memory A form of memory that is associated with powerful
experiences, and in which the memory contains a high level of contextual
information as well as the specific information. Researchers have
investigated flashbulb memory using questions such as 'Where were you
when you heard that President Kennedy was shot / Princess Diana died /
Space Shuttle Challenger exploded / the Twin Towers collapsed?', and
these studies show that people retain extremely clear memories of
exactly where they were and what they were doing at the particular
moment of time when they heard the news. However, there is reason to
doubt the accuracy of flashbulb memories, vivid though they may be. See
also confabulation. flooding See implosion therapy. flow The apparent
movement of the visual field that occurs as a result of the perceiver
moving around and being active in their environment. Flow is a central
construct in Gibson's theory of direct perception -- also known as
ecological perception -- which argues that the visual field itself
contains enough information for the perceiver to navigate around its
world, without the need for additional cognitive inference. This is in
direct contrast to Richard Gregory's theory of constructive perception.
fluid intelligence A form of intelligence that is creative and
adaptable, and can

focal therapy An approach to psychotherapy in which a specific focus
(problem) is identified early in the therapy and efforts are
concentrated on this focus for the remainder of treatment. The method
was developed as part of the attempt to make psychotherapy shorter and
more cost-effective. focus group A form of group interview that was
developed in market research (see consumer psychology) as a
costeffective way of gathering the views of consumers. They were
originally called focus groups because the job of the interviewer
(moderator) was to bring the group to focus on the issue. The conclusion
about the general wishes of the group would then be apparent. As
techniques for analysing group qualitative data have developed, there is
less stress on working the group towards a consensus, but the name is
still used for the increasing variety of group discussions. Much of what
social psychologists and psychotherapists have learned about how people
function in groups can be applied to research using focus groups.
Factors such as conformity and social desirability may produce an
unproductive consensus, especially if the interviewer allows their
motivations to be visible. Oppositional behaviour or simply showing off
by individu-

140

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

als can also reduce the usefulness of a focus group. Focus groups can be
used to research what people want, but are often used by marketeers and
politicians to find out how to make what they have already decided to
offer acceptable to the public. See also Leeds Attributional Coding
System. focus of expansion The point in the visual field towards which
the viewer is moving. This point does not seem to move, but the rest of
the visual field appears to expand around it as the viewer gets closer.
See also motion parallax, ecological perception. focused attention See
selective attention. foetus An organism in the later stages of
gestation, up to the time of birth; in humans, from the ninth week after
conception. Before this time, it is called an embryo. forebrain See
diencephalon. forensic psychology The application of psychology to legal
matters, including work on the reliability of witnesses, evidence given
by children, the consequences for children of possible court actions,
parole decisions, and the causes of criminal behaviour. Forensic
psychologists may be employed to examine criminal acts and draw
conclusions about the perpetrator. forgetting The failure to retrieve
information when it is wanted. Broadly speaking, theories of forgetting
can be sorted into seven major approaches: decay theory (the idea that
memory traces gradually decay over time unless they are strengthened by
being retrieved); interference theory; amnesia brought about through
physical causes; motivated forgetting; lack of appropriate cues for
retrieval; lack of the relevant

context for retrieval; and inadequate processing during storage (see
dementia, levels of processing theory). formal operational stage The
last of Piaget's four stages of cognitive development. In the formal
operational stage, the child has become capable of abstract thought and
can conceptualise possibilities that are outside their direct
experience. Piaget considered this to be the highest form of cognitive
activity, and one that is shown only in human beings, and from the age
of about 12 years at the earliest. The preceding stages he viewed as
steps towards this point, illustrating the stages by which abstract
logic had evolved. See also genetic epistemology. formula A symbolic way
of expressing a set of statistical calculations or other kinds of
theoretical relationships. fornix The fornix is the name given to the
curved structure in the brain which runs underneath the corpus callosum
and arches over the hippocampus and other internal brain structures. It
is considered to be the main communication structure of the limbic
system and is therefore implicated in experiences such as emotional
responses, memory and sexual arousal. forward model In neuropsychology,
this is the idea that we use the brain's awareness of motor programmes
to predict what an action will feel like, and what its effect on a
proposed target will be. See also mirror systems. fovea That part of the
retina that receives the clearest and most sharply focused image. The
fovea is roughly central to the retina, and is composed entirely of cone
cells that, through their discrimination of colour, allow for the
distinguishing of fine details, at the cost of some loss of sensitivity
to faint signals. See also rod cells.

F

fractional anisotropy A form of diffusion tensor imaging that measures
the concentration of water molecules in the white matter of the brain,
indicating its concentration in particular areas or neural pathways.
framing effect A source of errors in problem-solving that arises from
the influence of irrelevant situational factors (e.g. the place someone
is in at the time, or the social context). fraternal twins Twins which
have developed from two separate ova, such that they bear the same
resemblance and relationship to each other as normal siblings. Twins of
this kind are also known as dizygotic twins. See also identical twins,
monozygotic twins. free association A technique much utilised by Freud
and subsequent psychoanalysts, as they believed that it provides
important clues to the workings of the unconscious mind. Free
association consists of the individual producing an uncensored,
non-calculated account of what they are thinking and feeling during the
session. Because the spontaneous expression avoids intervention and
possible censorship by the ego (the conscious mind), the nature of the
responses made during a free association session indicates the concerns
and preoccupations of a person's unconscious. The agreement to engage in
free association is called the 'basic rule' of psychoanalysis and is
regarded as essential for its success.

141

free recall The act of producing memories without the use of specific
cues, or other forms of memory assistance or structuring. freeloaders
People who receive the benefits of collective action, without
contributing to it themselves. See also social loafing. frequency A
count of the number of times an event, or the score in a given category,
occurs. Frequency data are tested by non-parametric statistics such as a
sign test or chi-square. frequency polygon A descriptive statistic which
shows frequencies as a shape, with the x-axis forming the base of the
shape and consecutive points on the y-axis (the frequencies) joined by a
straight line and joining to the x-axis at start and end points.
frequency theory A theory concerning how information contained in sound
waves is transmitted to the brain. Frequency theory states that the
wavelength, or frequency, of the sound affects the rapidity of
transmission of electrical impulses along the auditory nerve, with
sounds at higher frequencies producing more rapid transmissions. When
the frequency rises to a point that would require firing at a more rapid
rate than the neurones concerned can manage, the volley principle comes
into effect, with neurones taking it in turns to fire, producing bursts
or volleys.

Freud, Sigmund (1856--1939) Freud was the founder of psychoanalysis, an
attempt to provide a complete account of human psychology, and then to
base a method of treatment on it. Freud proposed that the child develops
through a progression of oral, anal, phallic, latency and genital
stages, incorporating the Oedipus complex and the

142

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

development of the id, ego and superego. This developmental frame,
showing how the unconscious is formed, provides a basis for Freud's
account of adult psychopathology. He saw coping with anxiety as a major
drive and argued that we build defence mechanisms to protect the ego
against threat from the id and the superego. Within therapy, he
recognised transference of feelings for familiar people on to others,
such as the psychoanalyst. Psychoanalysis had a profound impact not only
on psychology but also within sociology, literature and Western society
in general. Many of the strongest ideas, such as repression or the
continuity hypothesis, have become so widely accepted that they are no
longer seen as particularly Freudian.

Freudian slip A mistake that can be interpreted as revealing unconscious
wishes, fears, etc. Freud argued that all apparently accidental errors
of this kind reveal something of the unconscious. Friedman's ANOVA A
statistical technique allowing researchers to identify and locate
significant differences between several different samples. See also
analysis of variance. friendship A relationship between people which has
at least some elements of affection, trust, shared interest and
commitment, and which lasts over time. There are four areas of the brain
which respond particularly strongly to friendship: the amygdala, which
is involved

in both positive and negative emotions, the hippocampus, which is all
about memory storage, the nucleus accumbens which is associated with
reward and reinforcement, and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, which
is active in emotional regulation. Friendship also activates brain areas
associated with loving and attachment, and long-term friendship involves
neurones in the globus pallidus normally associated with movement,
although the reasons for that are as yet unclear. frontal apraxia Also
known as action disorganisation syndrome, this is a disorder that
results from damage to the frontal lobes, in which people have no

Frith, Uta (1941--) Uta Frith trained in clinical psychology at the
Institute of Psychiatry in London. She pioneered research into autism,
dyslexia and other developmental challenges, and argued strongly for
autism to be seen as a developmental condition rather than as a response
to negative parenting. Frith proposed that autism has two distinctive
characteristics: a lack of 'implicit mentalisation', or the ability to
know one's own mental state, and 'weak central coherence', meaning that
autistic people are good at processing detail but have difficulty
integrating information from different sources. Her research contributed
directly to the idea that a deficit in theory of mind (TOM) is a
significant aspect of autism.

F

difficulty with object recognition or using isolated objects, but have
difficulty undertaking routine tasks that involve several steps or
subgoals -- such as making a cup of tea. See also apraxia. frontal eye
field (FEF) The part of the frontal lobes that is responsible for
voluntary movement of the eyes. frontal lobe The general term given to
the front part of the brain, located above the lateral fissure and in
front of the central sulcus. In the early part of the twentieth century,
the frontal lobe was thought of as the seat of aggression, from the
discovery made by Monitz in 1930 that chimpanzees which had experienced
lobotomy (the surgical removal of the frontal lobe) showed a decrease in
aggressive behaviour. This led to considerable popularity for lobotomy
as an operation to treat those with psychosis. The discovery that
similar results could be achieved by the severing of connections between
the frontal lobe and the rest of the cortex just above the lateral
fissure (leucotomy) led to equal popularity for the latter operation.
However, it transpired that many other functions were also impaired,
including generally the capacity for autonomous functioning and
decision-making. Although the frontal lobe has few localised functions,
it seems to be involved in much generalised cortical activity. See also
occipital lobe, parietal lobe, temporal lobe, frontal apraxia. FRU See
face recognition unit. frustration Both the act of preventing an
organism from reaching a goal and the emotion aroused in the organism by
this experience. frustration--aggression hypothesis The proposal,
particularly associated with Leon Berkowitz, that aggression is caused
by some kind of frustration. This

143

theoretical model has achieved widespread popularity and is supported by
comparative studies of overcrowding in animals, as well as by studies of
human behaviour, although the validity of the original theory was
undermined by its assumption that frustration inevitably leads to
aggression, disregarding other factors and influences. FTT See failure
to thrive. functional autonomy of motives See extrinsic motivation.
functional fixedness A form of Einstellung, or mental set, in which the
individual is unable to deviate from using objects in a manner
consistent with their normal functioning. For instance, in a
problem-solving exercise, functional fixedness may prevent someone from
realising that something such as a jug, usually used to contain liquids,
could also be turned upside down and used as a support. See
problem-solving. functional integration The way that different areas or
networks in the brain communicate with one another. See also resting
state paradigm, default mode network. functional magnetic resonance
i­maging (fMRI) A method of brain scanning that images the oxygen uptake
of brain cells, and thereby indicates which brain cells are in use at
any particular time. It works by identifying the magnetic fields of
water molecules in brain cells, which are influenced by the strong
magnetic field of the scanner, and slightly different when the cell is
using blood than when it is quiescent. A whole fMRI brain scan only
takes about two ­seconds, so researchers can use this method to explore
brain activity and cognition (e.g. by asking the person to read a word,
or think of a special event). The scan then indicates changes in the

144

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

activity of different areas of the brain as they do it. It is a popular
method for researchers, partly because of its accuracy, but also because
there are no X-rays or radioactive substances involved. See also
multiple-demand network, multi-voxel pattern analysis, event-related
functional magnetic resonance imaging. functional neuroanatomy The
analysis of physical areas and structures of the brain in terms of the
physiological or cognitive functions that they are known to be involved
in, or to determine. functional specialisation The way that different
regions of the brain are specialised to deal with different functions.
functionalism The claim that psychological phenomena are best understood
in terms of their functions rather than their structure (the claim of
structuralism). Concepts such as adaptation and role, and therapeutic
methods such as systemic family therapy, represent a functionalist
approach. fundamental attributional error The general tendency to
attribute people's behaviour to internal causes, character or
dispositions. Attribution theory has shown that we consistently
overestimate such causes and underestimate the influence of
circumstances. The effect is so strong that we even attribute the
behaviour of inanimate objects to motivations and dispositions (see
animism). However, an exception may be made when a person explains their
own behaviour (see actor--observer effect). fundamental frequency The
lowest frequency component of a particular sound. This normally
determines the

perceived pitch of the sound, but see also missing fundamental
phenomenon. funnelling Organising a questionnaire in such a way that the
first questions are very broad in scope, but later ones become
increasingly tightly defined and focused. fusiform body area (FBA) A
region of the inferior temporal cortex that responds preferentially to
whole bodies, rather than to body parts. See also ­fusiform face area.
fusiform face area The area including the fusiform gyrus in the temporal
cortex, which forms part of the face recognition system, but is also
involved in recognising other objects. See also fusiform gyrus. fusiform
gyrus A part of the fusiform face area in the underneath part of each
cerebral hemisphere. In the right hemisphere, this area is involved in
face recognition, and the same applies to the area on the left
hemisphere in illiterate adults. As literacy develops, however, this
area on the left hemisphere responds more to reading, and particularly
to the interpretation of letters and words. See also face recognition
unit. future shock One of several theories about the stress imposed by
transitions and life events. The idea was introduced in a book with the
same title by Alvin Toffler to describe what he claimed were the
traumatic effects of our present rapid progress into the future. Toffler
proposed that people could be protected against the effects of change by
maintaining some areas of stability in their lives. FWE See Family Wise
Error.

G g See general intelligence factor. GAF See Global Assessment of
Functioning scale.

galvanic skin response (GSR) Also known as galvanic skin resistance,
this is a highly sensitive measure of arousal,

Galton, Francis (1822--1911) Francis Galton was a pioneer of systematic
measurement and developed several statistical techniques, including the
concepts of correlation and regression. He set up a Psychometric
Laboratory in London, which members of the public could visit and, for a
penny, obtain a range of personal measurements, such as lengths and
widths of parts of the body, and strength of grip or kicks. Using these
data, Galton found that human capacities tended to fall along a normal
distribution curve. Reasoning that psychological abilities were
presumably dependent on physical ones, he then concluded that capacities
such as intelligence, too, must be normally distributed. Unfortunately,
this, together with studies of high-achieving families, led him to
develop the idea of eugenics, or selective breeding of human beings to
promote higher intelligence or other desirable characteristics, which
ultimately became the rationale for the Nazi concentration camps, as
well as US immigration and other discriminatory social policies.
registering even such slight increases in arousal as are produced by a
disturbing thought or a slight twinge of pain. It refers to the
electrical resistance of the skin, which changes as a result of
increases in the rate of sweating. GSR detectors form an important
component of polygraphs, which record a range of physiological
indicators of psychological events, and are sometimes used as lie
detectors. gambler's fallacy A belief that if a chance event occurs,
then it is less likely to occur on the next trial. If red comes up
several times running on a roulette wheel, there is a (mistaken)
tendency to believe that black is more likely on the

next throw. This universal tendency has been of interest to cognitive
theorists, as it is a failure to follow probabilistic logic, and so may
shed light on how humans assess probability. It may best be seen to
reflect the fact that genuine instances of random sampling without
replacement are uncommon in real life, rather than as a failure to judge
probabilities accurately. The gambler's fallacy is therefore a normally
effective strategy that becomes inappropriate in certain rather
artificial circumstances. game The psychological uses of this term are
similar to the ordinary meaning except that the idea of playfulness is
usually absent, so a game is an activity DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

146

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

within defined limits in which all of the participants operate according
to agreed rules. Eric Berne, in his book 'Games People Play' argued that
much social interaction can be regarded as a game, with plenty of scope
for problems when the rules and the limits of the game are not made
explicit. Game theory is a different approach, which expresses the rules
of the game in mathematical terms so that the possible strategies can be
precisely identified and their consequences predicted. See also zero-sum
game. game theory An approach to the mathematical modelling of social
interactions that is largely concerned with how an individual's success
in making choices is influenced by the decisions of others. Although
still popular in some areas of cognitive psychology, game theory tended
to fall out of favour as psychologists increasingly recognised its
inability to take account of more complex social factors. See also
payoff matrix, individualism, prisoner's dilemma. gamification The
process of converting psychometric tests into a form which is
challenging and preferably fun or interesting for the testee -- often
resembling a video game. The idea is that this will facilitate
motivation and application. gaming Engaging in digital games. These may
be platform-based, Internet-based, or stand-alone, and include many
types of game, such as sporting replications, actionadventure games or
problem-­solving games. The term is most commonly used for prolonged
engagement with computer games, often through an Internet-based ­network.
See also avatar. Ganong effect The observation that an ambiguous phoneme
is more likely to be perceived as a sound which produces a word rather
than as a non-word. GAS See general adaptation syndrome.

gaslighting A form of emotional abuse in which a person with power in a
relationship works to cause the other to doubt their memories, emotions
and perceptions and even, eventually, their sanity. The objective is to
demoralise the victim and make them totally dependent on the abuser to
define what is real. The term comes from a novel and film in which a
husband makes his wife doubt her sanity by, among other tricks,
repeatedly reducing the gas supply so that the (gas) lighting became
unstable while insisting that she was imagining the changes. gate
control theory A theory of pain control which holds that pain awareness
is mediated by 'gates', or neural pathways which permit the passage of
information about nociception. Control of these gates either chemically
or psychologically may be useful in mediating or reducing chronic pain.
Gaussian distribution See normal distribution. gaze cueing A term
describing how the direction of one person's eye gaze can automatically
cue another person or group of people to look in that direction. See
also joint attention. GDPR see General Data Protection Regulation.
gender identity The awareness individuals have of themselves as a member
of their sex. It emerges from the relationships between the beliefs they
have about appropriate sex-role behaviour, and their perception of
themselves. For example, a small man who regarded size and muscularity
as indicators of masculinity might modify his gender identity
accordingly. Gender identity used to be regarded as a relatively
clear-cut consequence of biological gender, although that was

G

147

never unproblematic. However, recent improvements in social tolerance
mean that it is now regarded as much more of a social and personal
choice. See also transsexual, heterosexual, identification.

results from a particular combination of genes and environment, such as
the development of lung cancer as a result of smoking. See
diasthesis-stress model.

gene A unit of heredity that consists of a small segment of a chromosome
made up of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). Each gene exerts its influence
on the body by triggering protein synthesis -- usually the production of
an enzyme, but sometimes a protein that contributes to the production of
a particular type of cell in the body. The word gene is also used
loosely and erroneously in sociobiology to mean 'a unit of natural
selection'.

gene X-environment interactions See gene-environment interplay.

gene-culture coevolution The idea that while culture can influence gene
frequencies in a population, genes may simultaneously influence culture
(e.g. through physiological predispositions). gene-environment
correlations gene-environment interplay.

See

gene-environment interplay The interaction between genes and their
environment. This is generally considered to involve four types of
mechanism: (i)

(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 

Direct environmental influences affecting the timing and degree of
functioning of the genes (e.g. an enriched diet in childhood producing a
larger individual). Heritability, which varies according to
environmental circumstances. Gene-environment correlations, which are
genetic influences on people's exposure to different environments
(e.g. genotypes may influence whether people seek out risk-taking
experiences or highly stimulating environments). Gene X-environment
interactions that happen when a person's susceptibility to a trait or
problem

general adaptation syndrome (GAS) A long-term response to stressful
stimulation identified by Selye in 1949. It is characterised by
extremely high levels of adrenaline in the bloodstream but without the
rapid heart and pulse rates and changes to internal organs normally
associated with adrenaline release and the alarm reaction. Selye's
research indicated that the effects are always the same, regardless of
the source of the stress. GAS has been shown to result in increased
susceptibility to illness, possibly through a decline in the number of
white blood cells and antibodies produced by the body. See also arousal.
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) Legislation enacted by the EU
and adopted by many other countries worldwide, in order to protect
people's rights to privacy and protection of their digital information.
The legislation argues that personal information may only be released in
six types of circumstance: consent (i.e. with the person's informed
agreement); contract (fulfilling contractual obligations with the person
whose data it is); public task (e.g. complying with legal obligations);
vital interest (e.g. medical information about the person whose data it
is or another individual); legitimate interest (e.g. performing a task
in the public interest); and legal requirement (complying with legal
obligations of the data controller). general intelligence factor (g) The
idea of one overall capacity of intelligence, as suggested by Galton and
Spearman.

148

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Many psychologists consider this to be a contentious view, arguing that
intelligence is a combination of many differing skills and attributes.
However, most intelligence tests are based on the assumption that a
generalised intelligence factor, or 'g', can be calculated as a result
of administering a set of specialised subtests, and it is as a
consequence of this belief that the intelligence quotient, or IQ, has
been so widely applied. See also triarchic intelligence. general mental
ability tests Another term for intelligence tests and one that is
preferred in occupational testing circles since its use circumvents the
controversial issues and criticisms ­associated with the terms
intelligence test and IQ. general problem-solver (GPS) A ­computer
program, devised in the early 1970s, that emphasised the use of
­heuristics in tackling specific problems, and which formed the prototype
for many subsequent attempts at computer simulation within the general
field of artificial intelligence. generalisation The process by which a
learned response will occur in more situations than those in which it
was first learned -- it will also be applied to similar situations. See
also conditioning. generalisation gradient The relationship between the
strength of a given response and the similarity of the triggering
stimulus to the original stimulus. When eliciting a generalised
response, a stimulus that is very similar to the original stimulus will
produce a strong response, while one that is less similar will evoke a
weaker response. generalised anxiety disorder A nonspecific
psychological problem that consists of high levels of anxiety or panic
attacks which can be generated

in many different contexts and don't appear to be related to a single
stimulus or set of stimuli. generation gap The differences in attitudes
and expectations that become apparent between widely differing age
groups, as a result of changes in society and culture over the decades.
generative retrieval The deliberate or voluntary retrieval of details
about autobiographical memory. See also direct retrieval. genetic(s) (i)

(ii) 

In the singular, concerning the origin of something. Used particularly
to refer to the development of abilities and characteristics of children
(see genetic epistemology), but also applied to the development of
characteristics in a species or the development of the species itself.
See also ontogeny, phylogeny. In the plural, genetics refers to the
study of genes and their actions. See also behaviour genetics,
Lamarckian genetics, Mendelian genetics.

genetic determinism The idea that human psychological characteristics
are determined primarily by genetic mechanisms, established at
conception. For example, H.J. Eysenck argued that the personality traits
of extraversion and neuroticism were genetic in origin and unlikely to
be significantly affected by environmental experience. Its converse --
environmental determinism -- asserts that human characteristics have
been produced primarily by environmental influences. In fact, both forms
of determinism are exaggerating the case. See also dialectics. genetic
engineering The process of altering genetic characteristics through
microscopic surgical or chemical inter-

G

vention, usually by inserting a new gene or section of chromosome into
an existing one, such that when the chromosome is replicated, the new
portion is also replicated and becomes part of the organism's overall
genotype. genetic epistemology The title for a theory of the growth of
knowledge and understanding. It is usually reserved for Jean Piaget's
theory charting the development of the child's cognitive functioning
through a series of stages, in the belief that 'ontogeny recapitulates
phylogeny' -- that is, that the development of the individual organism
reflects the stages through which those organisms have evolved. Piaget
argued that cognitive development took the form of a gradual reduction
of egocentricity, in which the child passed through four stages: the
sensorimotor stage, the preoperational stage, the concrete operational
stage and the formal operational stage. See also conservation, circular
reactions, naughty teddy, Lamarckian genetics. genetic psychology The
psychology of development (not of genetics). It covers the psychological
development of both individuals and species, but the term is no longer
widely used. genetic reductionism The idea that an understanding of
genetic influences is all that is needed to understand human behaviour
or human social phenomena. While this links with genetic determinism,
and can be seen as another facet of that particular belief structure,
the difference is that determinism refers to causality -- what has
caused this to occur -- while reductionism is concerned with what we
need to study in order to understand something fully. See also
reductionism. genetic transmission Passing information from one
generation to the next by means of DNA, the genetic ­material

149

that carries information about the nature of individual development, and
which is found in each cell nucleus. Genetic transmission may be
asexual, in which case the information is transmitted in very much the
same form as it was in the parent organism, or it may be sexual, in
which case each individual in the next generation receives a new set of
genetic information, formed as a combination of genes from each parent.
See also allele. geniculostriate pathway This is a neural pathway which
transmits visual information from the retina through the lateral
geniculate nuclei to the primary visual cortex. Found only in birds and
mammals, it works alongside but is distinct from another pathway, the
tectopulvinar pathway, which also connects these areas but appears to
have evolved earlier and to deal with more basic functions of vision.
genital stage In psychoanalytic theory, the final stage of psychosexual
development, beginning at puberty, in which the adult forms of sexual
desire and activity are acquired. genogram A standardised way of
representing a family tree showing the main connections between
successive generations. Used in therapy to give a visual summary of the
family structure. genome The complete set of genetic information in an
organism. genome-wide association study (GWAS) A phenotype-led study
involving thousands of participants, which uses small variations of the
genome to identify 'hot spots' (i.e. areas where individuals of the same
phenotype have distinctive genetic similarities). genotype The term used
to describe the full set of genes possessed by an individual,

150

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

which have been replicated throughout the cells of the body. Because
many genes will not encounter the circumstances in which they would
become active, and others are recessive, so that their action is
suppressed by a dominant gene, less than 50 per cent of the
characteristics coded in the genes actively contribute to the structure
or characteristics of the individual (the phenotype). However, all of
the components of the genotype are available for passing on to
offspring. genotype-first An approach to genetic analysis in which
different alleles or

genotypes are used to identify variations in the phenotype. See also
phenotype-first. geometric illusions Forms of visual illusion that have
their effect through the way the perceptual process deals with static
visual forms such as line drawings. Gerstmann's syndrome A set of four
cognitive deficits (acalculia, finger agnosia, agraphia and left-right
disorientation) occurring together, which are believed to result from
damage to the left parietal lobe.

Gesell, Arnold L. (1880--1961) Gesell developed a theory based on the
maturation of the nervous system, claiming that its development is fully
controlled biologically. He observed that foetal and neonate development
is cephalo-caudal and proximo-distal, and he argued that behaviour
arises from the fixed order in which the physiology of the child
unfolds, and the set of stages through which it proceeds. Most existing
assessments of infant development are based on the Bayley Infant
Development Scales, which were created using Gesell's theory and
observations. Apart from his theory, Gesell was a gifted observer of
child behaviour and an early user of film and photography. He provided a
good example, rare in psychology, of descriptions (at six-month
intervals from birth to ten years) of what real children were like.
However, just as Skinner pushed conditioning beyond its limits as an
explanation for all behaviour, so did Gesell with biological
explanations. In both cases, psychologists have learned from the
process, but have not accepted the more extreme claims.

Gestalt principles of perception An attempt to describe the important
features of perceptual functioning through a set of principles that are
consistent with the Gestalt emphasis on wholes. See also Law of
Prägnanz. Gestalt psychology A form of psychology, popular in Europe in
the first half of the twentieth century, which gathered support in
opposition to the mechanistic

approach of the behaviourism school in America. Gestalt psychology
emphasises the holistic nature of the human being and opposes
stimulus--response reductionism, on the grounds that the whole is more
than the sum of its parts, and that there are many aspects of
perception, memory and learning processes which cannot be understood in
terms of collections of smaller units, but which are

G

151

complete and unitary in themselves. The Gestalt emphasis on cognitive
psychology provided an important background to the cognitive revolution
of the 1960s and 1970s.

was one of the influential concepts in the later development of
mindfulness.

Gestalt therapy A method of psychotherapy developed by Fritz Perls that
works in the 'here and now' rather than the past, and aims to increase
the person's awareness of how all of their psychological processes are
integrated. The emphasis on understanding the person as a whole is
derived from Gestalt principles of perception. Gestalt therapy

gesture A mode of non-verbal communication in which information is
conveyed by movement, usually (but not always) of the hands and arms.
Gestures tend to vary considerably from one culture to another, and the
same sign may have a very different meaning even in neighbouring
countries.

gestation The period before birth when the embryo or foetus is growing,
or 'gestating', in the womb.

Gibson, Eleanor J. (1910--2002) Eleanor J. Gibson became known as the
'grand dame' of American developmental psychology. In the UK, she was
best known for her research into infant depth perception, particularly
studies involving the visual cliff. Eleanor Gibson was concerned that
cognition should be understood in terms of the way that it relates to
environmental demands and the survival requirements of the organism. Her
later research into child cognitive development reflected that concern.

Gibson, James J. (1904--1979) The husband of Eleanor Gibson, James J.
Gibson is recognised as one of the most influential theorists in the
field of perception. His theory of ecological perception argued that it
was important to understand perception from the point of view of the
ecological function which it served for the organism. As a result, he
directly challenged the top-down theories of perception put forward by
Gregory and others, arguing that there was no need for inference in
perception because the visual field -- or more specifically the optic
array -- contained enough information to make sense of incoming
information, particularly when the movements of the observer and their
interactions with their environment were taken into account. He
therefore emphasised aspects of perception such as the flow of the optic
array, and the affordances for interaction offered by objects within the
visual field. See also ecological perception.

152

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

GIGO An acronym for 'garbage in, garbage out' -- produced by computer
users to point out that if one's data are rubbish, then running them
through a sophisticated statistical program on a computer will just turn
them into different rubbish. glia An alternative term for glial cells.
glial cells Small cells that are found among the neurones of the nervous
system. Their main function seems to be to provide nutrients and to
absorb excreted waste from the neurones. Global Assessment of
Functioning (GAF) scale A scale used to measure 'psychological health'
that focuses on how well adapted the individual is to their
circumstances. global attributions Attributions in which the chosen
cause is of a kind that is likely to affect many outcomes (e.g.
attributing your unusually intensive revision to the fact that the
result of the exams that you are taking will influence

your whole future career). When the cause has only minor consequences,
it is described as a specific attribution. globus pallidus A part of the
basal ganglia which is involved in the regulation of voluntary movement,
but is also activated in long-term friendships and maternal love -- a
connection which is not yet fully understood. go/no-go test A test of
response inhibition in which the person is required to respond
accurately to a series of trials in which they are presented with a
rapid sequence involving some stimuli they should respond to and other
stimuli to which they should not respond. It reflects activity in the
medial prefrontal cortex, as does the Stroop test. goal setting theory
The idea that working towards and achieving goals is a fundamental part
of human motivation. Goal setting is used in some psychotherapies and in
training.

Goleman, Daniel (1946--) Daniel Goleman is most well known for his book
on emotional intelligence. In it, he argued that IQ should not be taken
as the main factor in workplace success or leadership; but that
non-cognitive skills such as the ability to interact well with others,
and to recognise non-verbal indicators in interactions, were much more
important. Goleman's ideas became widely acknowledged in both psychology
and management and led to the development of a number of psychometric
instruments designed to assess levels of emotional intelligence, as well
as specific arguments concerning its precise structure in psychology,
and the acceptance of emotional intelligence as a factor in management
theory.

gonads A general term used to describe the sex glands -- either the
testes or the ovaries. goodness of fit How well data that are the
outcomes of a study correspond with those anticipated by a particular
statisti-

cal model. For example, if a hypothesis is that gender does not
influence whether people drink wine, a survey of wine drinkers would be
expected to have numbers of men and women that do not differ
significantly. See also fit.

G

GPS See general problem-solver. gradient of colour One of the monocular
depth cues that indicates the distance of objects from the observer.
Gradient of colour refers to the way in which the colours of distant
objects appear to be greyer and less vivid than those of close objects.
The brain utilises the relative intensity of the colour to deduce
probable distances. gradient of texture One of the monocular depth cues
that indicates the distance of objects from the observer using the
extent to which fine details of texture can be discriminated. Nearer
objects have a finely detailed appearance, whereas those that are
further away appear to be smoothed out, and detail is lost (see Figure
33). grammar A set of rules set up to specify how a language is
constructed. Grammar is more concerned with syntax than with semantics,
but particularly within psycholinguistics it is likely to be concerned
with both. The objective of grammar is to have a set of rules that will
generate all acceptable sentences within a language, but no others. As
with logic, there may be a problem in that a particular set of rules
that does the job may not correspond to the rules that humans use to
achieve the same objective. The most widely accepted form of grammar in
psycholinguistics is that produced by Noam Chomsky, known as
transformational

Figure 33 Gradient of texture

153

grammar. Neurological studies have shown a specific event-related
potential in the brain known as the P600, which happens in response to
grammatical anomalies, and begins to develop even in relatively young
children. grandmother cell The hypothetical idea that there are specific
neurones in the brain that only respond to one specific stimulus, such
as the sight of one's grandmother. grapheme A basic unit for describing
writing, in much the same way as a phoneme is a basic unit for
describing spoken sound. The idea is that writing is made up of
combinations of graphemes. However, this does not mean that a grapheme
simply corresponds to a letter, since a single letter may contain more
than one grapheme 'element'. graphemic buffer A form of short-term
memory store that holds information about individual letters immediately
prior to spelling a word. grey matter or gray matter The term given to
the densely packed mass of neuronal cell bodies and unmyelinated fibres
found on the inside of the spinal cord and on the outside of the
cerebrum. See also white matter. grid cells Neurones within an animal's
medial temporal lobes that respond when

154

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Gregory, Richard (1923--2010) Richard Gregory specialised in the study
of visual perception, and in particular optical illusions. He became
well known in psychology partly as the author of one of the first truly
accessible textbooks (Eye and Brain), but also because of his work on
optical illusions, and the experience of a blind person who had sight
restored in later life. Gregory proposed a top-down model of perception,
suggesting that the brain makes inferences from limited information
based on its past experience and knowledge, which was challenged by
Gibson for real-world perception, but remains a likely explanation of
many less real-world experiences. He was also the founder of the Bristol
Exploratory, one of the first hands-on science centres that illustrated
in practice many of his theoretical observations. See also visual
illusions. it is in a particular location in a part of their
environment. These cells operate in such a way that they produce a
repeating grid-like structure, so cells may fire in multiple locations,
but always in respect to the same position within that cell of that
grid. See also hippocampus. grounded theory A data-driven approach to
research that specifies that data should be acquired in ways which
ensure that it has not been influenced by theoretical assumptions. The
data are then explored in detail, until some organisation of the
material, such as recurrent themes or principles, emerges. Using this
information, theoretical claims can then be made through a process of
induction. A grounded theory analysis requires several stages of
in-depth exploration of the data, involving an iterative and rigorous
examination of themes and implications arising from that exploration. It
is a powerful technique, but demanding for the researcher if done well,
and therefore not for the faint-hearted. Or those looking for an easy
option. See also qualitative analysis, core analysis, interpretative
phenomenological analysis. group norm The generally accepted standards
of a particular social group.

These may be standards of behaviour, achievement, attitude or other
characteristics, but they are generally considered to be what counts as
acceptable and used as the criteria to which group members should
conform. In psychometric tests, group norms are data sets which describe
the distribution of particular test results in given categories of the
population, allowing the tester to assess the typicality or otherwise of
a specific person's results. They are an important part of the
validation of normative tests and need to be kept up to date. See also
validity. group polarisation The emergent property of groups in which
people can be shown to make more extreme decisions when acting as a
group than when they are acting as individuals. This was first
identified with the risky-shift phenomenon, in which groups were shown
to make riskier decisions than would be made by the individuals that
comprise them. However, more recent research shows that, under certain
conditions, groups may also make more cautious decisions, so the term
group polarisation was adopted as one which described the phenomenon
without making assumptions as to the direction in which the group would
shift.

G

group selection theories Models of evolutionary processes which are
based on the idea that a trait may evolve because it helps the species
as a whole to survive. Although popular in the 1960s, through the work
of Wynne-Edwards and others, this approach to understanding evolution
was largely discredited in favour of individual survival mechanisms, and
in particular by the dominance of sociobiology in the 1980s. In more
recent times, with the increased awareness of coevolution and similar
mechanisms, some variants of group selection theories are beginning to
be regarded as academically acceptable once again. group test A
psychometric test that is administered to several people at once by a
single tester, such as some of the classroom-type intelligence tests.
group therapy Psychotherapy which involves a number of people who come
together at agreed intervals for the purposes of the therapy. There are
many different forms of group therapy, corresponding to most of the
varieties of individual therapy, but all could be claimed to have three
major advantages over individual therapy: (i) (ii)

(iii) 

cost-effectiveness, as a single therapist sees several patients
simultaneously; group processes that aim to ensure that the participants
will have genuine interactions with each other and real emotional
experiences; which will relate meaningfully to their experiences in
daily life, and which can be used effectively by the group therapist;
and the support offered by group members to one another.

groupthink One of the emergent properties that can occur in tightly knit
groups

155

with a high level of consensus and group loyalty. Groupthink is the
phenomenon whereby a consensual view of reality emerges within the
group, so that unpleasant (and more realistic) alternatives to the way
in which the group sees the world are not taken into consideration.
Attempts to bring more realistic perspectives to bear on the situation
are dismissed or perceived as evidence of disloyalty. The process
therefore results in the group making silly or at times tragic
decisions. The classic example of groupthink was the American military
decision to invade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs -- a decision that turned out
to be a military disaster, and one which could have been easily foreseen
if those making the decision had been able to make a realistic appraisal
of the situation. Similar considerations apply to the disastrous launch
of the Challenger Space Shuttle. Groupthink can occur in any tightly
knit group with strong leadership and was therefore also apparent in
many of the governmental decisions made during the Thatcher and Blair
years in the UK. Investigations of groupthink suggest that conscious and
deliberate efforts to promote debate and to admit unwelcome
possibilities are required to overcome it. See also decision-making.
growth mindset The idea that intelligence is not fixed but can develop
and increase given experience, effort and learning. This type of mindset
results in positive self-efficacy beliefs, and encourages perseverance
and effort. Compare fixed mindset. growth motive A term used in
humanistic psychology models of personality to describe the tendency of
human beings towards personal growth and development, not only through
the acquisition of new skills and experience but also through cognitive
re-evaluation and an

156

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

increased sense of personal control and autonomy. Humanistic
psychologists consider this to be a very basic motive in the human
being, and fundamental to an understanding of mentally healthy
behaviour. See also self-actualisation. GSR See galvanic skin response.
gustation The sense of taste. Although previously thought to be closely
linked to olfaction, this sense involves different neural pathways.
Taste information is registered by taste receptors throughout the mouth
which transduce different combinations of chemicals into electrical
information. This then passes through the medulla and thalamus to the
gustatory cortex. Olfactory perception is often stimulated at the same
time, for example when eating food; which is

why those with a keen sense of smell find their sense of taste appears
to be inhibited if the nose is blocked. gustatory cortex An area found
behind the somatosensory projection area and just above the lateral
fissure, which processes gustatory information and has links with both
pleasure and avoidance pathways in the brain. gustatory perception The
perception of taste, which uses sense receptors in the tongue and in the
nasal epithelium. See gustation. GWAS See genome-wide association study.
gyri The plural of gyrus. gyrus A ridge on the cerebral cortex. See also
sulcus.

H habit In behaviourist terms, a habit is described simply as a
stimulus--response learning sequence. In cognitive psychology, it is
seen as a set of automatic routines and subroutines in which the
individual engages, and which, owing to frequent exercise, requires
little conscious cognitive input. In everyday life, it is a routine or
procedure which we do often, without consciously planning to do it. The
learning process involved in acquiring a habit may involve classical
conditioning, but will not be habituation. habituation A very basic form
of learning that involves gradually ceasing to respond to a repeated
non-significant stimulus. Ceasing to notice the ticking of a clock is a
typical example. Habituation can be distinguished from fatigue by the
fact that a small change in the stimulus will result in the response
reappearing, a process called 'dishabituation'. Habituation is essential
in that it allows organisms to concentrate on those properties of
stimuli which have significance for them, and to avoid having the
cognitive system overloaded with irrelevant information. For example,
car drivers do not habituate to the sight of red at the top of a traffic
light, but they are likely to have difficulty in remembering the colour
of the stripes painted on the poles. haemophilia A genetic disorder that
results in excessive bleeding when the body is even slightly wounded,
owing to an inability of the blood to clot. Haemophilia is found in many
psychology textbooks, as a classic example of

a sex-linked trait, although the psychological implications of the
disorder are obscure. hallucination A vivid and convincing mental image
that may appear in any sensory modality. The person experiencing it may
be unable to believe that no sensory stimulation was involved. Although
hallucinations such as hearing voices are not uncommon in the general
population and carry no stigma in many cultures, they are regarded as
one of the most reliable signs of schizophrenia. They may also be caused
as a side effect of psychoactive drugs. See also Charles Bonnet
syndrome. hallucinogen A drug that induces hallucinations or other
unusual forms of perception. The most commonly used hallucinogens are
psilocybin and LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), but there are many
others, including mescaline and the hallucinogen contained in the fly
agaric mushroom. Traditionally, hallucinogens have formed an integral
part of religious and social ceremonies in many parts of the world. In
the West, they are normally used as recreational drugs, although there
have been several instances of artists and creative writers utilising
their effects to obtain special insights for their work and one or two
investigations of their usefulness in certain kinds of therapy. halo
effect An effect in which people or objects who are judged positively on
one characteristic are also judged positively on others. For instance, a
person who is judged to be physically attractive DOI:
10.4324/9781003158899

158

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

is more likely also to be perceived as being more amusing or intelligent
than a physically less attractive individual of a similar personality.
See also impression formation. handedness The term for specialisation in
the use of one hand that develops in humans during the first years of
life. Often the preferred foot or the preferred eye is not on the same
side as the preferred hand. Handedness is thought by some to be related
to hemisphere dominance. Since the right cerebral hemisphere controls
the left side of the body, and vice versa, people who are right-handed
are thought to be left-hemisphere dominant, while left-handed people are
right-hemisphere dominant. However, the evidence relating handedness to
cerebral dominance is often contradictory, despite the plausibility of
the idea. haploid Having half the usual number of chromosomes -- just
one from each pair. Some social insects such as bees and ants are mostly
haploid, as are reproductive cells (ova and sperm), which combine with
cells from the other parent

to ­produce a complete set of chromosomes to form a new individual. See
also diploid, gene, meiosis, mitosis. happiness A central focus in
positive psychology, happiness is a positive state of being, in which
the person is aware that they are in a positive mood and content with
being so. Happiness can be an ephemeral state for some and a common one
for others, but although it has been traditionally seen as a personality
trait, modern researchers have shown that it is possible to learn to
become more generally happy, through appreciation of the positive
aspects of living and the challenging of negative attributions.
Neurological studies have shown that happiness activates areas right
across the brain, particularly including the superior parietal lobule.
It also activates areas associated with negative emotions, including the
amygdala, the insula, the prefrontal cortex and the cingulate gyrus,
although it activates different groups of neurones within those
structures. haptic To do with the sense of touch.

Harré, Rom (1927--2019) Rom Harré was a distinguished social philosopher
and psychologist. He developed the social psychological approach known
as ethogenics, which identified two important methodological approaches:
episode analysis and account analysis. Episode analysis takes the view
that real everyday living is experienced as a series of episodes, and
that the episode is therefore the most meaningful unit to adopt in any
study of social experience. Account analysis emphasises the importance
of discourse and memory in making sense of experience and contributed
greatly to the development of discourse analysis. Hawthorne effect The
phenomenon whereby when changes are introduced into a work environment
in order to bring about an increase in productivity, there may be a
temporary increase

in productivity just because those changes have been tried. An entirely
useless change may therefore appear to work unless the effects are
tested over a reasonable period of time. Hawthorne

H

159

effects illustrate the importance of social factors and expectations in
the working environment. See also organisational psychology,
self-fulfilling prophecy, placebo effect.

and in particular to their adopting behaviours that are known predictors
of health (or otherwise). A strong belief in the efficacy of these
behaviours has also been linked with the placebo effect.

HCI See human--computer interaction.

health psychology Originally health psychology was concerned with the
psychological factors in medical conditions. It has now become a broad
term to group together the areas of psychology that are concerned with
different aspects of both physical and mental health and illness.

head-related transfer function (HRTF) The way that sounds become
distorted by the unique shape of one's own ears and head. health belief
model A theory which argues that the health beliefs people have are
directly linked to their actions,

Hebb, Donald (1904--1985) Donald Hebb was an influential Canadian
neuropsychologist, who was concerned with exploring how learning and
experience impacted on the brain. He argued that it was the repetition
of connections between neurones which stimulates synapse development,
making familiar or more practised connections more likely to direct the
neural impulse than novel or unfamiliar ones. Hebb challenged the
mechanistic stimulus--response models of the behaviourists, arguing that
the connection was also mediated by the organism, making it S--O--R
(stimulus--organism--response) rather than S--R (stimulus--­ response).
Although disregarded for a while, more recently his theoretical work has
become widely accepted as the basis for neural network theory, and
neurological research shows that synaptic knobs do become enlarged as
stronger neural pathways are formed, as he proposed.

Hebb's theory of synaptic learning Hebb argued that it was the
repetition of connections between neurones which stimulated the
development of synapses, forming cell assemblies so that familiar or
more practised connections are more likely to direct the neural impulse
than novel or unfamiliar ones. hedonic relevance The issue of whether a
cause leads to effects that have direct positive or negative
consequences for the person concerned. A cause has hedonic relevance for
someone if it produces

something pleasant or unpleasant. For instance, a government ruling that
student loans were to be halved would have direct hedonic relevance for
students. It would not, however, be personalised. See also personalism,
attribution. hedonism In philosophy, hedonism is the idea that pleasure
or happiness is the highest good. In psychology, it is the idea that it
is fundamental to human beings to seek pleasure and to avoid pain, and
that this in itself is a valid explanation of much behaviour.

160

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

helping Giving aid or assistance to someone. Psychologists have studied
helping behaviour as a contrast to bystander apathy, and find that our
'natural' response seems to be to help others who appear to need it, but
that this can be impeded by social and/or cognitive anxieties. See also
reciprocal altruism. helplessness theory See learned helplessness.
hemianopia Cortical blindness that results from damage to the primary
visual cortex in one hemisphere, and is therefore restricted to one half
of the visual field. hemiplegia Damage to one side of the primary motor
cortex, which results in an inability to move the other side of the
body. hemispatial neglect A failure to attend to stimuli on one side of
the perceptual field, opposite to the side of the brain lesion producing
the neglect. hemisphere bias The idea in popular culture that there is a
distinction between right-brain activities and left-brain activities,
that engaging in these different activities generates different
approaches to life in general, and that people can be divided into
'right-brain' and 'left-brain' types. This belief involves an extensive
mythology that has been built up from a few valid neurological
observations. While there is some evidence that logic and calculation,
for example, tends to involve the left hemisphere more than the right,
there is (a) some activity on both, and (b) no justification for the
idea that the right cerebral hemisphere is therefore more emotional
because emotions are the opposite of logic. Similarly, the observation
that activities such as art appreciation or listening to music (for
non-musicians) tend to involve more activity in the right brain has been
exag-

gerated to the idea that (a) only the right hemisphere is involved, and
(b) artists and musicians are therefore right-brain people, as opposed
to writers and accountants who are left-brainers. (Incidentally, it has
also been shown that trained musicians tend to generate left-hemisphere
activity when listening to music.) There are some neurological
tendencies towards hemisphere bias -- for example, the location of most
(but not all) language functioning on the left hemisphere, and evidence
that the left side of the face (controlled by the right hemisphere) is
more expressive of emotion. But these tendencies do not justify the
widespread popular beliefs that have grown up about this area. See also
hemispherectomy. hemisphere dominance The observation that, in most
individuals, one cerebral hemisphere of the brain is more influential or
has greater control over the body than the other side, thus possibly
producing right or left handedness, etc. hemispherectomy An operation
that involves the removal of one entire cerebral hemisphere. Studies of
left hemispherectomy in severely brain-damaged patients have shown
interesting, often puzzling recovery of language functioning and
linguistic memory that was not evident when the damaged hemisphere was
in situ. These cases call into question the accepted idea that language
is firmly localised on the left hemisphere, and they rather suggest a
hologramlike storage mechanism whereby each hemisphere is capable of
taking over the functions of the other but does not do so in everyday
functioning. See also hemisphere dominance, split-brain studies.
hemodynamic methods Ways of analysing brain activity by recording blood
flow (e.g. PET scans).

H

hemodynamic response function (HRF) Changes in the BOLD response that
occur over time. hereditarian A term used to describe a theory or
approach that emphasises inherited mechanisms and genetic influence, and
excludes, or minimises, other factors. See also genetic determinism,
genetic reductionism. heredity The processes by which part of the
biological potential of the parent is transmitted to the offspring. In
sexual reproduction, this involves half of the genetic material of each
parent combining to form the complete genetic structure of the
offspring. See also chromosome, gene. heritability A statistical concept
designed to indicate how much of a given trait can be deemed to have
come about as a result of genetic influences. The concept of
heritability, while widely accepted in behavioural genetics and regarded
as largely unproblematic when applied to physical characteristics, is
often challenged when it is applied to behavioural or psychological
characteristics because of its assumption that transmission through
families is evidence that the trait concerned has been inherited. This
leads into the twin study debates and a political history in which the
concept was seriously misused to inform racist and divisive social
policies. See also heritability estimate. heritability estimate A figure
that purports to state the proportion of influence exerted by genes on
the individual's development, despite the fact that many developmental
geneticists and psychologists (e.g. Hebb) have demonstrated
unequivocally how inseparable genetics and the environment are. The most
well-known 'heritability estimate' is that of 80 per cent genetic
influence on the variation in intelli-

161

gence, put forward by Jensen in 1969 on the basis of Cyril Burt's
fraudulent data on twin studies. The controversy concerns not so much
the estimate of 80 per cent as the conclusions to be drawn from any
estimate of heritability. hermaphrodite An individual who possesses the
primary sexual characteristics of both sexes at the same time. True
hermaphrodites have gonads, one of which has developed as an ovary and
the other as a testis. They could therefore, theoretically, produce an
ovum and fertilise it themselves, and so potentially produce offspring
without assistance from any other individual. The condition is extremely
rare and is not likely to be the true explanation of unexpected
pregnancies. hermeneutics The study of meanings in social behaviour and
experience. It is concerned with meanings on a number of levels, ranging
from the conscious and unconscious, personal and social to the cultural
and sociopolitical levels. Rather than simply looking at the
generalities of behaviour, or at statistical information, hermeneutics
is concerned with the interpretation of experience, and the ways in
which various forms of symbolism are used to convey meaning in human
life. See also account analysis. heroin Heroin is a powerful analgesic
of the opiate group, originally developed as a non-addictive painkiller.
However, it was soon found that as a substance it is extremely
addictive, producing tolerance very rapidly, and leading to increased
doses of the drug being necessary for the same effect. It is probably
the most abused of all the narcotic drugs. In addition to its analgesic
properties, heroin induces profound mood changes, leading to relief from
tension and producing a state of drowsy contentment. Its use

162

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

and abuse as an illegal drug is most widespread in the poorer sector but
occurs throughout society. In addition to the problem of tolerance,
addiction to heroin produces a high level of susceptibility to infection
and disease. In chemical terms, heroin has a structure very similar to
the endorphins and enkephalins that are produced naturally in the brain
in response to prolonged

exercise, and it is picked up at the same receptor sites. hertz (Hz) A
measure of frequency, one hertz being one cycle per second. In the
audible range, the frequency determines the pitch of a sound or tone.
Tones of higher pitch produce more frequent cycles and hence are said to
be of a higher frequency. See also frequency theory.

Hertzberg, Frederick (1923--2000) Frederick Hertzberg was an influential
organisational psychologist, whose main contribution to applied
psychology was concerned with developing an understanding of employee
motivation. His dual-factor theory of motivation argued that there were
two types of influencing factors: hygiene factors, which were concerned
with the basics of working life such as pay, relationships with others,
company policy, and the like; and motivator factors such as achievement,
recognition, the work itself, and so on. Hygiene factors do not produce
positive motivation, but are often the cause of dissatisfaction at work,
while positive motivation depends on motivator factors.

heteroceptors Presynaptic areas that are able to receive a range of
chemical messages from other neurones. See also synapse.

male/female relationships are acceptable and that homosexuality is
abnormal, inferior, to be despised or at best pitied. See also
homophobia, prejudice.

heterogeneity A set which is varied, or showing a large number of
differences. A heterogeneous sample is one in which the research
participants are of many different kinds. 'Hetero-' as a prefix means
'different' or 'other'. See also homogeneity.

heterosexual Having sexual inclinations towards members of the other
sex. See also homosexual.

heteronomous morality The second of Piaget's stages of moral
development, this is also known as the 'moral realism' stage. At this
point, morality is considered to be subject to the laws of others. In
other words, the child accepts as right and proper the rules given by an
authority. See also autonomous morality. heterosexism A judgemental
approach which assumes that only conventional

heuristics Problem-solving strategies that involve taking the most
probable or likely options from a possible set, rather than working
systematically through all possible alternatives. Heuristics provide a
way of reducing a complex problem to a manageable set of tasks with only
a slight risk that the solution lies among the alternatives excluded at
the start. Heuristics differ from algorithms in that they do not
guarantee a solution. See also problemsolving, decision-making.

H

hidden observer The term given to the experience of a dispassionate
'inner self' that observes the individual in stressful situations, or
during day-to-day living. Such an experience is particularly common
during hypnosis, in which the hidden observer is felt to have
experiences that are parallel to, but not the same as, the hypnotised
self. In psychotherapy, the objective part of the therapist that
comments on their feelings and involvement with the patient is called
the 'observing ego'. hierarchy A structured form of organisation
constructed in levels, with each level overshadowing or dominating the
lower ones. The idea of hierarchy is used in many different ways. For
instance, a hierarchy of concepts refers to the ways in which concepts
may be stored in the brain, such that general concepts contain within
themselves smaller constituent units. The analysis of organisations is
almost always formulated in terms of hierarchies. See, e.g., pandemonium
model. hierarchy of human needs Maslow's hierarchy of human needs refers
to the idea that needs become important in a systematic progression.
Lower, more 'basic' needs such as those for food and security are
important first, and 'higher' needs such as those for beauty and
selfactualisation only become important once the lower levels have been
satisfied. The theory applies both developmentally and to the mature
person. According to Maslow, children must be adequately satisfied at
one level before they start to develop motivations at the next level, so
the higher stages are not reached for several years, and
self-actualisation may take at least 30 years to achieve. Adults may be
stuck at a low level if they have never experienced sufficient
satisfaction at that level, but even those who have progressed higher
may cease to be

163

motivated at the upper levels if they are seriously threatened in a more
basic way. For example, the need for dignity ceases to matter if you
look up and find you are in danger of being run down by a bus (see
Figure 34). On the other hand, the theory doesn't account for starving
poets. See also social needs. higher-order conditioning See secondary
reinforcement. hill climbing heuristic A basic heuristic used in
problem-solving, in which the person focuses on 'one step at a time' --
in other words, on making moves that appear to bring them closer to the
overall goal. hindsight bias The tendency to regard decisions or choices
that have already been made as having been the only practical or
realistic option. Hindsight bias describes the way that we are strongly
predisposed to justify or rationalise the benefits of our previous
decisions. As a result, we often make these appear to have been clearly
thought out, or simply a matter of logical choice (as in conspiracy
theories), when in reality those decisions were taken in a much more
impulsive manner, or according to much less rational criteria. See also
decision-making, cognitive dissonance. hippocampus Also sometimes
referred to as the medial temporal lobe, this part of the limbic system
seems to be the main centre for the consolidation and storage of
memories in the brain. Its name derives from the Greek for 'seahorse',
reflecting its general shape. People with surgical damage to both sides
of the hippocampus have subsequently experienced an inability to store
or recall new information, although earlier memories remain intact and
can be retrieved at will. A famous study of London taxi drivers (Woolett
and Maguire, 2011)

164

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

selfactualisation: to develop all one's potential self-esteem needs: and
self-respect social needs: for friendship and social acceptability
safety needs: for safety and freedom from danger physiological needs:
for food, water and shelter

Figure 34 Maslow's hierarchy of human needs showed that the amount of
time they spend in the job correlates positively with the volume of the
right hippocampus, suggesting that the demanding level of memory
processing in their work produces increased development of neural
connections in this area. See neural plasticity, grid cells, entorhinal
cortex. histogram An accurate type of bar chart in which the length and
area of the bars represents precisely the relative proportions of the
variables being illustrated. See also descriptive statistics. holistic
Complete, treating its subject matter as a coherent and indivisible
unit. For example, a holistic approach to medicine would involve dealing
with the whole person, including their own experiences, stresses and
understanding of the situation, rather than simply

treating the symptoms of their illness or disorder. holistic processing
Cognitive processing that involves integrating information from
different sources to produce a meaningful whole (e.g. in face
recognition or everyday depth perception). hologram A portrayal of a
threedimensional image as a projection from a small unit or a
two-dimensional surface, in such a way that the image can be examined
from different angles and shows the appropriate motion parallax. A
complete holographic image may be reconstructed from a proportion of an
original, although some clarity of detail is lost. Understanding the
perception of holograms poses a unique problem to psychology, which as
yet seems far from resolution. Holograms are also of interest to
psychologists because in

H

some ways the cerebral cortex appears to function similarly. It seems
possible that information is not stored in a specific location, but is
available in any large enough area of the cortex. See also
hemispherectomy. holophrase A single-word utterance that conveys the
meaning of a whole sentence in itself (e.g. 'Lost!'). home range The
area within which an animal habitually forages for its food. This is not
necessarily the same as the area that an animal will defend against
other members of its species -- many species have overlapping home
ranges, but distinctive territories. See also ­territoriality.
homeostasis The process of maintaining a stable condition or state by
detecting and reducing differences from a goal state. The classic simple
example is a central heating system where the thermostat turns the
boiler on when the temperature drops and turns it off when the
temperature is high enough. The basic process involved is called
negative feedback. The concept has been widely used to describe the
maintenance of physiological balance in the body, with metabolic
functions kept at an optimal level through the operation of mechanisms
that correct imbalances. Homeostasis in the human body is maintained
through a variety of mechanisms, tightly mediated by the hypothalamus.
Drives were considered to arise directly from such homeostatic
mechanisms. For instance, the hunger drive is purportedly initiated when
blood sugar levels in the body fall below a certain level. This produces
foodseeking behaviour, until food is ingested and satiation is reached.
The concept of homeostasis plays an important part in systems theory and
cybernetics, and can therefore be applied to how psychologi-

165

cal stability is maintained in people and their families. homogeneity
Similarity or likeness. Something that is homogeneous is the same
overall, showing little variability. A homogeneous group of research
participants will have been selected so that all of them score similarly
on essential measures. For example, one might recruit a sample of
25-year-old middle-class mothers, each with one pre-school child. This
would be a homogeneous sample for research on child-rearing (although
not necessarily for research in other fields, e.g. religious attitudes).
A mixed sample is described as heterogeneous. The prefix 'homo-' means
'the same'. It is not related to the Latin 'homo', meaning 'man'. See
also heterogeneity. homogeneity of variance One of the criteria used for
the selection of a parametric statistics test. Homogeneity of variance
refers to the variance or 'spread' shown by the populations from which
the data samples have been taken. The purpose of parametric analytical
techniques such as the t-test is to compare the means of two samples, in
order to determine whether they are different enough to have come from
different populations. However, the formula for estimating the variance
of the parent population relies on the two sample variances being
similar, so if they are not, a t-value would be misleading. For this
reason, homogeneity of variance is an important criterion for using a
t-test, and variance is usually checked using an F-test (See F ratio).
Note that finding a significant difference in the variances of the two
samples might be just as important as finding a difference in their
means (see Figure 35). homograph A word that has a single spelling but
two or more different meanings, such as 'set' or 'hamper'.

166

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience mean

90

95

100

105

110

mean

60

80

100

120

140

Figure 35 Distributions with different variances

homophobia Hostility to homosexuals as a group. See also reaction
formation. homophone A word that sounds similar to another word, but
which is spelt differently and has a different meaning (e.g. 'stair' and
'stare'). homosexual Having sexual inclinations towards others of the
same sex. The prefix 'homo-' is derived from the Greek, meaning 'the
same', and not from the Latin, meaning 'man'. The term therefore applies
equally to men and women. See also heterosexual. homunculus In
physiological psychology, this refers to the two areas on the cerebral
cortex on which areas of the body are mapped in relation to motor and
sensory functioning. The area is a representation of the body in which
size is proportional to sensitivity, so a fingertip gets relatively much
more space than an area on the back because it is so much more

­sensitive. The term is also sometimes used to express the ancient idea
that there is a miniature human operating within the body (e.g. a
­miniature perceiver looking at the image received by the eyes). See also
homunculus ­problem. homunculus problem The problem of the 'inner
observer' found in some models of thinking or perception, which implies
that the brain is acting as if it were another observer, or small
person, observing the individual's mental processes. It is a problem
because we would then need to propose another 'inner observer' to
explain how the first observer makes sense of what it sees, and so on,
ad infinitem. hope A feeling of positive expectation -- the desire that
a positive event or situation will come to pass. See also positive
psychology. hormones Chemicals released into the bloodstream that
produce changes in

H

the functioning of the body. Hormones are produced by the glands of the
­endocrine system, which operate in close conjunction with the
hypothalamus. hostile aggression Aggression in which the objective is to
inflict harm on the other, as opposed to instrumental aggression, which
is undertaken for some other purpose. See also aggression. HPA See
hypothalmic-pituitary-adrenal axis. HRF See hemodynamic response
f­unction. HRTF See head-related transfer function. hub-and-spoke model A
model of memory which proposes a central 'hub' of semantic memory that
is not dependent on any particular mode, but which feeds into a range of
modes of representation based on sensory and motor systems such as
vision, hearing and sensation. hue The term used to describe a
particular wavelength, or tint, of a colour. It is a subdivision of the
broader categories of colours. For instance, there are different hues of
green. human--computer interaction (HCI) The study of how human beings
interact with and use computers, including ergonomic design,
human-friendly displays such as the WYSIWYG (what you see is what you
get) system for documents, the desktop interface popularised by Mac and
replicated in Windows, and studies of just what people actually use
computers for. humanistic psychology An approach within psychology that
emphasises the whole person and their scope for change. Humanistic
psychologists reject the reductionist approach of many researchers,
which sees human action simply as collections of separate mechanisms,
and they also argue against the dehumanisation

167

and 'objectifying' of human behaviour produced by trivial laboratory
investigations and behaviouristic attitudes within psychology. Instead,
they argue that psychologists should take more account of the whole
person, including attitudes, values and responses to social situations
(including experiments). To attempt to study people in a fragmented way
is, they consider, to ignore the essence of what it is to be human.
There are many humanistic psychologists, of whom Carl Rogers, the
originator of humanistic therapy, is perhaps the most famous. humour
Communication that is amusing. Humour has primarily been studied in
terms of its use in social processes, and in the hidden meanings of
jokes. There is no satisfactory theory of the psychological processes
involved when something is experienced as funny. There is a widespread
belief and growing evidence that frequent use of humour and laughter is
associated with positive physical and psychological health. Although it
is sometimes asserted that humour is a right-brain activity,
neurological evidence shows that the prefrontal cortex is involved in
processing humour, while the insula and the amygdala on both sides of
the brain are involved in appreciating and enjoying it. Slapstick and
cartoon humour activates neurones across the temporal and parietal lobes
of the brain, while verbal humour involves the language areas of the
left temporal lobe. humours of the body The dominant theories of
personality and of physical and mental health over some 2,000 years,
until the nineteenth century, were in terms of the balance between four
types of bodily fluids or humours: blood, phlegm, black bile and yellow
bile. These were linked with personality characteristics: a predominance
of blood produced a '­sanguine'

168

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

personality -- confident, joyful and optimistic; phlegm produced a
'phlegmatic' personality: calm, hard-working and deep thinking; black
bile produced a 'melancholic' personality, artistic but with a tendency
to depression, and a predominance of yellow bile produced a 'choleric'
personality, impatient and easily inclined to anger. Everyday
expressions such as being in 'a bad humour' hark back to this theory.
See theory of the humours Huntingdon's disease Also known as
Huntingdon's chorea, this is a genetic disease that involves contorted
postures and flailing limbs (chorea). It occurs through the degeneration
or death of inhibitory neurones in the indirect pathway between the
basal ganglia and the thalamus. The indirect pathway acts to reduce
unwanted muscular movement, while the direct pathway acts to increase or
accelerate it. Overactivity of the indirect pathway produces movement
inhibition as in Parkinson's disease, while overactivity of the direct
pathway produces chorea, as in Huntingdon's disease. See also
hyperkinetic, hypokinetic. hygiene factors Factors in the working
environment, identified by Hertzberg, which are concerned with the
working conditions of the individual, such as shift organisation, staff
facilities and organisational structure. In investigations of job
satisfaction, Hertzberg found that bad hygiene factors contributed
considerably to job dissatisfaction, but that incentives known as
'motivators' (e.g. promotion prospects and a sense of goals) were
necessary to produce high levels of job satisfaction. See also
organisational psychology. hyper- A prefix indicating a high or
excessive level of some function. hyperactivity A condition of excessive
and apparently uncontrollable ­activity

in children, sometimes referred to as hyperkinesis. There is controversy
over the reality of the condition, but there are some children whose
activity is maintained at such an extreme level that the label seems to
be unavoidable. It is also clear that many children who are labelled as
hyperactive are just rather more active than their parents or teachers
find convenient. The condition is strongly associated with difficulties
in maintaining attention, leading to boredom, and it may be this aspect,
rather than the activity level itself, which is fundamental.
Hyperactivity can be effectively treated with drugs related to
amphetamines. Although these drugs are usually used as stimulants, they
also help to maintain attention, and it seems to be this effect that is
useful to hyperactive children. The term hyperactivity has been replaced
with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). hypercomplex cell
A type of cell, discovered by Hubel and Wiesel, which are located in the
thalamus and the visual cortex and receive information from complex
cells concerning basic images occurring in the visual field.
Hypercomplex cells collate this information, so as to respond to simple
patterns and shapes, and are thought to represent the basis of
figureground perception (see Figure 36). hyperkinesis See hyperactivity.
hyperkinetic An increase in movement, often involuntary. See
Huntingdon's disease, basal ganglia. hyperlexic Hyperlexic children are
those who learn to read extremely quickly, with little apparent
difficulty. See also dyslexia. hyperphagia Excessive eating that may be
induced by lesions to the hypothalamus. See also set weight.

H

169

hypercomplex cell

complex cells

simple cells

Figure 36 Cell organisation in the visual cortex hyperscanning Recording
the activity of two or more different brains at the same time.
Hyperscanning has been shown to be a useful technique in investigating
the neural correlates of experiences such as trust or empathy.
hyperthymestic syndrome A distinctive example of autobiographical
memory, concerning an exceptional ability to remember the events of
one's own life. hypnagogic imagery Vivid visual imagery that is
experienced during the transition from waking to sleep. It often takes
the form of an unusually clear image of an object that has been the
subject of intense concentration during the day, but the most common
image is of falling. Hypnopompic imagery, which is rarer, is a similar
kind of imagery that occurs during waking. hypnosis An altered state of
awareness (or consciousness) usually induced by voluntarily allowing
one's actions to be directed by another person (the hypnotist). The
major characteristics of the state are heightened suggestibility and
concentration of attention on the hypnotist. Some research participants
appear to achieve a very high level of this state,

called a hypnotic trance, in which they feel totally controlled by the
hypnotist. Researchers have argued that hypnosis is just a matter of
highly suggestible people role-playing a trance state, although others
argue that EEG records of a changed pattern of brain activity during
hypnosis are evidence of a special state. See also hypnotherapist,
autohypnosis. hypnotherapist A practitioner who uses hypnosis for
therapeutic purposes. It has been argued that hypnosis itself has no
direct therapeutic effects, but that it can be used effectively within a
cognitivebehavioural approach for purposes such as reducing anxiety.
hypokinetic Lacking in spontaneous movement, as in Parkinson's disease.
See also hyperkinetic. hypothalamus A small but important part of the
brain, located immediately below the thalamus (hence the name). The
hypothalamus is generally concerned with maintaining homeostasis in the
body, and its functions seem to be partly localised. For instance,
lesions to specific nuclei within the hypothalamus in rats have been
shown to produce excessive eating, resulting in obesity.

170

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

hypothalmic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA) A neural pathway that is
activated during stress, producing changes in stress-related hormones.
hypothesis An idea that is not proven, or which is advanced as a
tentative suggestion or possible explanation. In terms of formal
experimental method, a hypothesis is an idea, derived logically and
consistently from a specific psychological theory, which contains an
explicit prediction stating the likely outcome if particular conditions
apply and the theory is true. This prediction can then be verified or
refuted by some kind of empirical investigation, usually an experiment.
See also null hypothesis. hypothesis testing See hypotheticodeductive
method. hypothetical construct An idea or factor that is not empirically
evident, or demonstrable in reality, but is proposed as a theoretical
explanation for some phenomenon or experience. hypothetico-deductive
method The technique of investigation outlined by Karl Popper as being
central to the scientific method. It consists of investigating by means
of the formulation of an explicit hypothesis containing an explicit
predic-

tion as to what would happen in a given situation. An empirical
investigation is then set up to test the hypothesis (i.e. to see if the
prediction was true). If the hypothesis is to be retained because the
prediction worked, that would be taken as support for the theory from
which the hypothesis was derived. On the other hand, if the hypothesis
is refuted, that would be taken (in an idealised world) as evidence
against the original theory, and an alternative explanation would have
to be found. See also Type I error, Type II error, paradigm. hypovolemic
thirst Also known as osmotic thirst, this is the thirst that arises when
the body's internal fluids have been depleted, as opposed to thirst
brought on by advertising or other social pressures. hysteria A physical
symptom, with no apparent physical cause, but which appears to have some
psychological function. An example would be temporary blindness or a
paralysed arm that prevented someone from performing a job which they
hated but dared not leave. Such symptoms are not under voluntary
control. See also psychoanalysis. Hz See hertz.

I IAT See implicit association test. ICD See International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems. iconic
representation The coding or representing of memories by utilising
sensory images (from the Greek 'icon', meaning 'image'). Iconic
representation is usually used to refer to visual imagery and was
considered to be the second mode of representation to develop, according
to Bruner. See also enactive representation, symbolic representation,
eidetic imagery. ICSS See intercranial self-stimulation. id The
primitive part of the unconscious personality, according to Freud,
characterised by extreme emotional reactions and demands for immediate
gratification. The function of the id is to fulfil instinctual needs,
but it operates according to the pleasure principle and may be satisfied
by fantasising the desired object. Therefore, the infant has to begin to
develop the ego in order to deal with reality. ideal self-image The
internalised concept of the perfect version of ourselves that, according
to Rogers, is held by every individual. The ideal self-­concept is used
as a yardstick by which the actual self's behaviour is judged.
Accordingly, it expresses the person's internalised conditions of worth.
Highly neurotic clients are often distinguished by an unrealistically
high ideal self-concept, resulting in continual anxiety and a recurrent
sense of failure.

idealism A tendency to believe that events will occur, and people will
behave, in the best possible way. An idealist will wish and hope that
other people, as well as themselves, will behave for the best. identical
twins See monozygotic twins. identification A process seen as essential
by both social learning and psychoanalytic theorists because it is an
efficient way of acquiring new characteristics. It is the second stage
of the social learning process outlined by Bandura, the first of which
is imitation. Identification refers to the internalisation of imitative
learning, such that it becomes incorporated into the individual's
self-concept. For instance, a person starting a new job may spend the
first couple of days consciously imitating others in that role. After a
while, they come to internalise the new role and are able to generalise
their learning to novel situations. Freud proposed that models would be
chosen when they were seen as successful in solving those problems which
the person found most urgent, or had power over. During the Oedipal
phase, the strongest identification is with the parent of the same sex
as the child, and so an appropriate gender identity is formed. A person
may identify with a particular individual, or with a particular social
role. identifier codes Sets of letters or digits used to disguise the
identity of individuals participating in research. identity The sense an
individual has of the kind of person that they are. According to Eric
Erikson, the major DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

172

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

task of adolescence is to establish a stable sense of identity that will
remain relatively constant as the person moves between different
situations. A failure to achieve a secure identity results in identity
diffusion, which leaves the young adult unable to enter into commitments
or close relationships for fear of being taken over by the other person.
A more recent approach is to hold that everyone has available a range of
identities that may be called upon in different social contexts.
identity formation The process of forming an identity. The
identifications made throughout development play an important role, and
adolescents in particular will try out different kinds of identity and
use feedback from others to decide which to retain and which to abandon.
See also social identification. ideology A comprehensive belief system
with an implication for acting in prescribed ways, such as Marxism. When
the term is used to refer to psychological theories, it usually has a
critical overtone. For example, calling behaviourism an ideology implies
that its adherents have an irrational commitment to the theory.
ideomotor apraxia A condition resulting from damage to the left parietal
lobe, in which people have difficulty in planning and carrying out an
action, for example in response to a request, even though they are able
to copy such an action. idiographic Concerning or describing the
functioning of individuals, as opposed to searching for general laws of
behaviour. Idiographic approaches to human personality examine
characteristics that are considered to be common to all individuals but
which, in their operation, make each person unique. For instance,
personal construct theory

represents an idiographic approach, whereas most other psychometric
approaches, which are concerned with comparing people with one another,
do not. Because it is concerned primarily with individuals, who may
change over time, idiographic research places a greater emphasis on
validity than on reliability. See also nomothetic. idiolect An
individualised form of language use, specific to a particular individual
or small group. See also dialect. idiosyncratic Special to that
particular individual; characteristic of that person but not of most
people. idiot savants People of very low general intelligence who have
an exceptional ability in one specific area, such as being able to
perform very elaborate mental arithmetic extremely quickly. illusion
Something that tricks the senses into a false interpretation of what is
there. Illusions may operate in any sensory mode (e.g. the McGurk
illusion is an example of an auditory illusion). However, the
best-understood ones are visual illusions. These have been extensively
studied because they offer a chance to see how the visual system works.
See also constancy scaling, pareidolia. illusory conjunction When the
features of two different stimuli are mistakenly combined to produce a
perception of a single object. illusory correlation The impression that
two events or facts are connected because they happen at the same time
when really there is no such connection between them. This is another
source of bias in decision-making. illustrators Non-verbal signals that
serve to amplify or demonstrate what someone is saying. See also affect
display, emblems.

I

imagery Mental representations that recreate sensory impressions. Visual
imagery refers to an impression of something as it would be directly
seen; auditory imagery is a representation of something being heard. An
image is usually of a fairly specific object, but may sometimes be more
diffuse (e.g. an image of autumnal colours). The study of imagery has
been a major area in memory research, as it forms one of the main
systems for the encoding and representation of memories. See also
hallucination, iconic representation. imitation The understanding and
reproduction of the actions of other people. This is distinct from
simply copying a specific action or sequence of behaviour, which is
generally described as mimicry. Imitation is a social learning process
that is common in young mammals but particularly important in humans of
all ages. It provides an extremely rapid form of learning and a
mechanism of early socialisation. See also identification. immediacy of
reinforcement The concept in operant conditioning that, in order for a
particular behaviour to be learned, it must be reinforced immediately
(i.e. as soon as it has taken place). Delayed reinforcements could mean
that alternative behaviours occur in the meantime and become
accidentally strengthened through becoming associated with the
reinforcement. See also Law of Effect, superstitious learning. immediacy
principle The idea in language theory that the person is analysing for
meaning as soon as they hear the first syllable of a spoken word.

173

which the individual becomes so deeply involved in the data that they
become largely unaware of other issues. impact bias An over-estimation
of reactions to loss, exaggerating intensity and/ or duration. See also
memory bias. implacable experimenter The situation in classic
experimental research in which the experimenter appears entirely
unaffected by the participant's behaviour. This was a significantly
influential factor in Milgram's studies of obedience. See also demand
characteristics. implementation intentions Plans for action that are
consciously aimed at achieving a specific goal (e.g. weight loss), based
on specific information about how that goal could be achieved. implicit
Unspoken and/or assumed. The term is also used to refer to cognitive
processes that are not available to the conscious mind. implicit
association test (IAT) A test that provides an implicit measure of
racism by recording response times to the categorisation of words and
names. implicit attitudes Attitudes that are not overtly expressed, but
which form the cognitive underpinnings of general statements and
beliefs. For example, the idea that individualism is the dominant
feature of human psychology is a commonly held but implicit attitude
among North American researchers. See also social representations,
cultural psychology, prejudice.

immediate memory A term occasionally used instead of short-term memory.

implicit learning The learning of complex information without any
awareness that it has been learned. See also subliminal perception.

immersion A term used in phenomenological research and some other
approaches to qualitative research, in

implicit memory Memory that does not rely on conscious recollection. See
also explicit memory, non-declarative memory.

174

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

implicit memory bias The way that tests of implicit memory show a
tendency to better recall of negative information than of neutral or
positive information. See also memory bias, interpretive bias, impact
bias. implicit personality theory Ideas about how personality traits are
grouped together which are taken for granted in everyday living. For
example, traits such as 'ambitious' may automatically be grouped with
'aggressive' and 'energetic', or 'kind' might be grouped with 'gentle'
and 'peacable'. This means that individuals who are known to have one
particular characteristic are often reacted towards as if they also
possessed the full range of associated traits. They are treated in
accordance with the unspoken and assumed theory of personality held by
the people whom they encounter. See also personal construct, halo
effect. implosion therapy Otherwise known as flooding, this refers to a
technique of behaviour therapy in which the phobic individual receives
direct and extended exposure to the feared stimulus until they become
relaxed with it. For instance, someone who has had a car accident and is
frightened of going out may be repeatedly shown a film of cars
approaching them. As they become used to this, the fear dies away and,
through classical conditioning, a more relaxed attitude becomes
associated with the stimulus. See also systematic desensitisation.
impression formation The process of creating favourable or unfavourable
impressions on other people. The study of impression formation has
included research into primacy effects, non-verbal communication and
stereotyping, since all of these contribute to the judgements people
make about one another. impression management The presentation of the
self to others in as favourable a

way as possible. See also self-­presentation, social self, social
desirability scale. imprinting A rapid learning process that occurs
during a critical period shortly after birth in precocial animals such
as ducks, geese and horses, leading to diligent following of the mother
as she moves around. The 'following' behaviour can be elicited by any
moving object during the hours after birth, and the animal appears to
have a strong innate tendency to learn about and in some way identify
with the object. The learning is very resistant to change, and later in
life social and sexual behaviour may be directed at animals or objects
that resemble the imprinted stimulus. Attempts have been made to explain
the attachment of human infants to their mothers as a form of
imprinting, but the two processes are quite different, and it seems that
the main features which they had in common at the time when the theory
was proposed was that neither could be satisfactorily explained.
impulsivity A behavioural tendency to act without reflection, or to seek
immediate rewards without thought for subsequent needs. in vitro Using
laboratory methods. The term is usually used to refer to 'test-tube'
conception, in contrast to in vivo methods. in vivo Using natural
methods, as in real life. Usually used to refer to conception that has
occurred through sexual intercourse, as opposed to the creation of
embryos using in vitro methods. inattentional blindness A failure to
detect something appearing in the visual field because attention is
directed away from it. The classic example of this is the invisible
gorilla study. incentive A stimulus that has value, either positive or
negative, for an organism.

I

175

incentive theory A theory of motivation which distinguishes between the
expectation that a goal can be achieved (incentive motivation) and the
strength of the need for the goal (drive motivation). The amount of
effort made to achieve a goal is a function of both kinds of motivation,
so high drive alone may be ineffective if paired with low incentive. For
example, I would very much like a million pounds, but do not expect
success, so I am not doing anything about it. Equally, high incentive (I
am sure I could get spam for dinner if I tried) will not generate goal
(or spam) seeking if my drive is low because I do not like the stuff.
Practically, the theory indicates that if someone is not working towards
a goal, it is necessary to know whether to increase need (life will be
really wonderful if I can pass my psychology exam) or incentive (there
is still enough time to look up all the terms I do not understand).

lated at a totally subconscious level. Typically, this has been preceded
by an acquisition period, in which ideas are experimented with and
tested out, and is followed by a period of insight, and then intense
creative activity, in which the artist/writer/creator produces the final
work. Although not all creative individuals appear to operate within
this four-stage model, it seems to be a common sequence for many, and
the incubation period -- in which work on the idea seems, on the
surface, to have ceased -- is its distinctive feature. See also
creativity.

incest Sexual activity with a close relative. Because children born as a
result of incest will be likely to show undesirable genetic consequences
(inbreeding), incest is prohibited and usually illegal in most
societies. Domestic sexual abuse often involves incest. See also
Westermarck effect.

independent self A form of social identification in which the person's
goals and beliefs are seen as entirely separate from those around them.
See also allocentrism, collectivism.

incidental learning Learning that takes place without conscious
awareness or intention, simply as a result of what the animal or person
is doing. See also latent learning. inclusive fitness An evaluation of
an animal's likelihood of survival by comparison with others of the same
species. This particular form of evaluation takes 'survival' as
referring to the perpetuation of the animal's genes, rather than the
survival of the individual. See also evolution, sociobiology. incubation
period The period during the creative process in which ideas seem to
develop and become formu-

independent-measures design The kind of study that involves comparing
the scores or responses from two or more separate groups of people, such
that one group experiences one of the experimental conditions and the
other group experiences a different condition. See also
repeated-measures design.

independent t-test A two-sample statistical test for interval or ratio
data in which the two samples consist of separate and independent
individuals, which means that the test has to be able to account for
variations in the scores arising purely from individual differences. See
levels of measurement, dependent t-test. independent variable In its
classic research context, this means the variable, or set of conditions,
which is manipulated by an experimenter to bring about a result -- that
is, to cause an effect in an experiment. An independent variable may
have two or more conditions, and research participants' responses to
each of them are studied. Independent

176

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

variables may be existing features (e.g. males versus females) or be
created by the experiment (e.g. dark versus light conditions). The
variable is described as independent because it is not affected by the
experimental procedures. In statistics, the term is used slightly
differently, to refer to one of the types of influence on a given set of
scores. In analysis of variance, for example, each type of influence --
each independent variable -- is referred to as a factor, and there may
be several independent variables in a given set of research data. See
also dependent variable.

ual, and that although social contexts may exert influences, these are
only contributing factors to behaviour rather than determining it. The
opposite of social determinism, or in other contexts of collectivism.

indexing In grounded theory, this is the process of identifying and
labelling groups or categories. In writing, it is the tedious process of
developing an alphabetical list of key terms and their locations in a
book or other lengthy document.

induction Deducing general principles from a collection of specific
instances. Theories such as psychodynamics and learned helplessness have
been arrived at by a process of induction. It can be a creative process
leading to a theoretical statement that efficiently combines a large
number of individual facts. Induction contrasts with deduction, which
works in the opposite direction. The term can also be used to refer to
something being created in another person or thing. For example, if we
say that page 75 is really exciting, this may induce in you a wish to
turn to that page -- or it may induce a feeling of disbelief.

indirect reciprocity A name given to a form of altruism that involves
helping other people who may never be in a position to reciprocate
(e.g. who one may never meet again). The assumption is that there is
still some kind of benefit or exchange involved, such as reputation
enhancement, and the term derives from the determination of certain
theorists to deny the existence of simple altruistic behaviour, as in
the empathy-altruism model. See also reciprocal altruism. individual
differences The study and measurement of the significant ways in which
individuals differ from each other. Some studies of individual
differences deal only with intelligence test scores, but the area is
usually taken to include any reasonably stable characteristics or
abilities. It therefore includes personality traits and psychological
dysfunctions. individualism A reductionist approach to knowledge or
social understanding which holds that what human beings do originates
entirely within the individ-

individuation The process of becoming separate. It is used particularly
about people during the transition from adolescence to adulthood when
they separate from and become independent of their families. Jung felt
that individuation could not be fully achieved before middle age.

inductive methodology An approach to research that starts with
observation and data collection, guided as much as possible by the
phenomena being investigated. Theory comes later by a process of
induction. Grounded theory is a particularly clear example of this
approach. inductive thematic analysis This is a form of thematic
qualitative analysis which allows themes to emerge from the analysis of
the data, rather than applying predetermined themes derived from theory.
See data-driven technique. industrial psychology The application of
psychology to industrial situations.

I

Industrial psychologists study the effects of environmental influences
on people at work, of organisational influences, such as the effects of
different management structures or styles, of social relationships
within an industrial setting, or of sources of stress and industrial
accidents. See also applied psychology. infancy The period of human
development before the child is able to speak, usually taken as the
first year or two of life. infant-directed speech See motherese.
infantile autism See autism. infantile sexuality A supposition,
originating with Freud, that the sensual pleasures and motivations of
infants have a sexual basis. The issue became one of great controversy,
and in some respects rests on the definition of sexuality. However, it
is also the case that Freud was indicating a previously unrecognised
aspect of infant functioning when he pointed out the pleasure that all
infants obtain from activities such as oral stimulation and
masturbation. inferential statistics Statistics in which assessments
about probability are made. Inferential statistics usually take the form
of statistical tests, which examine the characteristics of the data sets
and estimate the likelihood that these have arisen purely through
chance. See also hypothetico-deductive method, descriptive statistics,
null hypothesis. inferential test A statistical test which allows the
researcher to make estimates of probability, such that it becomes
possible to state how likely to unlikely it is that this result would
have been obtained by chance. See statistical significance, t-test, Type
I error. inferior Towards the bottom or lower edge. See also anterior,
posterior, superior.

177

inferior colliculus A set (nucleus) of cells in the midbrain that
carries out a preliminary decoding of auditory information, much as the
nucleus known as the superior colliculus does in the visual system.
inferior occipital gyrus This is a key area in the visual cortex that
helps with facial recognition. Neurones in this area respond
preferentially to face shapes even in small babies, and develop further
as we mature. It has strong links with the superior temporal sulcus,
which is concerned with facial expression, and also with the fusiform
face area, which is concerned with recognising familiar faces. See also
face recognition unit. inferior parietal lobule This is a large area
where the occipital and parietal lobes of the cerebrum meet, and it
contains areas known to process language. Neurological studies have
shown that this area is involved in preparing and understanding speech,
decoding words, and generally processing linguistic information,
including linking together auditory and visual input when we are
understanding what others are saying to us. The area has links with
Wernicke's area and with Broca's area, as well as with both the visual
cortex and the auditory cortex. See also language pathways. information
processing An approach which analyses cognitive processes in terms of
the manipulations of information that are involved. As computers have
become capable of progressively more sophisticated operations,
information processing has become accepted as a plausible approach to
understanding perception, decision-making, etc., although it can
sometimes fail to take into account the implications of social
cognition. The approach is more directly involved with computers when
they are

178

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

used to run models of particular cognitive processes (known as a
simulation) to see how the model would work in practice. See also mental
chronometry. information theory An approach to understanding the
functioning of the brain in terms of processing of information.
Information theory uses concepts and techniques developed by engineers
studying the flow of information and has played an important role in the
study of selective attention. informed consent An agreement to
participate in a research project or other event that is based on full
knowledge and awareness of what is involved, including any foreseeable
physical, psychological or social consequences. See also presumptive
consent, prior general consent, ethical issues. infrasound Sound that is
too low in pitch to be detected by the human ear. Some animals, notably
pigeons and whales, are able to detect infrasound of extremely low
frequencies, and it has been suggested that they may use geological
sources of infrasound to help them to navigate. See also ultrasound.
in-group A name given to the main group being referred to when
describing intergroup behaviour. If social identification is seen as
being all about 'them' and 'us', then the in-group is 'us', while the
out-group is 'them'. inhibition (i)

(ii) 

The process by which a neurone becomes less likely to fire. Inhibitory
synapses raise the threshold of response for the next neurone, thus
rendering it likely to fire only in response to extreme stimuli. A
process in learning whereby a response becomes increasingly less likely
to occur with repeated

(iii) 
(iv) 

presentations of the stimulus. The term inhibition is generally used to
refer to a damping down or restraining of a behaviour, as a result of
overuse or some other kind of direct stimulation. The idea of a specific
memory becoming lost or distorted as a result of further information.
See interference. Suppression of a social response or emotional
reaction.

inhibition of return The reduced probability of returning one's
attention to a stimulus or object that has just recently been attended
to. inhibitory synapse A synapse that operates in such a way that the
nerve cell which receives its message becomes less rather than more
likely to fire, so the passage of the neural message is inhibited,
rather than passed on. Both inhibitory and excitatory synapses are
necessary for the formation of neural pathways in the brain. innate
Literally meaning inborn. It also means unlearned, or present at birth,
and is used synonymously with inherited or genetic. Compare congenital.
innate releasing mechanism (IRM) A term used by Tinbergen to refer to
the stimulus that triggers off an instinctive behaviour. Examples are
the moving shape that stimulates pecking in a young herring-­gull chick,
and that which provokes 'freezing' in turkey chicks. The behaviour
released by an IRM has direct survival value, either in avoidance of
predators or in obtaining food. Currently, the term sign stimulus is
preferred for referring to these signals, as it avoids the implicit
assumptions about internal mechanisms contained within the term IRM.
inner ear The third main division of the ear. It is that part of the ear
with

I

direct connections to the brain via the auditory nerve. The inner ear
contains the ­cochlea -- a long, fluid-filled tube containing hair cells
that transduce the vibrations of sound information into electrical
impulses. It also contains the semicircular canals, which are the major
sensors for equilibrioception, detecting the orientation of the body and
motion in a similar fashion (i.e. by means of hair cells that fire when
stimulated by motion or vibration). See also middle ear. inner scribe
The part of the visuo-spatial scratch pad that deals with spatial and
movement information. insecure attachment A type of attachment in which
the infant lacks certainty and confidence in its relationship with its
primary caregiver. Insecure attachments are generally classified into
two types: insecure/anxious attachment, and insecure/avoidant
attachment. Infants with insecure/anxious attachment show high levels of
stress on separation and are difficult to console when reunited with the
caregiver. Those with insecure/avoidant attachments are less
demonstrative although still distressed on separation, and tend to avoid
contact when reunited with the caregiver. There is some evidence that
these attachment styles may sometimes carry over to adulthood, and fMRI
studies have found differences in prefrontal cortex activity between
them. Those with avoidant attachment styles show higher activity in the
lateral prefrontal cortex in response to relationship problems, while
those with secure attachment styles show greater activity in the
orbitofrontal cortex, implying a more analytical and less emotional
approach. See also secure attachment. insight (i)

In learning or creativity, a sudden and complete realisation of

(ii) 

179

the solution to a problem, usually involving a restructuring of the
person's perceptions. The process was regarded as particularly important
by Gestalt psychologists. An awareness of one's own psychological
processes, unconscious fears and wishes, etc. Forms of psychotherapy
that work specifically to increase insight, such as psychoanalysis and
humanistic therapy, are often known as 'insight therapies'.

insight learning Learning that occurs as a result of a sudden flash of
inspiration, in which the solution to a particular problem or task is
perceived in an instant. See also learning set, aha! experience.
insomnia A general name given to the inability to achieve regular sleep.
There are many different kinds of insomnia, and also many causes of it,
but one of the most common is stress or tension. However, sleep research
shows that many insomniacs do actually sleep for far more hours than
they realise: they dream that they are lying awake. See also sleep
cycles. instinct A term now avoided as much as possible, but once used
to refer to those aspects of human experience that were deemed to have
been inherited and to be immutable. The concept of an instinct is always
directed towards function (e.g. 'an instinct for' security or
motherhood), and is therefore of very little value in describing or
explaining behaviour itself. An instinct for security might manifest
itself in a variety of ways. To one person, it might mean having money
safely invested; to another, it might mean having a comfortable home;
while to yet another, it might mean becoming increasingly self-reliant
and able to survive with as

180

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

little money as possible. Such potential diversity of behaviour means
that the concept itself is of dubious value, and has largely been
replaced by the term instinctive behaviour. instinctive behaviour
Behaviour that occurs as a result of the direct action of genes. Such
behaviour typically shows certain distinctive characteristics: (i) (ii)
(iii) (iv) (v)

stereotype (the behaviour is ­stereotyped, being fixed and not modifiable
by the individual); there is a complex sequence of behaviour, not just a
reflex response; it arises in individuals even if reared apart from
their own ­species; it does not require prior learning or practice; and
it is species-specific behaviour.

Such behaviour appears to be relatively common in fish and birds, but
rather less so among the higher animals, which tend to rely more on
adapting their behaviour through learning. See also imprinting, critical
period. institutionalisation The effect on a person of living in an
institution for a long time. Institutions such as psychiatric hospitals
are likely to develop procedures that are very different from those in
the outside world. As the inmates adapt to the regime, they develop
patterns of motivation and behaviour that could prevent them from
functioning successfully in the outside world. Ironically, the
phenomenon operates most clearly in just those institutions (e.g. mental
hospitals and prisons) that are supposed to improve the client's ability
to function within society. It has been suggested that the reason why
staff

in institutions fail to take the process of institutionalisation into
account is that they themselves are subject to it. instrumental
aggression Aggression that occurs because it will result, directly or
indirectly, in a desired outcome for the individual showing the
aggression (i.e. it serves a purpose). instrumental learning Learning
that occurs as a direct result of the beneficial or pleasant
consequences which it has for that individual. The term is often used
synonymously with operant conditioning. insula A region of the cerebral
cortex that is buried beneath the temporal lobes. The insula is involved
in pain and gustatory perception and has also been shown to have links
with the amygdala which becomes active in a wide range of emotional
experiences, including disgust, anger and happiness, and social emotions
such as gratitude, embarrassment, pride, awe and guilt. integrative
agnosia A form of agnosia in which people have difficulty combining
parts into wholes. It is usually diagnosed using Gestalt-based
perception tasks. intellectualisation A way of coping with anxieties by
denying the emotional component of a situation, and concentrating on an
abstract logical account of the details of the situation and one's own
response to it. It is one of the defence mechanisms. intelligence In
general, the ability of an individual to understand the world and work
out appropriate courses of action. Within psychology, there is no more
precise definition that is generally accepted, although the old claim
that 'intelligence is what intelligence tests measure' is uncomfortably
accurate in terms of how it is often viewed

I

in ­psychological research. See also Intelligence A, B, C, intelligence
quotient, intelligence test, triarchic intelligence. Intelligence A, B,
C Classifications developed by Hebb and Vernon in an attempt to express
the relative contributions of experience and inheritance to an
individual's intelligence. The term Intelligence A was used to describe
the total potential intelligence of an individual, given that particular
genotype and an ideal environment from conception. Intelligence B was
conceived as an unknown proportion of Intelligence A -- that amount of
their potential which the individual had been able to realise throughout
their life. Intelligence C referred to the unknown proportion of
Intelligence B that can be measured using an intelligence test. In
formulating this model, Hebb was applying the genetic distinction
between genotype and phenotype, and arguing that to talk of the relative
contributions of genetics and environment as if they were alternatives
or could be quantified was inherently misleading (see Figure 37).
intelligence quotient (IQ) A score devised by Binet in an attempt to
express the relationship between a child's mental age and its actual or
chronological age. The quotient was obtained by dividing

Intelligence A

the child's mental age (obtained by using a variety of age-related
tests) by its chronological age and then multiplying the result by 100.
This meant that 100 became the normative figure -- a child who had a
mental age appropriate for its chronological age would score 100,
children who were advanced for their years would score above 100, and
those who were behind would score below 100. Although Binet repeatedly
expressed his concern that this should not be taken as indicative of a
child's potential to learn, but simply of its achievements so far, IQ
scores have been systematically misused to represent a static measure of
the individual's intellectual capacity. In addition, despite the
normative nature of IQ scores, in many cases, they have been erroneously
treated as equalinterval data and used as the basis of elaborate
statistical calculations such as those underpinning the concept of
heritability. Such research formed the basis for such outcomes as
compulsory sterilisation laws in the USA (see eugenics) and differential
schooling systems in many countries and contributed to the concepts of
racial inferiority that resulted in the attempted genocide of the Jews
and Gypsies in the Second World War. Although the original formulation
of IQ had some diagnostic

Intelligence B Intelligence C

Figure 37 Intelligence A, B & C

181

182

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

value, its widespread misuse and abuse in society have resulted in its
use being regarded with considerable suspicion. See also mental
handicap, neurodiversity. intelligence test A standardised set of tasks
from which intelligence can be estimated. All tests should have been
fully assessed for reliability and validity, but a great variety is now
available, to some extent reflecting problems that have been identified
during the history of mental testing. Of the most widely used tests, the
Stanford--Binet test is a direct descendant of the original test devised
by Binet to give a single measure of IQ. The WAIS provides 12 subscales
that measure different aspects of intelligence. Raven's progressive
matrices attempt to eliminate cultural bias by having items and
administration that do not depend on the use of language. The British
Ability Scale was an attempt to incorporate later psychological work on
intelligent performance, such as Piaget's ideas. intentional stance This
can be defined as the tendency to explain or predict the behaviour of
others in terms of their intentions or intentional states. It has been
articulated into four different orders of intentionality, depending on
the sophistication of the assumptions made about the actor. See also
zero-order intentionality, first-order intentionality, second-order
intentionality, third-order intentionality. intentions Plans for action
or goals towards which actions are directed. See also conative domain,
paracingulate cortex. inter-observer reliability The extent to which two
observers observing the same events agree about what they have observed.
Also known as inter-rater ­reliability. interaction A situation in which
one thing reciprocally affects another, such

that an exchange takes place. The term is used particularly with
reference to social interaction. interactionist The interactionist
perspective within physiological psychology is a direct contrast to the
traditional approaches of reductionism. Rather than seeing physiology as
the direct cause of behaviour, an interactionist perspective emphasises
how environment, cognition and physiology may all have a reciprocal
effect on one another, such that each may influence the other in
achieving a given effect. Within this approach, physiological variables
that are usually regarded as causes may equally well be seen as results.
intercranial self-stimulation (ICSS) Electrical self-stimulation of the
brain, in which electrodes are placed in one of the pleasure centres of
the brain, and the individual is able to stimulate it voluntarily.
interdependent self A form of social identification in which the
individual's beliefs and goals are strongly linked with those of other
members of their family or social group. See also collectivism,
allocentrism, individualism. interference The concept in memory theory
that information may become lost or distorted because of the storage of
additional information. The interference theory of forgetting was a
popular approach in memory research throughout the 1950s and 1960s, and
it centred around the idea that memories could become displaced because
of the storage of similar information. Interference was considered to be
of two kinds: (i)

proactive interference, in which material that had been learned first
interfered with the acquisition of later information; and

I

(ii) 

retroactive interference, in which information that had been acquired at
a later stage interfered with the retrieval of previously learned
material.

intergroup behaviour The behaviour of two distinct groups towards one
another. See also social identity theory. intergroup conflict Aggression
or hostility between different social groups. See also social identity
theory, prejudice. intergroup rivalry Rivalry between groups, which in
certain circumstances can be created simply by dividing some people into
two groups, giving the groups different names, and putting them in
competition for resources. See also minimal group paradigm. intermittent
reinforcement Reinforce­ ment which is given only in some instances of
the desired behaviour and not every time that behaviour occurs. See also
schedule of reinforcement. internal attributions Attributions in which
the chosen cause is internal to the person concerned (e.g. perceiving
your examination success as having been caused by your own hard work
and/or ability, rather than by luck). The alternative would be to see
the result as arising from circumstances, in which case they would be
described as ­external (e.g. perceiving your examination success as
having been caused by just the right questions coming up rather than by
your own hard work). Internal causes are often equated to dispositional
attributions, although this sometimes creates conceptual problems (is
hard work a ­disposition?). internal consistency A measure of reliability
that looks at the similarity of results produced by those different
elements in a psychometric test which are deemed to measure the same
characteristic or trait.

183

internal--external scale A scale originally devised by Rotter in the
1960s to measure whether a person believes the causes of events to
originate within themselves (emotions, abilities, effort) or outside
(powerful other people, luck). See locus of control for one use of such
a scale, and attribution theory for another. internal locus of control
One extreme of locus of control which refers to a belief that control of
events, or more specifically of reinforcements, comes from inside the
person. See also external locus of control. internal validity In
psychometrics, the term is used to refer to the extent to which an
individual item in a test measures the same thing as the other items
relating to the same factor in that test. In phenomenological research,
the term is used for a form of validity which compares the researcher's
insights with the participants' own judgements. This is very different
from other forms of validity, as it operates from an entirely different
epistemology. See also validity, construct validity. internalisation
Making something part of oneself. Freud was concerned with the child
internalising the moral values of its parents, as expressed in their
system of rewards and punishments. The term is now used more broadly,
particularly in areas such as conformity, where its use distinguishes
research participants who have fully adopted and internalised certain
ideas from those who express them for expediency. International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD)
This is the main alternative to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders. It is produced by the World Health Organization and
differs from the DSM in that it covers

184

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

health as a whole, including mental disorders but not primarily focusing
on them. Its classification of mental disorders differs significantly
from that of DSM-V (e.g. it classifies schizotypal disorder as a mild or
arrested form of schizophrenia, whereas DSM-V classifies it as a
personality disorder). The two systems also disagree on the
classification of other kinds of personality disorders, and even how
many there are. It is the more common system used for diagnosis outside
the USA. interneurones Neurones within the central nervous system that
connect sensory input (brought by sensory neurones) with motor output
(carried by motor neurones). Also called connector neurones.
interoception Sensitivity to bodily stimuli, and in particular the
perception of movement and pain within the body. Interoception may be
conscious or unconscious. See also kinaesthesia, proprioception.
interpersonal Occurring between people. The term may apply to an
interaction between two or more people, to feelings between people, or
to other psychological processes by which two or more people influence
one another. interpersonal attraction The study of what determines
whether a person will find another individual attractive. After decades
of research investigating a great range of subtle variables, it has
emerged that people are attracted most to those whom they find
physically attractive and who are geographically close to them.
interpersonal intelligence A form of intelligence that is concerned with
how effectively the person is able to interact with other people. It
includes communicative and empathic skills as well as the ability to
relate well to others. See also multiple intelligences, emotional
intelligence.

interposition See superposition. interpretation (i) (ii) (iii)

The sense made of events or stimuli by people in their everyday lives.
Meaningful translation from one language to another often carried out in
the immediate context. A trained skill used by therapists, which aims to
identify significant unconscious conflicts in order to clarify and deal
with them.

In psychotherapy, it refers to the activity of the therapist in pointing
out underlying meanings in the patient's activities or cognitions. In
psychodynamic therapy, interpretations are made to uncover the defence
mechanisms of the patient and to describe the patient's transference
reactions, with the aim of making the patient's unconscious processes
explicit. interpretive bias The tendency for people to perceive
ambiguous stimuli or situations as being potentially threatening.
interpretive repertoire The range of images and metaphors used in
conversation to make sense of or illustrate a particular perspective or
set of ideas. interpretivism An approach to social research which starts
from the position that it is the meanings of any given experience which
are important. Interpretivism developed within psychology in opposition
to the idea that it is meaningful to study objective reality. Personal
construct theory is a good example of interpretivism. See also
hermeneutics. interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA) is an
approach to idiographic qualitative research which is based on
participants' accounts with a focus on their

I

experience and meanings. Developed and promoted by Jonathan Smith, the
term is usually abbreviated to IPA as this is easier to say.
interquartile range The spread of a set of scores between the end of the
first quartile and the start of the fourth quartile (i.e. between the
25th and 75th percentage points) of a distribution. See also
semi-interquartile range. inter-rater reliability The extent to which
two independent raters of the same object, behaviour or event (e.g. of
the attractiveness of photographs), or on the way that the same data-set
should be coded or evaluated. A high inter-rater reliability is
essential if a measure or test is to be relied on. See also reliability.
interstitial fluid The fluid that surrounds cells in the body and brain.
interval scale See equal-interval scale. intervening variable An
unobservable process that is proposed to account for the relationship
between input and output. The characteristics of intervening variables
can be studied by manipulating the independent variable and observing
the effects on the dependent variable. interview A conversation between
a professional and a respondent designed to provide the professional
with a certain kind of information. The nature of the interview will be
influenced by its function, which may be an evaluation of the respondent
(for a job, therapeutic purpose, or research). The form of the interview
may be fully specified in advance, as in a structured interview, and
resemble a verbally administered questionnaire -- a form of interview
commonly used in marketing research. Research interviews

185

usually have a list of open questions, which indicate to the participant
the areas for discussion, but allow new areas of interest to be
explored, as in semi-structured interviews. A selection interview may
also be planned in more or less detail, or be conducted without any
prior consideration of what information is wanted and how it is to be
obtained. Research has shown interviews to be an inaccurate method of
selecting people for jobs, but this may be because the interviews
studied had not been carefully constructed with clear objectives. See
also depth interview, focus group, rapport interview and transcription.
interview schedule A set of questions and their organisation or
sequencing which has been designed for use in interview research.
interview transcript A precise written description of the verbal
exchanges or other (usually verbal) activities which have taken place
during an interview. interviewer effects The usually unwanted effects
that an interviewer can have on the respondent to an interview. The
respondent may, for example, be influenced by their values, motivation
to obtain a particular result, or the personal qualities of the
interviewer. These effects can operate through the structuring of
interview questions, leading the participants to talk about particular
topics in a particular way, through non-verbal cues by the interviewer,
or other features of the interview which affect the process without
either participant being aware of them. Researchers working within a
positivist paradigm would regard interviewer effects as a contamination
of the objective reality that the research is investigating, and
therefore to be

186

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

eliminated if possible. Constructionist researchers see the interview
itself as defined by the interaction between the interviewer and
respondent, in which case it would make no sense to talk about
eliminating the effect of the interviewer. Instead, it should be
reflexively reported as accurately as possible. See also depth
interview, focus group. intrapersonal Within the person -- a term used
to refer to internal processes that do not involve interaction with
others. intrapersonal intelligence A form of intelligence proposed by
Gardner, concerning the awareness the individual has of their own
internal habits and thought processes See multiple intelligences.
intrinsic Internal, or deriving from internal, pre-existing factors. See
also intrinsic motivation, extrinsic. intrinsic motivation Motivation
that comes from the nature of an activity rather than from an external
reward (extrinsic motivation). Examples are being motivated by pride in
achievement or pleasure derived from the activity. introspection The
process of self-­ examination, or looking within one's own experience in
order to gain insight into psychological phenomena. Although notoriously
unreliable in many respects, introspection can sometimes provide
valuable insights that could otherwise be missed. introspectionism A
school of thought, prevalent in the early years of psychology as an
independent discipline from philosophy, in which investigations were
conducted through systematic and often detailed introspection by one or
two highly trained psychologists. Although castigated as 'armchair
psychology' by the early behaviourists, this technique established
several important theoretical

perspectives, such as those outlined in James' 'Principles of
Psychology', which in many cases are still of use to modern psychology.
With the advent of behaviourism in the first part of the twentieth
century, introspectionism as a technique became disregarded, but in
recent years it has re-emerged to a limited extent within the
phenomenology school of modern psychologists, and also, in a structured
form, through the use of protocol analysis. introversion A dimension of
personality in which people are quiet, reserved, and find social
situations stressful. In the Eysenck Personality Inventory, it is the
opposite of extraversion. See also ambivert. intuiting This is the third
stage of phenomenological research, in which the researcher takes an
open-minded approach to the data and identifies insights which arise as
a result. See also internal validity. intuitive definitions Definitions
that have been adopted or used because they 'feel right' to the person
using them, rather than because they have been verified according to
extrinsic or objective criteria. invariants Things that don't vary. In
Gibson's theory of ecological perception, these are the properties of
the optic array that don't change when other aspects do. invasiveness A
term used in neuropsychology to refer to whether a measuring technique
is located entirely externally, as in fMRI scans, or whether it involves
adjustments to the internal state of the body (e.g. the ingestion of
radioactive isotopes prior to PET scans). inverse problem The problem
that results from taking measurements of event-related potential at the
level of the scalp, and trying to infer the specific neural activity
which has produced

I

that result, out of a potentially infinite number of possibilities. See
also dipole modelling. invisible gorilla A now-classic study by Simons
and Chabris (1999), in which participants were so focused on counting
passes in a basketball game that they entirely failed to notice a person
in a gorilla suit crossing the front of the screen image and even
stopping in midscreen to gesture. It is cited as a clear illustration of
­inattentional blindness. invisible observer The idea in an observational
study that familiarity with the observer's presence will eventually mean
that the observer is no longer noticed and has no effect on the
behaviour of those being observed. In hypnosis, the term is sometimes
used for that part of consciousness which is aware and detached from the
hypnotic state and observing what is going on. involuntary response A
reaction or reflex which is produced to a stimulus regardless of the
individual's conscious intervention or inclinations. See also
unconditioned response. iodopsin A form of light-sensitive pigment found
in the cone cells of the retina, which responds to coloured light by
changing the electrical polarity of the cell, and so contributing to an
electrical impulse. See also rhodopsin, photopsin. ionotropic receptors
Receptors that open or close in ionic channels in response to the
presence of a particular neurotransmitter. Iowa gambling task A
problem-solving task sometimes used to identify lesions

187

in the ventromedial frontal cortex. The task involves a card game in
which people have to learn to avoid making risky choices, producing a
net loss, in favour of less risky and more rewarding choices. IPA see
interpretative phenomenological analysis. ipsative Assessed or measured
by comparison with the self. Ipsative scales involve the individual
using their own values or behaviour as the yardstick by which
comparisons and evaluations are made. See also normative. ipsilateral
Belonging to, or relevant to, the same side. The prefix 'ips-' usually
means 'of one's own'. IQ See intelligence quotient. IRM See innate
releasing mechanism. iteration A complete sequence of processing steps
or stages. In data analysis, for example, some procedures for
qualitative analysis require the analysis to undergo several iterations
-- i.e. they require the analytical process to be repeated several
times, with each repetition of the procedure being performed on the
information obtained from the previous one. Each full sequence, or
iteration, reveals different levels of meaning in the data. See also
grounded theory. iterative A procedure in which the same action or
procedure is carried out repeatedly, in order to achieve further
refinement or a closer approach to a goal. Each round of action gets
closer to the objective until it is achieved or sufficiently well
approximated.

J Jahoda, Marie (1907--2001) Marie Jahoda was a social psychologist who
maintained a firm belief in equity and social justice throughout her
life. Born and educated in Austria, she was imprisoned in 1936 for
supporting the socialist movement against a political background of
growing support for fascism. Released in 1937 as a result of foreign
appeals, she went to Cambridge University for the duration of the war,
spent from 1945 to 1958 in the USA before returning to Britain, where
she was influential in the development of the psychology of prejudice.
Her most famous work was a detailed longitudinal case study of the
psychology of unemployment, drawing data and examples from Marienthal,
where a sudden shut-down of a flax mill had removed the only significant
source of employment in the village, and showing how initial resilience
eventually morphed into despair.

James, William (1842--1910) Widely considered to be one of the 'founding
figures' of modern psychology, James exerted most of his influence
through his major textbook 'Principles of Psychology', published in
1890, in which he explored the nature of the human mind. He took the
view that consciousness could either come through the 'front door'
(i.e. learned from scratch by the individual), or through the 'back
door' (i.e. shaped by our evolutionary history). Many of his insights
into the nature of experience are still taken as the starting point for
the teaching of psychological topics such as emotions (as in the
James--Lange theory) and infant cognition. His approach to investigation
is considered a prototypical example of introspectionism, and in later
years he became more concerned with philosophy than with psychology
itself. James--Lange theory An early theory of emotion which argued that
the experience of emotion arises from the perception of physiological
changes in the body, brought about by the emotional stimulus. In other
words, the physiological changes occur first, and the emotion is simply
the perception of DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

those changes. See also alarm reaction, Cannon--Bard theory. jargon
aphasia A condition arising from brain damage in which the person's
speech is reasonably grammatical, but they have severe problems in
accessing the appropriate words for what they want to say

J

189

and tend to replace them with different, sometimes similar words. To the
listener, therefore, they appear to be producing meaningless jargon. See
also neologism.

Jungian Pertaining to the psychoanalytic system developed by Carl Jung,
sometimes also referred to as analytical psychology.

jet lag A syndrome in which a person's circadian rhythms become out of
phase with the surrounding environment, as a result of the rapid
crossing of time zones during long-distance travel. This produces
feelings of extreme fatigue, and in some cases disorientation, sometimes
lasting for several days until the individual has fully adjusted to a
new time system.

just noticeable difference (jnd) The smallest change of stimulus that an
individual is able to detect consistently for 50 per cent of the time.
The amount of the jnd varies as a proportion of the intensity of the
stimulus that is changing. For instance, a relatively larger change is
necessary before a difference in the volume of a loud sound is detected,
than for a relatively quiet sound. See also Fechner's law, Weber's law.

jnd See just noticeable difference. joint attention The sharing of
attention between two or more people, all focusing on the same object or
location. See also gaze cueing, postural echo. judgement In cognitive
psychology, the term is taken to mean an assessment of the probability
of a given event occurring, usually based on incomplete information.

just world hypothesis The idea that everything works out fairly in the
end, so that people, by and large, get what they deserve. juvenile
delinquent A young person who has been convicted of a criminal offence.

Jung, Carl Gustav (1875--1961) Jung was an early disciple and
collaborator of Freud but separated from him in 1913 to investigate the
unconscious basis for symbolism and myths, which he believed existed in
similar forms in all cultures. He argued that the unconscious keeps
contact with ancient insights which were lost to the conscious mind as
industrial society developed. Jung's analytical psychology was based on
the idea of archetypes -- powerful symbols that are embedded deep in the
collective unconscious of humankind. Certain everyday occurrences or
symbols are invested with powerful significance through synchronicity --
a direct connection with the collective unconscious. Archetypes, Jung
believed, exert an unrecognised influence, identifiable through everyday
symbols and through dreams. For a time, Jung's theorising led him to an
involvement with parapsychology, giving him a reputation for mysticism.
His idea of psychological types is the basis for the Myers Briggs Type
Indicator -- a reasonably popular psychometric test used in occupational
psychology. He also developed the concept of introversion--extraversion,
which was subsequently adopted by Eysenck (perhaps the least similar
psychologist possible).

K Kelly, George (1905--1966) George Kelly founded personal construct
theory, which formed the basis of cognitive approaches to psychotherapy.
Kelly was impressed by the different ways in which people perceive and
understand the same events. He proposed that all cognition is based on
personal constructs, by which we distinguish between people and events
by the criteria that we have learned are most useful. His concept of
'constructive alternativism' pointed out that we cannot deal in absolute
truths, and proposed that we should focus instead on the varied ways in
which people make sense of their worlds. Kelly's theory is based around
the idea of 'man as scientist' -- that we are continually searching for
better ways of understanding and prediction. Kelly also generated the
memorable quote: 'If you don't know what's wrong with the patient, ask
him. He may tell you,' which was a direct challenge to the dominant
ethos of the time, which assumed that the expert is the only one who
knows anything. He developed the repertory grid as a way of recording
constructs, and he was rather disappointed that the test became better
known than the much more important theory behind it. He pointed out that
most psychological theories account for the behaviour of 'subjects', but
not for the activities of psychologists, whereas a good theory would be
reflexive -- both applying to itself and explaining its own existence.
key example The use of a specific case in preference to others in a
study because it represents a significant example of, or provides
important information about, the topic under investigation. key word
method A mnemonic technique for learning the meanings of technical or
foreign terms. It involves identifying a familiar word derived from the
sound of the unknown one. A visual image is formed linking this key word
with the meaning of the word to be learned. The visual image forms a
link between the perceived sound of the new word and its meaning.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

kibbutz An Israeli community in which property and responsibility are
held in common by all members of the kibbutz (kibbutzniks). Many
kibbutzim have communal child-rearing systems, which were intensively
studied in the 1960s. The then-current theoretical ideas on
mother--infant bonding implied that children would become
psychologically damaged if they were not kept with their mother, but
little evidence for this was found among the communally reared children
of the kibbutzim. See also metapelet. kin selection A concept put
forward in sociobiology, kin selection involves the

K

idea that an individual may protect their genes for the future by
protecting not just their offspring, but other relatives who share them.
Since siblings share on average 50 per cent of their genes, the
individual can ensure that a proportion of the genes survive by
protecting their siblings. The concept is used to explain behaviour that
is apparently altruistic, such as the self-sacrificing behaviour of
worker ants. It is, however, open to question how far the behaviour of
ants has relevance for human beings, and examples from animals closer to
humans on the phylogenetic scale are distinctly lacking. kinaesthesia A
form of sensory perception that identifies movement of the body or parts
of the body. It involves receptors in the muscles, tendons, joints, and
the vestibular system of the inner ear, some of which are also involved
in proprioception, but the difference is that kinaesthesia involves the
perception of movement while proprioception involves the perception of
position. See also equilibrioception. kinaesthetic To do with sensations
of movement. kinesics The study of human movement patterns and the types
of communication that use them. Kinesics is a major area in the study of
non-verbal communication, involving gestures and changes of posture and
gait. Klinefelter's syndrome A condition in which a man has inherited an
extra X-chromosome, having an XXY group of sex chromosomes instead of an
XY pair. Such individuals are usually clearly male, but can sometimes
show some female secondary sexual characteristics. Kluver-Bucy syndrome
A syndrome observed in monkeys after bilateral

191

lesions of the amygdala. It consists of unusual calmness and tameness,
dietary changes, and an increased tendency to examine objects with the
mouth. It has been proposed that these changes arise from objects having
lost their emotional connotations for the animal, owing to the lesions.
knowledge-based errors Mistakes or errors that arise from the people
concerned having the wrong factual information, and so taking
inappropriate actions when an emergency arises. Compare skill-based
errors. knowledge effect The tendency to assume that other people
possess the same information as you do. knowledge frame The set of
assumptions and information within which a particular problem is
located. The knowledge frame defines what counts as relevant information
and needs to be taken into account when making decisions and selecting
what information is to be discarded or ignored. See also
decision-making. knowledge-lean problems Problems that can be solved
without the need to apply specifically relevant prior k­ nowledge.
knowledge-rich problems Problems that can only be solved with the use of
considerable background information. Korsakoff's syndrome A condition
acquired by long-term alcoholics who have combined heavy drinking with
eating too little, resulting in an extended period of thiamine
deficiency. Korsakoff's syndrome patients demonstrate severe and
apparently irreversible proactive amnesia, such that they are unable to
retain new information, while still maintaining their repertoire of
basic skills. While conversational topics remain on a general level,
many Korsakoff sufferers remain undi-

192

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

agnosed. An attempt to retrieve current information often reveals the
deficit. Kruskal--Wallis test A test for statistically significant
differences between three or more samples, which can be used when
analysis of variance is not appropriate. See also levels of measurement.

kurtosis The overall shape of the normal distribution curve -- that is,
how much the scores in a particular sample cluster towards the middle or
towards the ends of the distribution, making the curve tall and thin or
wide and flat. See also skewed distribution curve, positive skew,
leptokurtic, platykurtic.

L labelling When a label is applied to someone, there is a tendency for
that person to be seen, both by others and often also by themselves, as
having all of the characteristics implied by the label, and being
nothing more than that. Therefore, labelling someone as schizophrenic or
depressive can cause them to be treated as less than a whole person,
since all of their behaviour is likely to be interpreted in terms of the
illness, as schizophrenic or depressed behaviour. This tendency can be
resisted by insisting on referring to 'a person with depression' rather
than 'a depressive', but the tendency remains difficult to avoid. The
study of labelling and its implications is an important part of social
psychology and has been so ever since the discovery of the
self-fulfilling prophecy. See also stereotype. labile Changeable, or
likely to alter rapidly. The term is often used of emotional states or
autonomic arousal.

laboratory observation A non-­ interventional study of the behaviour of
individuals, groups or animals which takes place in a formal research
setting. LACS See Leeds Attributional Coding System. LAD See language
acquisition device. laddering A technique drawn from personal construct
therapy, which involves asking questions that become progressively more
personal or intense, with each being based on the response to the
previous question. laissez-faire Allowing people to get on with things
in their own way. It is used to indicate a leadership style in which
most of the responsibility for action is left with the group, rather
than assumed by the leader, but has also been applied to child-rearing
styles. Groups with ­laissez-faire leadership tend not to be as
productive as others, but some findings suggest that they continue to
­operate

Laing, R.D. (1927--1989) The psychiatrist R.D. Laing was most famous for
applying the philosophical approach of existentialism to psychiatry and
social psychology. In doing so, he examined some of the less positive
aspects of social living such as the mind games or 'knots' that people
use to confound and manipulate others emotionally. He developed a major
alternative explanation for schizophrenia, in which he asserted that the
primary cause of schizophrenia was not medical, but social, arising from
disturbed relationships within the family. Although refuted by the
medical establishment at the time, and challenged by some later
researchers, his work drew attention to the importance of social
stressors, and the influences that these exert on vulnerable people. See
also vulnerability model. DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

194

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

better than other groups when the leader is absent. Lamarckian genetics
The theory of genetic transmission proposed by Lamarck at the beginning
of the twentieth century. This model proposed that characteristics which
an individual acquires during their own lifetime can be passed on to
their offspring. For example, it was suggested that giraffes had
acquired long necks because they had had to stretch upwards for food,
and the elongation caused by stretching had been inherited by the next
generation. Although now thoroughly discredited as a model, Lamarckian
genetics influenced a number of other theories, most notably Piaget's
model of cognitive development. See also genetics, Mendelian genetics.
language The complex system of communication that involves the
organisation of words into meaningful combinations. Although most people
would agree that the use of language is a distinctively human attribute,
the lack of a precise definition of what exactly language is makes it
difficult to decide whether such phenomena as bird songs, bee dances, or
whatever can be taught to chimpanzees in this line, should be called
language. However, it is generally accepted that language involves
symbolic representation, and that there are distinct rules concerning
acceptable combinations of the elements of language (usually words)
which do not permit all possible combinations to be regarded as
meaningful. Language can be studied on a number of levels, which may be
broadly classified as lexical (concerning the word units themselves and
their referents), syntactic (concerning the rules for combining words
into meaningful utterances) and semantic (concerning the meaning of what
is said). The use of analogy and metaphor in language means that the
lexical characteristics of an utterance

may not be identical with its semantic characteristics (e.g. describing
someone as 'burning' with enthusiasm). Psychologists have also studied
social aspects of language use, such as the impact of accents or sexist
language, and recently much research attention has been devoted to
discourse analysis (looking at the way in which language is used in
complete conversations). See also paralanguage, psycholinguistics,
sociolinguistics, verbal deprivation hypothesis, language areas, McGurk
illusion. language acquisition A term used to describe how language is
learned by small children. The term 'acquisition' is used in preference
to 'learning' as a result of heated debates about the precise mechanisms
involved. It is considered to be more non-committal. See language
acquisition device. language acquisition device (LAD) A mechanism
proposed by Chomsky to explain the extreme rapidity with which young
children develop speech. He argued that the young infant is born with an
innate language acquisition device, which enables it to extract basic
rules of grammar from the speech heard around it. Moreover, Chomsky
asserted that this occurs as a more or less automatic process -- all
that is required is that the child hears or experiences language used by
others. In view of an increasing body of research indicating that human
interaction forms a fundamental part of speech acquisition, later
theorists have modified this concept, preferring instead to talk of a
language acquisition system, or LAS, which allows for rather more active
involvement on the part of the child than simply passive decoding. See
also deep structure, surface structure. language areas Specific parts of
the cerebral cortex, usually (although not

L

always) located on the left hemisphere, and mediating the functions of
language. For many decades, three main language areas were identified:
Broca's area, which is largely responsible for speech production and the
formulation of appropriate words; Wernicke's area, which is concerned
with the comprehension of speech; and the angular gyrus, which receives
information concerned with the written word from the visual cortex and
converts it into soundequivalent representations for decoding in
Wernicke's area. However, modern scanning research shows that the actual
processes of language are more complex. See language pathways. language
pathways Different types of language information take different routes
through the brain. Hearing and understanding speech, for example,
involves neurological processing in a special area below the primary
auditory cortex, which identifies speech sounds as meaningful, and then
passes that information on to the inferior parietal lobule, where it
connects with visual information about facial movements from the
speaker: lip-reading is an intrinsic part of the brain's processing of
spoken language. Understanding speech

195

also involves connections with the supramarginal gyrus, which is
associated with both word choice and empathy. Speaking itself involves
several areas in the frontal lobes, including the prefrontal cortex
which deals with intentions as well as the premotor cortex and Broca's
area (Figure 38). See also N400, P600. larynx The organ in the neck of
mammals that is involved in sound production. The larynx is particularly
important in human beings as its flexibility offers a wide range of
possible phonemes, making possible the use of spoken language. late
selection models Models of selective attention which suggest that any
filtering or selection occurs at a late stage in cognitive processing,
rather than when the information is first received. See also filter
models. latency period In Freudian theory, the period from the end of
the Oedipal stage around six years, until the onset of puberty and the
beginnings of genital sexuality. Freud saw this as a relatively calm
period of the child's development. latent Unrevealed and inoperative,
but nonetheless present and liable to become active or relevant if
situations change. See also latent learning.

Figure 38 Some language pathways in the brain

196

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Lashley, Karl (1890--1958) Karl Lashley was one of the first significant
researchers into the relationship between memory and the cerebral cortex
of the brain. His most significant discoveries were the principle of
mass action and the principle of equipotentiality. The principle of mass
action states that with regard to memory, it is the overall amount of
functioning cortex that is important rather than specific areas, and the
principle of equipotentiality was concerned with how other areas of the
cortex could take over memory functions in response to brain damage.
Lashley's research, although outdated in the light of recent brain
scanning, was important in highlighting that, although some brain
functions were localised, higher ones such as memory and thinking
appeared to utilise the whole cortex rather than small areas. latent
content The underlying and usually hidden meanings in the account
provided by a patient in psychoanalysis. The term is usually used about
dreams, which Freud thought were particularly rich in indications of
unconscious processes for anyone who could see past the manifest
content. See also dreamwork.

nerve from the eyes. The first synapse of the optic nerve is found at
this point, and some basic perceptual organisation seems to occur here,
namely the sorting of the visual information by means of simple cells,
complex cells and hypercomplex cells, such that hypercomplex cells fire
in response to simple patterns and shapes.

latent learning A system of learning, first demonstrated in 1932 by
Tolman, who presented clear empirical evidence that even laboratory rats
could form internal cognitive representations of a complex maze (e.g. in
Figure 39), and that learning need not necessarily be manifested
immediately in behaviour but might remain latent until it was
advantageous to use it. Latent learning was important as a concept
because it provided a counter to the behaviourist argument that learning
and changes in behaviour were synonymous.

lateral hypothalamus (LH) A part of the hypothalamus that has been shown
to affect the intake of food in experimental animals, and is thought to
be implicated in human eating disorders. Electrical stimulation of the
lateral hypothalamus induces eating behaviour in some animals, while its
removal or destruction results in the animal ceasing to eat. See also
ESB.

lateral On the side of the body or body segment. See also medial,
ventral, dorsal.

lateral inter-parietal area (LIP) An area of the brain that responds to
relevant environmental stimuli in the planning of the direction of eye
movements. See also visual system.

lateral fissure A long fissure, found at the side of each cerebral
hemisphere, which serves as the boundary between the temporal lobe and
the frontal lobe. lateral geniculate nuclei A group of cells found in
the thalamus, which receive information carried along the optic

lateral inhibition The reduction of activity in one neurone caused by
the activation of a neighbouring neurone.

lateral prefrontal cortex A part of the brain that appears to be
actively involved in tasks requiring the control or evaluation of
neutral stimuli or

L

197

curtains one-way doors

start box

goal box

Figure 39 A maze used to test latent learning information. See also
prefrontal cortex, multiple-demand network. lateral premotor cortex This
is part of the premotor cortex. It receives visual information from the
parietal lobe and is particularly concerned with acting on objects in
the immediate environment, such as reaching for a cup of tea or tapping
a screen. See also medial premotor cortex. lateral thinking Thinking
that involves a 'sideways leap' from conventional attempts to solve a
problem, and which reaches a solution by adopting novel tactics or by
reformulating the problem in an unusual manner. Lateral thinking has
been promoted since the 1960s by Edward de Bono, and involved a search
for originality and flexibility in mental operations that would
counteract

sterile and hidebound problem-solving practices, both in management and
in day-to-day problem-solving. Divergent thinking has a similar meaning.
See also creativity, brainstorming, groupthink. laterality
Specialisation of function on one side. The term is used both of
handedness and of the specialisation of function in either the left or
right hemisphere of the brain. See, e.g., language areas. Latin square
An experimental design in which the set of conditions is presented as if
in a grid, with each condition appearing once in each column and once in
each row. Each condition therefore has the same average position in the
sequence. Each of four participants experiences a different row of the
square, to eliminate order effects.

198

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

However, in the usual form, a Latin square does not avoid the possible
influence of one condition on the next (see Figure 40). Latin square
counterbalancing A way of organising the conditions of an experiment in
order to control for order or practice effects. It is similar to the
ABBA design, but suitable for three or more conditions. Law of Effect
The principle, developed by Thorndike in 1911, that a response which was
followed by a pleasant consequence would be more likely to be repeated.
This idea was developed and amplified by B.F. Skinner in his work on
operant conditioning. Law of Effort A principle developed as a result of
investigations into imprinting in ducklings, in which it was observed
that the more effort a duckling had to put into following its imprinted
'parent' around, the stronger the attachment bond would become. Law of
Exercise The principle of associative learning, which stated that a
learned

Figure 40 A Latin square

connection between a stimulus and a response would be established by the
repetition of their association. In other words, if they occurred
together often enough, they would become associated together, and
learning would have occurred. This concept was later developed more
fully by Pavlov in his research on classical conditioning. Law of Mass
Action A principle formulated by Lashley as a result of investigations
into the role of the association cortex in learning. He found that much
of the cerebral cortex appeared to have non-localised functioning, but
instead seemed to function as a mass -- the more there was of it, the
more effective the learning ; or alternatively, the greater the amount
destroyed, the greater the learning impediment. See also
equipotentiality. Law of Parsimony See Occam's razor. Law of Prägnanz
The principle by which meaningfulness and the organisation of visual
stimuli occurs, according to Gestalt psychologists. The Law of

L

Prägnanz is concerned with the ways in which perceptual organisation
occurs through the subsidiary principles of proximity, similarity,
closure and 'good Gestalt', such that we see meaningful figures against
backgrounds, rather than just a jumbled mass of disparate elements of
visual information (see Figure 41). lay epistemology An approach
articulated by Kruglanski, lay epistemology represents an attempt to
structure the processes by which social attributions and social
representations become incorporated into the individual's personal
knowledge frameworks and used as 'common sense'. One of the distinctive
processes identified in studies of lay epistemology is that of
'freezing', in which the person latches on to one specific explanation
and then does not change it, even in the face of directly contradictory
information: a mechanism commonly found in conspiracy theories. lay
knowledge The everyday information or beliefs held by ordinary people.
leadership style Patterns of behaviour by designated group leaders that

Figure 41 Gestalt principles of perception

199

have emerged from empirical studies in organisational psychology. One
division is between task-oriented leaders whose efforts are directed
towards getting the job done, and maintenance-oriented leaders who pay
more attention to ensuring that the group is working together well.
Other forms of leadership are authoritarian, authoritative (maintaining
authority through example and negotiation), democratic (working through
persuasion and consensus), and laissez-faire (largely leaving the group
to find its own solutions). Similar styles have been identified in
studies of parenting. See also child-rearing styles. learned
helplessness A concept demonstrated experimentally by Martin Seligman in
the 1970s. He showed that animals which had received unpleasant
experiences about which they could do nothing were less ready to
undertake action in a similar situation but where a relatively simple
response would avert an unpleasant experience. Instead, the animals
would remain passive and do little to help themselves, not even
struggling. Seligman drew parallels between the behaviours shown by
animals in this condition and the behaviours associated with depression
in humans. From these parallels, he developed helplessness theory, which
proposes that (some) depression may result from a belief of having no
control over bad events. Subsequently, the theory was revised by
Seligman and others in terms of attribution theory. See also learned
optimism. learned optimism A process proposed by Martin Seligman in the
1990s. Having spent several of the previous decades exploring learned
helplessness, Seligman then turned his attention to positive thinking
and identified a style of thinking characterised by distinctive
attributional patterns and a deliberate

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

attempt to identify positive aspects of events. His research showed
learned optimism to be mentally healthy and a significant tool in stress
management. See also positive psychology. learning A relatively
permanent change in knowledge, behaviour or understanding that results
from experience. Innate behaviours, maturation and fatigue are excluded.
Learning used to be claimed as the core phenomenon of psychology,
although in practice the field often seemed to have operated by
producing a theory and then defining learning as being whatever that
theory explains. Specialist areas include modelling and imitation, motor
skills, insight, the formation of schemata, creativity, habituation and
conditioning. The learning of specific skills such as language are areas
of study in their own right. See also behaviourism, connectionism.
learning curve The graph obtained when a measure of competence is
plotted against the number of learning trials the animal or person has
had. The learning curve has a characteristic shape, but this is usually
achieved rather artificially, by averaging together a large number of
learning curves. Individual curves may be much less regular (see Figure
42). learning difficulty A general term used to refer to people with
limited cognitive ability who would in earlier days have been said to
have mental handicap. It is often used in the form 'people with learning
difficulties' in an attempt to reduce the effect of labelling. The term
is somewhat unsatisfactory because, by only referring to learning, it
understates the difficulties experienced by this group of people and
their carers. See specific learning difficulties, neurodiversity.
learning set A generalised style of learning, or state of preparedness
to solve

time taken to complete task

200

number of trials

Figure 42 A learning curve problems in certain ways, which has been
acquired through experience with similar types of problems. Possession
of a learning set means that the individual is likely to look for that
kind of solution in preference to any alternative strategy. Where
problems are similar, learning sets may be advantageous, but they may
prove a hindrance to the individual faced with a problem that requires a
novel approach. See also insight learning. learning theory A theory
about how learning occurs. Note that, as discussed under learning, the
theory is not specifically about what learning is, since that tends to
be assumed at the outset, although its definition may be modified as the
theory develops. Some theories, such as operant conditioning, are
presented as accounting for practically all learning, while others deal
with a particular type (e.g. insight learning). There are also theories
for specific phenomena such as transfer of training and modelling. Leeds
Attributional Coding System (LACS) A technique for attributional
analysis developed by Stratton et al. in 1986, in which attributions
made during interviews and other verbatim sources

L

are analysed in terms of five dimensions: stable/unstable,
global/specific, internal/ external, personal/universal, and
controllable/uncontrollable. As an alternative to covariance theory, the
LACS has been found to be useful in family therapy, as well as in other
contexts (e.g. the qualitative analysis of information provided by focus
groups). left brain A commonly used term indicative of a popular
misconception about brain functioning. See also hemisphere bias. left
hemisphere The left half of the cerebrum. The cerebrum is divided into
two hemispheres by a deep fissure. In most people, the left hemisphere
contains the language areas and is also thought to be concerned with the
general functions of logic and numeracy. It is sometimes referred to as
the dominant hemisphere, as functions from the left hemisphere will
usually override those from the right hemisphere. However, differences
in functions between the two areas have been seriously exaggerated. See
hemisphere bias. lemma A word used to describe a hypothetical early,
abstract form of a word that has not yet been outputted by the speech
system. leptokurtic A statistical distribution of scores with very few
extremes, so the curve appears pointed towards the centre. See also
normal distribution, kurtosis. lesbian A female person who is sexually
attracted to members of her own sex. lesion A term used to refer to
damage to organic tissue, usually used by psychologists to refer to
brain or neural injury. Lesions may be surgical or accidental and may
take the form of cutting of specific fibres or pathways, or of general
damage (e.g. damage caused by the impact of a heavy object).

201

leucotomy A form of psychosurgery that involves severing the main
connections between the frontal lobe and the rest of the brain.
Leucotomy was introduced as a less drastic alternative to lobotomy and
has been shown to produce difficulty with decision-making and a
limitation of impulsive behaviour. Rarely carried out in the modern
world, although not yet entirely defunct, it is a contentious operation,
since its effects (i) are irreversible and (ii) can be seen as a form of
social control. levels of analysis Ways of describing a phenomenon, for
example, a human activity, at different degrees of specificity or
generality. For example, an arm movement might be described at the
physiological level in terms of muscle or motor nerve actions, or at the
interpersonal level as an aggressive act designed to intimidate.
Different levels of analysis cannot readily be converted into each other
(see reductionism), so several levels of analysis are needed for a full
description or understanding of complex events, especially human
activity. levels of explanation See levels of analysis. levels of
measurement Types of measurement that differ in how far they can be
manipulated mathematically. The lowest level of measurement is known as
nominal data, which is information that cannot be ranged on a scale but
can only be organised into different categories. The next level is
ordinal data, which are data that can be put into a definable order, or
sequence, and so can be ranked, although no information can be provided
about the size of the difference between any two items. For example, if
colours are arranged in order of preference, it is possible to say that
one colour is liked more than another, but it is not possible to be
numerically precise about how much more it is

202

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

liked. The third level of measurement is equal-interval data, in which
the measurements can be ordered on a scale that has equal intervals
(e.g. measurements of temperature in degrees Fahrenheit or Celsius). The
highest level of measurement is known as ratio data, which is
equal-interval data with an absolute zero, such that it is possible to
describe one score as a precise proportion of another. Because
temperature in degrees Celsius is only an interval scale, there is no
sense in which 40 degrees is twice as hot as 20 degrees. However, height
is a ratio scale, so two metres is twice as high as one metre. See also
nominal scale, ordinal scale.

\% words recalled correctly

levels of processing A theory of memory proposed by Craik and Lockhart,

which argues that information may be processed at a number of levels
depending on how it is organised, linked with other memories, tied in
with emotional experience, and so on. Information that has been only
superficially processed or accepted passively will be readily forgotten,
and this is used to explain the phenomenon of rapid forgetting
previously characterised as short-term memory. Information that has been
processed more deeply will be retained for a longer period of time (see
Figure 43). lexeme The basic unit of a language, which may be a single
word-like sound or a whole word. lexical To do with words.

70 60 50 40 30 20 10 visual

auditory

semantic

Figure 43 Levels of processing

Lewin, Kurt (1890--1947) Kurt Lewin was one of the pioneers of social
psychology, influencing many future psychologists such as Abraham
Maslow, Carl Rogers and Leon Festinger. His field theory argued that
social behaviour can only be understood in the context of the full range
of personal and social environments operating on the individual: a view
which challenged the S--R approach of the behaviourists. Lewin also
founded and developed the idea of action research, on the grounds that
laboratory methods were simply inappropriate for studying social or
working experience, and undertook seminal work on leadership styles and
the processes of psychological change.

L

lexical decision task A task used in cognitive experiments that requires
the research participant to choose between different words.
lexicalisation (i) (ii) (iii)

The process of selecting a word based on the meaning that is intended.
The speech production process of translating a word's meaning into its
sound representation. How a sound's meaning becomes a base or
'blueprint' for the sound itself, such that hearing the sound
automatically links with the meaning. 'Ow' might be an example.

lexicon The set of words generally taken to define a language. In the
case of artificial languages, such as Yerkish, the lexicon is very much
smaller than it is for human languages. LH See lateral hypothalamus.
Also sometimes used as an abbreviation for 'left-handed'. libido A term
originally used by Freud to refer to sexual energy that is derived from
the id and is available to power mental and physical activity. Later,
Freud regarded libido as a general life energy. In common usage, the
connotation of sexual energy is still associated with the term. lie
detector See polygraph. lie-scale A subset of questions in a test
designed to find out if the person is being honest in their answers. A
typical item would be 'I have never told a lie in my whole life'. Anyone
agreeing to this statement is likely to be responding with social
desirability as a stronger motivation than accurate self-report. Put
more simply, they are almost certainly lying.

203

life coaching See coaching. life event An event that results in a major
change in the life situation of a person. There is evidence that all
life events, even those that are fundamentally positive, impose some
stress. Holmes and Rahe produced a 'Life Events Scale', which gives
weightings to different events, ranging from 100 for death of a spouse
down to 12 for Christmas and 11 for minor violations of the law. The
scale can be used to provide a total score for all of the life events
experienced during, say, the last year. People who have experienced a
lot of change will obtain a high score, and high scores may indicate
that a person is at higher risk of illness or accidents. Negative life
events may also make some people more prone to depression. life script
Cultural expectations or assumptions concerning how major life events
are expected to proceed during a person's life. lifespan The entire
period of a person's life. There has been a move within developmental
psychology to study the whole lifespan rather than restrict the field to
childhood. This approach has opened up the adult years from 20 to 85 as
an important period within which to study development, but so far the
obvious worthiness of the objectives has not been matched by exciting
findings or theories. light adaptation The process by which the
photosensitive cells of the retina adjust to changing levels of
­illumination. By varying their sensitivity to light, and also by varying
the opening of the pupil of the eye, in order to maximise light intake
in dim conditions, and minimise it when conditions are bright, the
individual adjusts their perception to accord with the amount of light
available. See also dark adaptation.

204

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

lightness constancy The experience of a consistent level of illumination
in different environments, even though objective measurements of the
light available would show them to be widely varied. For example,
sitting under electric light in the evening is often perceived as 'full
light', and as equivalent to daylight, despite the fact that in reality,
the light level is several thousand times dimmer than sunlight. See also
perceptual constancy. Likert scale A five- or seven-point scale commonly
used in attitude measurement. Typically, a Likert scale will express
variation along a single dimension, such as 'strongly agree -- agree --
neutral -- disagree -- strongly disagree'. See also ordinal scale.
limbic circuit A loop of brain cell activity particularly associated
with reward-based learning. The limbic circuit begins and

Figure 44 The limbic system

ends in the cortex of the frontal lobe, and includes the amygdala and
anterior cingulate gyrus parts of the limbic system, the basal ganglia
and the thalamus. limbic system A term used to refer to a series of
small structures buried deep in the centre of the brain, including the
hippocampus, the amygdala, the cingulate gyrus and the mamillary bodies.
The limbic system is generally considered to be involved in relating the
organism to its environment, and its structures appear to be involved in
several disparate functions. These include the encoding of memories (the
hippocampus), recollective memory (the mamillary bodies) motivation and
emotion (the amygdala) and the detection of emotional and cognitive
conflicts (the cingulate gyrus) (Figure 44). See also limbic ­circuit,
fornix.

L

limerence The infatuated emotion often described as romantic love. The
concept of limerence was developed by Tennov to distinguish between that
emotion and the deeply affectionate companionship often developed in
more long-term relationships. The two emotions are quite different and
have very different characteristics, so referring to them both as 'love'
can be seriously misleading. See also loving. line of best fit The line
in a scattergram that has the minimum overall total distance from the
data points. It is the line from which the correlation is calculated.
linear regression A way of using correlations as inferential statistics,
to estimate the likelihood of other outcomes. Linear regression uses the
regression line (aka the line of best fit) and makes predictions
according to the probability of other examples falling along that line.
See also regression. linguistic determinism The theory, put forward by
Benjamin Lee Whorf, that thinking and perception are determined by the
language we have available. The usual example is that Inuit Eskimos,
having many more words for different kinds of snow than the English,
will be able to make finer discriminations on the subject. The
hypothesis has not been validated experimentally perhaps because meaning
is embedded in a whole combination of linguistic and cultural practices,
and not in single words. The belief that the availability of certain
words or phrases influences thought and behaviour remains widespread. It
is used in behavioural programmes, such as when training young children
to use words like 'also' in order to consider alternative consequences
of their actions. It also underlies attempts to

205

change cultural attitudes by making people more aware of the
consequences of using words with disparaging implications, such as
calling young women 'chicks'. It is an interesting confirmation of the
approach that people who wish to resist it have managed to convert the
label of 'political correctness' into an insult. linguistic intelligence
A form of intelligence that is concerned with how competent or skilled
the person is at language. See multiple intelligences. linguistic
relativity hypothesis Some­ times also known as the Sapir--Whorf
hypothesis, this is the idea that thinking is dependent on the language
used by the individual -- in other words, that the possession of words
for a concept shapes a person's thought. In the 'strong' form of the
hypothesis, words are seen to determine thought entirely, but a 'weak'
form has become more generally accepted, which states that the words
available serve to facilitate and amplify thought, and to indicate
relationships between concepts, rather than actually to determine them.
See also linguistic determinism. linguistics To do with language. The
term linguistics is used to refer to the study of language itself. LIP
See lateral inter-parietal area. lithium The basis for drugs used as a
treatment for bipolar depression, effective in most cases. The effect
seems to be to prevent the manic phase so that the cycle does not
continue, and so the depressive phase is also prevented. The method of
action of the drug is not known. Lithium is an element that is close to
sodium and potassium, so it is thought likely that it alters neural
transmission in the central

206

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

nervous system. The drug has to be taken continuously and it is
dangerous, with significant side effects even in carefully controlled
doses. Lloyd Morgan's canon The principle proposed by the
nineteenth-century physiologist that animal behaviour should never be
explained in terms of higherlevel mental functioning if it could be
explained in terms of a more basic process. This rule was particularly
influential with the behaviourists, but led to some remarkably
convoluted ways of explaining animal behaviour, as researchers tried to
avoid describing processes such as remembering or reasoning when faced
with animals that were clearly doing both. The extremely mechanistic but
not very practical applications of Lloyd Morgan's canon provide good
examples of some of the shortcomings of reductionism as an approach. See
also Occam's razor. lobe Generally used to refer to a rounded or fleshy
lump; in the brain the term usually relates to one of four general
sections of each cerebral hemisphere, or one of the two halves of the
cerebellum. See occipital lobe, parietal lobe, frontal lobe, temporal
lobe. lobotomy A form of psychosurgery in which the frontal lobes of the
brain are removed. It was originally developed as a method for making
highly aggressive or unstable individuals more docile, but its use was
both politically and psychologically suspect. It was largely replaced by
leucotomy, also controversial. As a general rule, both operations have
been replaced either by more specific ablation, or by chemical
intervention. local knowledge cases A term used to refer to case studies
which are concerned with specific and localised events.

localised functions Functions, usually of the cerebral cortex, that have
been shown to be located at a particular site. Among the many localised
cortical functions are motor control, located in an area alongside the
central fissure, body skin sensation, located on the other side of the
central fissure, vision, located in the striate cortex or visual cortex
in the occipital lobe, olfaction (the sense of smell), located in a
strip at the base of the temporal lobe, and the language areas. location
constancy The way the perceptual system automatically modifies its
estimations of place and distance, depending on their location and the
location of the perceiver. Objects seen from an alternative location are
not perceived as having changed their position, despite the fact that
their background has altered. Instead, they are seen as having remained
constant, in the same place. The perceptual constancies are often used
to illustrate how the received visual image is only a part of perception
-- what is known on a cognitive or experiential level is an equally
important part. locus of control (LOC) A concept at the core of a social
learning theory developed by Rotter in the 1960s. It refers to the
person's belief about where social reinforcements originate -- whether
they are internal to the person, or external. Someone with an internal
locus of control will tend to believe that marks gained by an essay
depended on the amount of effort and ability applied to writing it.
Someone with an external locus of control will tend to attribute those
marks to luck, predestination or the whims of the person doing the
marking. LOC can be measured using a variety of short self-report scales
and has been found to relate meaningfully to how people behave in a wide
variety of situations,

L

207

Loftus, Elizabeth (1944--) One of the most important figures in memory
research, Elizabeth Loftus provided unequivocal evidence for the way
that human memories are easily distorted by cues, context and
unconscious hints from language. Her work demonstrated the variability
of eyewitness testimony and showed how unreliable identity parades were
as a method of identifying criminal suspects. Her research into memory
errors such as the misinformation effect and the creation of false
memories was at times controversial, but it has contributed
significantly both to the academic understanding of memory processes and
to the legal uses of memory research.

supporting the construct validity of those scales. An internal LOC is
more likely to result in the individual making efforts to improve their
situation, but whether this is useful depends on whether events actually
are under their control or not. A similar but not identical concept was
developed more or less independently in attribution theory. See
internal--external scale, controllable attributions. log-linear
modelling A statistical technique for estimating the effect of
independent variables on frequencies. The logarithm of the frequencies
is used because this has desirable mathematical characteristics. It
allows the effects of a number of independent variables to be estimated
(where chi-square can only cope with one), and the interactions between
them to be calculated. logic A set of rules by which conclusions can be
reliably deduced from initial statements (propositions). Logic can be
applied without regard for the truth of propositions. For example, the
statement 'All students work hard and those who work hard pass their
exams; therefore all students pass their exams' sounds logical. The fact
that it is not true that all students work hard or pass their exams

if they do means that the conclusion is not necessarily true. Logic was
of interest in psychology because it can be regarded as perfect
reasoning and therefore was used as a starting point for analysing how
people reason. It turns out that people are much more sophisticated and
rather less rigid in their thinking than any logic that has been
invented, and there is not too much similarity between the two
processes. Logic was the basis for one of the attempts to create a
culture-fair intelligence test, the Valentine Test Of Higher Reasoning
Ability, but as logical reasoning can be learned, scores on that test,
as with many others, are not independent of education or culture.
logical concepts Concepts that are founded on clear and unambiguous
rules, without exception. Logical ­concepts are quite rare in everyday
life. See also concept. logical-mathematical skills Aspects of
intelligence that are concerned with how well the person is able to deal
with abstract logical puzzles and mathematical or symbolic problems.
These skills form part of the componential intelligence sector of
triarchic intelligence. See also multiple intelligences.

208

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

logistic regression A form of regression analysis designed for use when
the outcome or dependent variable is dichotomous. The analysis provides
a prediction of how much influence the independent variable will have on
the either/ or state of the dependent variable (e.g. the effect of
alcohol consumption on becoming pregnant, after other aspects of diet
have been taken into account). logogen A cognitive unit of word
recognition, sometimes referred to as a 'dictionary unit', and used in
theories of selective attention and reading. long-term memory (LTM) A
term used to describe memories other than those that remain for a few
seconds only. According to the two-process theory of memory, any
information which is retained for any length of time above a few seconds
is deemed to have been stored in LTM, while that which lasts just for a
brief interval (such as a t­ elephone number that has just been looked
up) is considered to have been stored in shortterm memory. Many modern
researchers question this commonly accepted distinction, arguing that it
is unnecessary and that it fails to discriminate between information
retained for varying periods of time. One alternative to this approach
has been the levels of processing theory, which argues that the decisive
factor in determining how long information is retained is how deeply it
has been rehearsed, organised and processed, and that there is no need
to postulate separate memory stores. See also orthographic lexicon,
long-term working memory. long-term potentiation (LTP) Neurones that are
frequently stimulated by other presynaptic neurones show an increase in
the probability that they will be activated, known as long-term
potentiation. This links with Hebb's theory of synaptic learning,

in which he proposed that learning occurs through the increased
activation and structural reinforcement of neural pathways. long-term
working memory An efficient form of memory storage, characteristic of
experts' cognition, in which relevant information is rapidly stored in
long-term memory, but accessed through retrieval cues in working memory.
longitudinal study A study that takes place over a period of time, and
is concerned with studying some form of development or change.
Longitudinal studies have been valuable in challenging many erroneous or
commonly held beliefs. For example, longitudinal studies of the
relationship between ageing and intelligence suggest that intelligence,
if used, continues to develop and increase throughout life, rather than
declining with age as was once thought. See also cohort effect,
cross-sectional study. loss aversion A tendency in decisionmaking to be
more sensitive to potential losses than to potential gains. The tendency
may be stronger when the person is depressed. love need A term used by
some humanistic psychologists to refer to the need for affection or
positive regard from others, which is seen as a fundamental part of
human nature. loving A usually intense and longterm form of emotional
positive regard for another person. In psychology, it is often
distinguished from the shortterm infatuation known as limerence.
Maternal love has been shown to activate the globus pallidus and the
substantia nigra of the basal ganglia, and the Raphé nuclei of the
medulla, as well as other areas of the brain known to be active in
emotion, such as the insula and the cingulate cortex. See also
attachment.

L

209

LTP See long-term potentiation.

Lucid dreams can be induced in the laboratory by delivering a
prearranged stimulus, such as a puff of air or a very mild electric
shock, during REM sleep.

lucid dreaming Dreams in which the dreamer is aware that they are
dreaming. Sleep researchers have discovered that it is possible for
lucid dreamers to 'control' their dreams, making events happen or
characters appear by will.

lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) A recreational drug that forms a potent
hallucinogen when ingested, producing visual disturbances, sometimes
hallucination, and a heightened or distorted awareness of reality.

LSD See lysergic acid diethylamide. LTM See long-term memory.

M MA See mental age. Machiavellianism A personality trait that involves
a manipulative approach to interactions with other people, together with
a disregard of moral conventions and principles and an emphasis on
self-interest. Machiavellianism is considered to be one of the Dark
Triad of personality traits. magical thinking The belief, common in
young children and some adults, that thinking of something makes it
happen or be true. magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) A non-invasive
technique in which the brain is studied using a succession of
electromagnetic waves, like radio waves, which are passed through the
brain. Water molecules in active brain cells respond to electromagnetic
stimulation by producing their own electromagnetic waves, which the MRI
scanner detects and records. A computer combines hundreds of these
measurements and collates them, building up an image of the electrical
activity in different areas of the brain. fMRI (functional magnetic
resonance imaging) is used to explore specific brain
activities/functions, while efMRI (event-related functional magnetic
resonance imaging) compares the electrical activity produced by two or
more events. See also brain scan. magneto-encephalography (MEG) A brain
scanning technique that is based on recording the electrical fields
generated by the brain's activity, by means of electrodes attached to
the scalp. This type DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

of brain scan uses SQUID technology to detect changes in the magnetic
activity of the brain. See also magnetic resonance imaging. magno cells
Cells belonging to one of the major visual pathways in the brain. Magno
cells are found in the visual cortex, and carry information about
brightness and depth. They are thought to have evolved earlier than the
complementary Parvo cells. main effect The overall relationship between
a class of independent variable and the dependent variable. The term is
used mainly in analysis of variance. major hemisphere See dominant
hemisphere. majority influence The effect of the opinions or actions of
most of the people present or relevant, on the actions of a single
individual. See conformity. maladjustment A poor adjustment. The term is
used of people, particularly children and adolescents, whose behaviour
is judged to conflict strongly with the expectations and requirements of
society. malapropism A common speech error that involves using a word
which has a similar phonological form to the intended one, but is
inappropriate to the context and intention of the utterance. The term
derives from the character Mrs. Malaprop, in Sheridan's play The Rivals.
mamillary bodies A pair of small, round bodies found below the thalamus
and considered to be part of the limbic system. They have connections to
the

M

211

anterior thalamus and are believed to be important for recollective
memory.

relationships and/or multiple dependent variables.

mania An emotional disorder during which there is elation,
talkativeness, impatience with others, overconfidence and an
uncontrolled flight of ideas. See also bipolar depression.

mantra A word or phrase on which a per­ editation. son concentrates as an
aid to m Traditionally, the mantra is derived from Hindu scripture and
has spiritual power.

manic depression An emotional disorder in which there is an alternation
between mania and depression. See also bipolar depression. manifest
content The overt content of an account, usually of a dream. Dream
interpretation involves seeing beyond the manifest content to understand
the underlying meaning -- the latent content. manipulative skill A skill
that involves direct action with the hands, usually in terms of
handling, manoeuvring and placing of objects. Mann--Whitney test A
two-sample statistical test used for ordinal data or interval data not
deemed suitable for a t-test, and independent samples. See also
statistical significance. MANOVA Multivariate analysis of ­variance --
that is, analysis of ­variance which deals with data involving ­complex

marijuana A psychoactive drug that induces a feeling of lethargy and
relaxation when consumed. Marijuana is derived from the cannabis plant
and may be consumed either by smoking the dried leaves or resin of the
plant, or by eating small pieces of the resin. The use of marijuana as a
relaxant is extremely common in many areas of the world, including
Africa, the Middle East and Central America. It is widely (although
often illegally) used as a recreational drug in Western industrial
societies and is becoming increasingly accepted as a therapy for those
in constant pain. Marijuana appears to exert its main effects by
increasing noradrenaline levels in the brain. It is increasingly
available in medical preparations although research into such uses was
limited by legal restrictions for a long time. masking A term used in
cognitive research to refer to suppressing the

Marler, Peter (1928--2014) Peter Marler has been a major figure in
comparative psychology through his work as an ethologist and
neurobiologist. Among other discoveries, he identified the use of
natural concepts in monkeys and worked with other famous figures on
social relationships in the great apes and other primates. Most
importantly, Marler contributed significantly to our understanding of
the role of neural adaptation in learning, through a lifetime of
research, including work that clarified the relationship between
environmental and inherited aspects of birdsong, the role of critical
and sensitive periods, and the nature of species-specific learning.

212

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Marr, David (1945--1980) David Marr is best known in psychology for his
work in clarifying the way that we process visual information to arrive
at our perception of real-world objects, people and animals. His work on
the neural and computational stages required to build up a fully
three-dimensional representation of the outside world from the neural
input represented by the optic array has become the basis of both
medical and scientific understanding of visual processing.

­processing of a response by introducing a second task requiring
processing immediately afterwards. There may still be some unconscious
processing of the first task taking place, but it is masked by the
conscious demands of the second. masochism Obtaining sexual
gratification from personal pain or humiliation. Often associated with
sadism. massed practice Extended periods of practice while learning a
new skill, taken without breaks. Massed practice has been found to be
less effective than distributed practice, which allows for consolidation
of the learning. mastery goals Personal goals that are to do with
acquiring competence and skills

in order to be able to carry out tasks or exercises. mastery play Play
that leads to the acquisition of new skills. This definition leaves open
the question of whether children are motivated to achieve mastery, or
just cannot avoid learning when having fun. See also play. matched pairs
see matched participant design. matched participant design A research
design in which different people are allocated to each of the
experimental conditions, but in which the participants have been
carefully matched on significant factors, e.g. if one group contains a
single high-intelligence individual,

Maslow, Abraham H. (1908--1970) Abraham Maslow is most famous for his
theory of the hierarchy of human needs. This model distinguished between
deficit needs, such as safety, and higher needs, such as
self-actualisation. Although the theory is essentially only a
description, it has been widely used, especially in the personal growth
movement and in occupational psychology. Its emphasis on the idea that
human beings move beyond deficit needs in order to fulfil their human
potential made it much more attractive and relevant to the lives of
ordinary people than the dominant focus on negative drives such as fear
and hunger. Perhaps the main reason for the theory's popularity,
however, was the way in which it provided other psychologists with a
clear and tangible example of the humanistic approach to psychology, at
a time when behaviourism dominated most psychological explanations for
human activity.

M

then so does the other. The intention is to ensure that individual
differences will act equally on each of the experimental conditions,
rather than affecting one condition more than the others. matching The
name given to ensuring that two sets of experimental materials or
research participants are identical in all important respects. A matched
task or test has questions carefully selected to ensure that, in each
test, the questions are equivalent in difficulty and in the type of
problem posed. It is also desirable to select a group of people matched
in terms of age, sex and overall intelligence levels, although other
criteria may also be used if required for the study. matching hypothesis
The idea that people will tend to form lasting relationships,
particularly marriages, with those of similar appearance, or at least a
similar degree of attractiveness. The concept is problematic, not least
in terms of the use of ratings of attractiveness based on photographs of
strangers. It forms part of research into impression formation.
materialism (i)

(ii) 

A theoretical position that assumes that everything can be explained in
terms of physical matter. It leads to a reductionist position that
thoughts, feelings and all manifestations of mind can be accounted for
in terms of physiological processes. In everyday language, materialism
refers to placing importance on acquiring material possessions.

maternal deprivation A concept proposed by John Bowlby and Rene Spitz to
account for the poor development of children brought up in institutions.
Of

213

the various disadvantages suffered by these children, the theories of
the time (1940s) focused on the lack of consistent mothering. Bowlby
added other evidence and concluded that any disruption of mothering,
especially between the ages of 6 months and 3 years, was likely to have
damaging long-term consequences. The belief that infants should never be
separated from their mothers became stressed beyond anything Bowlby had
claimed. It has been suggested that the concept of maternal deprivation
was exploited in order to remove women from employment and so release
jobs for men at the end of the Second World War. If so, then similar
calls might be expected during any other period of high male
unemployment. The concept of maternal deprivation was soon challenged,
and much evidence has now been accumulated showing that good development
is possible without the consistent presence of a mother or mother
substitute. However, the evidence does not show that good development is
especially easy under these circumstances. A fair statement might be
that, while around 1950 mothering could be thought of as something that
the infant either did or did not receive, we now know that the normal
processes of mothering provide a great variety of physiological and
emotional effects, learning experiences, motivations, practice in social
interaction and no doubt much else besides. Substituting for all of
these may certainly be possible, but it is likely to be difficult. More
recently, use of the term 'mothering' has been replaced by 'caregiving'
or 'parenting', on the grounds that parents of either gender are able to
provide the emotional and caring processes involved in the concept of
'mothering'. See also attachment, maternal privation.

214

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

maternal drive The tendency, usually presumed to be innate, to engage in
caretaking behaviours such as nestbuilding, retrieving and suckling
during the infancy of offspring. The tendency is displayed by mothers,
and sometimes by fathers, in many species. Use of the term drive implies
that there is some basic need to be maternal -- an assumption that
should not be accepted uncritically. The term 'maternal instinct' is
sometimes used instead, but this is even more likely to bring in
assumptions for which there is inadequate evidence. The most misleading
use of the terms arises when meanings that have been developed by
studying species such as rats are applied uncritically to humans.

elling and many other functions, and designed to interact with a variety
of programming languages and symbol sets.

maternal privation Rearing from birth without a mother. Strictly,
privation means 'never having had', while deprivation means having
something taken away. Experiments involving total maternal privation
have been carried out on various species, although not with humans.
However, these are typically classed as maternal deprivation studies,
and in practice, the term maternal deprivation is used for all
variations of a shortage of mothering in the upbringing of young.

McGurk illusion A striking auditory illusion that occurs when an
auditory stimulus is combined with a different but matching visual
stimulus, resulting in the perception of a third, different event. For
example, if someone is given the auditory input of 'baba' while at the
same time seeing someone making lip movements of 'gaga', they will
report -- quite definitely -- hearing 'dada'. It is believed that this
illusion arises from the way that speech perception is based on the
fusion of multiple inputs.

mathematical modelling An approach to understanding which involves
describing systems using mathematical symbols or expressions.

mean The name given to the arithmetic average of a set of numbers,
calculated by summing the numbers and dividing this total by the number
of figures in the set. The mean is one of the three main measures of
central tendency, but it can only be used for equal-interval or ratio
levels of measurement.

mathematical notation Specific symbols that describe mathematical
operations or unknown quantities. mathematical-logical intelligence A
form of intelligence proposed by Gardner as one of seven different types
of intelligence. See multiple intelligence. MATLAB A commercial
computing and programming environment, able to handle complex
computations, 3D mod-

maturation The term used to describe behavioural or physical changes
that occur as a direct result of genetic action, but which emerge as the
animal or human matures or grows older. A clear example of maturation in
terms of physical development are the changes that occur at puberty. In
the 1920s, Gesell proposed a theory that nearly all development is
controlled by maturation and so is independent of practice or
experience. Modern approaches tend to take a more interactive stance.
MBD See minimal brain dysfunction.

mean square Another term for the variance of a set of scores which is
particularly used when conducting analysis of variance. See also measure
of dispersion. means-end analysis An approach to computer simulation and
other forms

M

of problem-solving in which the solutions are calculated by comparing
the final goal state with the current situation, and developing
strategies, known as heuristics, designed to reduce the gap between
them. measures of central tendency A collective term for all of the
statistical measures that provide information about the most typical
distribution of scores. The mean is the most widely used, but others may
be more informative in certain circumstances. For example, when
considering the spread of incomes in a particular country, the mean may
be unduly affected by a few extremely rich people. The median will tell
you the income of someone right in the middle of the range of possible
earnings, while the mode will tell you the most common income (see
Figure 45). measures of dispersion A collective term for statistical
measures that provide information about the way in which a distribution
of scores is spread out. See also range, standard deviation, variance.
mechanoreception The sense which responds to external pressure on the
skin. See also thermoreception, nociception, proprioception. medial In
or towards the middle. See also dorsal, ventral, lateral.

Figure 45 Measures of central tendency

215

medial geniculate nucleus A set of cells in the thalamus that are
associated with auditory perception, in particular with locating and
identifying sounds. See also lateral geniculate nuclei, audition. medial
pre-optic area (MPOA) A region of the hypothalamus that responds to
pregnancy-related hormonal change and triggers parental behaviours in
many mammals. medial prefrontal cortex The middle part of the prefrontal
cortex. It appears to contribute to the sense of self and identity, for
example by responding strongly to the sound of one's own name, and also
when we think about others close to us. The upper part of this region
also becomes active when we think about other people's intentions. See
also empathy, MRI, frontal lobe. medial premotor cortex Often known as
the supplementary motor area, this part of the brain, which is located
just in front of the primary motor cortex, receives strong
proprioceptive signals and is associated with spontaneous, well-learned
action sequences that don't require much cognitive processing. Examples
might include rapid typing on a keyboard, or (for a musician) playing a
familiar tune on a well-known instrument. See also lateral premotor
cortex.

216

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

medial temporal cortex This is an area located alongside a fold known as
the rhinal sulcus, at the base of the temporal lobe (Figure 46). This
area is primarily concerned with memory, forming a major connection
between the cerebral cortex and the hippocampus and dealing with both
episodic and semantic memory. See also perirhinal cortex, entorhinal
cortex. median A measure of central tendency that is calculated as the
middlemost score from a given set. Fifty per cent of the scores in a
given set will fall at or below the median score, and 50 per cent fall
at or above it. The median is appropriate for use with ordinal levels of
measurement. mediating variable A variable which is not the focus of the
main analysis in a study, but which is proposed to explain the
connection between two measured variables. mediators Processes
(e.g. memory, perception, thinking) that occur in between a stimulus and
a response. The early behaviourists claimed that as mediators

Figure 46 The medial temporal cortex

cannot be observed directly, they should not form part of scientific
psychology. Cognitive psychologists, on the other hand, regard them as
the main subject matter of psychology. See also schema. medical model An
overall approach to abnormal behaviour or personality that assumes an
individual organic source of any disorder, mental or physical. This
implies that the task of treatment is to diagnose the condition and then
cure it. The medical model has been called into question in relation to
the less serious psychiatric disorders. One of several problems with the
medical model is that it tends to result in labelling. meditation A
process of disciplining or training the mind, either to achieve an
internal focus or to achieve full apperception of an external single
stimulus, such as a crystal or a chant. In either case, it involves
disregarding and eventually cutting out completely, all distracting
thoughts and ideas. See also mindfulness.

M

medulla The lowest part of the brain, formed by an outward thickening
from the spinal cord. Also known as the brainstem, the medulla mediates
the autonomic functions of breathing, digestion, heartbeat and blood
pressure.

217

relates of memory. See also constructive memory, two-process theory of
memory, autobiographical memory, hippocampus.

MEG See magneto-encephalography.

memory bias The tendency to retrieve more negative or unpleasant
information from memory, than positive or pleasant information. See also
mood congruity.

meiosis The process of cell division involved in sexual reproduction, in
the formation of gametes (ova and spermatozoa). Unlike the kind of cell
division that is involved in growth and tissue repair (see mitosis),
this process involves the separation of pairs of chromosomes, such that
the resulting cells are haploid (i.e. they have only half the normal
number of chromosomes). In order to form a complete zygote, which can
develop to form a new individual, these cells must combine with another
haploid cell to make up the full complement of chromosomes. In this way,
the newly formed individual comes to inherit half of its chromosomes
from each parent.

memory span A well-known measure of an individual's capacity for
retaining small units of meaningless information over a brief period of
time. In a typical measure of memory span, a list of digits is read out
to someone at a regular pace. On completion of the list, the individual
is required to repeat what they have heard, either forward or backward.
First observed by Miller, it has been repeatedly observed that the
average span available to the individual is of 7 ± 2 digits, and that
this can only be increased by some system for chunking the information
into meaningful units. See also levels of processing, two-process theory
of memory, working memory.

meme The term given to a unit of culture that is transmitted from person
to person (or group to group) according to its perceived usefulness. The
term has been popularised by its use in social media contexts, where it
refers to the rapid spread of an image, often adapted into different
forms, a phrase or a jargon word.

memory trace In older texts sometimes referred to as an engram, a memory
trace is a hypothetical 'image' of what is to be remembered, which has
been encoded and which is stored for varying periods of time. The term
memory trace was originally associated with the decay theory of
forgetting, which holds that memory traces die away if they are not
strengthened by being recalled from time to time. As this approach is
not particularly open to empirical investigation, the term fell into
disfavour as an explanation of forgetting for many years. With the
advent of more sophisticated cognitive research, and especially of forms
of brain scanning which allow observation of the active brain, the term
memory trace has returned to general use in a slightly modified form,
now meaning a distinct memory which is recalled through specific
stimulation.

memetics The study of the transition of memes in popular culture. memory
The general term given to the storage and subsequent retrieval of
information. Memory has been intensively studied by psychologists
throughout the history of psychology, and consequently involves an
extensive range of theoretical approaches and fields of enquiry. These
include the study of episodic memory and prospective memory, everyday
memory, levels of processing, encoding and representation, and
physiological cor-

218

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

menarche The beginning of menstruation during puberty. Mendelian
genetics The currently accepted theoretical model of genetic
transmission, Mendelian genetics proposes that this occurs through the
passing on of discrete units of inherited ­information -- genes -- which
are fixed, and which change only through accidental mutation. Individual
differences occur because reproductive cells are haploid, containing
only half the number of genes required for the complete organism, and so
have to combine to produce a new individual. The new individual
therefore inherits characteristics from each parent and is thus
different from either of them. The combination of Mendelian genetics
with Darwinian evolutionary theory proposes that those combinations and
accidental mutations which are favourable to the individual, in terms of
helping it to survive, will be passed on because that individual will
then become fitter, healthier, etc., and therefore more likely to
reproduce successfully. See also evolution, genetics, Lamarckian
genetics, sexual reproduction, meiosis. meninges The layers of membrane
­covering the brain, between the brain and the skull. Meningitis is
inflammation of these membranes. menstruation The phase of the monthly
menstrual cycle in which, if the woman is not pregnant, the blood and
other material that has built up in the uterus following ovulation is
discharged. Many cultures have beliefs about the dangerousness of women
during or around menstruation. The major Western version concerns
premenstrual tension. mental age (MA) A construction developed by Binet
in his early work on the measurement of intelligence, mental age refers
to the abilities of the ­individual compared to others of that society.
By

selecting a series of age-appropriate problems and tasks, a set of age
norms is developed, allowing each child to be assessed in terms of how
far they ­measure up to these criteria. The level of difficulty of items
at which the child starts to fail is compared to the norms. The average
age of children who pass the items up to this point is found, and this
is regarded as the mental age of the child being tested. Binet's
original formulation of IQ involved the comparison of mental age with
the child's chronological age ('real' age). mental chronometry The study
of the time taken to process information in the brain. This is a
significant measure in both cognitive psychology and neuroscience since
it is inferred that a longer time taken to respond to a stimulus implies
that more processing time has been required, and therefore more complex
processing procedures have been involved. See also information
processing. mental handicap An outdated term for people of very limited
intelligence as measured by intelligence tests. The term 'mental
handicap' is one in a long line of labels that may have been
scientifically neutral when first used, but which have become
unacceptable as they pass into the general language as terms of abuse --
for example, an earlier grading of such people was as idiots, imbeciles
and morons. The term 'mental deficiency' was sometimes used,
particularly for mental handicap that is believed to be due to brain
damage, and 'mental retardation' has also been widely used, particularly
in the American literature. These terms' current unpopularity is in part
due to a recognition that it is not very productive to attempt to
distinguish between organic and non-organic cases and in part a
recognition that specific neural disorders such as dyslexia may produce
effects which result in lim-

M

ited scoring on intelligence tests, even though other aspects of
intelligence remain unaffected. Since intelligence is generally highly
valued in this culture, this can result in stigmatisation of those with
low intelligence scores, even though they have been measured by tests
which many regard as unsatisfactory. In particular, intelligence tests
are usually standardised on the 'normal' (dominant) population and they
may have less validity when applied to other groups. In modern usage,
learning difficulty has replaced mental handicap as the official term,
although this solution also has problems, notably in undervaluing the
efforts demanded of those who care for people with such problems. See
also labelling, specific learning difficulty, neurodiversity,
self-fulfilling prophecy. mental imagery The use of imagined pictures,
or other sensory images, such as sounds or smells, to represent
information in the mind. Mental imagery involves recreating the apparent
sensation, as part of the process of memory or thinking. See also iconic
representation, symbolic representation. mental model An internal
representation of a situation, event, process or experience. See also
concept, mental representation. mental representation The form that
information takes in the brain. See also imagery, memory, schema. mental
retardation A general term for limited intelligence. The term tends to
carry a misleading assumption that low intelligence is due to either a
slowness of mental functioning or slow intellectual development. For a
fuller discussion, see mental handicap. mental set A state of
preparedness to perform certain kinds of mental operations rather than
others. Mental sets may refer to particular kinds of problem-

219

solving (see learning set), or to readiness to perceive certain things
rather than others (see perceptual set), or to a preparedness to
remember certain items of information in preference to others.
mentalising The process of inferring a particular mental state in
someone else, or attributing mental states to other people. See also
animism. mentalism The approach to psychology which attempted to study
and describe the mind directly. The main tool of the mentalist approach
was introspection. The approach was widely used in the early years of
psychology but was strongly attacked by early behaviourists such as
Watson and lost its popularity. In recent years, it has been gaining
influence, mainly through the use of protocol analysis techniques in
cognitive studies. mesencephalon Another term for the midbrain. It forms
the front part of the brainstem, and it is associated with sensory
functions, movement, sleep and wakefulness, arousal and temperature
regulation. Not to be confused with the metencephalon. mesolimbic
pathway See reward pathway. messenger RNA Also known as transfer RNA,
this is a form of RNA that carries coding information from the nucleus
to the site of protein synthesis. See also ribonucleic acid,
transcription. meta-analysis A research technique that involves a
statistical comparison of the outcomes of a number of different studies
in the same area, and an examination of the general themes or trends
which can be identified as a result. Sometimes illustrated using
dot-plot diagrams, metaanalysis has become an increasingly important way
of analysing the outcome of multiple studies. However, metaanalysis can
only be done by combining

220

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

studies that meet the same rigorous criteria, which means that it can
ignore other, possibly important, evidence. See also meta-research.
meta-research Research that involves examining multiple studies in a
particular area, or ideally all of them. Nowadays it is used as a
general term in preference to meta-analysis, which refers specifically
to the statistical analysis of the outcomes of large collections of
studies. See also systematic review, metareview, narrative review.
meta-review A form of meta-research in which the relevant studies in a
particular area are evaluated and appraised. See also document analysis,
meta-analysis, systematic review, narrative review. metacognition
Cognition about cognition (i.e. awareness of one's own cognitive
processes and how they work). An overall term used to refer to personal
knowledge about how cognitive processes work, which is often highly
influential in cognitive development. The study of metacognition
includes the study of how people monitor and control their own cognitive
activity, such as being aware of cognitive limitations (knowing that you
don't know) or abilities (knowing that you can learn certain types of
information readily). The act of looking up a word in this dictionary,
for instance, is one that would be unlikely to happen without
metacognition. metalinguistic awareness Knowledge about the nature,
forms and functions of language. It is possible to be a fully competent
language user without metalinguistic awareness, but the different ways
in which people understand how language works are likely to influence
how they interact with their world and each other. It is therefore an
important area of study for psychologists.

metamemory Knowledge about how one's memory works, or what its
limitations are. Such knowledge often directly affects behaviour, such
as a decision to write a note to yourself to remind you of something, or
to adopt a specific revision technique to make remembering easier. See
also metacognition. metapelet The name given to a childnurse or
professional carer for children in an Israeli kibbutz. Such an
individual, rather than the parents, carries the responsibility for the
care of the children, and oversees their day-to-day experience and early
learning. metaphor Using a word relevant to one thing when talking about
another (e.g. 'The success of cognitive psychology pulled the rug from
under behaviourism'). The phrase 'pulling a rug from under' creates a
powerful image that is much richer than if we just said 'weakened'. The
use of such figures of speech is such an important part of thinking and
language that it has even been claimed that all novel thinking depends
on the use of metaphor. metencephalon A name given to the section of the
embryonic brain which eventually separates into the pons and the
cerebellum. Not to be confused with the mesencephalon. See also
subcortical structures. method of loci A mnemonic technique in which a
mental image is formed that visualises items to be remembered at
specific locations. Usually, the locations take the form of landmarks
along a familiar walk or journey -- something that is already well known
to the person forming the image. By subsequently visualising the
journey, the individual is reminded of the items to be remembered.

M

methodology The procedures adopted for creating knowledge. Different
schools of thought, including different approaches to research, use
their own methodology. Any account of research will need to describe the
methodology used in some detail, and will usually contain a
justification for the choice of that particular methodology.
micro-electrode recording A means of investigating neural activity by
recording the firing of single neurones. It consists of a technique
whereby microscopic electrodes, sensitive to very small electrical
charges, are inserted into the appropriate region of the brain or
nervous system. These electrodes record when their target cells fire. By
means of this technique, several discoveries have been made, including
the processing of visual information in the thalamus and the visual
cortex, and the changes to neurones involved during the imprinting
process in young chicks. See also hypercomplex cell.

221

midbrain A part of the brain above the brainstem, which includes part of
the reticular formation and the pons, and also the cerebellum. Sometimes
called the mesencephalon, it is active in the integration of sensory
input and motor activity. See also superior colliculus, inferior
colliculus. middle ear The air-filled chamber of the ear that is
separated from the outer canal by the tympanic membrane, and which
serves to amplify the received signal, in preparation for its
transduction in the inner ear. The middle ear contains three small
bones, known as the ossicles, which form a link from the tympanic
membrane at one side of the chamber to the oval window at the other.
Each ossicle receives the vibrations in turn and amplifies them slightly
as it passes them on. In sequence, the ossicles are the malleus (hammer
bone), the incus (anvil bone) and the stapes (stirrup bone), named in
accordance with their overall shapes.

Milgram, Stanley (1953--1984) One of the most famous of all social
psychologists, Stanley Milgram conducted research into a wide range of
real-world social behaviours, but he is most famous for his studies of
obedience, in which he showed that, given the right circumstances, even
quite ordinary people were able to obey orders to the extent of killing
another person. Milgram proposed that we all have two distinct states --
the autonomous state in which we act as individuals, and the agentic
state in which we act as agents of others and suppress our own
consciences. The fact that all injury was simulated did not prevent a
massive ethical debate arising from Milgram's work, resulting in the
development and application of strict ethical guidelines for
psychological research.

Milner, Brenda (1918--) Brenda Milner was a pioneer in neuropsychology,
working in the field for over 60 years, and contributing significantly
to the understanding of memory in the brain: she has been called the
founder of neuropsychology. One of her

222

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

most famous studies was of H.M., who had experienced lesions to the
hippocampus leaving him unable to store new memories but with reasoning,
language and perception unaffected. Milner's studies showed a
distinction between episodic and procedural memory, which introduced the
idea of multiple systems of memory in the brain.

mimicry The copying of a specific action or sequence of behaviour
without necessarily having any understanding of the goals of the action.
Most bird vocalisations are considered to be mimicry rather than
imitation. mind-body problem The problem of how the physical, chemical
and electrical characteristics of the brain can produce sensations,
thoughts and emotions in the mind. mindblindness The inability of
autistic individuals to comprehend that other people have minds of their
own, and therefore different viewpoints. See also theory of mind, false
belief task. mindfulness The practice of bringing one's mental attention
to the immediate present, and disregarding extraneous thoughts or
stimuli concerned with aspects of living that are more distant in either
time or space. Mindfulness as a technique combines Buddhist meditational
techniques with approaches used in Gestalt therapy and is often
considered to have begun in the 1970s, although it only achieved general
popularity in the 2010s. It has been shown to have considerable
psychological and physical health benefits, such as dealing with stress
and anxiety, attenuating pain, and assisting in dealing with drug
addiction. See also meditation. mindset A term which summarises
different approaches in the beliefs people have about their intelligence
and selfefficacy. See growth mindset, fixed mindset.

minimal brain dysfunction (MBD) The preferred choice from a number of
terms that have been proposed to account for, or at least label, a set
of quite common childhood conditions which include hyperactivity,
attention deficit disorder and clumsiness (apraxia). They are the kind
of problems that could arise because of brain damage, but no organic
damage can be identified in these children. The conditions were
therefore classified as 'minimal brain damage', with the implication
that there was damage, but it was too minimal to be detected. As
psychologists came to realise that invisible brain damage was not really
a useful explanation of anything, alternative terms were proposed such
as minimal cerebral injury and eventually MBD. It is now becoming
recognised that the various conditions have little in common, so we can
hope that the search for a suitable term under which they can all be
grouped will be abandoned. minimal group paradigm An approach to the
study of social identification, in which minimal indicators of group
membership are shown to produce reliable social effects. In a typical
example, participants in a minimal group paradigm experiment are
allocated to membership of a group according to some arbitrary
criterion, such as the toss of a coin. When asked to allocate resources
to members of their own or other groups, they then show a reliable
tendency to favour their own group above the others. Minimal group
studies

M

have generated a number of hypotheses about social identification that
have been supported by more realistic investigations, including the
tendency to accentuate differences between the in-group and the
out-group, and to stereotype out-group members. However, such studies
appear to be particularly susceptible to demand characteristics, as it
is difficult to imagine what other behaviour could be expected from the
cooperative participant whose only information is that they belong to
either one group or another. Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inven­tory
(MMPI) One of the most famous questionnaire measures of ­personality,
consisting of 550 items and providing eight scales or traits. The
objective evidence suggests limitations in its use either as a clinical
predictor or as a guide to how people are likely to behave in practice.
However, it is still widely used in research. See also five-factor
theory. minor hemisphere The name given to the half of the cerebrum that
does not form the dominant hemisphere. In most cases, this is the right
hemisphere, but in some people the right hemisphere is dominant and the
left one forms the minor, or non-dominant, hemisphere. See also
hemisphere bias. minority influence The way that a small group of people
can sometimes produce social or cognitive change even though the
majority may be against their ideas -- e.g. the abolition of slavery in
Western countries. The key aspects of minority influence are consistency
over time, clarity and persistence. mirror neurone A neurone that is
active in goal-directed actions designed to copy or imitate the action
of someone else. Mirror neurones respond to the person's (or monkey's)
own actions, and also to

223

the same action seen performed by others (i.e. they appear to disregard
the distinction between self and other). They are often tuned to very
precise actions, such as grasping, twisting or tearing, and do not
respond to robotic actions of the same type. See also mirror systems.
mirror self-recognition The ability to recognise oneself in the mirror.
This is one of the key comparative techniques for assessing whether a
given species has a self-concept. It is usually assessed by placing a
mark on an individual's face or head while they are asleep, and then
seeing how they respond when they see it in a mirror -- in particular,
whether they attempt to rub it off themselves, or off the image in the
mirror. mirror systems Specialised groups of neurones found in the
cerebrum that appear to reflect, or mimic, input from other people. For
example, interacting with someone who is smiling at you produces a
'smiling' response among these neurones, and the neural node which is
activated when we feel disgusted is also activated when we see someone
else expressing disgust. The discovery of mirror systems sets a strong
physiological basis for empathy and social sensitivity, and reinforces
the importance of the social nature of human evolution. See also mirror
neurone. mirroring The process of echoing or sharing other people's
emotions, reactions or posture. See also echopraxia, echolalia, postural
echo. misery-is-not-miserly effect The tendency for people who are
depressed or sad to be prepared to pay more for a commodity or event
than other people would. See also mood. misinformation effect The
distorting effect of information presented after an

224

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

event, on eyewitness memory. See also eyewitness testimony. mismatch
negativity (MMN) A change in event-related potential that happens when
an auditory stimulus is different from the prior auditory stimuli which
the person has experienced. missing fundamental phenomenon A phenomenon
in audition, whereby the fundamental note in a chord or complex sound
can be removed, but its absence is not perceived because the brain
reinstates it. mitochondria Small energy-producing structures found
inside the cell nucleus. Mitochondria also contain a form of DNA that
derives from nurturing in the womb, and therefore maps genetic origins
along the maternal line. Mitochondrial DNA has been widely used to map
the ancestral origins of the human species. mitosis The process of cell
division that results in each new cell possessing a full complement of
chromosomes -- an identical copy of the genes carried by the parent
cell. This is the most common form of cell division, being the type
which is involved in tissue growth and repair; it contrasts with the
form of cell division involved in sexual reproduction, which is called
meiosis. Mitosis also made possible the development of cloning. Since
each cell of the body carries the full genetic complement of that
animal, given the right medium for cell division and growth, it is
possible to recreate an identical animal from a cluster of parent cells.
But see mitochondria. mixed conditions Research designs that involve a
combination of repeated-­ measures and independent-measures designs.
mixed error effect A type of error of speech in which the word given is
incorrect, but related to the correct one in terms of both its meaning
and its sound.

MMN See mismatch negativity. MMPI See Minnesota Personality Inventory.

Multiphasic

MMR Moderated multiple regression, which is the technique generally used
in a statistical analysis of the impact of a moderating variable on
research data. mnemonic An aid to memory, which can be achieved in any
way, including leaving a note for oneself. Several different kinds of
mnemonics have been identified and developed over time. Many of them are
concerned with forming of mental images that will help the person to
remember connections between items, or lists. Some mnemonics rely on the
use of visual imagery, such as the method of loci or the key word
method. Other mnemonics rely on verbal processing, such as first-letter
mnemonics, in which the first letter of each item spells out a new word
or a sentence, for example 'Richard Of York Gave Battle In Vain' for the
colours of the spectrum (red, orange, yellow, etc.). The famous 'knot in
the handkerchief' was a common mnemonic that combines visual and tactile
cues to help the person to remember, although now largely outdated owing
to the preference for paper tissues producing a decline in the use of
handkerchiefs. MNI template A 'standard' brain developed by the Montreal
Neurological Institute, which has been derived from the data from 305
individual brains and is used for stereotactic normalisation. See also
Talairach cooordinates. mob psychology An approach to crowd psychology
that sees members of crowds as reverting to a primitive state in which
individual conscience and responsibility are entirely suppressed, and
the person becomes entirely impulsive and emotion-driven. This approach

M

to crowds was extremely popular in the early twentieth century, as it
allowed the governments of the day to ignore or dismiss people's
grievances. A modern-­ day equivalent of mob psychology can be found in
Zimbardo's theory of deindividuation. More recently, crowd researchers
have taken a different view, investigating the perceptions of people in
crowds, which turn out to be rather more rational and balanced than
might be thought from conventional 'mob' theories. modal To do with the
mode. The modal score in a data-set is the most commonly occurring
value; modal scores are those which have the same value as the mode. See
also levels of measurement, variation ratio. modal model of memory A
simplistic approach to memory storage that sees information as passing
from STM to LTM by rehearsal and repetition, as put forward by Atkinson
and Shiffrin. Generations of students have shown how this is not really
a very effective memorising technique. See also levels of processing.
mode The most frequently occurring score within a distribution. It is
one of the measures of central tendency. modelling Providing an example
which can be imitated, such that the imitator is able to learn new
styles of behaviour. Modelling is considered to be an important aspect
of social learning in children because what is copied is more general
than the imitation of a specific behaviour. It is often used explicitly
in therapy, to show adults how to vary their styles of interaction with
others. moderated multiple regression See MMR. moderating variable An
unmeasured variable in a set of research data which

225

has influenced the strength of a connection between two variables. See
also mediating variable. modes of representation Ways of ­coding
information internally. Bruner identified a developmental sequence in
representation, arguing that the first mode to develop was enactive
representation, in which information is stored as 'muscle memories'. As
the child's experience widens, and the environment makes increasingly
complex demands, more sophisticated modes of representation are required
-- first iconic representation (using images) and then symbolic
representation (in which information is represented by symbols).
modularity The idea that certain cognitive functions or areas of the
brain are limited to the performance of particular tasks, and in the
information they ­possess. molar actions Actions that involve the whole
body (e.g. walking, jumping, turning around). Compare molecular actions.
molecular actions Actions that involve only part of the body, and in
which the rest of the body is relatively stationary (e.g. typing,
writing, sewing). Compare molar actions. monetarised Particularly used
in reference to sampling techniques and research participants, this
refers to people or research outcomes who or which may have been
influenced by the existence or offer of financial reward. mongolism See
Down's syndrome. monitoring The process of continually checking progress
in a task by repeatedly connecting current information with the task
requirements. monochromatism Seeing in one colour only, usually
interpreted as seeing in black and white. In other words, monochromatic
individuals are those who

226

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

are entirely blind to all wavelengths of colour. This is a rare
condition, as most colour blindness involves a lack of sensitivity to a
few wavelengths only. monocular depth cue An indication of how distant
something is which can be detected just as well with only one eye as it
can with two. Monocular depth cues include relative size, height in the
plane, superposition, gradient of colour, gradient of texture, shadow
and motion parallax (see Figure 47). monotropy Bowlby's original idea of
the way in which attachment develops between the young infant and its
mother. Based on ideas from ethological studies of imprinting, the
theory stated that the relationship which an infant formed with its
mother was qualitatively different from any other relationship which it
formed with other people, and that if the bond was broken, through
separation, during the early years of life, then the child could suffer
permanent damage. This led to the maternal deprivation debate and
produced extensive research into attachment and mother--infant
interaction. monozygotic (MZ) twins Identical twins who have developed
from the same fertilised ovum which has subsequently split to develop as
two independent foetuses. Monozygotic twins are identical genetically
and hence have been used in studies of the relative importance of
genetics and environmental influences in development. See also dizygotic
twins, heritability estimate.

relative size

height in plane

Figure 47 Monocular depth cues

mood A temporary emotional state that is extended over time, forming an
affective baseline for personal responses and reactions. See also mood
congruity, misery-is-not-miserly effect. mood congruity The observation
that emotional material is learned more effectively if the participant's
mood matches the affective value of the material to be learned. See also
statedependent learning. mood disorders Mental problems such as
depression that manifest themselves as fluctuations or extremes in the
person's general emotional state or mood. mood freezing A phenomenon
observed by researchers in the 1980s, who gave a placebo to
participants, informing them that it would make it impossible for them
to change their moods. They then put them through a series of
frustrating tasks and identified a number of strategies that
participants used instead of reacting aggressively, including leaving
the situation, seeking distractions and practicsing relaxation
techniques. The study particularly challenged the validity of catharsis.
See also mindfulness. mood-state-dependent memory Memory that is linked
with the individual's emotional state or mood (e.g. the way that
memories about a partner's inadequacies or irritating behaviours are
more likely to come back if someone is in an irritable or angry mood,
while the same memories are totally forgotten when the person is

superposition

shadow

M

in a more positive mood). See also statedependent learning. moral
anxiety In Freudian theory, anxiety that arises from a fear of the
superego. As the superego has incorporated the rewards and punishments
of the parents, it is able to inflict pain, and if it becomes too
powerful the person may live in a chronic state of anxiety. See also
neurosis. moral development This should refer to the development of
moral standards and behaviour. In fact, the term has been taken over by
a particular approach that concentrates on moral judgement. Piaget
analysed tendencies in the developing moral judgement of the child, such
as a progression away from a belief in absolute justice. Lawrence
Kohlberg developed Piaget's ideas and produced a scheme of six stages of
moral reasoning along which the child progresses. While moral reasoning
is important, the theory has been criticised both for the ways in which
the stages are defined and for appearing to undervalue other aspects of
moral development such as moral behaviour. See autonomous morality,
conventional morality, pre-moral stage. moral disgust A form of disgust
that comes from a distasteful feeling about the moral standing of a
person's attitudes or actions, often in terms of their disposition to
engage in acts which are considered to be morally wrong. Interestingly,
moral disgust involves the same brain areas as physical disgust, while
also involving activity in those areas of the frontal lobes which are
concerned with making social judgements. moral emotions Emotions that
are connected with the propriety or significance of one's own behaviour
in relation to others, or others' behaviour in relation to the self or
third parties.

227

moral norms Rules of conduct that are based on social principles of
right and wrong, generally deriving from ideas about personal welfare.
See also conventional norms. moral realism Another name given to the
stage of heteronomous morality described by Piaget, in which the child
accepts fully the rules that are given to it by society and those in
authority. See also autonomous morality, moral development. moral
therapy An early approach to humane treatment of the mentally disturbed,
pioneered by Pinel shortly after the French Revolution. The essence of
moral therapy was that mentally disturbed people should be treated not
as dangerous lunatics, but with dignity. The therapy involved such
measures as discarding chains and constraints, and providing clean
living quarters and such work as the patients were able to undertake. It
had a remarkably high success rate, and eventually made a significant
contribution to the reform of the care of the mentally ill. Moro reflex
A reflex found in newborn babies in which the limbs are closed into the
body and the hands are clenched. The probable function of the reflex can
be seen when it is elicited by letting the baby slip while holding it
and the Moro reflex causes the baby to cling on to its caretaker (do not
try this, take our word for it!). See also reflex. morpheme A unit of
spoken language, in which basic speech sounds (phonemes) have been
combined to produce basic syllables or simple words. A morpheme is the
smallest unit of speech that has any real meaning in communication.
morphology The study of form, or complete units. In linguistics,
morphology refers to the study of how morphemes are utilised and
combined in speech. In

228

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

biology, it refers to the study of the form and function of parts of the
anatomy, or the structure of the living being. morphosyntax Linguistic
rules concerned with word order and the grammatical elements of words.

son to suppose that this care can only be provided by the biological
mother or by a woman, and parenting has become a preferred term. motion
parallax The apparent relative movement of objects in the visual field,

Moscovici, Serge (1927--2014) Along with Tajfel, Moscovici was a central
figure in the development of European social psychology. His work in
social representation theory at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes et Sciences
Sociales in Paris began in the early 1960s, with a study of the social
role of psychoanalytic theory in French folk wisdom, but was more
clearly articulated two decades later, following a series of
psychological investigations into the mechanisms of social influence,
such as the role of minority influence in conformity, during the 1970s.
Social representation theory became one of the key theories in European
social psychology, expressing as it does the way in which cultural and
social beliefs can be transmitted and developed through individual and
group interaction.

mother--infant interaction See parent-- infant interaction. motherese A
simplified form of speech that adults adopt when talking to babies. Also
known as infant-directed speech, motherese is characterised by a
generally higher pitch, slower expression of elongated vowels, and more
pitch variability. Infants respond preferentially to this type of
speech, and it has been suggested that it assists their learning of the
relevant phonemes for their spoken language. mothering Providing the
physical, cognitive and emotional care and stimulation required by an
infant or child. Research indicates that this kind of care can be
provided by any adult or older child provided that they have an
appropriate commitment, a knowledge of the needs of infants, and an
ability to respond to the signals offered by the infant. There is
therefore no sound rea-

which occurs when the person doing the perceiving moves around. Objects
in the foreground seem to move more than objects in the background, so
that when a perceiver moves, such objects appear to change their
relative position in the visual field. See also depth cue. motivated
forgetting A term for the forgetting of information as a result of an
unconscious unwillingness to remember it (e.g. the forgetting of an
impending dental appointment, because you don't want to go). According
to Freud, all forgetting is motivated forgetting in some way, either
because it could lead to the recall of deeply buried childhood traumas,
or because the forgotten information is symbolic of such trauma. Other
researchers have identified alternative explanations for many kinds of
forgetting, but motivated forgetting is still considered to be valid as
an explanation for some instances of failure to recall information.

M

motivation The general term given to an inferred underlying state that
energises behaviour, causing it to take place. There has been extensive
physiological research into the neural mechanisms involved in
motivational states such as hunger, thirst, the need for sex and
exploration of novelty. In addition, much research has emphasised the
social aspects of motivation -- the need for positive regard from
others, or the way that specific forms of behaviour may occur as a
result of the need to communicate or interact in meaningful ways with
other people. While the majority of psychology textbooks limit
discussions of motivation to physiological factors and need or drive
theories, a more comprehensive formulation of human motivation might
incorporate a wider range of motives. These would include motivations
arising from cognitive processes, such as cognitive dissonance or
personal constructs, factors involved in motivating personal action such
as self-efficacy beliefs, locus of control, attributions and learned
helplessness, affiliative motivators such as empathy or positive regard,
and sociocultural motivators such as social identifications and social
representations. motivators Specific incentives or aspects of the
environment that can induce certain forms of behaviour in the
individual. The term has been commonly used in management theory, where
it includes such items as the provision of personal career development
for individuals at work, or bonus payments which would encourage those
in employment to work harder. See also Hertzberg. motive A specific
inferred reason put forward to explain the likelihood of a particular
behaviour occurring. See also motivation. motor Referring to movement.

229

motor aphasia A disorder of speaking (see aphasia) that is due to
problems using the muscles of the tongue, lips, etc. motor cortex Part
of the cerebral cortex which is particularly involved in the
coordination of voluntary movement. It forms a strip running alongside
the central fissure, at the back of the frontal lobe. The area of the
frontal lobe immediately before the motor cortex is known as the
premotor cortex, and this is where voluntary movement is planned and
sequenced. See also prefrontal cortex, cerebellum. motor end plate The
part at the very end of a motor neurone where the axon divides into
small dendrites, which spread out and make synaptic connections with
receptor sites in the muscle fibres. The neurotransmitter involved at
the motor end plate is acetylcholine. motor neurone A nerve cell that
transmits information in the form of electrical impulses from the
central nervous system to the muscles of the body. This information
forms a signal for muscular contraction, resulting in movement of the
limbs or body. Motor neurones tend to have their cell body located
within the grey matter of the central nervous system itself, surrounded
by dendrites that receive information from many other neurones. The axon
is elongated and reaches from the central nervous system to the muscle
fibre itself, where it spreads into dendrites to form the motor end
plate. Motor neurones are usually myelinated, which speeds up the
passage of the impulse along the axon and allows more accurate timing.
See also connector neurone, sensory neurone (see Figure 48). motor
program Stored action routines that conform to preestablished patterns.
motor projection area The part of the cerebral cortex that is directly
concerned

230

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience dendrites

cell body

direction of impulse motor end plate axon myelin sheath

Figure 48 A motor neurone

Figure 49 The motor cortex & sensory cortex with the mediation of
physical actions. Also known as the primary motor cortex, this area
forms a strip running alongside the central fissure, on the side of the
frontal lobe. It runs directly parallel to the somatosensory projection
area and, in a manner similar to that of the organisation of the
somatosensory area, different parts of the strip mediate activity in
different parts of the body. The most mobile parts of the body, such as
the hands, have a large proportion of surface area representing them in
the motor area (Figure 49). See also homunculus, premotor cortex.

motor skill A skill that is physical, as opposed to a cognitive skill.
The word 'motor' in this context implies muscle movement. The study of
motor skills involves looking at the influence of practice, feedback,
and the development of smooth muscular coordination, and it was the main
area for studying the acquisition and operation of skills. The area was
strongly influenced by Cambridge psychologists who became fascinated
with the skills involved in playing cricket and the training of fighter
pilots during the Second World War. Other major landmarks include a

M

study of cigar makers in Cuba, which discovered that performance
improved for at least the first 250 million cigars rolled, and that the
improvement followed a power law. See also automatisation, bilateral
transfer. MPOA See medial pre-optic area. MRI scans See magnetic
resonance ­imaging. MS See multiple sclerosis. MT An abbreviation for the
middle temporal area of the visual cortex, also known as V5. mu
oscillations A pattern of EEG ­variations that are found across the
sensory and motor cortex, and are most common when the person is at
rest. mu suppression The way that performing actions involves a decrease
in mu oscillations in the brain. mu waves see mu oscillations.
Müller--Lyer illusion A well-known geometric illusion that consists of
two equal lines, one with 'arrowheads' and the other with lines forming
'fishtails' at the ends. See also visual illusions. multi-cell
recordings The combined activity of many neurones recorded individually
at one electrode. Multi-cell recordings are usually measured by the
number of action potentials per second.

231

members of several cultural groups live, each bringing aspects of their
previous culture to bear on the life of the society. multimodal A
statistical distribution having more than one peak. Also, perception,
thought or action operating in several forms, or a therapy that combines
more than one therapeutic approach. multiple-demand network A set of
brain regions, mainly in the prefrontal cortex, that are shown by fMRI
scans to be activated in a wide range of tasks involving cognitive
control. The network also includes regions of the lateral prefrontal
cortex and the anterior ­cingulate gyrus. multiple intelligences A theory
of intelligence put forward by Gardner, which held that intelligence
actually consists of seven distinct and independent abilities, each of
which should be assessed and evaluated separately. The seven
intelligences are linguistic intelligence, musical intelligence,
mathematical-logical intelligence, spatial intelligence,
bodily-kinaesthetic intelligence, interpersonal intelligence and
intrapersonal intelligence. See also triarchic intelligence, emotional
intelligence.

multi-method study A study that involves several different approaches to
conducting research.

multiple mothering Childcare that is carried out by a number of
different people, usually in succession. Infants in institutions were
often exposed to a succession of caregivers, and it is widely accepted
that this form of maternal deprivation results in long-term difficulties
in forming relationships. These days, considerable efforts are made to
avoid the repeated making and breaking of attachments in children who
have to be brought up in care. See also kibbutz.

multicultural Involving characteristics and aspects of several different
cultures simultaneously. The term is usually used to refer to modern
societies in which

multiple personality A rare ­condition in which a person functions with
two or more distinct personalities. ­The ­personalities may alternate and
may

multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA) A method of analysing fMRI data in
which the patterns of activity across the cortex are linked to cognitive
processes.

232

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

appear to be quite unaware of each others' existence. Multiple
personality is not a form of schizophrenia, but a development of a
phenomenon that is quite common and normal in childhood. See also
dissociative identity disorder. multiple regression A statistical
technique by which the contribution each independent variable makes to
the criterion variable is calculated. For example, we might have a
criterion score of the number of friends each person has, and want to
know the relative contribution of factors such as attractiveness, wealth
and age. Because these variables are themselves correlated with each
other, it is difficult to say how important each is on its own. In
multiple regression, the strongest correlate of the criterion is
identified and then the scores on all the other variables are rescaled
to eliminate their statistical association with that variable. The next
strongest correlate is then selected, and the two variables combined to
generate a multiple regression coefficient. All variables are now
rescaled to eliminate their correlation with this coefficient, and so
the process goes on until a score is available for all of the variables.
At this stage, the correlation of each variable with the criterion is
completely independent of its correlation with the other variables. So
in our example, the correlation of age with the number of friends is no
longer potentially boosted by the fact that older people tend to be more
wealthy, or reduced if, in this sample, they are perceived as less
attractive. The multiple regression coefficient is a measure of how well
the chosen set of independent variables predict the criterion, and the
calculation also shows how much each measure independently contributes
to the prediction. A major use of multiple regression is in constructing
tests that

predict the criterion. In our example, we will be able to predict (for
this sample) the number of friends we are likely to find by choosing
certain combinations of the independent variables. multiple resource
theory The idea that cognitive processing depends on several different
processing resources, such as visual or semantic processing, which are
limited but work together. multiple sclerosis (MS) A progressive
degenerating illness that results in the person gradually losing motor
coordination and control. MS is produced by the destruction or
degeneration of the myelin sheaths covering the axons of nerve cells in
many parts of the brain, thus slowing down the transmission of
information from one part of the brain to another. The process by which
this occurs is not yet fully understood. multipolar neurones See
connector ­neurones. multitasking Carrying out several tasks at the same
time -- or, in neurological terms, in rapid succession. Multitasking
requires both task switching and an ability to retain awareness of
future goals while dealing with immediate ones. multivariate analysis A
general term for statistical techniques such as multiple regression and
factor analysis that processes the correlational relationships between
several variables. Multivariate analysis may be concerned with
identifying significant differences, as in MANOVA, or significant
correlations as in multiple regression. multivariate analysis of
variance see MANOVA. musical intelligence A form of intelligence put
forward by Gardner that is concerned with musical comprehension and
appreciation as well as musical

M

ability. See also multiple intelligences, interpersonal intelligence.
mutation A spontaneous or relatively sudden change in genetic structure
that, because it is genetic, may be passed on to offspring. MVPA See
multi-voxel pattern analysis. myelin sheath An insulating fatty
substance that is wrapped around the dendrons and axons of neurones in
the central nervous system. The myelin sheath is formed by Schwann
cells, which coil themselves around the axon, thus preventing ionic
transfer between the inside of the neurone and the surrounding fluids. A
small gap between each Schwann cell is known as the node of Ranvier, and
it is at these points that ionic transfer takes place. Because of this
arrangement, the electrical impulse travels along the neurone in a
series of jumps, which is a much faster method of passing information
the length of the

Figure 50 A myelin sheath

233

neurone than a steady progression. This system is particularly common in
the central nervous system itself, and in the receipt of sensory
information and the transmission of motor impulses. In cases where a
slightly slower progression is not a disadvantage, as for example in the
autonomic nervous system, neurones tend to be unmyelinated. The white
matter of the central nervous system consists of packed masses of
myelinated nerve fibres (see Figure 50). myelinated Covered with a
myelin sheath. myelination The process of covering the axons of neurones
with a myelin sheath, which speeds up neural transmission. In human
infants, myelination can continue for some years after birth. myside
bias The tendency for people to evaluate statements or ideas in terms of
their own beliefs. MZ twins See monozygotic twins.

N nAch see need for achievement. nAff see need for affiliation. n-back
This is a performance task that is often used as a measure of working
memory capacity. The person is presented with a continuous sequence of
stimuli and asked to identify when a new stimulus is the same as one
that is a fixed number of items (n) back in the list. The value of n
varies, and the higher it is, the more difficult the task. A variant of
this task is the dual n-back, in which two different sets of stimuli are
presented together -- ­usually one visual and one auditory. The task
requires considerable concentration, and in fact, a variant of it is the
central task in the board game/app of that name. N170 A distinctive
variation in the event-related potential pattern that happens when the
person is looking at faces rather than at other types of visual stimuli.
See also face recognition. N400 This is an evoked potential response
pattern appearing in EEGs when a word's meaning appears unexpectedly, or
out of context. naïve Inexperienced or without previous exposure to the
particular tasks or experiences being used in a specific research
project. naming task A cognitive processing task in which the person is
presented visually with a rapid sequence of words, and asked to
pronounce them. nano- One billionth. One nanometer (nm) is a billionth
of a metre and is used as a measurement of the wavelength of DOI:
10.4324/9781003158899

light. One nanosecond (ns) is a billionth of a second and is most likely
to be encountered in measurements of the speed with which a computer can
perform its simplest operation (known as the cycle time). narcissism A
love of the self. The more puritanical approaches to therapy regard
narcissism as always undesirable, and when most of a person's affections
are fixated upon themselves, this must be so. However, there is plenty
of evidence that a healthy degree of affection for the self is essential
for maintaining self-esteem and productive functioning. In personality
assessment, the trait of narcissism is one of the Dark Triad,
characterised by egotism, pride, grandiosity and a lack of empathy.
narcolepsy A condition in which the person is subjected to sudden,
short, uncontrollable episodes of deep sleep. It is much more extreme
than the tendency to sleep during psychology lectures, and also much
rarer. narcotic Drugs that have both sedative (encouraging sleep) and
analgesic (pain-relieving) properties. They are usually of the opiate
family, such as ­morphine or heroin. narrative review A literature
review, either introducing a piece of research or published in its own
right, that picks out interesting features in the literature and
discusses them, rather than attempting to give a comprehensive account
of all studies. The term is also used for reviews of outcome evidence
which combine

N

the results of studies descriptively rather than in terms of their
statistical rigour as in a meta-analysis. See also systematic review,
meta-review. narrative therapy An approach to ­therapy based in the idea
that people live their lives and relationships through narratives that
they have constructed, and that therapy can be effective by helping them
first to make their narratives explicit and then by helping them to
create new and more functional narratives. nativism A school of thought
which holds that the important determinants of development are directly
inherited through genetic transmission. The name implies that the
emphasis is on qualities which are inborn. Although nativists do
recognise that environmental factors may have an effect on development,
they consider such effects to be minimal, with the main explanation for
individual differences being the genotype of the individual. The
maturational theory of Gesell is an example of a nativist position. See
also empiricism. natural categories Types of concept identified by
Rosch, which seem to fit with everyday behaviour or activities, and so
form a useful and unremarkable way of grouping objects together. They
may have superordinate or subordinate concepts, but the central concept
is one that relates to something which human beings do. For example, the
concept of chair has a superordinate concept of furniture, and many
subordinate concepts, such as armchair or stool. However, all chairs
share the same property, of being things that people sit on, and in this
respect 'chair' is a natural category. The comparative psychologist
Peter Marler suggested that natural categories may even predate and form
a precursor to language.

235

natural concepts Concepts that appear to emerge purely as a result of
the a­ nimal or human's interaction with their world. See also concept,
concept formation, natural categories. natural experiments Experiments
in which variables vary and opportunities exist to study their
consequences, but this happens as a result of social, ­biological or
economic circumstances and without deliberate manipulation by the
experimenter. natural science paradigm A ­framework for scientific
inquiry based on the ­natural sciences of physics, chemistry and biology.
natural selection See evolution. nature --nurture debate The name given
to two opposed theoretical stances which used to be common as
psychological debates. One stance emphasises 'nature', the inheritance
of abilities or characteristics, while the other emphasises 'nurture',
learning or the effect of environmental influences. Nature--­nurture
debates represent a convenient way of organising some theoretical
issues, but are now recognised as deceptive in that they present a false
dichotomy: almost every feature of human psychology has both a genetic
and an environmental component. See also empiricism, nativism,
dialectics. naughty teddy A semi-legendary character introduced to
modern psychology during a series of investigations of the effects of
context in Piagetian conservation tasks. In investigations by
McGarrigle, the changes in shape of the experimental substances were
caused by a small teddy bear who 'lived' in a box on the experimenter's
table and would periodically emerge to alter the experimental materials.
The small children being tested

236

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

had little ­trouble recognising that the materials had, in fact,
conserved their volume or number despite the actions of the toy bear.
The studies were interpreted as throwing some doubt on the basic
Piagetian assumptions concerning children's logical capacities. It was
argued that the Piagetian findings resulted from the abstract nature of
the conventional tasks and their lack of context, rather than from the
child's inability to reason. near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) A system
for measuring the level of oxygenation in the blood. Areas of high blood
oxygenation in the brain are considered to represent a higher degree of
neural activity. Consistent low oxygen is an indicator of poor physical
health. Necker cube A reversing figure, which appears to change its
orientation irrespective of the intentions of the observer. The Necker
cube was cited by Gregory as an example of hypothesis testing in
perception. Without perceptual cues to indicate which way round the
figure should be seen, the brain alternates from one plausible
interpretation to the other (see Figure 51). need A state of
physiological deficit. Many needs, such as thirst, are associated

Figure 51 The Necker cube

with a drive or homeostatic motivation, but others, such as a need for
vitamin C, are not. The term has been extended to non-physiological
needs such as affiliation and achievement motivation. See also hierarchy
of human needs. need for achievement (nAch) A proposed psychological
need to achieve success in some or several areas. See also achievement
motivation. need for affiliation (nAff) A proposed psychological need to
link with or belong to other people. See also affiliative needs.
negative aftereffects Illusions that occur immediately after continuous
or very intense stimulation of the visual system with the same sensory
information. Possibly as a consequence of the habituation of sensory
neurones, the opposite experience to the previous stimulation is
experienced. The best-known negative aftereffects occur as a result of
looking at something very bright, such as a light bulb or the sun. For
some minutes afterwards, the shape is perceived as a closed figure in
the field of vision, and it is usually of the opposite colour to that
which was seen. Colour aftereffects can also be induced by staring at a
brightly coloured object for a couple of minutes and then transferring
the gaze to a plain background. Negative aftereffects also occur with
movement. The waterfall effect occurs when a subjective impression of
reversed movement is experienced after continuous exposure to movement
in just one direction. negative correlation A measure of the consistency
with which an increase in one variable is accompanied by a decrease in a
second variable. For example, cognitive capacity correlates negatively
with the number of units of alcohol consumed. A relationship in the
opposite direction is

N

237

called a positive correlation, and the measure of such relationships is
the c­ orrelation coefficient.

strengthens the probability of a behaviour, whereas punishment reduces
or suppresses the target behaviour.

negative emotions Antisocial emotions or emotions which are generally
experienced as unpleasant, such as fear, anger, jealousy, anxiety and
disgust. Compare positive emotions.

negative skew A distortion of a normal distribution in which more of the
scores are higher so that the peak of the curve is shifted towards the
right. In a negatively skewed distribution, the mode will be higher than
the median, which in turn is higher than the mean. See also kurtosis.

negative feedback Information which is fed back within a system in such
a way that it reduces the distance from a goal. Whereas positive
feedback (e.g. when a microphone picks up from the speakers and the
sound gets louder and louder) can make a system go out of control,
negative feedback is essential for keeping a system within limits and on
target. A common example is a central heating system in which a higher
temperature causes the boiler to shut down. In this technical sense, an
essay mark is only negative feedback if it helps to make subsequent
essays move closer to the desired form. See cybernetics. negative
incentive An object or experience that has the opposite effect to an
incentive, so that the organism works to avoid or prevent it. See also
negative reinforcement. negative priming When an object that has
previously been ignored suddenly becomes the focus of attention.
Negative priming of this kind produces slower recognition and response
rates. See also priming. negative reinforcement Reinforcement that
involves the withdrawal or avoidance of something unpleasant or
aversive. Behaviour that has been strengthened by negative reinforcement
-- especially in the case of avoidance learning -- is extremely
resistant to extinction. The term is often wrongly applied to
punishment. Negative reinforcement, like all reinforcements,

negative state relief theory The idea that helping behaviour originates
in our seeking to alleviate the personal distress we feel as a result of
seeing others in need. negative triad A way of describing
characteristically 'depressive' negative beliefs. The triad consists of
beliefs about the self, the future and the world in general. Depressive
individuals characteristically hold negative views on all three of
these. See also attribution. neglect (i)

(ii) 

A standard category of child abuse indicating a substantial failure to
provide what the child needs. Neglect is a form of passive abuse and may
involve poor physical care, a lack of cognitive stimulation or
inadequate emotional warmth (see attachment). Neglected children are
often also actively abused. In neurological contexts, neglect refers to
the brain's failing to recognise or acknowledge the existence of part of
the visual field, despite receiving information about it. See also
hemispatial neglect, extinction.

NEO A term used to summarise the first three traits to be identified
using a combination of meta-analysis and factor analysis. The letters
stand for

238

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Neisser, Ulrich (1928--2012) Ulrich Neisser was a major influence on the
development of cognitive ­psychology during the second half of the
twentieth century. He challenged the mechanistic, linear processing
models of cognition which were common at that time, and developed a
cognitive model which was much more concerned with how people analyse
and deal with the real world (see anticipatory schema). He also
undertook important research into human memory, showing how time and
social influence distort the details of factual memories, but do not
necessarily change their social or human meaning. neuroticism,
extraversion and openness to experience. See also five-factor theory,
EPI, personality trait. neo-behaviourism A revised form of behaviourism
in which it is recognised that cognitive processes do play some role in
determining behaviour. neocortex Another name for the cerebral cortex,
which refers to the fact that it is the latest part of the brain to have
evolved. There are six distinct layers in the neocortex which may
represent different modes of operation: for example, layer IV generally
has connections with other parts of the cortex -- although not in the
primary motor cortex. The precise functions of the layers of the
neocortex, however, are as yet unclear. neocortical substrate The layer
of neurones immediately below the surface of the cerebral cortex,
generally consisting of white matter transmitting information between
different parts of the cortex. neo-Freudians A term used to describe
psychoanalytic theorists who accept Freud's basic ideas, but have
developed them further, often emphasising social and cultural factors in
psychodynamic processes. The British neo-Freudians have concentrated on
object relations theory, which in turn has made the study of attachments
an important part of developmental psychology.

neologisms Made-up words. In neurological contexts, the word is often
used to describe the words made up by people suffering from jargon
aphasia. neonate A newborn. For humans, the neonatal period is usually
taken to extend from birth to one month, the period of greatest risk of
death. Recently, it has been recognised that the first major change in
functioning occurs at around eight weeks, a time of an increase of
connections within the brain, and it has been suggested that the
neonatal period should be extended up to the time when these changes
start. neoteny The evolutionary model, proposed by the biologist Stephen
Jay Gould (among others), which argues that human infants are born
'prematurely' in the sense that they are far more helpless than most
other young animals, and so have a long period of dependency before they
are capable of independent existence. This extended dependency period
allows for more extensive brain development biologically, and
psychologically for an extended learning period, providing the human
being with a highly developed capacity for learning and the ability to
adapt to numerous different types of environment. See also evolution.
nerve A fibre or system of fibres that conveys sensory information from
the sense

N

receptors to the central nervous system, or motor impulses from the
central nervous system to muscle fibres. Afferent nerve fibres consist
of the axons or dendrons of sensory neurones bunched together to form a
thread-like structure, while efferent nerve fibres consist of the axons
of motor neurones arranged in a similar manner. nerve cell See neurone.
nerve growth factor (NGF) A stimulating protein that can be produced by
the body in some circumstances, and encourages the development or
regrowth of neural fibres. See also synapse, synaptogenesis. nervous
breakdown A nontechnical term for a more or less complete loss of
ability to cope with day-to-day living, showing itself in changes from
the person's normal behaviour, such as extreme weepiness or anxiety, and
general loss of psychological well-being. nervous system The network of
nerve fibres that run throughout the body, which includes the two main
structures of the central nervous system -- the brain and spinal cord.

239

the neurone receives sufficient neurotransmitters into its receptor
site. Also known as the neurone's action potential. See also myelin
sheath. neural network A group of brain cells, or neurones,
interconnected in such a way that they are all involved in some
neurological function or process. The term is also used by researchers
in artificial intelligence to refer to an interconnected group of
decision-making computational nodes, forming a network that is involved
in a particular function or process, although it is more accurately
referred to as an artificial ­neural network (ANN) in that context. See
also connectionism, parallel distributed processing. neural pathways The
routes through the brain taken by sequences of neurones and the
activation of nodes. Different neural pathways have been linked with
different aspects of experience (e.g. visual pathways or reward
pathways). See also population vector.

neural To do with neurones.

neural plasticity The ability of nerve cells and brain tissue to adapt
their functioning as they recover from injury or trauma. Neural
plasticity is particularly strong in children, who often recover from
substantial brain damage with little long-term effect, as the remaining
brain tissue takes over the functions of the damaged parts. Adults can
also show surprisingly high levels of neural plasticity, but whether
this takes place is complicated by the extremely high levels of
motivation required for the effort of re-ordering neural pathways to
effect recovery, and the way in which many adults experiencing such
injury see themselves as being permanently damaged, and therefore fail
to make the required efforts.

neural impulse The small burst of electrical activity that is generated
when

neural substrate A term used to indicate those parts of the nervous
system

nested territories Territories that are located as smaller areas within
larger ones. For example, the female American jaçana maintains a large
territory during the mating season, and several males occupy smaller
territories nested within it, with the female mating with all of them.
The female defends her large territory against other females, and the
males defend theirs against one another. netnography Internet-based
research which has been carried out within an ethnographic framework.
See ethnography.

240

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

that are concerned with a particular psychological state or behaviour.
neural tube A primitive type of spinal cord, which consists of nerve
fibres running the length of the body, with a hollow space in the
centre. It is found in simple organisms such as flatworms and is thought
to have been one of the first stages in the evolution of the brain and
nervous system. neuro- A combining prefix meaning to do with nerve
fibres or the nervous system (e.g. neuropsychology, neurotransmitter).
The related adjective is neural. neuroanatomy The study of the structure
and composition of the nervous system. See also functional neuroanatomy.
neuroblast A form of stem cell that will develop into a neurone.
neurochemistry The study of the chemical aspects of the nervous system,
which includes the study of specific neurotransmitters and of ionic
transfer within the neurone. neurocognitive Concerning those aspects of
cognitive functioning which are linked with or relate to brain
structures or neural pathways. neuroconstructivism The term used to
describe the interaction between brain capacity and the demands of the
environment, which leads to increased neural development and the
development of mature cognitive systems. neurodiversity The idea that
neurological differences such as dysgraphia, dyslexia, dyscalculia or
autism reflect normal variations in brain development and should be
encompassed in working or educational practice as simply reflecting
unusual modes of brain operation. The associated adjective is
neurodivergent. See specific learning difficulty, mental handicap.

neuroeconomics The use of methods and theories derived from neurological
research to account for economic decision-­making. neuroethics The
application of neurological findings to ethical issues. neurogenesis The
process of generating new nerve cells in the brain. See also neuroblast.
neurogenetic determinism The reductionist idea that human life and
experience are entirely caused by genetic and neural factors, rather
than seeing them as contributing towards experience through a dynamic
interaction with society and the environment. neurogenetics The study of
the relationship between neural development and genetic factors.
neuroimaging The use of scanning techniques to develop images of the
structure of, and changes to, the brain. The advent of improved brain
scanning has resulted in the rapid development of neuroimaging as an
area of research. neuromuscular junction The synapse where nerve
messages communicate with muscle fibres. See also motor end plate.
neurone A cell that receives or relays information within the nervous
system. The information takes the form of electrical impulses, which are
passed from one cell to another by means of synaptic transmission. There
are generally considered to be three main kinds of neurones: (i)

(ii) 

sensory neurones, which receive information from the sense receptors and
pass it to the ­central nervous system; motor neurones, which transmit
information from the central nervous system to the muscles, thus
affecting actions; and

N

(iii) 

connector neurones, also known as interneurones, which are mainly found
within the central nervous system, and which relay information to and
from several neurones.

See also neurotransmitter. neuropsychology The study of brain processes,
especially when damaged or faulty, to give an understanding of
behaviour, capability and consciousness. See also clinical
neuropsychology. neuroscience The scientific study of the components,
structure and function of the brain and nervous system. neurosis A broad
category of psychological disturbances that are not believed to have an
organic origin and which are not psychoses. The major neuroses are
depression, chronic anxiety, hysteria, obsessions and phobias. Usually,
the sufferer maintains contact with reality, recognising that the
symptom is irrational but still unable to modify it. The term has gone
through several meanings since the eighteenth century when it referred
to a disease of the nervous system. The usage indicates a belief about
the source of the problem, and today neuroses are expected to have
psychological causes, whether in the remote or recent past or in the
present. neuroticism A personality trait indicating a tendency to be
anxious. It is the opposite of psychological stability and forms one of
the central traits in the five-factor theory of personality.
neurotransmitter A chemical involved in synaptic transmission. There are
many different chemicals that serve as neurotransmitters, of which the
best known are serotonin, acetylcholine, dopamine, noradrenaline,
endorphin and enkephalin. Neurotransmitters are highly influential

241

in subjective experience as well as in more general brain functioning,
and many of the psychoactive drugs exert their effect either by blocking
the uptake of specific neurotransmitters or by preventing their
dispersal and causing a build-up of the substance within the synaptic
cleft. new paradigm research An alternative framework for research,
based on ­hermeneutics -- in other words, emphasising the importance of
social experience and social meaning. Traditional psychological
methodology in the 1970s was seen as deterministic, tightly controlled
and often artificial, resulting in socially meaningless information. New
paradigm research involved a rethinking of the relationship between the
psychologist and the person or persons who are the subject(s) of
psychological enquiry. In new paradigm research, people are seen as
active collaborators or participants in the study, whose opinions and
experiences have value. This stands in direct contrast to conventional
psychological methodology, which tended to assume that its 'subjects'
were there to be manipulated or tricked by the experimenter, and that
good empirical investigation consisted of 'controlling', or preventing,
any human influences from individual subjects from affecting the
research. New paradigm research was therefore closely linked to the
growing interest in ethical issues in psychology, to the increased
acceptance of qualitative analysis, and to the approach to social
enquiry known as ethogenics. It tends to involve non-experimental
methods of investigation, such as interviewing people and asking them
about their experiences, or the dynamic real-world approaches
exemplified in action research. It also tends to involve methods of
analysis that are directly concerned with identifying

242

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

the social meaning in the material, rather than with simple
quantification. NGF See nerve growth factor. nicotine Sometimes
described as one of the most addictive drugs ever known, nicotine is one
of the most popular recreational drugs taken in industrial society. It
is usually smoked, but sometimes chewed, and has been clearly implicated
in lung and mouth cancers, and in heart disease. Its psychological
effects include a slight sedative effect. Nicotine is picked up in
receptor sites in the motor end plate of the muscle fibres, thus
reducing the uptake of acetylcholine. Consequently, nicotine withdrawal
often leads to increasingly restless sensations, as the muscles become
more receptive to acetylcholine, and to increased lability of the
autonomic nervous system, accentuating both positive and negative
emotional reactions. NIRS See near-infrared spectroscopy. nociception
The perception (and experience) of pain through the skin.

gained prominence in opposition to the influence of logical positivism.
In a psychological context, it refers to those aspects of experience
which are not directly observable, such as thinking and knowing and
other types of mental activity. Most cognitive psychology, and a large
part of modern social psychology, could therefore be described as
noetic. noise Stimulation that does not carry any information. Often
this will be a sound, but noise can occur in any sensory channel. Noise
is of most interest when it accompanies information (which would tend to
be called the signal) and therefore makes it more difficult to detect or
interpret the signal accurately. A measure of detectability of a
stimulus is to divide the strength of the signal by the amount of noise
-- the signal-to-noise ratio. The term is also used within psychology in
its more usual sense of a strong auditory stimulus that may be of
interest as a source of stress or of deafness.

nociceptor A pain receptor found in the skin that responds to
mechanical, thermal or chemical stimuli. See also thermoreception,
mechanireception, pain.

nominal scale See levels of measurement.

nocturnal To do with or taking place during the night-time. For example,
nocturnal enuresis is bed-wetting that occurs at night, and nocturnal
animals are those that are active at night.

nomothetic Concerned with the formation of general laws, usually of
behaviour. Nomothetic principles are concerned with that which is
abstract, universal or generally applicable to humankind. See also
hermeneutic, ­idiographic.

node of Ranvier The small spaces that occur between the Schwann cells
forming the myelin sheath along the axon of the neurone. nodes The basic
units in neural network models, nodes are groups of neurones that are
activated in response to activity from other parts of the network.
noetic The origins of the term are about relating to the intellect, and
it

nomophobia Distress or anxiety caused by not having a mobile phone
immediately to hand.

nomothetic tests Tests that are constructed in order to make comparisons
between people. Compare idiographic. non-committal agreement A general
expression of agreement or approval which does not imply any particular
opinion or stance on the part of the person expressing it. See also
non-directive therapy.

N

243

non-common effects Effects that are specific to a particular behaviour
or circumstance, rather than representing more general or widespread
outcomes.

if they have higher status and are widely used even when the assumptions
are known to be violated. See also levels of measurement, test power.

non-contingent reinforcement Rein­ forcement that is not dependent on a
particular action or response from the organism involved. Such
reinforcement is often involved in superstitious learning.

non-participant techniques A term that used to be applied to
observations in which the observer (researcher) takes no part in the
activity which is being observed. The term has become ­obsolete since the
word 'participant' is now used to refer to the people taking part in the
study.

non-declarative memory Memories that are used but not consciously
processed (e.g. the procedural knowledge involved in having a bath or
drinking a cup of tea). non-directive therapy The group of therapies and
counselling techniques that consistently avoid making value judgements
about what the client has done, is doing, or should do. See also
client-centred therapy. non-invasive techniques Approaches to the study
of the body or brain that do not involve penetrating the skin. See EEGs,
CAT scans, and MRI and PET scans for examples of non-invasive methods
used in brain research. non-modal scores The scores in a dataset that
are not modal. See also variation ratio. non-parametric statistics
Statistical techniques such as rank correlation and the Mann--Whitney
U-test which do not require that the data should fit requirements such
as interval scaling and normal distribution. Because they use less of
the information in the data, they are usually less powerful than
parametric statistics. The corresponding advantage is that they make
fewer assumptions about the nature of the data and so are less likely to
give misleading results. In principle, non-parametric tests are
preferable if they are able to demonstrate a result. In practice,
parametric tests are treated as

non-technological society A term used to describe societies that
maintain their traditional economic systems and cultures, such as are
found in some parts of Africa, Australia and South America. In colonial
times, such cultures were often referred to as 'primitive', but a deeper
knowledge of them has shown that their levels of sophistication are
extremely high, but that they centre around a more ecologically balanced
style of living, rather than around technological development.
Consequently, the term non-technological societies is increasingly used
as providing a more accurate description. non-verbal communication (NVC)
Communication through signals other than those used in language
(e.g. posture, appearance, smell, and a range of specific behaviours
such as pupil dilation, facial expression and the pattern of eye
contact). Extensively studied by Michael Argyle, non-verbal
communication takes place through a number of different non-verbal cues,
which can be combined in various ways. Some researchers have estimated
NVC as being more than four times as powerful as verbal communication,
although one could imagine that trying to teach the psychology syllabus
non-verbally would be rather laborious. An understanding

244

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

of the cues and use of non-verbal signals forms the basis of most social
skills training. non-verbal cue A signal that conveys some kind of
communication to an observer without involving the use of language.
Non-verbal cues are usually considered to be of seven main types:
paralanguage, proxemics, posture, gesture, facial expression, eye
contact and dress. Some theorists consider that ritual and ritual
symbolism should also be regarded as an important medium of non-verbal
communication. noradrenaline A neurotransmitter and hormone that is
commonly involved in emotional reactions as a main transmitter of the
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system, as well as within
the brain itself. norepinephrine The American name for noradrenaline.
norm The range of values within which the members of a particular
population can be expected to function. Psychometric tests will list
different sets of standardised norms for various groups of people
(e.g. 'women 35--50 years old' or '5--7-year-old boys'). Users of the
tests can then compare their results with the norms for a comparable
population. Within developmental psychology, norms are used to determine
whether a child is performing so far out of the normal range as to
require special treatment. See also social norms. normal curve The
bell-shaped curve that is produced when data from a population with a
normal distribution are plotted as a frequency distribution. normal
distribution When Francis Galton began measuring a number of

human characteristics, he found that they could be plotted as a
frequency distribution which consistently took the form of a normal
distribution curve, also known as a Gaussian distribution. Many of the
sources of data that psychologists deal with fit a normal distribution,
either because the population has that form or because the measure has
been constructed deliberately to provide it (e.g. intelligence tests).
The normal ­distribution has therefore been an important basis for many
parametric statistical tests, such as t-tests and analysis of variance.
Because it is clearly defined mathematically, it can easily be used to
define aspects of a set of scores, particularly to indicate the
probability or the implausibility of any specific score. Once the mean
and the standard deviation of a normal curve are known, the frequency
with which scores will be found a given distance away from the mean can
be accurately computed. These frequencies are given as tables of
z-scores in statistical texts. The values of utmost interest to
psychology are those that will occur no more than 5 per cent or no more
than 1 per cent of the time, as these are the conventional levels that
count as evidence against the null hypothesis. It is also a feature of
the normal distribution that the mean, the mode and the median have the
same value. Problems with the normal distribution arise because many
sets of data are not actually distributed precisely, or even
approximately, in this way. Yet the convenience of tests based on the
distribution means that they are often used in any case, and we can
usually only guess at how much influence this has on the results of the
studies. Tests that do not assume a normal distribution are known as
non-parametric statistics.

N

normality A state that is usually considered to be unremarkable -- the
opposite of abnormal. Three alternative approaches are often used in
attempts to identify normal as opposed to abnormal behaviour for the
purposes of psychological classification. (i)

(ii) 
(iii) 

Behaviour that is accepted as usual, or as frequently occurring.
Abnormal behaviour is then regarded as behaviour that is uncommon, or at
least which is infrequently acknowledged. (In some cases, such as the
imagined 'seeing' of a recently dead relative, the experience may
actually be very common, although not often openly acknowledged.)
Behaviour that conforms to accepted norms or social demands. In this
event, social consensus becomes a major factor in decisions concerning
normality and abnormality. Statistically common behaviour, irrespective
of consensus. This approach rests on the assumptions of the Gaussian
(normal) distribution. The problem with this approach is that people who
are statistically uncommon in a highly valued direction (e.g. of
extremely high IQ) are also defined as abnormal. See also International
Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems.

normative To do with, or expressing, the norm. normative social
influence Social influence that 'pushes' the individual towards
conforming to the generally accepted social norm. See also Asch effect.

245

normativism Judgements of the 'correctness' of a way of thinking that
are based on how well it conforms with particular norms or standards.
NREM sleep Non-rapid eye movement sleep -- the stages of sleep in which
rapid eye movements do not occur. See also orthodox sleep, sleep cycles.
nuclear family A family consisting of two parents, usually one of each
sex, and their offspring. The nuclear ­family has been treated as the
basic family structure on which Western society is based, so people have
been concerned to discover that it is much less common than had
previously been supposed. In fact, there are grounds for supposing that
it never was as common as had been assumed. nucleotides The four base
chemicals that make up DNA. nucleus A dense area within the cell body
that contains structures necessary to the life and development of the
cell, including chromosomes and messenger ribonucleic acid. nucleus
accumbens An area at the back of the amygdala which is associated with
reward and positive reinforcement. It has been shown to be particularly
active when thinking about or dealing with friends or friendship. null
hypothesis A prediction in a research study that the outcome of the
study could have been simply a consequence of chance factors, and not a
result of the experimental conditions. The null hypothesis can never be
totally ruled out, which is why it is wrong to make statements such as,
'The t-test is significant, so the hypothesis is true'. Instead, the
amount of confidence that can be placed in the results

246

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

of a study is expressed in terms of how low the probability (p) is that
the null hypothesis is correct. This is known as the significance level,
or confidence level. In most student experiments, the acceptable level
of significance is set at p\<.05. In other words, if the probability
that the null hypothesis is correct is less than 0.05, or 1/20, the
results will be accepted. For research with more potentially damaging
consequences, more stringent significance levels are

used. A slightly more accurate way of describing the null hypothesis is
to say that the results occurred through sampling error. This refers to
whether the sample of subjects in the study accurately represents its
parent population. See also normal distribution, statistical
significance, statistics. number neurones Neurones that are most likely
to respond to numbers or sizes. NVC See non-verbal communication.

O obedience Within social psychology, obedience has been studied as the
social phenomenon that enables an individual to perform actions when
instructed to do so by someone else, and which they would not consider
when acting independently. Its study was largely initiated by an attempt
to understand the behaviour of German troops and civilians during the
Second World War and was given an impetus by the work of Milgram. His
study of obedience shows how the demand characteristics of a situation
appear to enable people to suspend their own conscience, and to perceive
themselves as having had no option but to obey. See also autonomous
state, implacable experimenter. obesity Excessive weight. Obesity is
usually defined in terms of body weight being a certain percentage above
the ideal weight for that person's age, sex and height. The percentage
varies but is often either 15 or 30 per cent. This vagueness is not
crucial, as there is no absolute standard for 'ideal weight', which is
largely a cultural judgement. object concept The idea that objects have
a continuing existence, whether the individual is paying attention to
them or not. Although this has been disputed by philosophers, the
operational concept is an important one for the young child to develop
in their interactions with the world, and the way in which this happens
has been extensively studied as part of cognitive development. object
constancy The perceptual process by which adjustment is made to

the fact that objects have a continuing existence and maintain the same
physical properties, even when they are not being attended to. See also
object concept, shape constancy, size constancy. object orientation
agnosia An inability to identify the orientation of an object
(e.g. which way up it is), even though the person can recognise and
identify the object itself. See also object constancy. object permanence
See object concept. object relations theory A psychoanalytic theory
developed primarily by Melanie Klein and W. Ronald Fairbairn in Britain
as a reaction against Freud's concentration on instincts. Objects are
the people, parts of people or things to whom the individual relates.
Infants are believed to relate only to separate parts of people, such as
the mother's breast. The ability to perceive the parts as belonging to a
whole person, with both their good and bad aspects, has to be learned.
Only a whole person can be recognised as having their own feelings,
needs, etc., which ought to be respected, so only a whole person can be
the object of a mature relationship. Psychological disturbance in adults
is believed to result from problems in object relations in childhood,
with the more severe conditions reflecting problems earlier in
development -- hence the emphasis by Klein on the breast as the first,
crucial, part object. Therapy is directed towards resolving the
relationship with bad or persecutory objects internalised by the patient
so that they can make mature relationships with people and not just DOI:
10.4324/9781003158899

248

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

use them as vehicles for their own gratification. objectification A
process of social representation theory in which an idea becomes
associated with a specific object, category, person or item.
Objectification using an object, category or item is known as
figuration, while that using people is known as personification.
objective test A test that can be marked without any need for subjective
judgements. For example, multiple-choice tests and intelligence tests
are regarded as objective by most psychologists. objectivity The attempt
to stand outside the research process so that no personal feelings or
beliefs will influence the results. observable behaviour Behaviour that
is visible and can therefore be used in an observational study or a
behavioural assessment. The concept of observable behaviour is mainly
contrasted with internal psychological processes such as cognition.
observational learning Learning that occurs as a result of observing the
behaviour of others. As such, observational learning includes the two
processes of imitation and identification, and is an important component
of social learning theory. observational study A study that involves
watching what happens, in a given context, rather than intervening and
causing changes. Observational studies may take place in a variety of
conditions, ranging from a highly controlled laboratory setting to
uncontrolled 'field' conditions. Similarly, the observation itself may
be undertaken in a number of ways, ranging from the use of electronic
equipment, to the presence of a human observer, and to the active
participation of the

observer in the interaction under study. No matter how well controlled
they are, observational studies can only provide correlational data, as
without the direct manipulation of variables, such as those that occur
in an experiment, causality cannot be inferred. The major methodological
problem is that the presence of the observer, particularly if filming is
used, is likely to influence the behaviour being observed. See also
participant observation. obsession An idea or image that persistently
enters thought despite being unwanted and recognised as abnormal. See
also compulsion. obsessive--compulsive disorder A neurotic disorder in
which the person is unable to resist spending a lot of time in
obsessional thoughts that are usually absurd and/or obscene, and
carrying out pointless rituals -- compulsions. The condition is
extremely distressing and associated with a high level of anxiety. In
extreme cases, the person may spend so much time on the ritual thoughts
and acts that they are unable to do anything else at all. Psychoanalysis
regards it as a personality disorder in which tremendous efforts have
been made to suppress and control emotions, with the obsessions and
compulsions being the denied aspects of the self that are breaking
through the defences. Behavioural approaches view this as an outcome of
conditioning processes in which the ritual is reinforced because it
provides temporary relief from the anxiety of tackling some real task.
Biomedical aproaches focus on suppressing anxiety symptoms. Occam's
razor A scientific principle which states that, given a choice between
two possible solutions or theoretical explanations for a given problem,
the simpler one of the two should be adopted. It is also known as the
law of

O

parsimony. Lloyd Morgan's canon applies a version of this idea to animal
behaviour, often inappropriately. occipital face area (OFA) An area of
the visual cortex that responds preferentially to faces, but does not
process facial identity. See also fusiform face area, extrastriate body
area, face recognition unit. occipital lobe The lobe of the brain that
is found right at the back of the head. The occipital lobe contains the
visual cortex of the cerebrum. See also frontal lobe, parietal lobe,
temporal lobe. occupational psychology The use of psychological
knowledge and principles in the study of people at work, or in any
productive occupation. Occupational psychology and industrial psychology
are closely linked, but occupational psychology has a wider range than
just the study of people in industrial situations, as it includes such
occupations as that of housewife, novelist and unemployed person. See
also organisational psychology. ocular dominance columns Arrange­ ments
of cells in the visual cortex of the brain, identified by the Nobel
prizewinners Hubel and Wiesel. They found that cells dealing with the
same elements of visual stimulation (see simple, complex and
hypercomplex cells) were arranged in columns running perpendicular to
the surface of the brain, and that these columns alternated in a highly
regular fashion between those receiving visual information from the
right eye and those receiving information from the left eye. It is
thought that this arrangement helps the brain to compare the different
images from the two eyes -- using binocular disparity as a depth cue
(see Figure 52). oculomotor cues Depth cues that are generated by the
slight movements of the eye muscles as the eyes change their

249

focus. Detection of these slight movements is an example of
kinaesthesia. oedema A blood clot occurring among the neurones of the
central nervous system, which can produce a stroke or aneurism. Oedipus
complex In Freudian theory, a process occurring during the phallic stage
(around three to five years) in which the child wishes to possess the
parent of the opposite sex, and so sees the samesex parent as a rival.
As this parent is also powerful and successful, the child will feel
threatened, but also tends to resolve the conflict by identifying with
the rival parent. Neo-Freudians, particularly of the object relations
theory school, have shifted the emphasis on to earlier relationships
with the mother, so that Oedipal conflicts have come to be seen either
as occurring at a younger age or as less important as a source of
psychological disturbance. The Oedipal process is regarded as applying
just as much to girls as to boys. See also Electra complex. OFA See
occipital face area. olfaction The sense of smell. olfactory bulb A part
of the limbic system which is particularly concerned with interpreting
smells. It is very pronounced in fish and other animals with limited
cerebral mass but is less evident in humans. It receives information
from the olfactory epithelium and has further links across the brain,
but particularly with the amygdala, the hippocampus and the olfactory
cortex. olfactory cortex A strip of the cerebral cortex that runs along
the base of each temporal lobe and receives information from the scent
receptors in the nose. This area is concerned with the analysis and
interpretation of smells. olfactory epithelium An area in the higher
part of the nose that detects the

250

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

stimulus from left eye stimulus from right eye

I

III

IV

layer of visual cortex

II

V

VI

Figure 52 Ocular dominance columns minute chemical particles conveying
smell information. Nerve cells present in the olfactory epithelium pass
this information on to the olfactory cortex. olfactory perception
Awareness of, and the ability to identify, olfactory stimulation.
olfactory tubercle This is an area in the olfactory cortex which has
been described as one of the best-connected areas of the brain, with
more than 20 different sources of incoming smellrelated information from
many other areas of the brain, and a similar number of pathways for
outgoing information. It has been described as the 'olfactory control
centre'. See also olfactory epithelium, brainstem, amygdala.

omission bias A general preference for risking harm through inaction
rather than risking harm through action. one-sample test A statistical
test which can be used when the data originates from a single sample, or
group of research participants. one-tailed prediction A prediction that
states the direction of a difference or correlation -- that is, which
states which will be the larger of two or more sets of scores, or
whether the correlation will be positive or negative. one-tailed test
The use of statistical tests when a hypothesis clearly predicts only one
direction of outcome. Suppose the research hypothesis is that
distraction by loud noise will reduce the amount

O

remembered. When you examine the memory scores of the distraction group,
you merely need to test whether they are significantly lower than the
mean for the control group. This may amount to a significance level of
p\<.05, meaning that their mean falls within the lower 5 per cent of the
normal d­ istribution of possible outcomes. If your assumption is wrong
and in fact, loud noise facilitates remembering, the use of a one-tailed
test has been inappropriate. Compare this judgement with that for a
two-tailed test. one-trial learning A very rapid form of learning,
through classical conditioning, in which just one experience is
sufficient for a lasting learned association to occur. Most examples of
one-trial learning are concerned with food or pain and are thus regarded
as being linked to very basic survival mechanisms. If consumption of a
specific food is followed by vomiting, or if contact with a specific
stimulus is followed by a painful experience, then a strong avoidance
behaviour will result which is highly resistant to extinction. Forms of
one-trial learning that are specific to the species and which seem to
have a biological basis are examples of prepared learning. One-trial
learning has also been associated with instances of superstitious
learning. one-way ANOVA An analysis of variance carried out on the
scores on a single variable of a number of groups (e.g. the exam results
of four sets of students). It compares the variance within the groups
with the variance between the means of each group to calculate an F
ratio. This calculation can indicate whether the group means differ
significantly more than would be expected from just the variation
between individuals. online research Research that is carried out using
the internet in one form or another. Social media is one of the

251

more commonly used vehicles for this, but online research can also
encompass document analysis or other methods. See also online research
panel, netnography. online research panel A bank of potential research
participants which has been made available through the internet, and
involves online contact with the researcher. There are several
commercial online research panels which provide samples for researchers,
although there is some doubt about the validity of using monetarised
samples in this way. online sample A group of research participants
whose selection and activity is entirely internet-based. See also
sample. ontogenic To do with individual development. See also ontogeny.
ontogeny The origins and development of the individual. The most
well-known use of the word is probably in the phrase 'ontogeny
recapitulates phylogeny', which is a biological principle that was
popular at the beginning of the twentieth century, stating that the
stages of growth of each individual member of a species mirror the
evolutionary development of the species itself. For instance, much was
made of the idea that the human foetus in its early stages has
structures which resemble gills, a tail, etc. Although this idea is now
regarded as contentious, or even dubious, it was highly influential at
the time. For example, Piaget's study of cognitive development in the
child was undertaken because of his interest in the evolution of
abstract thinking and formal logic. By looking at how children developed
logical processes, he hoped to identify the evolutionary stages by which
rational thought had evolved. ontological To do with being or existence.
See also ontology.

252

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

ontology The branch of physiology ­concerned with the existence of things
and how they have come to be as they are. Compare ontogeny. OOB See
out-of-body experience. open field test A measure of ­anxiety and/or
independence, used mainly with animals but sometimes also with small
children. It involves a wide open, unprotected area in which the animal
or child is placed, and symptoms of anxiety (clinging to mother or toys,
animal droppings, etc.) are recorded. open questions Questions that may
be asked during research or a therapeutic interview that are phrased so
that a detailed answer is required. An example would be: 'Can you tell
me about any ways that studying psychology has helped you gain insight
into your own behaviour?' Such questions invite the participant to
respond in terms of their own thinking and so are likely to be more
productive than closed questions. open-structure interview A method of
carrying out an interview for research purposes in which the
conversation is allowed to roam pretty freely, as long as a set of
defined topics are covered. Compare structured interview. open system A
system that is open to receive energy or information. Open systems are
therefore able to develop, and will tolerate new structures within them,
in contrast to closed systems. openness to experience One of the main
factors in the five-factor theory of personality, which reflects a
tendency to welcome new experiences and to be ready to change
impressions. operant Any unit of behaviour that has an effect (of any
kind) on the environment. Also known as operant behaviour, it is the
basis of the condi-

tioning of voluntary behaviour. Unless behaviour that has some kind of
effect in the environment is produced spontaneously, the Law of Effect
cannot come into play, and the organism's behaviour will continue to be
emitted more or less randomly. See operant conditioning. operant
conditioning A process of stimulus--response learning of voluntary
behaviour, which occurs through the consequence of actions produced by
an organism (an animal or human being). The idea is that the learning of
an appropriate action or operant is likely to be reinforced
(strengthened) if the action is followed by a pleasant consequence (see
Law of Effect). This increases the probability that the action will
occur again. Reinforcement in operant conditioning can be positive or
negative. If it is positive, the action is directly rewarded; if it is
negative, it is indirectly rewarded by the removal or avoidance of
something unpleasant. Operant conditioning was controversially claimed
by B.F. Skinner to be the basis of all human behaviour, even language.
The other major type of conditioning is classical conditioning. See also
partial reinforcement, primary reinforcement, secondary reinforcement,
reinforcement schedule. operant strength This is a term used to describe
how strongly a response acquired through operant conditioning has been
learned. There are two main measures of operant strength -- resistance
to extinction and response rate. operation span the maximum number of
items on a list that a person can recall accurately more than 50 per
cent of the time. See also digit span. operational definition A
definition that identifies something by its effects. An operational
definition may not form an ideal definitive statement, expressing all

O

aspects of the topic being defined, but it needs to be good enough to
allow some empirical investigation of the topic. For instance,
systematic work on sustained attention only became possible when
researchers adopted the operational definition of attention as being the
detection of relatively small changes in stimuli from within a varied
background (e.g. picking out one particular signal on a radar screen).
Failures to detect the target stimuli were accepted as evidence of
failure to attend. Although this was not an ideal definition of
attention itself, it served as a useful operational definition. Apart
from giving clear rules by which the phenomenon can be identified, the
definition also has to be close enough to the accepted meaning to be
acceptable to most researchers. However, the use of operational
definitions can at times lead to conceptual confusion, such as the use
of self-serving choices in group tasks as an operational definition of
rivalry or aggression. See also signal-detection task. operations
Manipulations of objects or concepts. The major use within psychology is
in Piaget's theory, which is largely about the different kinds of
cognitive operations, particularly logical manipulations, which are
carried out by children at different ages. See also concrete operational
stage, formal operational stage. opiates Drugs that have both analgesic
(pain-relieving) and narcotic (sleep-inducing) effects. Opiates include
naturally occurring drugs such as opium and morphine, drugs synthesised
from those natural substances, such as heroin, and some synthesised
chemicals that have the same properties. There are also several
naturally occurring opiates, of which the most well known are the
endorphins and enkephalins, which act as neurotransmitters in the brain.
Some foodstuffs (e.g.

253

milk) contain small amounts of naturally occurring opiates. Opiates are
widely used both as clinical and as recreational drugs, and in general
are highly addictive. opponent processing A theory originally proposed
by Hering as an explanation for negative aftereffects -- especially
those concerned with colour. Hering located opponent processing as
occurring in the rod and cone cells of the retina, although more recent
research indicates that it takes place in the second retinal layer,
which consists of bipolar neurones. The idea is that cells, or groups of
cells, have two different and complementary modes of operation. One
group of cells responds to red stimuli when in one mode, and to green
stimuli when in the other, a second group responds to blue or yellow
stimuli, and a third group responds to light or dark. Overstimulation of
any one system through continuous presentation of just one of the paired
stimuli results in compensation when the stimulation stops -- the
opposite stimulus is experienced as the cells gradually return to normal
functioning. See also negative aftereffects. opportunity sampling An
approach to sampling (it is hardly a method) in which research
participants are taken into the research as they become available.
Opportunity sampling is liable to produce a highly biased sample, but
this may not matter for certain research objectives. oppositional
defiant disorder (ODD) A pattern of behaviour in children in which they
react negatively to authority and to attempts to control them. It is not
as extreme as conduct disorder but is sufficiently problematic for
caregivers to have been classified as a disorder in DSM-V rather than
ordinary childhood tendencies to test out rules and follow their own
wishes. It has been suggested

254

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

that much of the problem arises because parents are showing the
characteristic ODD pattern in relation to their partners and their
children, but this idea has not been taken up enthusiastically by the
adults concerned -- or it may just be that doing something harmless and
pleasant does not need controlling. opsins Light-sensitive receptors.
optic To do with the eye and vision. optic apraxia A variant of
simultanagnosia in which the person has difficulty using vision to guide
actions, such as hand movements, because they have problems with the
motor planning involved in moving eyes and hands simultaneously. See
also optic ataxia. optic array The way in which the contents of the
visual field are represented on the retina of the eye. The photoreceptor
cells of the retina can be visualised as a series of dots, forming an
image like that on a TV screen. The optic array is the way in which
those dots are responding to information entering

the eye from the outside world. Strictly speaking, it is the pattern of
light reaching a single point on the retina, from all directions, but
the term is generally used to refer to the broader image. optic ataxia
This is the inability to use vision to guide action accurately, even
though the person may not have any particular visual or voluntary
movement deficits. Effectively, they fail to coordinate their muscular
actions, and so do not make the appropriate adjustments to their eye
movements at the right time. It is thought to result from damage to the
occipitoparietal junction. See also optic apraxia. optic chiasma A point
within the brain where the optic nerves from each eye meet. At this
point, nerve fibres carrying messages from the left side of each retina
combine, and pass on the left side of the thalamus and then to the
visual cortex on the left hemisphere. Those carrying messages from the
right side of each retina combine and pass on to the right side of the
brain (Figure 53). This crossover and

retina optic nerve

cerebrum (from below)

optic chiasma

thalamus

visual cortex

Figure 53 The optic chiasma

O

recombination of nerve fibres is thought to be instrumental in depth
perception, specifically in the process of binocular disparity, in which
the image from each eye is compared. A similar process occurs with
audition, allowing the direction of sounds to be identified. optic flow
The way that aspects of the visual field change their relationships as
the person moves around their environment. An important feature of
Gibson's ecological perception, optic flow (aka ­visual flow) removes the
need for hypothesis testing in, for example, depth perception. See also
optic array. optic nerve The axons of the ganglion cells in the retina,
which bunch together and carry visual information from the eye to the
lateral geniculate nuclei of the thalamus. The place where the optic
nerve leaves the retina is the blind spot. optimistic bias A
characteristic belief that bad things will happen to other people rather
than to ourselves. oral To do with the mouth. Oral functioning is
particularly important for the young infant and seems to be a major
source of pleasure. The oral region is quite mature in good time for
birth, and the newborn is able to coordinate sucking, swallowing and
breathing. In Freudian theory, the oral stage is the first of the
psychosexual stages, and fixation at the oral stage is said to produce
adult tendencies such as greed, mania and depression, and a tendency to
engage in oral behaviours such as smoking and lecturing.

255

orbitofrontal cortex An area on the ventral surface of the frontal
lobes, above the eye sockets, also known as the orbitofrontal gyrus,
which has reciprocal connections with the main parts of the limbic
system. It is involved in attachment, motivation and regulating social
behaviour. It has also been shown to be directly concerned with the
immediate motivational value of rewards, calculating internal and
external contexts and adjusting the value of rewards according to their
context and immediate relevance. See also emotional regulation.
orbitofrontal gyrus See orbitofrontal cortex. order effect An
experimental effect that arises as a result of the order in which two
tasks are presented. Order effects are of two main kinds: (i)

(ii) 

practice effects, where the research participant becomes more skilled at
a given task as a result of practice, and so performs better in later
conditions of the experiment; and fatigue effects, where the research
participant becomes tired or bored as the study progresses, and so
performs worse in later experimental conditions. See also ABBA design,
counterbalancing.

ordinal scale A system of measurement in which the basic units can be
ranked. See also levels of measurement, rank.

orbicularis oculi The muscle in the face that closes the eyelids, and is
the muscle stimulated when using the eyeblink response measure.

ordinate The vertical or y-axis on a graph. By convention, this axis
usually carries the measure of outcome, or dependent variable (see
Figure 54). See also abscissa.

orbito- A prefix meaning close to, or at the level of, the eye sockets
(the 'orbits').

orectic To do with desire or appetite. The term is only likely to be
encountered in contrast with cognitive.

256

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience 50

ordinate

40 30 20 10

5

10 15 abscissa

20

25

Figure 54 The ordinate and abscissa of a graph organ of Corti The
structure in the inner ear that produces the transduction of vibration
into electrical impulses, which are then transmitted to the brain for
interpretation. The organ of Corti consists of two membranes -- the
basilar membrane and the tectorial membrane, between which are hair
cells that trigger off an electrical impulse when vibrated. This then
passes to the fibres of the auditory nerve, which are embedded in the
basilar membrane. See also frequency theory, place theory. organic
disorder A disorder that is known, or at least believed, to be due to a
physiological or organic malfunction. The extent to which psychological
disorders result directly from organic brain dysfunction is one of the
major controversies in the field. Psychiatrists are more likely than
psychologists to believe that disorders are organic. The term is
sometimes used as a contrast (e.g. to distinguish organic psychoses from
those that are better understood psychologically, and are called
'functional' psychoses). organisational culture The set of implicit
beliefs, customs and conventions that are typical of a particular
organisation,

and which distinguish it from others. In psychological terms,
organisational cultures can be seen as social representations, closely
linked with the social identifications of the working groups within the
organisation, and gaining their strength from the extent to which the
shared beliefs, social identification and social representations in
different working groups overlap with one another. organisational
psychology The study of how people act and interact in organisations.
Although sometimes regarded as a part of occupational psychology,
organisational psychology is increasingly accepted as an area of study
in its own right. It is distinguished from industrial psychology in that
it includes the public sector and voluntary organisations. organism A
term used during the behaviourist era of psychology to describe animals
and human beings when talking in terms of simple (stimulus--response)
learning processes or motivational states, such as hunger or thirst
drives. The use of the term in preference to 'animal' or 'person' was
intended to signify:

O

(i) 
(ii) 

the way in which stimulus-- response learning is applied to all active
creatures alike, as the basic building block of behaviour; and the
dispassionate objectivity of the scientist, whereby people were to be
regarded simply as units which emitted behaviour, irrespective of
sentimental human values.

See also social responsibility of science. orgone energy A basic energy
proposed by Wilhelm Reich to be the activating universal life force.
Although it bears some similarity to Freud's concept of the libido,
Reich took his ideas very much further, arguing that orgone energy is a
physical energy that can be accumulated by special devices and can be
utilised directly for therapeutic purposes. Orgone energy, he argued, is
the source and motivation of all life and is generated by free sexual
expression, among other things. Many members of the psychological
community at the time (from the 1940s to the 1950s) found Reich's claims
extreme; the state saw them as directly fraudulent and prosecuted Reich
accordingly. orientation The angle at which something is arranged or
exists. When used to refer to an individual's theoretical stance, it
means the attitude or position which that individual adopts towards a
specific theory or school of thought. orienting Changing attention from
one focus to another. See also covert orienting, orienting reflex.
orienting reflex A set of physiological and behavioural changes that
occur in response to an unexpected stimulus which attracts the attention
of the individual. The orienting reflex includes positioning of the body
towards the sound or other stimulus and then

257

keeping the body very still, dilation of the blood vessels in the head,
EEG changes, and alterations to muscle tone, pupil dilation, heart rate
and breathing. This combination of physiological changes means that the
individual is more prepared to receive the stimulus. The opposite
pattern, when a stimulus is being excluded, is called the defensive
reflex. See also attention. orofacial dyspraxia An impairment of speech
that involves a problem in carrying out the coordinated movements
involved in speaking. See also dyspraxia. orthodox sleep Ordinary,
quiescent sleep that does not involve rapid eye movements (REM) or the
experience of dreaming. Orthodox sleep occurs at four levels or stages,
which correlate with the subjective experience of being lightly or
deeply asleep, and with each showing characteristic EEG patterns. Stage
1 sleep is entered first, and is the lightest form of sleep, with a
fairly regular EEG pattern. Some dreaming may take place during this
stage. The sleeper then progresses through the stages to the deepest
level of stage 4, in which the EEG is very irregular with large spikes.
In this stage, it is very difficult to awaken the sleeper, and in
children bed-wetting, night terrors and sleepwalking may occur. The
pattern changes through the period of sleeping (see sleep cycles).
Orthodox sleep is also called NREM (non-rapid eye movement) sleep. See
also paradoxical sleep. orthographic lexicon The part of longterm memory
that stores word spellings. orthographic neighbours A term used in
cognitive research to refer to the number of words that can be formed
from a target word, by changing one of its letters.

258

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

orthography A system of writing. osmoreceptors Although not empirically
established, osmoreceptors are thought to be receptors in the brain that
respond to changes in fluid composition in brain cells, and so are
thought to act as signals to the brain for the experience of thirst.
osmotic thirst See hypovolemic thirst. other-race effect The finding
that memory for people of a similar ethnic background to the observer is
generally better than memory for the faces of ­people of different ethnic
backgrounds. See also face recognition. otoliths Small particles of a
bony substance that float in the fluid-filled semicircular canals of the
inner ear. The canals are lined with hair cells, which produce an
electrical impulse when the otoliths come into contact with them. In
this way, movement and turbulence of the fluid in the semicircular
canals are detected, which is an important factor in the sense of
balance. out-of-body experience (OOB) The subjective experience that the
person is floating outside of their body, and only connected to it very
loosely. Sometimes experienced during dreaming, OOBs are also
characteristic of near-death experiences. In parapsychology, they are
believed by some to enable remote viewing of real-world objects. outcome
variable See dependent ­variable. outer ear The part of the ear that is
in direct contact with the outside world. It includes the pinna and the
lobe (the two external parts of the ear itself) and the auditory canal.
The pinna and lobe serve to direct sound waves into the auditory canal,
and they pass along it in the form of waves of changing air pressure
until

they come into contact with the eardrum, or tympanic membrane. This
marks the boundary between the outer ear and the middle ear, and
vibrates in response to the air pressure. See also inner ear. outliers
Scores or results which are so very different from the mean or other
measure of central tendency that they stand out from most of the other
scores. overcompensation An excessive response in attempting to overcome
a disadvantage or difficulty. There is usually an implication that the
person who does this is abnormally affected by the original problem. For
example, a short person who goes to exceptional lengths to disguise or
compensate for their height would be judged to be ­excessively sensitive
about it. The term is more often used as a derogatory expression in lay
language than in psychology, where it has no technical meaning. See also
compensation. overextension The tendency, found particularly in young
children acquiring a language, to apply words too widely (e.g. calling
all animals 'doggy'). See also overgeneralisation. overgeneralisation
The situation that occurs when findings from research are extended
beyond their implications (e.g. when the extent of drug use in a small
group of students is used to make claims about drug usage in the general
population). The term was also used by Piaget to identify a
characteristic of the preoperational stage, which was that young
children would overgeneralise rules that they had learned and apply them
inappropriately. Piaget argued that the characteristic disappeared as
the child matured, but this may not be as clear-cut an issue as he
assumed.

O

overt Apparent or obvious to the observer. overt orienting The visible
sign that someone's attention has been drawn to an object or phenomenon,
shown by movements of the eyes, head or body. See also orienting reflex.
ovum An egg. The female contribution to reproduction that requires
fertilisation by a male sperm. See also zygote. own-age bias A
phenomenon observed in eyewitness testimony, whereby people are more
likely to identify someone round about their own age as the culprit,
rather than much older or younger people.

259

own-race effect The finding that people are more able to recognise faces
of people from their own ethnic group than they are of those of another
e­ thnic group. This has been taken by some social theorists as evidence
of implicit racism, but, apart from in known racist individuals, there
is no neural indication that this effect is also linked with negative
affect. See also own-age bias. oxytocin A peptide hormone released by
the pituitary gland, which is involved in attachment formation and is
also involved in orgasm, lactation, and uternine contractions during
labour. See also vasopressin.

P p-value The probability of a statistical outcome like the one that has
been observed, if the null hypothesis is correct. P600 An event-related
potential that occurs in the temporal lobe, and seems to be associated
with the processing of grammatical anomalies. It implies that syntactic
structure is as important in language processing as lexical knowledge,
although not the same. paedophilia A condition in which an adult is
sexually attracted to children and can only achieve sexual arousal with
them. See also sexual abuse. pain A state of acute discomfort brought
about by stimulation of pain receptors, or nociceptors, in the nervous
system. Pain can take several forms, and may be chronic or acute. See
also nociception, phantom limb. pain anxiety Fear or nervousness that
pain will be likely to occur. There is also a model of pain perception
bearing the same name which states that some people become
hyper-vigilant and overanxious about pain because they have developed
what amounts to a phobia about it. As a result, these people tend to
interpret ordinary states of discomfort as more painful than another
person might. pair bonding A long-enduring relationship or attachment
with a single individual partner. paired-associate learning A learning
task that involves the association or linking together of two stimuli,
usually words. This form of learning task was DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

extremely popular in the study of memory throughout the 1950s and 1960s,
and demonstrated processes such as the primacy effect, but in more
recent times has been heavily criticised for its artificiality. pairing
Presenting two stimuli in such a way that they always occur together.
pairwise comparisons A term used in analysis of variance which describes
comparing two specific means from a larger set, in order to identify
whether those two are significantly different. PALS An acronym used in
some psychology syllabuses indicating Psychological Applied Learning
Scenarios (i.e. aspects of real-world experience that are used to
demonstrate the operation of psychological processes). pandemonium model
A hierarchical model of cognition, first proposed in the late 1960s,
which forms an interesting example of bottom-up processing. It was
mainly concerned with feature recognition in perception, and how the
identification of features can be combined to result in meaningful
percepts. The model proposes a hierarchical organisation of
'sub-demons', 'cognitive demons' and 'decision demons'. There are
myriads of sub-demons, each of which is tuned in to detecting specific
aspects of a stimulus, such as the specific letters in a word. When a
stimulus occurs, the appropriate sub-demon shrieks. The more similar the
stimulus is to the demon's template, the louder it shrieks. The decision
demon at the next level in the hierarchy is faced with the task of
deciding which of the shrieking sub-demons

P

best represents the stimulus, taking into account other shrieking
sub-demons responding to subsequent stimuli (hence the name 'pandemonium
model'). As the overall picture becomes more complex, general cognitive
demons come into action, which operate at a higher level and represent
complete concepts or schemata. Because of the idea of competition
between the demons at each level, this model is well able to cope with
the explanation of our response to ambiguous stimuli, but some consider
it to be less satisfactory in explaining some of the more general
aspects of active cognition. panic attack An anxiety disorder in which
the person experiences sudden and unpredictable attacks of acute anxiety
or terror that have no organic cause, and which are not a response to
any threat in the environment. The anxiety is increased by the fact that
the person does not know when another attack will happen, and cannot
make any sense of what is happening to them. Papez circuit A neural
pathway based in and around the limbic system. It was originally thought
to be the source of feelings of emotion, but this idea has not been
supported by more recent neurological observation. paracingulate cortex
The area of the inner cerebrum immediately above the cingulate gyrus. It
becomes particularly active in decoding and predicting social
intentions. The anterior part of this region is active in predicting
them -- both our own and other people's intentions, and has links with
the prefrontal cortex. The posterior part of the paracingulate cortex
becomes active when we are thinking about ourselves and how our own
behaviour connects with, or impacts, other people. The paracingulate
cortex is thought to be a significant brain area

261

involved in empathy, and also in theory of mind (TOM). paradigm The
framework of assumptions or beliefs within which a particular item of
knowledge is located. Literally, a paradigm is a set of beliefs that are
shared by a scientific community, and which are used to interpret
factual information. Perhaps the clearest example of the power of a
paradigm can be seen in the 'school chemistry syndrome', in which,
despite rhetoric about learning from direct observation, thousands of
children fail to obtain the 'correct' results from their project work,
but what is actually written up is the result that the scientific
community believes should have happened, rather than the one which
actually did. paradigm shift A time when the basic paradigm of a
particular science is rejected and a completely new paradigm becomes the
standard. The shift to a new paradigm is expected to resolve some of the
weaknesses in the previous paradigm. paradigm specificity This occurs
when the findings from a piece of research cannot be replicated unless
all of the assumptions and conventions of explanation and procedure are
also adopted by the would-be replicator. In other words, the findings
apply only within one specific knowledge paradigm, and cannot be
generalised outside of that context. paradox A situation in which two or
more rules combine to give an impossible outcome, such as the Cretan who
said 'all Cretans are liars'. Paradoxes have been much studied in logic
and mathematics, but for psychologists, the chief interest is in those
that trap people into apparently crazy behaviour (see double bind for an
example). Some therapists believe

262

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

that many symptoms result from paradoxes in the person's life and so are
best treated with a 'counter-paradox' designed to free them. A common
example would be to instruct the person to have their 'uncontrollable'
symptom at a particular time. If they have the symptom, then it shows
that they can control it. If they do not have the symptom, this shows
that the symptom can be prevented (i.e. it is controllable). As with any
other powerful therapeutic technique, paradoxical injunctions can be
ineffective and potentially harmful unless they are used with respect
and sympathetic understanding for the patient. paradoxical sleep A name
given to the type of sleep in which rapid eye movements occur (it is
also called rapid eye movement \[REM\] sleep), and during which dreaming
takes place. It was named 'paradoxical' in the 1960s, as a result of the
discovery that EEG patterns shown in this type of sleep suggested that
the sleeper was only sleeping lightly and would wake easily, whereas in
reality, they proved very difficult to wake by some stimuli (e.g. loud
noises) but easy to waken by more meaningful events (e.g. having their
name spoken). See also orthodox sleep, sleep cycles. paralanguage The
non-verbal cues that are used during speech and include speech sounds,
such as 'er' and 'um', the timing of utterances or inflections and
accents. Paralanguage is an important part of communication through
speech but provides information independently of the actual verbal
aspects of the communication. A measure of the importance of
paralanguage to speech is the way that in written language, punctuation
is needed to substitute for the additional information normally added
through tones of voice or pauses.

parallax See motion parallax. parallel distributed processing (PDP) A
computer simulation system which works on the principle that human
reasoning often involves the simultaneous operation of more than one
sequence of arguments. Consequently, PDP involves simulation programs
that operate several different logic chains simultaneously, with
considerable cross-linking between them. The particular value of this
approach appears to be that it is capable of producing novel or
unexpected outcomes in computer problem-solving. The general approach to
computer simulation expressed by this technique is also known as
connectionism. parallel evolution ­evolution.

See

convergent

parallel play A form of play in which two or more children play
alongside each other without direct interaction. It is common in young
children before social play becomes usual. parallel processing The
processing of information in such a way that more than one set of
operations is happening simultaneously. Models of parallel processing
were introduced to cognitive psychology in an attempt to account for the
extremely rapid ways in which people can search for information, taking
several features into account apparently all at the same time. parameter
A mathematical measure of some characteristic of a population, such as
the mean. The same measure in a sample is called a statistic. parametric
statistics Statistical techniques that have been developed on the
assumption that the data are of a certain type. In particular, the
measure should be an equal-interval scale, the scores

P

should be drawn from a normal distribution, and different samples should
be independent of each other -- the choice of items or scores in one
sample should not have affected the choice of items or scores in
another. Because construction of parametric statistical tests is based
on these assumptions, using them on data that do not fit the assumptions
can give misleading results, although there seem to be no clear answers
about how serious a problem this is. Parametric statistics are usually
preferred because, by using more of the information available in the
data, they are more powerful in detecting significant effects. The
alternative is to use non-parametric statistics that do not make the
same assumptions about the data. However, although there are
non-parametric versions of correlation and t-test, there are not always
nonparametric versions of more complex techniques such as analysis of
variance and factor analysis. See also levels of measurement. paranoia A
disorder in which the person is dominated by thoughts of persecution,
grandeur and sometimes jealousy. Intellectual functioning is not
impaired, and great ingenuity may be shown in interpreting every event
to fit with the paranoid belief. Most conspiracy theories are
essentially manifestations of paranoia. paranoid schizophrenia A
schizophrenic condition of which the main feature is paranoia, but the
consistency of the beliefs found in paranoia is missing. See also
schizophrenia. parapsychology The study of phenomena that resemble
psychological or physical events, but cannot be explained by accepted
principles or mechanisms. Parapsychologists investigate instances of
apparent clairvoyance, psychokinesis, ESP (extrasensory perception) and

263

telepathy. A considerable amount of their work is also devoted to the
study of deception (i.e. how fraudulent 'psychics' manage to persuade
people to believe in clairvoyance, ESP, etc.). parasympathetic division
The division of the autonomic nervous system that comes into action
during quiescent emotions, such as contentment or sorrow. The
parasympathetic division is also concerned with processes for restoring
and conserving bodily resources such as digestion, and storing glycogen
and other reserves that have been depleted by the action of the
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system. pareidolia The
tendency to misinterpret a stimulus as an object or meaningful pattern,
such as seeing faces in clouds or vegetables, or hearing hidden messages
in music. See illusion. parenting A term used instead of mothering
either to emphasise that any adult could be providing the care, or to
refer to a specific aspect of care of the young that is undertaken by
either parent. parent--infant interaction The forms of interaction
between caregivers (who may or may not be the mother) and infants,
particularly in the first few months of life. This interaction has been
extensively studied to provide information about the beginnings of
attachment, and has been found to be very complex. Previously called
mother--infant interaction, it has been shown that parents of either
gender are able to provide the sensitive responsiveness which forms the
basis of attachment. See also transaction, contingency. parietal lobe
The large area of the cerebrum located behind the central fissure and
above the occipital lobe. See also frontal lobe, temporal lobe.

264

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Parkinson's disease A progressive neural disease that mostly affects
older people, producing gradual loss of motor control, noticeable
trembling of the limbs, and eventually resulting in paralysis.
Parkinson's disease is known to be caused by dopamine deficiency in the
brain, and the symptoms can sometimes be alleviated by treatment with a
drug known as L-dopa, which is converted into dopamine in the brain
itself. Unfortunately, this form of treatment also has distressing side
effects, so it is not regarded as a fully satisfactory method of
managing the disease. Long-term use of many antipsychotic drugs can
produce a set of symptoms similar to Parkinson's disease, known as
drug-induced Parkinsonism. See also hypokinetic. parsimonious
Parsimonious explanation is the form of explanation that is the most
efficient, or requires the fewest number of adjustments, conditions or
iterations to be complete. See also Occam's razor. parsimony principle
See Occam's razor. parsing The process of analysing sets of words or
sentences to identify the syntactic structures that determine how they
are grouped. part-whole effect The way that a facial feature is more
easily recognised if it is presented as part of a whole face, than if it
is presented on its own. See also face recognition. partial correlation
A calculation of the correlation between two variables which is adjusted
so that the influence of the correlation of each of them with a third
variable is eliminated. For example, in a given sample, physical health
and IQ might correlate, but it may be that each of these variables
correlates with the quality of diet. Once the correlation with diet is
'partialled out', the

apparent correlation between health and IQ may be much reduced. partial
reinforcement Reinforcement in an operant conditioning process that is
not given every time the desired behaviour is shown, but only some of
the time. This is also known as intermittent reinforcement and produces
a somewhat slower but stronger form of learning that is more resistant
to extinction. See also reinforcement schedule. participant The title
given to someone taking part in research who is not the researcher. It
has replaced the term 'subject', which was felt to imply (or recognise)
that there was a one-way process in which researchers operated on
passive subjects who had less awareness or control of what was
happening. Using the term 'participant' reminds us that research is a
mutual venture in which everyone involved has hypotheses about what is
happening and intentions about what should happen. participant
observation A research technique in which the researcher takes a full
role in the group being studied, often without the other members being
aware of the research. In this way, the distortion produced by the
presence of an observer is minimised, and the researcher can obtain a
fuller appreciation of the experiences of the group. See also action
research, observational study, passive observation. particularistic
meanings Meanings of words or phrases that are entirely dependent on the
context in which they are uttered. See also universalistic meanings.
Parvo cells Cells that form part of a major visual pathway in the brain.
Parvo cells are found in the visual cortex and carry information about
colour and fine detail. They are thought to have evolved more recently
than the complementary magno cells.

P

passive observation A form of observation in which the researcher is
physically present but takes no active part in what is going on. Compare
participant observation. pattern perception The way in which different
perceptual features of shapes or figures are recognised as belonging
together and forming a pattern of stimuli, rather than being separate
and discrete. Without pattern perception, our subjective experience
would simply be of patches of light and dark, or of patches of colour,
without any linking of the stimuli into meaningful units. The basis of
pattern perception is figure-

265

ground organisation (i.e. the inherent tendency for our perceptual
system to organise sensory data into meaningful figures set against
backgrounds). This organisational principle produces our ability to
perceive patterns. It is also evident in the perception of other sensory
modes, such as music or speech perception, which involve pattern
perception in linking and distinguishing the different components of the
information. pattern recognition The ability to identify or recognise
two-dimensional patterns, such as fingerprints or cartoon images. See
also pattern perception.

Pavlov, Ivan P. (1849--1936) Despite his personal identification as a
physiologist, Pavlov became one of the most well-known figures in
psychology's history. His discovery of conditioned reflexes while
studying digestion in dogs led to a systematic investigation of learning
processes and established the principles of classical conditioning.
These were taken as a foundation concept in behaviourism by J.B. Watson,
and so influenced the development of psychology throughout the twentieth
century. Pavlov was Professor of Physiology at the Institute of
Experimental Medicine in St Petersburg for nearly 50 years, between 1890
and 1939, and remained in post under Lenin despite being an outspoken
opponent of the Bolsheviks. There are sometimes advantages to being an
internationally recognised, prestigious scientist. Pavlovian
conditioning See classical conditioning. payoff matrix In game theory,
this is a matrix that lists the costs and benefits to the players which
would result from the differing decisions of players. PDD-NOS This
stands for 'pervasive developmental disorders not otherwise specified'
(i.e. problems developed in childhood that appear to fit the category of
autistic spectrum disorders, but don't have a clear label or reflect a
known grouping of symptoms).

PDP See parallel distributed processing. peak experience The rare
experience of feeling for a moment complete and at one with oneself and
the world. Maslow regarded peak experiences as important, but not
essential, aspects of self-­actualisation. Pearson's product--moment
correlation (r) A measure of correlation that uses interval data (see
levels of measurement). It is a parametric test that makes the standard
assumptions about the data. It is the preferred measure of correla-

266

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

tion if the data are suitable. If not, then Spearman's rank--order
correlation coefficient is generally used, at least for smaller numbers,
although for large samples its outcomes are deemed to be so similar to
Pearson's that the latter is used to assess significance. See also
statistics. pecking order An idea taken from the observation that
chickens seem to have a social hierarchy in which anyone can peck those
below them, but not those above. The unfortunate character at the bottom
is under attack from all of the others, and is literally 'henpecked'.
The term has been extended to describe any social hierarchy in which
there is a clear and specific definition of the order in which people or
animals are dominant. This is more technically known as a dominance
hierarchy and in its strict form turns out to be surprisingly rare in
animal societies. peer group A group composed of people from similar
backgrounds and of equal status. The term is most commonly used to
indicate that the group is composed of children of equal age. penis envy
In psychoanalytic theory, the envy that girls are claimed to feel about
the fact that boys have a penis and they do not. Freud believed that
women experience penis envy throughout their lives, but this is now a
deeply unfashionable point of view for which Freud has received his fair
share of interpretations. percept The impression which the person
receives of that which is being perceived. The percept is the subjective
or internal experience that represents an object or event in the
external world. See also representation. perception The process by which
we analyse and make sense of incoming sensory information. Perception
has been studied extensively by psychologists, and

now forms part of cognitive psychology. Perception can be distinguished
from sensation, which concerns the stimulation of sensory receptors and
may also be restricted to the earlier stages of processing incoming
information. However, there is no fully agreed definition. Some
theorists, such as Ulric Neisser, regard perception as identical to the
rest of cognition, and so would make little or no distinction between
the two. Perception includes several distinct areas, such as visual
perception, person perception, auditory perception, and the perception
of other forms of information such as nociception, or gustatory, tactile
or olfactory stimulation. perceptual constancy The way in which a
person's perception adjusts itself so that the world is seen as
constant, despite the changes in stimulation detected by the sense
organs. The perceptual constancies enable us to perceive events more
accurately in terms of their meaning (e.g. people are seen as the same
size, however far away they are). There are many forms of perceptual
constancy, of which the most studied have been the visual phenomena of
size constancy, shape constancy, colour constancy and location
constancy. perceptual cycle The cognitive process described by Neisser,
in which actions are directed by a combination of our expectations and
our direct experience. The cycle involves anticipatory schemas which
direct our exploration of the perceptual world. That exploration samples
perceptual information from the real world, which in turn directs
action, which modifies our anticipatory schemas. So we are constantly
using information from our actions and attention to revise our
expectations, and those expectations are then directing our actions and
attention.

P

perceptual defence The idea that the perceptual system has higher
thresholds for perceiving information that is psychologically
threatening to the individual, meaning that such information is less
likely to be detected or recognised. See also defence mechanism.
perceptual organisation The structuring of visual information, in such a
way that it becomes possible to detect figures against backgrounds, and
patterns. See also pattern perception. perceptual set A state of
readiness or preparedness to perceive certain kinds of information
rather than other kinds. Perceptual set is a powerful phenomenon that
links closely with selective attention and which can be affected by a
range of circumstances, such as prior experience, emotion, motivation,
culture and habit. See also mental set. perceptual span The field of
view in reading. It has been shown that expert readers have a wider
visual span than novice readers (i.e. they can take in more words before
and after the word they are focusing on at a given glance). perfect
correlation An exact, one-to-one correlation, in which one variable
always increases or decreases in perfect proportion to the amount that
the other variable increases. Perfect correlations may be either
positive or negative, have a numerical value of 1, and are extremely
rare. performance A term used in experimental psychology for the level
of competence that a person or animal achieves on a particular task.
performance decrement A measure of the increase in the number of
failures or misses achieved by a research participant on a particular
task, over a specified period of time -- in other words, how much worse
they get at doing the task.

267

periaqueductal grey Grey matter in the midbrain that has been shown to
be involved in nociception. peripheral dyslexia A form of disruption of
the reading process resulting from spatial and attentional disturbances,
and also disruption of the ability to compute word forms. Pure alexia is
an example of peripheral dyslexia. See also dyslexia. peripheral nervous
system A term for those parts of the nervous system that are not
included in the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord). The
peripheral nervous system accordingly includes the autonomic nervous
system and the somatic nervous system, which is composed of motor and
sensory neurones carrying information to and from the central nervous
system. peripheral traits Personality or attitude traits that are not
particularly fundamental to the person's sense of self or identity, and
can therefore be fairly easily changed. perirhinal cortex An area close
to the hippocampus which is concerned with recognition and familiarity.
It has strong links with the sensory pathways and codes whether an
object or experience is familiar or unfamiliar. See also entorhinal
cortex, rhinal sulcus. permastore Another name for long-term memory
storage. perseveration The failure to change focus in a task, or to act
differently from a previous response when asked -- typical of those with
prefrontal cortex damage. See also Wisconsin card-sorting test. person
identity node (PIN) An abstract level of representation proposed as part
of the ways that we recognise people. The idea is that the person
identity node links with face recognition units

268

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

and with other stored semantic memory about that person and is activated
when the person, or information about them such as their name, is
encountered. person perception The application of methods of studying
and understanding perception to the perception of people. Person
perception is fundamental to the process of understanding other people
and often, by implication, ourselves. It has been found to have the
usual features of perception when it is operating in conditions in which
the object is complex and the conditions are difficult. That is, it is
highly influenced by set and expectations, and by the needs, fears and
wishes of the observer. Person perception is an active and highly
researched area within psychology, involving the study of attribution,
non-verbal communication, interpersonal attitudes and social memory.
personal attributions Attributions which are seen to apply just because
that particular person was involved. They therefore tend to relate to
some unique or identifying characteristic of that person. For example,
passing a very high-level music examination on the cello would be likely
to be attributed to the special characteristic of exceptionally high
talent. If the attributed causal sequence would have happened whoever
was involved, it is classed as 'universal'. Some writers, such as
Seligman, treat personal attributions as being the same as internal
attributions. personal constructs A unique set of ideas about the world
and the people in it, which each individual develops and uses to make
sense of the world and to function effectively in it. Personal
constructs were proposed by George Kelly as the individual theories that
people use to generate hypotheses in order to explain their experience.
Kelly's model of the person was of 'man as scientist' -- that the

person was actively making sense of the world by formulating hypotheses
about it, and then testing them, much as a scientist investigates their
chosen subject area. By identifying the special, personal set of
constructs that the individual uses, a therapist would be far better
placed to understand that person and to assist them with their problems
in living. Kelly's was therefore an idiographic theory, concerned with
the uniqueness of the individual and how they understood their world.
The form of assessment known as the repertory grid, which Kelly
developed, allows the therapist to identify the individual's own
constructs in order to use them in analysing that person's experience.
See also laddering. personal growth The development of character and
personal qualities such as tolerance or self-efficacy as the person
becomes more mature. According to Carl Rogers, personal growth is
another way of describing the process of self-­ actualisation -- the
development and making real of one's talents and abilities. Personal
growth may occur in response to life events, or as a result of therapy.
See also post-traumatic personal growth, clientcentred therapy,
actualising tendency. personal space The distance that people keep
between themselves and others during everyday activities. This distance
will vary depending on the individual's culture, the circumstances, and
their relationship with the other person -- we tend to position
ourselves more closely to intimate friends than we do to strangers.
Personal space is a manifestation of proxemics and an important
non-verbal cue. It is often described in terms of territoriality.
personalism The degree to which the actions of others are perceived as
directed particularly towards yourself. There is evidence that we tend
to

P

overestimate the extent to which this happens (i.e. we
over-personalise). See also attribution, hedonic relevance. personality
Those relatively enduring features of an individual that account for
their characteristic ways of behaving. We put this forward as a useful
definition, but many alternatives would be possible. The differences are
not a matter of accuracy, but of deciding which approach to the subject
is most likely to be productive. Some uses of the term 'personality'
refer to patterns of behaviour rather than their causes or, more
narrowly, to the social roles that a person adopts. Some theories are
concerned with the way in which the structures underlying personality
are formed (e.g. Freud), and in general, the psychodynamic approaches
stress personality as an integrated whole, more than the sum of its
parts (see personality dynamics). Other theories are trying to attain a
biological basis (e.g. Eysenck's type theory). Another approach is to
measure different aspects of people on the assumption that their
behaviour is the product of many traits. In some respects, type and
trait theory have come together with the five-factor theory. Completely
different is the line taken by many psychologists, such as Walter
Mischel, who claims that there is little evidence of stable structures
within people that cause them to behave in certain ways. Instead, he
suggests that, as far as human behaviour is consistent at all, it is
consistent because people tend to spend their time in particular kinds
of environments and so behave in recognisable ways. Mischel would claim
that there is no such thing as personality as defined above. personality
assessment A system for measuring the personality characteristics of
different people. Personality assessments may be nomothetic, using the
format of objective testing, as in a per-

269

sonality inventory designed to compare individuals or projective tests
such as the thematic apperception test or the Rorschach inkblot test.
Alternatively, they may be idiographic, often based on phenomenology,
such as the repertory grid or the Q-sort. personality disorder A term
for the very broad class of psychological disorders that seem to arise
from long-term characteristics of the person. Roughly speaking, the term
applies to conditions that reflect what the person is, rather than how
they behave (behaviour disorders). Examples include psychopathic
personality and paranoia. personality dynamics An approach to
understanding behaviour in terms of the active interplay of aspects of
the personality structure. Freud's account of personality in terms of
interactions between the id, ego and superego is the classic example.
personality inventory A personality test that takes the form of a set of
straightforward questions about the individual's behaviour, which is
used to build up a personality profile or to assess personality traits
quantitatively according to a predetermined set of criteria. See also
trait theory. personality profile A system for describing the outcome of
a personality test that assesses the individual in terms of predefined
traits. Rather than just providing a single score as the outcome of the
test, an image of how the individual has scored on each of the set of
traits is given, usually graphically. personality trait A dimension of
personality, such as affability or introversion. Trait theories of
personality tend to assume that traits are (a) stable and (b) inherited,
although not all trait theorists hold these beliefs to the same degree.
Personality tests are usually based on

270

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

trait theories, although they vary in the actual traits they attempt to
measure. personification A form of objectification in which the idea
becomes associated with a particular individual (e.g. the identification
of a particular economic ideology as 'Thatcherism'). persuasion The
social process of encouraging a person to act or think in a particular
way or towards a specific goal. See also attitude. PET scans See
positron emission tomography. PGO waves A characteristic waveform of
electrical activity in the brain often found in REM sleep. They get
their name because they originate in the pons, go through to the lateral
geniculate nuclei, and then pass on to the occipital cortex. phallic
stage The third psychosexual stage in Freudian theory, in which the
child's interest focuses on the penis. Having based a significant part
of personality development on something possessed by only half of the
species, Freud's theory ran into all kinds of complications, and some
accusations of male chauvinism, about this stage. The phallic stage ends
with the Oedipus conflict and is generally concerned with issues of
potency. The term 'phallic' is used when the emphasis is on symbolic
aspects of the penis. phantom limb The experience, by people who have
had a limb amputated, of sensations as if they still had the limb. It is
of interest to psychologists partly because of what it says about pain
perception, partly because of its therapeutic challenges, and partly
because it is informative about how the body image is maintained.
phantom pain Pain which is experienced as coming from a part of the body
that has been amputated. See also body image, phantom limb.

phantosmia A sensory illusion that consists of the experience of a
non-existent smell. See olfaction. pharmacodynamics The biochemical and
physiological effects of drugs on the body. pharmacokinesis Muscular
movements or spasms that result from the actions of drugs rather than
originating with a disorder. The spasms characteristic of Parkinson's
disease, and once thought to be an inevitable symptom, have now been
shown to be pharmacokinetic in nature. phenomenal consciousness The
content of immediate awareness, sometimes also described as the 'raw',
or unprocessed, feeling of sensation. phenomenal field A term used by
perceptual theorists to describe the totality, or complete picture, of
what is being perceived. phenomenological research Research, usually
interview-based, which operates from a phenomenological perspective and
is therefore concerned with seeing events, people and the world in
general from the point of view of the research participant. Conducting
phenomenological research involves analysing research interviews through
four stages: bracketing (setting aside presuppositions), analysing
(looking at the whole experience and selecting the focus and scope of
the study), intuiting (exploring the data) and finally describing, in
which insights from the previous stages are pulled together to form a
coherent account. See also phenomenology. phenomenology The position
that the only reality of which we can be directly aware is conscious
experience. It therefore attempts to study the ways that consciousness
develops and operates.

P

Phenomenology was initiated within philosophy and has had its main
application within sociology. In psychology, it provided the impetus for
constructivist theories. phenotype The developed organism that results
from the interaction of the genetic characteristics which were inherited
from the parents, and the environment in which development occurs.
Although the term carries an idea of an end product, the phenotype is a
dynamic rather than a static phenomenon that, as both genetic and
environmental influence continue throughout life, is constantly
developing and changing. See also genotype. phenotype-first An approach
to genetic analysis that involves comparing many different phenotypes in
order to explore or identify genetic differences. See also
genotype-first. pheromones Chemicals that are released into the
atmosphere from the body and which provide a form of communication, as
they are detected by other members of the species. Many species release
distinctive pheromones to signal sexual receptiveness, and synthesised
pheromones are often used by animal breeders to facilitate the mating of
their animals. Although pheromone detection appears to be linked to the
sense of smell, it is not identical to it, as many pheromones seem to
exert a direct effect on hormone balance. phi phenomenon An illusion of
movement brought about by the sequencing in the illumination of adjacent
lights. If one light comes on when the other goes off, and the light
next to it goes on when that goes off, what is perceived (assuming it
happens reasonably quickly) is an impression of one light moving across
from the location of the first one to the location of the last. This
­phenomenon

271

is widely used in illuminated advertising signs, and can sometimes be
very convincing. Should the lights be arranged in a circle, the
perceived circular motion is seen as describing a circle of smaller
diameter than the actual arrangement of the lights. It is thought that
the phi phenomenon is a manifestation of the Gestalt psychologists'
principle of closure occurring with dynamic stimuli rather than with
static ones. See visual illusions. phobia A neurotic disorder in which
there is a strong and persistent fear of objects or situations that is
not justified by any danger that they pose. The sufferer will be aware
that the fear is irrational, but will make strenuous attempts to avoid
the feared situation. Often the symptoms can best be seen as attempts to
avoid the (very unpleasant) sensations of anxiety, rather than being
closely tied to the feared object. Phobias may be attached to a wide
range of situations, and particular forms are indicated by putting the
appropriate term (usually in Latin or Greek form) in front of the word,
as in agoraphobia and claustrophobia. Specific phobias can usually be
treated effectively by behaviour therapy, but many of them, such as
agoraphobia, incorporate a fear of social interaction, and are more
difficult to treat. phobic disorder The standard term used to cover all
of the phobias. phobic reaction The full range of behaviours shown by a
person suffering from a phobia. phoneme A basic unit of spoken ­language
-- a speech sound. Phonemes are not the same as syllables. A onesyllable
word such as 'cat', for instance, is made up of three distinct phonemes
that are combined to produce the syllable, or morpheme.

272

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

phoneme restoration The way that a listener will often 'fill in' a
missing phoneme in order to make cognitive sense of the utterance that
they are listening to. phonemics The study of regularities and
distinctive patterns in the combination of phonemes in spoken language.
Compare phonetics. phonetic spelling Methods of spelling that are
exactly equivalent to the sounds of the spoken words. In English,
therefore, phonetic spelling bears very little resemblance to written
English. phonetics The study of speech sounds in terms of their physical
properties rather than their use to create meaningful speech
(phonemics). phonological To do with the perception of words as sounds.
phonological dysgraphia A condition in which familiar words can be
written easily, but non-words cannot. See also dysgraphia. phonological
dyslexia The ability to read real words more easily than non-words. See
also dyslexia, peripheral dyslexia. phonological lexicon The abstract
speech sounds that make up known words. The phonological lexicon is
slightly, or sometimes considerably, different for each language.
phonological loop A part of the working memory model that stores verbal
information as temporary auditory images. phonological mediation The
idea that reading for understanding is dependent on converting the
visual input of the word to its speech equivalent. The alternative view
is that the processes of understanding written words and transcoding
text into speech are two separate, but interlinked, cognitive tasks.
Both theories have led to proposals for

improved teaching of reading in schools, with varying outcomes. See also
dyslexia. phonology The study of fundamental speech sounds, how they
differ in their use within a language and between different languages.
photopsin A light-sensitive chemical in the retina that responds to
coloured light. There are different types of photopsin, responding to
different wavelengths. See also rhodopsin. photoreceptors Cells in the
retina that respond to light and so are necessary for vision. phrenology
The theory, popular in the nineteenth century, that if someone had a
particular ability, then the relevant area of their brain would be
larger, and would affect the shape of the skull. Phrenologists aimed to
map the bulges in the skull caused by this greater brain development and
believed that mental faculties could be measured in this way. The belief
was so widely shared that phrenological evidence was even accepted in
law courts. In fact, a whole industry developed in which the technology
of skull measurement and pictorial representation of the recordings
received much greater attention than the validity of the results. Many
psychologists claim that current personality assessment does not make
the same mistake. phylogenetic scale An approximate scale that attempts
to chart an evolutionary progression through different types and groups
of species to human beings. Species are ranked in order of approximate
similarity to humans, with primates being closest and thus seen as
higher up the phylogenetic scale, and with fish and reptiles being seen
as significantly lower down. The concept of the phylogenetic scale is an
inherently misleading one, implying as it does that

P

evolution proceeds in a linear fashion, and that other species can be
seen as steps towards an ultimate goal, but the concept of species
similarity which it contains is sometimes useful in evaluating studies
in comparative psychology. If we want to generalise to human behaviour,
it makes more sense to take examples from other primate groups, or at
least mammals, than it does to take them from species that are far less
closely related, such as birds, insects or fish. phylogeny The
evolutionary processes by which a species develops its characteristics.
See also ontogeny. physical abuse Physical abuse may involve hitting,
shaking, throwing, poisoning, burning or scalding, drowning, suffocating
or otherwise causing physical harm to a person. Physical harm may also
be caused when a parent or carer fabricates the symptoms of, or
deliberately induces, illness in a child. Sometimes called
non-accidental injury or NAI. See child abuse. physical punishment
Punishment that involves some identifiable material consequence, such as
keeping a child in after school, or loss of pocket money. Although
corporal punishment is included in this category, the term physical
punishment is used to describe a wider range of punishments than simple
physical chastisement. Compare psychological punishment. physiological
arousal A general concept used to describe a combination of physical and
physiological reactions to threat, excitement or sexual stimulation.
There is a dispute among researchers about the extent to which a general
concept of 'arousal' is useful since there are many different forms of
arousal for different states. Nonetheless, there are generally
considered to be several commonly

273

shared characteristics, such as increased heart rate and sweating,
redirection of blood supply, dilated pupils, and other adjustments to
bodily function that provide the body with additional energy, strength
or responsiveness. See also alarm reaction, autonomic nervous system,
galvanic skin response. physiological correlate A physical change that
accompanies a behavioural or psychological response. The term is used to
avoid making assumptions about causality. It may be recognised, for
instance, that a cognitive event such as concentration or sleep is
accompanied by physiological changes in the body. However, the
relationship between the physiological change and the event itself is
not a simplistic causal one, and so the term 'physiological correlate'
is adopted as a description. physiological determinism The belief that
psychological processes are directly caused by physiological processes.
See also determinism. physiological needs Identified by Maslow as being
the lowest level in his hierarchy of human needs, physiological needs
are the requirements for physical functioning, such as the needs for
food, water, etc. physiological psychology The study of the way in which
human behaviour and cognition are influenced or informed by processes
that take place physically within the body. The term 'physiological' is
preferred to 'biological' because such influences are usually exerted by
whole systems of physical functioning operating together, as is
demonstrated, for example, in the fight or flight response, or the
sensory information-processing systems. Physiological psychology is
often seen as being inherently reductionist as it explains behaviour in
terms of the actions of

274

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

neurones and chemicals, but many physiological psychologists maintain an
interactionist approach to the subject, in which physiological factors
are seen as contributing to or influencing behaviour but not necessarily
determining it. physiological reductionism The claim that the best way
to understand psychological processes is to reduce them to their
underlying physiological mechanisms, and to study the latter. This
approach assumes that physiological determinism operates, and usually
takes the form of attempting to explain all psychological processes in
terms of brain function. See reductionism. physiology The functioning of
physical systems in the body, such as the regulation of blood flow and
digestive processes. 'Physiology' used on its own usually refers to the
workings of the body as a whole, living unit.

pie chart A diagram that presents frequency data in the form of a circle
divided into 'slices'. The size of each slice indicates the proportion
of the complete data-set that the variable makes up. pilomotor response
The response of the hair of the body standing on end at times of extreme
fear or rage. In many animals, this forms an impressive signal,
resulting in the animal looking much larger and, presumably, more
fearsome to a wouldbe attacker. It is also sometimes used to fluff up
the hair to provide added protection from cold. In human beings, owing
to the shortness and near invisibility of much body hair, the pilomotor
response simply results in the skin appearance known as goose pimples,
as the contraction of the small muscle at the base of each hair pulls
the surrounding skin into a small bump. The response is not particularly
intimidating to others.

Piaget, Jean (1896--1980) Piaget started his psychological studies
wanting to understand how mathematical and scientific thinking had
developed in human culture. His concept of genetic epistemology
('genetic' refers to development, not genes) led him to begin his
explorations of the nature of human knowledge by studying how thinking
develops in the child. Sixty years, 50 books and 500 papers later, he
was still working on this. Piaget's theory is based on the idea that
cognitive development occurs through the reduction of egocentrism, and
through equilibration, dealing with new experiences by the processes of
schema development through assimilation and accommodation. Like most of
the classic developmental theories, Piaget's was based on stages, in
this case of cognitive functioning -- the sensorimotor stage, the
preoperational stage, the concrete operational stage and the formal
operational stage. Piaget insisted that children's logic is appropriate
to their stage, and not just an inadequate version of adult thinking.
Piaget's theory continues to be extremely influential, especially in
education, but he underestimated the abilities of the child by
concentrating on reasoning about the physical world -- it is now
recognised that the child's social reasoning is more sophisticated. See
also adaptation, conservation, moral development, naughty teddy,
operation, reversibility.

P

pilot test The testing of an initial version of a questionnaire by
administering it to a smaller sample of respondents. The idea of
piloting is to identify problems with either the questions or the
proposed method of analysis. PIN See person identity node. pineal gland
A gland situated centrally in the brain, which was once thought to be
the seat of the soul. The pineal gland is known to be involved in the
hormonal changes which signal the onset of puberty and is also involved
in diurnal rhythms and seasonal hormonal variation, although the precise
functioning of the gland is far from established. pinna The dish-like
part of the outer ear that helps directs sound into the ear canal. The
shape of each ear is distinctive, and evidence shows that the
distinctive pattern of sound reflection from an individual's pinna is
actively recognised in the cognitive processing of external sounds. See
also audition. pitch The property of sound that relates to the frequency
of the sound wave, and allows different sounds to be experienced as
ranging from low to high. High pitches have more vibrations per second
(hertz) than low pitches, and the general range of perception of sounds
by the human ear spans from 20 to 20,000 Hz. Other animals can perceive
sounds outside this range (e.g. elephants and whales are able to detect
very low-pitched sounds, while bats notably perceive sounds that are
pitched at higher levels than humans can detect). See also frequency
theory, place theory. pituitary gland The main or 'master control' gland
of the endocrine system. The pituitary gland has a direct link with the
hypothalamus and secretes hormones that carry signals to all of the
other glands, stimulating their operations.

275

pity A form of concern about someone else's situation, which involves an
indication of awareness of the negative aspects of it and a sense of
feeling sorry for them. pivot words Words that children seem to use in
the earliest stage of language acquisition, as a base to which a large
number of other words (called open words) can be attached (e.g. 'allgone
car', 'allgone Daddy', 'nasty allgone'). Pivot words were once thought
to be the basis of grammar, and it was hoped to extend the concept to
utterances of three or more words. The idea is no longer widely used in
theories of language development. pixel A minimal spatial unit (e.g. a
dot on a computer screen). See also voxel. PK See psychokinesis. place
cells Neurones in the hippocampus that are closely linked with location
in space. They respond when a person or animal is in a particular
location in allocentric space (i.e. in response to their own movements).
place theory The idea that the pitch or frequency of a sound is
identified by the brain in terms of the specific region of the organ of
Corti that is stimulated, with high tones triggering off the hair cells
nearest to the oval window, while lower tones stimulate hair cells
further along the cochlea. placebo A fake or dummy form of medication
that is given during experimental trials investigating the effects of
drugs, or which purports to be a medical treatment when no alternative
is apparent or desirable. A placebo resembles the drug it is
representing but has no measurable effect on the body. In research, it
allows control of experimental effects such as the influence of beliefs,
by ­comparing the results of those people who have

276

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

had the drug and those who have had the placebo. In most such studies, a
double-­blind control will be used, such that experimenter effects are
also controlled, as the experimenter is not aware of who has taken the
placebo and who has taken the drug. See placebo effect. placebo effect
The positive effects caused by taking a placebo along with a belief that
the treatment will work. Although previously thought to have been a
simple self-delusion, research has indicated that the placebo effect
activates a complex neurological process, triggering neurotransmitters
linked with reward pathways such as dopamine and endorphins, and
stimulating neural pathways which are able to mitigate pain, generate
positive emotional reactions, and increase self-awareness. See also
mindfulness, self-fulfilling prophecy. planned comparisons in analysis
of variance, these are checks for significance or other relationships in
the data which have been explicitly stated before the analysis was
carried out. Compare unplanned comparisons. planum temporale A
triangular region located just behind the auditory cortex which forms
the heart of Wernicke's area, allowing speech-related sounds to be
integrated with non-sound information in order to facilitate language
understanding. See also language areas. plasticity This refers to the
brain's ability to change as a result of experience. It used to be
thought that neural plasticity only lasted until puberty, but it is now
clear that some degree of plasticity remains throughout the whole
lifespan. However, while neural plasticity (as in recovering from brain
damage or ablation) happens virtually automatically in children,
plasticity in later life is strongly related to effort and ­persistence.

platykurtic A distribution of scores with many examples of extremes,
such that the normal distribution curve appears flattened. See also
kurtosis. play There is no satisfactory definition of play. Either it is
defined by exclusion, which amounts to saying it is not work, or the
definition makes assumptions that fail to capture the appropriate range
of activities. Such a situation is usually an indication that there is
no adequate theory. Our ignorance about play comes under two headings --
functions and cause. Function is concerned with the role that play has
in the development of the individual, and how it came to be present in
the species. Theories here concentrate on the fact that much play
results in the development of skills that will be useful later in life,
but that play is uncoupled from serious consequences, and so can be
indulged in safely by the immature organism. The issue of cause --
whether a particular child will play in a particular situation -- is
even less well understood, with most work having been done under the
heading of exploration. Clues to both function and cause can be found by
studying the forms that play takes. Most of this research has
concentrated on pre-school children, as many of their activities involve
play, and there is relatively little research into adult play. See also
fantasy. play therapy A range of techniques in the diagnosis and
treatment of children that exploit the child's tendency to play. Often
materials such as puppets, dolls or just a piece of string may be
provided and kept for the child between sessions. In play, the child
will explore concerns that cannot be expressed in words, and the
therapist both learns about the child's problems and can help the child
to find ways of dealing with anxieties and difficulties.

P

pleasure centre A part of the brain that has been shown not to exist,
interest in this area resulted from studies in the 1970s showing that
stimulation of an area of the limbic system created sensations of
pleasure. More recent neurological investigations indicate that these
outcomes resulted from a complex reward pathway rather than a single
'pleasure centre'. See also ESB. pleasure principle In Freudian theory,
the basic function of the id is to pursue pleasure. In infancy, with a
high degree of dependency on caregivers, and before the ego with its
reality principle has developed, pleasure must be achieved either
through dependency on caretakers or through fantasy. In this context,
Freud wrote of pleasure as the reduction of tension, as if all
stimulation or arousal, at least for the infant, is unpleasant.
pluralistic ignorance This occurs when everyone in a group believes
something but no one expresses it, and so each person thinks they are
alone in their belief. Cases of bystander apathy and crowd behaviour may
depend at least partly on pluralistic ignorance combined with conformity
to the presumed beliefs of the rest of the group. The concept also
informs the idea of a 'silent majority'. point of subjective equality
(PSE) The value of a continuously variable stimulus at which it appears
to be identical to a standard stimulus. It is not usually measurable
directly but derived by a variety of psychophysics techniques. For
example, judgements may be obtained from a research participant about
whether a series of lines are larger or smaller than the standard line,
and the point at which they switch from larger to smaller is called the
point of subjective equality. polygenic Resulting from the action of
many genes. For example, the genetic

277

element in overall body height results from the action of several genes
contributing to the development of different parts of the body. Genetic
research indicates that most physical characteristics are actually
polygenic, and that phenotypic development caused by the action of a
single gene is actually quite rare. Phenotypic characteristics that are
polygenic show continuous variation in the population, as height does.
polygraph A device used to measure autonomic arousal. A polygraph takes
measurements of a number of different indices and provides a multiple
readout ('poly' is from the Greek, meaning 'many'). Typically, a
polygraph will take measurements of blood pressure and heart rate, EEG,
galvanic skin response and muscular tension. By such means, it is
possible to tell when an individual is under stress, and so polygraphs
are often used as lie detectors. A considerable amount of controversy
surrounds their use in criminal investigation, as it is not possible to
distinguish the stress produced by telling lies from that produced by
other factors (e.g. anxiety on behalf of someone else, anxiety caused by
being wired up to a complicated machine, or physical pain). polymorphism
The process of occurring in several different forms. pons A region in
the lower part of the brain that serves to connect the two halves of the
cerebellum, and which may also be involved in mediating dreaming sleep.
Ponzo illusion A geometric illusion consisting of two equal-length
horizontal lines, arranged one above the other, and flanked by two
straight lines that are angled towards one another at the top. The line
in the narrower gap appears longer. The illusion is thought to work as

278

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

a visual illusion because it resembles the perspective produced by
looking straight at parallel tracks such as railway lines. pop-out The
way that a single disparate object among a set of others appears to
stand out from the rest, by comparison with the way that a number of
such features scattered among others seem to have much the same visual
qualities, and merge into the whole pattern. population All of the cases
within a given definition (e.g. all of the women in the UK, all of the
schools in Huddersfield or all of the people in a given laboratory
class). Psychological research is nearly always only able to take a
sample from a large population, although researchers will often want to
generalise their results to the whole of the population. See also WEIRD
populations. population norms A set of scores which describes the
proportions of a given population, such as teenagers or women aged
30--40, that are expected to achieve particular scores on a test or some
other measurement. Psychometric tests have sets of population norms that
describe the proportions of different populations who would score at or
above different levels on the test. The norms can be used to judge
whether an individual is scoring within the normal range, or to predict
the numbers in a representative sample who will score above the level of
interest. See also norms, standardisation. population vector A
calculation of how neural impulses come to be channelled along neural
pathways, given the amount and direction of the firing of the neurones
concerned. It is arrived at by summing the preferred directions of
firing (vectors) of a large group of particular neurones (i.e. a
population). positive correlation A measure of the consistency with
which an increase

in one variable is accompanied by an increase in a second variable. For
example, reaction time correlates positively with the number of units of
alcohol consumed: the more alcohol, the longer the reaction time. A
relationship in the opposite direction is called a negative correlation
and the statistic describing such relationships is the correlation
­coefficient. positive emotions Emotions which are generally regarded as
pleasant or rewarding. People experience a much larger range of positive
emotions than is generally recognised, including happiness, contentment,
joy, gratitude, serenity, hope, amusement, satisfaction, and so on.
Although historically the tendency has been to focus on the negative
aspects of emotion, more recently researchers into positive psychology
have begun to develop our understanding of the effects of positive
emotions, which have been shown to have beneficial effects on physical
as well as mental health. See also negative emotions. positive
psychology A relatively recent innovation in psychology introduced by
Martin Seligman at the beginning of the twenty-first century. The
movement proposes that psychology has been limited by its focus on
negative states, and should now develop ways of cultivating positive
aspects of human life. It is said that, on a happiness scale, we have
become quite good at moving people from −5 to −2, but have not developed
any ways of moving people from +2 to +5. Michael Argyle and Abraham
Maslow could be seen as pioneers in this area with their work on
happiness and self-actualisation, respectively. positive regard Liking,
affection or love for another person. The term was used by Carl Rogers
to describe what he considered to be one of the two basic

P

needs of the human being -- the need for positive regard from others.
This, he believed, could either be conditional upon appropriate
behaviour or unconditional, but as a basic need, it would have to be
satisfied. Rogers' form of therapy requires that the therapist provides
the client with unconditional positive regard. See also
self-actualisation. positive reinforcement Reinforcement which provides
something that the organism wants, likes or needs -- a reward of some
kind. It is the essential component in operant conditioning. See also
negative reinforcement. positive skew A distortion of a normal
distribution in which more of the scores are lower so that the peak of
the curve is shifted towards the left. In a positively skewed
distribution, the mode will be lower than the median, which in turn is
lower than the mean. positivism A belief that reliable information can
only be obtained about events that can be observed directly. It
therefore claims that science should only deal with observables and not
with hypothetical constructs. Behaviourism in its more primitive forms
has been the clearest example of a positivistic approach within
psychology. An even more restrictive version, called logical positivism,
claims that a hypothesis can only be regarded as scientific if there is
a way in which it can potentially be disproved by empirical observation.
Logical positivism has been largely abandoned or superseded, but it was
always more popular among philosophers of science than among
psychologists, who mostly just got on with the job of studying
hypothesised psychological processes such as motivation. See also
noetic. positivity bias A tendency in human decision-making to focus on
positive statements rather than negative ones.

279

In social psychology, it refers to a tendency to evaluate individuals
more positively than groups or things. positron emission tomography
(PET) A non-invasive technique for investigating brain functioning, PET
scans work by detecting the blood supply to different regions of the
brain. Each time a nerve cell fires, it depletes its reserves and must
be replenished from nutrients carried in the bloodstream. Blood vessels
respond by increasing the blood supply to that area. PET scans detect
radioactive glucose introduced into the brain's blood supply, using
receptors placed on the scalp. The receptors feed information about the
distribution of the blood in the brain to a computer, which combines the
information to produce an image of the currently active parts of the
brain. posterior Towards the back, or behind. See also anterior,
superior, inferior. posterior paracingulate cortex The part of the
paracingulate cortex which becomes active when we are thinking about our
personal interactions with others. See also anterior paracingulate
cortex. post hoc tests Tests carried out after an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) test, in order to find out what the results of the test actually
mean. post-hypnotic amnesia The forgetting of information as a result of
a suggestion made while the subject was under hypnosis, and which occurs
after the hypnotic state has finished. Post-hypnotic amnesia is commonly
described by subjects as feeling like tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon
forgetting, and can often last for several days. post-hypnotic
suggestion A suggestion made to someone while they are in a hypnotic
state, which concerns behaviour that they will undertake once the
hypnotic fugue is over. In the case of

280

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

relatively trivial forms of behaviour, this is often performed by the
participant, who typically says that they 'just felt like doing it'.
Post-hypnotic suggestion has sometimes been presented by Hollywood
film-makers as being so powerful that it could force a subject to act
against their will, but this represents part of the Hollywood mythology
of hypnotism, which bears little resemblance to the real thing. It is
not possible to force someone to do anything against their will, either
during hypnosis or through post-hypnotic suggestion -- the state of
hypnosis itself necessarily involves the willing cooperation of the
person throughout. postmodernism An epistemological approach that
developed as a reaction to the modernist theories dominating society,
art and architecture in the first half of the twentieth century. In
psychology, it took the form of opposition to determinist approaches
such as behaviourism, which emphasised objectivity to the exclusion of
all else. Postmodernist psychology rejected the objective ideal, arguing
that it was (i) unattainable and (ii) unrepresentative of human
experience, and emphasised the importance of relative viewpoints and the
social construction of reality. See also social constructionism,
discourse analysis. postpartum depression Depression in a mother within
a few months of the birth of her baby, to be distinguished from 'the
blues', which is very common around the third day after the birth, but
which is not depression and does not persist. Some evidence is beginning
to emerge which suggests that depression in women is no more common
following birth than it is in other women of the same age. If this turns
out to be the case, then there will be little reason to suppose that
postpartum depression is in any way caused by pregnancy or birth.

post-synaptic potential (PSP) The temporary depolarisation of a neurone
after it has fired -- in other words, how ready a neurone is to fire
again after it has just done so. Some PSPs are excitatory, meaning that
the probability of firing is higher, while others are inhibitory, making
further firing less likely. See also excitation, inhibition, synapse.
post-traumatic amnesia Amnesia which results from some kind of accident,
such as that resulting from a blow to the head or from severe brain
damage. post-traumatic growth The observation that experiencing
traumatic events such as a major disaster or personal tragedy can
sometimes result in increased personal growth, as the person
re-evaluates their life and values and develops new and more positive
ways of interacting with the world. See also post-traumatic stress
disorder. post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) A set of symptoms
commonly found following any kind of extremely disturbing experience.
Research on concentration camp victims indicates that the disorder may
persist over many years, and it has been found to be a common response
in victims of rape, political torture and major disasters. The symptoms
of PTSD are varied from one individual to the next, but can be generally
classified into four types: changes in emotional and physical reactions;
an increase in negative moods and thoughts; avoidance of potentially
stressful situations or those reminiscent of the traumatic experience;
and intrusive memories, or 'flashbacks', both in waking life and in
dreaming. PTSD can be substantially reduced by therapy. postural echo
Sometimes referred to as 'mirroring', this is a non-verbal signal which
often indicates friendliness,

P

or that two people are in substantial agreement. While the participants
are engaged in social exchange (such as a conversation), they may be
seen to be adopting (usually unconsciously) the same posture, or
mirroring each other's posture if they are face to face. Postural echo
is often used consciously by therapists and salesmen to produce a
feeling of rapport in the client. See also chameleon effect. posture A
powerful non-verbal cue that is commonly used to indicate attitudes or
emotions. It is about the positioning of the body and the relative
arrangement of the limbs. Posture is commonly, although usually
unconsciously, taken as a communicative signal, and may make a
considerable difference to how a verbal message is understood (see
Figure 55). See also non-verbal communication, postural echo. power A
word that has several meanings, but generally contains the idea of the
ability to make things happen. In psychology, its main two uses are: (i)

In social terms, the ability to direct, command or control social
resources, and thereby the behaviour of other people. Power has always
been a significant sociopolitical motivator, and almost the

Figure 55 Posture

(ii) 

281

whole of human history can be viewed in terms of the use and/or abuse of
power. See also status. When applied to a statistical test, this refers
to the ability of the test to identify an effect, or reject the null
hypothesis, when an effect is present. In any test, the power increases
as the sample size is increased, but some tests are intrinsically more
powerful than others. In general, tests that use more of the information
in the data are more powerful. So a t-test, which calculates the amounts
by which scores differ, is more powerful than a sign test, which merely
uses information about whether scores are larger or smaller. Parametric
statistics are more powerful than non-­parametric statistics for this
reason.

power law A law propounded by Stevens which states that the subjective
strength of a stimulus is equal to the physical strength of the stimulus
raised to a power (squared, cubed, etc.). Like Fechner's law, the power
law relates to the fact that as a stimulus becomes stronger, larger
changes are required in order to achieve the same psychological effect.
The power law differs from Fechner's law in the mathematical expression
of the relationship.

282

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

practical intelligence A form of intelligence that is characterised by
the ability to deal effectively with real-world problems and
difficulties as they arise. It does not necessarily correlate with more
abstract forms of intelligence. See also triarchic intelligence.

Freud proposed that the preconscious lies between the unconscious and
the conscious mind, which it more closely resembles. Although we are not
generally aware of preconscious knowledge, a particularly vivid example
would be the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon.

practice effect An experimental effect in which apparent changes in the
dependent variable occur as a result of the person practising the task
during the course of the experiment, learning to do it better and
improving their performance. Practice effects are usually controlled by
counterbalancing the order of presentation of the conditions of the
study.

predictive validity See validity.

pragmatics An approach to studying language that concentrates on the
functions which language performs, rather than on the structure of the
language itself (linguistics). See also discourse analysis. precocial
animals Animals that can move about as soon, or almost as soon, as they
are born or hatched. Research into imprinting has traditionally centred
around work with precocial animals, as they show the phenomenon in a
clear and unambiguous form. It is a rapid and quite distinctive form of
attachment. precognition A knowledge of future events that is not based
on judgement but on an apparently direct perception of them. As a branch
of parapsychology, precognition requires more than the certainty that
dinner will be provided this evening and implies a special form of
knowledge, different from any that is understood by psychologists.
Anyone who could operate precognition reliably would presumably be
either very rich or very depressed. preconscious Thoughts and knowledge
that are not at present in the conscious, but which are not repressed
and so can be brought into consciousness at will.

predictor variable An experimental variable that appears to be able to
predict an outcome. preferential looking An observational approach in
the study of infant cognition, in which two stimuli are presented
simultaneously and the amount of time the infant spends looking at each
of them is recorded. Conclusions are then drawn about the greater
significance for the infant of the preferred stimulus. prefrontal cortex
This is the area on the frontal lobes that is located in front of the
premotor cortex. The prefrontal cortex is involved in planning and the
higher-level control or regulation of action. So, for instance, the
prefrontal cortex would be involved with selecting relevant actions to
satisfy intentions, while the premotor cortex prepares those actions in
response to internal or external situations, the motor cortex initiates
the activity itself, and the cerebellum coordinates the smooth movement
of the action. Interestingly, areas of the prefrontal cortex are also
involved in emotional states such as happiness, and link with the
amygdala to regulate or inhibit the expression of negative emotions such
as anger. See also contention scheduling, FAS test, dysexecutive
syndrome, paracingulate cortex. prejudice Literally meaning
'prejudgement', prejudice refers to the maintenance of a prior attitude
irrespective of new or contradictory information. It is commonly used in
connection with

P

283

negative or discriminatory social attitudes, such as racism or sexism.
It may also refer to a predetermined favourable judgement by which the
individual ignores relevant negative information. Negative prejudice
such as racial prejudice has been shown to have a powerful emotional
element, involving increased activity in the amygdala, and in this
respect is quite different from stereotyping. See also stereotype.

effects on the immature baby of being exposed to intense environmental
stimulation at a time when the nervous system is biologically adapted to
the protective environment of the womb.

prelinguistic thought The forms that thinking takes in children before
they have developed language abilities. It is thought that knowing about
prelinguistic thought may help us to understand the extent to which
adult thought may be independent of language.

premotor cortex This is the area immediately in front of the motor
cortex. It is the part of the brain that prepares the motor cortex for
physical actions. and is important for linking actions with information
from the environment. Located towards the rear of the frontal lobe
(Figure 56), it forms a strip of cortex running alongside and
immediately before the motor projection area. It receives information
from the prefrontal cortex and processes that information into
directions for specific actions, which it then passes on to the motor
cortex. The

premature A term used to describe babies who are born before gestation
is complete. New obstetric techniques mean that premature babies now
survive from a much earlier stage of development than was previously
thought possible. Psychologists are concerned about the

Figure 56 Areas of the frontal lobe

pre-moral stage The first of Kohlberg's three levels of moral
development, in which moral judgements are seen entirely instrumentally,
in terms of whether or not the individual is likely to be detected
and/or punished.

284

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

lateral premotor cortex links actions with visual objects; the medial
premotor cortex deals with self-generated actions using proprioceptive
input as well as input from the prefrontal cortex. See also frontal
lobe, pyramidal motor system, cerebellum. preoperational stage The
second of Piaget's stages of cognitive development. During this stage,
children are unable to think in terms of logical concepts such as
conservation or reversibility, and they are dominated by perceptual
features of their world. The stage starts from about two years of age,
at the end of the sensorimotor stage, when object permanence is first
seen. It ends at about seven years when the child starts the concrete
operational stage. prepared learning The finding that, to some extent,
organisms are biologically prepared to learn certain associations very
easily. The most common example is that animals which experience nausea
will associate this sensation with whatever they last ate, rather than
with other kinds of stimuli, even if these were more intense and more
recent. It is sometimes called the 'Garcia effect' after its discoverer,
but it is also known as the 'sauce Béarnaise phenomenon' after an
account by Martin Seligman of an experience of being sick, due to a
stomach virus, after eating a steak with his favourite sauce, and being
unable to face eating it ever again. In fact, the effects can be
overcome, and Seligman has had a lot of free meals while people have
tested the phenomenon's permanence. See also one-trial learning.

complaint about a particular symptom. This is called the presenting
symptom -- a reminder that some other symptom may be the real problem,
which may only emerge in the course of therapy. A major dispute about
evaluating different forms of therapy is based on the issue of whether
resolving the presenting symptom counts as a success. Many behaviourists
will work only on the presenting symptom and end therapy once it is
eliminated. Psychodynamic and cognitive therapists are more likely to
see the presenting symptom as a kind of ticket that enables the patient
to get into therapy so that they can then start to deal with underlying
problems. presumptive consent A technique used when it is not practical
to obtain informed consent from participants in a specific research
programme. A large set of people are asked to give their views on the
acceptability of the proposed procedure. Although the people giving
their views will not be taking part in the actual research, it is
assumed that their views are representative of the general public, so if
they deem the procedure to be acceptable, it can be used. See also
ethical issues.

pre-processing A term used in fMRI imaging to describe the stages in
between the initial data collection and the analysis of that data.

primacy effect An effect of the presentation of stimuli whereby those
items that are presented first tend to be recalled more readily than
those that are presented later on. Primacy effects do not only occur
with simple memory tasks but have their counterparts in person
perception, too, whereby those characteristics of a person that are
first encountered tend to be applied more readily than any
characteristics which emerge or are learned later. In memory studies,
the primacy effect is part of the serial position effect. See also
serial position curve.

presenting symptom A client will usually come into therapy on the basis
of a

primary abilities The fundamental mental abilities suggested by
Thurstone

P

as forming the basis of intelligence. There were considered to be seven
of these: memory, verbal ability, word fluency, number, spatial
awareness, perceptual discrimination and reasoning. primary appraisal An
initial assessment (e.g. of how strong a stressor is). See also
transactional model of stress. primary auditory cortex The area of the
cerebral cortex that is responsible for processing hearing. See also
auditory cortex, sensory projection area. primary drives Drives that
satisfy a fundamental physiological need, such as the need for food or
water. See also secondary drives. primary language pathway This is a
neural pathway which runs from those language areas concerned with
processing understanding, such as Wernicke's area and the interior
parietal lobule, to the motor areas involved in speech production, such
as Broca's area and the area of the frontal lobe immediately surrounding
it. See also language areas. primary motor cortex The area of the
cerebral cortex that is responsible for carrying out voluntary movements
of the body. See also motor projection area, sensory projection area.
primary process In Freudian theory, the more primitive kind of mental
process that is present in the functioning of the id from birth. It is
seen as the way in which the unconscious operates later in life, being
governed by the pleasure ­principle and not following the same laws as
conscious or secondary process thinking. For example, primary processes
take no account of time and space, so unconscious memories of
frightening childhood events are just as real, powerful and present as
current perceptions.

285

primary reinforcement A reinforcement that satisfies a basic need or
drive in the organism. See operant conditioning, secondary
reinforcement. primary sexual characteristics Those signs of someone's
gender that are directly concerned with reproduction. These include the
genitalia -- the penis and testicles in the man and the vagina and
clitoris in the woman. See also secondary sexual characteristics.
primary visual cortex (V1) The area on the cerebral cortex that receives
visual input from the lateral geniculate nuclei, and begins to combine
simple visual features into more complex ones. See also visual cortex,
simple cell, hypercomplex cell. primer question A question asked to
introduce a topic, whose function is really to prepare the respondent
for the questions that will be following. priming Generating a state of
readiness or preparedness to receive or respond to certain types of
information. See also associative priming, primer question. principle of
closure Probably the most powerful of the Gestalt principles of
perceptual organisation, the principle of closure refers to the
perceptual tendency towards complete forms and shapes. For example, a
set of disconnected lines is likely to be seen as indicating an
incomplete shape if this is at all possible, rather than simply being
taken as a group of independent stimuli. The principle of closure also
extends into the perception of movement, in the form of stroboscopic
motion and the phi phenomenon. principle of parsimony See Occam's razor.
principle of proximity One of the Gestalt principles of perceptual
organisation, which states that stimuli which

286

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

occur close to one another will tend to be perceived as being grouped
together, all other things being equal. principle of similarity One of
the Gestalt principles of perceptual organisation, which states that
similar stimuli will tend to be perceived as being grouped together, all
other things being equal. principle of truth The rather questionable
idea that our mental representations of assertions or their implications
are generally only concerned with what is true, and tend to disregard or
ignore false information. prior general consent When a large pool of
research participants are given a general briefing before a study, which
includes the fact that they might be misinformed about its true purpose,
or experience some emotional stress during the procedure. Those who
consent to this form the group from which the actual research
participants are drawn. The assumption is that there will be full
debriefing after the procedure has been completed. See also ethical
issues, informed consent, presumptive consent.

to store new information. See also anterograde amnesia. proactive
interference The situation that occurs when information which has
already been learned interferes with the learning of new material.
Proactive interference is particularly common when someone is trying to
learn a set of similar tasks within a relatively short period of time.
It may account for the primacy effect. probabilistic concept A concept
that involves a set of characteristics which its members are likely to
share but need not necessarily do so. For example, 'chair' is a
probabilistic concept in that one of its distinctive features is that
chairs usually have four legs. However, there are many styles of chair
which do not fit into that category -- it is probable, but not
necessary. In practice, most concepts used by human beings are
probabilistic in nature. See also classical concept, natural categories,
prototypes.

privation A lack, throughout development, of some requirement. Privation
should be distinguished from deprivation, in which the requirement was
available for a period and then removed. Experiments in which animals
are raised with no contact with a mother are ­privation studies, even
though they are often referred to as maternal deprivation.

probability The likelihood that an event will occur. Formally, the
probability is calculated by dividing the number of ways the event could
occur by the number of all possible events. For example, the probability
of getting a red apple out of a barrel on a single trial is given by the
number of red apples divided by the total number of fruits (e.g. red
apples + green apples + oranges) in the barrel. The probability of
getting a red apple ranges from 0 (no red apples, so zero probability of
getting one) to 1 (nothing but red apples so you are certain to get
one). Most use of statistics in psychology amounts to assessing the
probability of a result. If the probability is very low, then the
assumptions of the null hypothesis are unlikely to be valid. See also
binomial distribution, statistical significance.

proactive amnesia A disorder of ­memory in which the person is unable

probe A stimulus, such as a word or a digit, which is used to explore
some-

prisoner's dilemma A classic game used to identify strategic choices, in
which the person is required to choose between the best collective
strategy, which is cooperation, and the best individual strategy, which
is non-cooperation. See also game theory, payoff matrix.

P

thing (e.g. how much information is retained in short-term memory). In
this example, the research participant would hear a sequence of digits
read out, and would then be told a specific number and asked if that had
been included in the list. The number would be acting as the probe.
probe question A tentative question in an interview designed to
introduce a particular topic and test whether it would be worth
following up with more detailed questions. problem-solving The study of
the various strategies used by people, computers and sometimes animals
to achieve solutions, usually of highly specified puzzles. By having the
problem clearly specified, it is hoped that the detailed cognitive
processes involved in problem-solving will become apparent. However, it
is not clear whether the findings from such research have applications
to more complex human problems, such as how to pass an examination or
pay the mortgage. More recent research has tended to focus on
enumerating the huge number of heuristics and biases in typical human
decisionmaking. See also brainstorming, belief bias, creativity,
heuristics, Einstellung, functional fixedness, groupthink, Stroop
effect. problem space The name given to the difference between the
desired outcome or solution to a problem, and the point that the
problem-solver has currently reached. Early computer simulations of
problem-solving involved using heuristics to reduce the problem space,
and so bring the solution nearer. procedural knowledge Knowledge of
processes or action sequences (e.g. how to make a cup of tea).
Procedural knowledge appears to be stored in a different way to
declarative knowledge, as is shown by the fact that it is rarely
affected by brain damage producing amnesia.

287

product--moment correlation See Pearson's product--moment correlation.
professional competence An ethical principle which emphasises the
importance of training and expertise when giving advice in serious
matters which emerge in therapy or during the course of psychological
research. See also e­ thical issues. programmed learning A technique for
applying operant conditioning to classroom learning. The information is
broken down into small units and presented to the student in such a way
that one unit leads naturally on to the next. Each unit involves some
kind of simple test question. If the student gets it right, they move on
to the next stage; if they get it wrong, they go back over the relevant
material again. The idea is that this approach maximises positive
reinforcement (knowledge of correct answers) for the student, thus
maximising interest in and application to the learning process. As an
example of pure operant conditioning, programmed learning has been
criticised on the grounds that knowledge of results is a cognitive
rather than a behavioural reinforcement. In classroom practice, the
absence of social interaction between student and teacher has often
presented its own difficulties, and programmed learning has tended to be
introduced in a manner that is far more limited than Skinner originally
envisaged. progress monitoring The name given to a general heuristic in
which very slow progress towards a goal triggers a change of strategy.
In everyday terms, it might be referred to as impatience. projection One
of the ego-defence mechanisms identified by Freud, which involves the
individual attributing their own unconscious motives and ideas to
another person, or to an ambiguous situ-

288

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

ation. For example, a person who has not come to terms with their own
sexual drives might come to believe that many other people engage in
'bad' sexual practices. Like other defence mechanisms, this is an
unconscious process, but it is often a useful signal to a therapist of
issues that particularly concern the client. projective test A form of
personality assessment that involves presenting people with ambiguous
stimuli, and requiring them to indicate how they would interpret each
stimulus. The idea is that the reply will indicate some of the concerns
of the individual's unconscious mind -- themes and events that
particularly concern them at a subconscious level will be projected on
to the ambiguous material. Well-known examples of projective tests are
the Rorschach inkblot test and the thematic apperception test. proper
name anomia Serious and recurrent difficulty in retrieving proper names
(e.g. of people or cities). proprioception The perception of the
positioning of the limbs, and of movement. Proprioception and
kinaesthesia are commonly considered to represent a sixth and seventh
basic sense, which deal with internal rather than external sensory
information. See also proprioceptors, interoception. proprioceptors
Sensory neurones in the muscles, joints, tendons and inner ear that
convey information to the central nervous system about body position.
prosocial behaviour The opposite of antisocial behaviour. The term
'prosocial' is used to refer to behaviour that involves helping others
or making a positive gesture towards them in some way. It is commonly
used in discussions of bystander intervention and altruistic behaviour.
prosopagnosia A form of agnosia that is specific to an inability to
recognise faces.

prospective memory The type of memory that is concerned with remembering
to do things -- in other words, memory for things which have yet to
happen, such as a dental appointment. See also event-based prospective
memory. protocol A plan of the steps or stages involved in the solution
of a problem, or the steps to be undertaken in a research project. Also
used to refer to spoken reports of such stages. See also algorithm.
protocol analysis A form of qualitative analysis used by cognitive
psychologists, in which the research participant attempts to verbalise
the protocols or steps involved in a specific procedure (e.g. making a
decision, or composing a piece of music). Protocol analysis has
stimulated renewed interest in introspection, and also in how subjective
experience often differs from the cognitive processing itself -- in
other words, how what people think they have been doing is often quite
different from what they actually have been doing. proto-declarative
pointing Pointing that elicits joint attention (e.g. indicating that the
other person should look at the thing the pointer is pointing at).
proto-imperative pointing In childhood, pointing which implies that the
child wants something. See also protodeclarative pointing. proto-themes
Early ideas about themes, which may possibly emerge from the data during
the course of a grounded theory analysis. prototypes Specific examples
of a concept or a category that are considered to be, or designed to be,
typical of that concept or category. Prototypes need to have all of the
salient features of the category, but should not have additional
features. For example, a prototypical chair would have four legs, a seat
and a

P

289

back, but would not include arms, footrests, or other non-essential
features.

psi The ability to perform paranormal tasks. See parapsychology.

proxemics The study of personal space and the use of touch as non-verbal
cues in communication.

PSP See post-synaptic potential.

proximo-distal A sequence of development identified by Gesell in early
studies of infant development of motor coordination and incorporated
into his theory of maturation. Gesell observed that motor control
appeared to be acquired over the more central regions of the body first,
and only later did the extremities (hands and feet) become coordinated.
From this, he argued that development proceeded in an orderly direction,
which he called proximo-distal ('from near to far'). See also
cephalo-caudal. Prozac An antidepressant drug which works by blocking
the breakdown of the neurotransmitter serotonin in the synapse, causing
a build-up so that there are higher levels available than normal. PRP
See psychological refractory period. PSE See point of subjective
equality. pseudomutuality A process that occurs in families whereby
everybody pretends to be in agreement and everyone denies that there is
any conflict. Their commitment to keeping up this appearance prevents
them (or the family therapist) from tackling the real problems in their
relationships. pseudo-neglect Increased attention being given to the
left side of the space that the person is in, despite the lack of any
lesion or brain abnormality which might produce that effect. The effect
became known through experimental demonstrations but appears to be an
ordinary aspect of cognition. See also neglect, hemispatial neglect.
pseudowords Strings of letters that can be pronounced as if they were
real words (e.g. froom, struglich).

psyche The mind. Psychology was originally defined as the study of the
mind. psychedelic drugs Drugs that induce altered states of awareness,
commonly resulting in heightened perceptions of colour and sensory
imagery. Psychedelic drugs have been used as recreational drugs for
centuries, but were named 'psychedelic' during the 1960s, as a result of
their association with a particularly vivid form of visual art involving
massed swirling of colours and similar imagery. Drugs classified as
psychedelic include the hallucinogens (e.g. mescaline, LSD and
psilocybin). psychiatry The medical treatment of abnormal behaviour or
of mental disturbance. Psychiatrists are always medically qualified, and
psychiatric approaches tend to emphasise physical methods of treatment
(such as chemotherapy), although there is increased acceptance of
psychotherapeutic approaches, in which they may work in very similar
ways to some clinical psychologists. Within the UK's National Health
Service, psychiatrists have a statutory responsibility to deal with all
of the cases sent to them. Psychologists do not have this requirement,
and may therefore be able to spend more time on fewer patients.
psychoactive drugs Drugs that affect psychological experience such as
moods, consciousness or awareness. Although this is a very general term,
it is most often applied to the groups of drugs commonly used for
psychological purposes, such as anti-anxiety drugs, sedatives,
tranquillisers, antidepressants, stimulants and hallucinogens.
psychoanalysis The method of psychological treatment originated by Freud
and developed by various of his

290

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

­followers, the neo-Freudians. The major features of psychoanalysis are
the use of free association to uncover defence mechanisms that may then
be interpreted by the psychoanalyst in order to bring unconscious
material into consciousness. One of Freud's major insights was that
transference and counter-transference are not obstructions to therapy,
but should be a fundamental part of the process. The term is not applied
to the methods of those such as Carl Jung, who broke away from Freud and
whose approach is called analytical psychology.

have been empirically disproved. See also continuity hypothesis.

psychoanalytic theory The theory of personality development and human
functioning developed by Freud. Psychoanalytic theory was continually
elaborated and refined by Freud during his lifetime, and the process has
continued since his death, so there is no single 'psychoanalytic
theory', but many. However, they usually contain the ideas of the
unconscious with its effects on everyday behaviour, psychosexual stages
of development, and the personality structure of id, ego and superego.
Freud gave the theory a strong biological flavour, and the assumption
that adult behaviour is powerfully influenced by childhood experiences
remains fundamental to the approach. One major development of the theory
came from object relations theory, which emphasised the importance of
experiences from very early infancy. Psychoanalytic theory has had an
extremely wide influence on Western culture (e.g. in the understanding
of art and literature). Many of Freud's original insights such as those
concerning defence mechanisms are now regarded as common sense. The
theory has been attacked as unscientific, on the grounds that it does
not make claims which can be tested empirically. It has also been
attacked on the grounds that several of its claims

psychodynamic A term used to describe all of the theories of human
functioning that are based on the interplay of unconscious drives and
other forces within the person. Psychoanalytic theory is the clearest
example, and the term 'psychodynamic' is often used to refer
specifically to this class of theories.

psychobiology See biopsychology. psychodrama A set of therapeutic
techniques, originally introduced by Jacob Moreno in 1925, in which
people are helped to act out troublesome emotions or situations.
Regarding the situation as a play, and helped by the therapist and
usually other group members, the patient can try out alternative ways of
responding in safety allowing them to understand the problem better.

psychodynamic therapy Forms of psychotherapy that are based in
psychoanalytic theory but are generally less intensive, and shorter,
than psychoanalysis. psychogenic Having a psychological origin or cause.
The term is used particularly of disorders for which no organic cause
can be identified, so it is assumed, by default, that the cause is
psychological. See also organic disorder. psychokinesis (PK) Bringing
about a physical effect at a distance by psychological or, more
accurately, parapsychological means. psycholinguistics The study of
psychological aspects of language and the relationships between language
and other psychological processes. Psycholinguistics deals with such
questions as the interdependence of language and thought, language
acquisition, the ways in which social experience and language

P

­acquisition interact, reading and pragmatics. Psycholinguistics is
therefore a much broader field than linguistics, which is concerned with
the origins and form of language itself. psychological assistant A
career grade in the UK that allows psychology graduates to work in
clinical psychology departments. They undertake routine psychological
tasks such as the scoring of psychometric tests, research, or the
organising of therapeutic events. The grade is frequently used to gain
appropriate experience before training as a clinical psychologist.
psychological determinism The idea that all psychological processes have
been directly caused by something, whether that be unconscious motives
or fixations, as suggested by psychoanalytic theorists, or the patterns
of firing of nerve cells in the brain brought about by conditioned
responses to stimuli. psychological field This was a fundamental aspect
of Lewin's field theory, which emphasised that human behaviour should be
seen in context, as opposed to the behaviourist approach of seeing it
simply in terms of action units. The psychological field is seen as part
of the overall life space in which human experience takes place.
psychological punishment Punishment that does not necessarily involve an
explicit penalty, but which is more concerned with the communication of
social expectation and the disappointment/sadness of people for whom the
miscreant cares. Psychological punishment typically requires some form
of an act of atonement, such as an apology or an attempt to right the
wrong. Some research has indicated that psychological punishment is more
influential than physical punishment in changing behaviour and in
developing strong consciences in children.

291

psychological refractory period (PRP) The name given to an effect
observed in cognitive research whereby the person takes longer to
respond to the second of two stimuli than to the first, if the two are
presented close together in time. psychological technician Another term
for a psychological assistant, but also used for a psychology graduate
working in non-clinical psychology departments. psychology Psychology
has been defined in various ways, depending on the inclinations of
researchers at the time when the definition was formulated. It has been
variously defined as 'the study of the mind', 'the study of behaviour',
'the study of human experience' and 'the study of mental life'. It is
difficult to produce a definition which will satisfy everyone, although
we can state that it involves the study of human and animal behaviour
and experience, examined from a number of different viewpoints and using
a variety of techniques, most of which emphasise the importance of
empirical evidence in support of explanatory theory. The field of
psychology is divided, often somewhat arbitrarily, into different areas,
each of which has its own style. Some qualifiers of the term, such as
developmental, social and comparative psychology, refer to particular
kinds of subject matter, with newer areas (e.g. community psychology)
being added as the discipline expands. Some refer to basic psychological
processes such as cognitive psychology, perception and motivation. Some
define the scope or indicate a theoretical or empirical approach to the
study, such as neuropsychology and experimental psychology,
respectively. Other titles -- clinical, educational, occupational --
refer to the psychological professions, while the term applied
psychology refers to a general orientation towards using

292

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

p­sychological concepts in real-life situations that cuts across the
whole field. psychometric test A form of assessment designed to measure
aspects of the individual's psychological functioning. Tests may be
ipsative or normative, and in the latter case are validated through the
development of group norms, establishing likely results for given age
groups or other categories. Psychometric tests include intelligence
tests, personality assessments, creativity tests, and a whole range of
other tests used for personnel selection, such as vocational guidance
tests. See also gamification. psychometrics The measurement (usually
through questionnaires or inventories) of psychological characteristics
-- 'mental testing'. See psychometric test. psychomotor retardation The
slowing down of speech and movement found in severe depression.
psychopathic personality A form of personality disorder in which the
person lacks anxiety and guilt, disregards society's laws and
conventions, and has no concern for other people. They may also be
impulsive and aggressive. The condition does not fit readily into
psychological classifications, but the term is extensively used in legal
situations and allows certain kinds of offender to be treated in special
hospitals. It is also sometimes called 'antisocial personality
disorder'. See also psychopathy. psychopathology The study of deviation
from 'normal' behaviour or psychological functioning. psychopathy A
condition of personality that involves high levels of aggression which
are not tempered by any sense of guilt or empathy with the victim. In
personality assessment, psychopathy is a trait incorporating
selfishness, callousness,

impulsivity and antisocial behaviour. It is considered to be one of the
Dark Triad. See also psychopathic personality. psychopharmacology The
study of the psychological effects of drugs. See also psychoactive
drugs. psychophysics The study of the relationship between the
experience of physical stimuli and the physical stimuli themselves
(e.g. the study of the relationship between perceived levels of sound,
and levels of sound as measured by physical instruments). See also
Fechner's law, power law. psychophysiological ­psychosomatic illness.

disorder

See

psychophysiology Sometimes used with the same meaning as physiological
psychology but usually having a more restricted meaning. In its
restricted use, the term refers to studies that use non-intrusive
methods of monitoring physiological processes (e.g. surface electrodes)
to provide information about psychological processes. See also
physiological correlate. psychosexual stages In Freud's theory of
personality development, the progression of bodily aspects through which
pleasure is sought and towards which biological drives are directed. The
stages are the oral stage, anal stage, phallic stage, latency period and
genital stage. As with any stage theory, each stage must be completed
more or less satisfactorily in order for the next to be tackled. Failure
to complete a stage implies that a significant part of the person's
resources will remain invested in that primitive source of
gratification, and their personality will show relevant tendencies, such
as fixation, throughout adult life. psychosis A term used to cover the
most severe mental disorders, such as schizophrenia and bipolar
depression. The person

P

in a psychotic state loses contact with reality (see reality testing),
has severe disturbances of thought and emotion that are not open to
being changed by contrary evidence, and has little or no insight into
their condition. Compare neurosis. psychosocial A label for possible
causes of a mental health condition that excludes the possibility of a
physical origin. psychosocial stages The term given to the eight life
stages proposed by Erikson. Each stage involves a basic conflict that
the individual needs to resolve, and which in turn provides a foundation
for the later stages. In brief, the eight conflicts are as follows: (i)
trust/mistrust; (ii) autonomy/doubt; (iii) initiative/guilt; (iv)
industry/inferiority; (v) identity/role confusion; (vi)
intimacy/isolation; (vii) generativity/stagnation; and (viii)
integrity/despair. These basic conflicts arise at progressive stages
throughout a person's life, right up to old age, and present the
individual with a set of age-specific challenges to tackle.
psychosomatic illness An illness that has its cause in psychological
factors. Although the symptoms and discomfort of psychosomatic illness
are genuine, and often highly distressing to the patient, the illness
itself does not originate from a physical disorder of the body, but from
some kind of mental disturbance or discomfort, often unconscious in
nature. psychosurgery The use of surgical intervention in the brain to
control behaviour. The most well-known form of psychosurgery is the
operation known as lobotomy -- the removal of the frontal

293

lobe of the brain in order to induce quiescent behaviour in highly
agitated, aggressive or psychotic individuals. A similar operation,
leucotomy, involves the severing of the connections between the frontal
lobe and the rest of the brain, leaving it in place, and produces
similar effects. Although largely discredited as a technique by
neuropsychologists, in some areas psychosurgery is still performed to
control psychotic behaviour. It is one of the more contentious aspects
of psychiatry. psychotherapy Usually, this term covers the whole range
of psychologically based treatments by which trained practitioners help
people who have psychological problems. Sometimes the term is used in a
more restricted way, most commonly to refer to forms of treatment in
which a psychotherapist and a single client tackle the client's problems
by talking. Specific forms of psychotherapy may be identified by
additional terms. For example, psychodynamic psychotherapy covers forms
of psychotherapy that have been based on one of the psychodynamic
theories. Some other forms include nondirective therapy, cognitive
therapy and rational--emotive behaviour therapy. See also counselling,
WEG. psychotic Suffering from a psychosis or showing some psychotic
symptoms. However, the term is more commonly used to refer to the
personality trait named psychoticism by H.J. Eysenck, which he claimed
as a third dimension of personality, complementing extraversion and
neuroticism. psychotic behaviour Behaviour which is comparable to that
shown by a person suffering from a psychosis. psychoticism An item on
the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire indicating a tendency to be
solitary, hostile, and lacking feelings for other people.

294

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

psychotropic drugs This term literally refers to drugs that will promote
or effect psychological growth. It was first used to describe the
'mind-expanding' hallucinogens such as mescaline, psilocybin and LSD.
The term is in common misuse nowadays, referring to any drug that has an
effect on mood, such as tranquillisers, which are more properly referred
to as psychoactive drugs. PTSD See post-traumatic stress disorder.
puberty The stage of physical growth during which the child becomes
capable of reproduction. The occurrence of puberty is genetically
controlled and so is a maturation process. In girls, it is taken to
start at the onset of menstruation, and in boys at the first presence of
live sperm in the urine. As the latter sign is not readily visible, the
growth of pubic hair is more commonly used. Although puberty is regarded
as a period preceding adolescence, there is no clear definition of its
end. It can be taken as lasting until the basic physiological structures
required for reproduction have achieved a form recognisably similar to
the adult state. Substantial psychological adjustments are required
during puberty to cope with changing body shape and appearance, novel
hormonal balances and associated emotional changes, and changing sexual
identity. Because the early stages of puberty are so visible, the
substantial variations in age of onset (roughly from 10 to 14 years) can
cause problems for both early and late developers. The average age of
onset of puberty seems to have decreased by several years over the last
century, which suggests that adjustments are being demanded at an
earlier stage of psychological maturity. publication bias The tendency
of journal editors to accept only positive and/ or novel results for
publication, and to ignore replications. See replication crisis.

published studies Studies which have been peer-reviewed and accepted for
publication by an academic journal. punctuated equilibrium An approach
to the understanding of evolution which argues that evolutionary
development is not inevitably slow and continuous, but can sometimes
consist of long periods of relative stability, followed by periods of
sudden and rapid change which occur as a result of alterations in the
environmental demands to which the organism was previously adapted.
punishment The application of some kind of penalty or unpleasant event
in order to suppress an unwanted form of behaviour. Although punishment
is commonly used as a means of behavioural control, there is some
evidence to suggest that it is of limited value by comparison with more
directive approaches such as the direct rewarding of desired behaviour
which occurs in operant conditioning. Note that punishment is not a form
of negative reinforcement. See also physical punishment, psychological
punishment. pupil dilation The enlarging of the pupil of the eye. This
happens mainly: (i) (ii)

(iii) 

in darkness, or dim lighting, when the pupil enlarges so as to allow
more effective vision; under the influence of certain drugs, in
particular amphetamines and narcotic drugs (see also belladonna); and
when the individual looks at someone or something which they like or are
fond of.

As such, pupil dilation is a very powerful non-verbal cue, indicating
interpersonal attraction or empathy, and several studies have shown that
people respond more positively to others with dilated pupils (one reason
for the low lighting

P

295

that is common in many restaurants and nightclubs).

a word list) does not affect how other items in the sequence are
processed.

pure alexia A form of reading difficulty in which people can spell out
words by letter but have difficulty recognising the whole word. The time
taken to read a word increases in direct proportion with the length of
that word. See also alexia.

pure word deafness A form of auditory agnosia in which the person can
identify sounds around them, and music, but is unable to make sense of
spoken words.

pure deletion The assumption that removing a component from a cognitive
processing task will not affect the processing of other items in the
sequence. See also pure insertion. pure insertion This is an assumption
sometimes made in neuro-cognitive research that adding an extra
component to a task (e.g. an extra word in

pyramidal motor system A set of connections or pathways in the brain
that is concerned with processing deliberate movement. It links the
premotor and motor areas of the cerebrum with sensory input at the
thalamus, and then passes neural instructions on to the medulla, spinal
cord and ultimately the muscles to effect movement. See also
extrapyramidal motor system.

Q Q-sort A test often utilised in conjunction with client-centred
therapy to evaluate the individual's self-esteem in their own terms. The
Q-sort consists of a set of cards, each of which provides a short
statement about character or personality that may be positive, neutral
or negative. Clients are asked to sort the cards into piles that express
how closely the statements fit with their own self-concept (e.g. 'very
like me' and 'unlike me'). When all the cards have been sorted, the
client is asked to sort them again, but this time in terms of their
ideal self -- 'myself as I would like to be'. The similarity or
otherwise between the two sets of card-sorts provides a correlation
coefficient indicative of the individual's self-esteem. Among other
uses, the Q-sort has been employed in studies of the efficacy of
client-centred therapy. quadrantanopia A form of cortical blindness that
is restricted to a quarter of the visual field. See also scotoma,
hemianopia, blindsight. qualitative analysis An approach to the analysis
of psychological information which takes as its starting point the idea
that the human and social meaning of the information is the most
important feature of the data. Qualitative analysis is therefore not
concerned with reducing psychological information to numerical data
(quantitative analysis), but is concerned with identifying ways of
extracting meaning in a systematic and reliable manner. See also account
analysis, ethogenics, thematic qualitative analysis, grounded theory.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

qualitative data Data that are acquired in natural forms such as images,
speech or text, rather than as numerical scores. qualitative difference
A difference in kind, not simply in amount. If two things are
qualitatively different, this implies that arithmetic comparisons
between them are not appropriate -- that they are of a different nature,
like chalk and cheese. See also quantitative difference.
qualitative--quantitative distinction A controversial and now somewhat
dated division within psychology over whether 'true' psychological
research should be quantitative or qualitative. Quantitative research
was the dominant paradigm for many decades, with a long history from the
beginnings of psychology and claiming to be closest to the methodologies
of the physical sciences. Qualitative research, although always present
in the discipline, came back into prominence through newer paradigms
such as social constructionism and the ability to connect with
disciplines such as sociology and anthropology. In order to preserve the
divide, quantitative researchers had to disparage qualitative research
for its lack of statistical reliability and generalisable findings,
while qualitative researchers had to disparage quantitative research for
its lack of ecological validity and being limited to finding out what
the researcher could specify before doing the research. However, it is
now generally recognised that the two are not in conflict but complement
one another, and most modern psychological research projects combine the
benefits of both approaches.

Q

qualitative research Techniques for obtaining psychological information
which take the meaning of the information as the focus of analysis. The
most common techniques used in qualitative research are interviews and
case studies. These methods allow greater freedom for the person who is
the target of such research to determine what information is generated,
so the quality and richness of information are greater, but at the cost
of making reliability difficult to achieve. See also account analysis,
discourse analysis, grounded theory, hermeneutics, new paradigm
research, observational study, reliability/validity tradeoff.
quantitative To do with numbers and quantities. See also qualitative--­
quantitative distinction. quantitative analysis An approach to
psychological information that is primarily concerned with obtaining
numerical information, which can then be analysed and assessed for
probability using statistics. Quantitative methods require the
researcher to define the items to be measured in advance and to control
the situation so that only that information is recorded. The result is
that high levels of reliability can be obtained and measured, but there
are frequently problems with validity. Although traditional psychology
has often tended to assume that only quantitative analysis is
worthwhile, recently many psychologists have become increasingly
concerned with the qualitative analysis of information, in addition to
quantitative techniques. See also psychometrics, reliability/validity
tradeoff. quantitative data Data that are acquired as numerical scores
rather than images, speech or text. quantitative difference A difference
in amount, rather than a difference in kind. See also qualitative
difference.

297

quartile A point marking out a segment of a data-set, representing
one-quarter of the total number of scores. The interquartile range is
the range of scores after the highest and lowest quarters have been
excluded. See statistics, semi-interquartile range. quasi-experiments
Experiments in which the independent variable has more than one
condition, but these have not actually been manipulated by the
experimenter. Examples include experiments in which men form one
participant group and women the other. questionnaire A research tool
that involves presenting a series of questions to participants, in a
form which can be answered physically on paper, electronically, by
computer or app, or verbally to a researcher. While it appears to be a
relatively simple way of collecting data, designing a good questionnaire
is much more complex than it seems: it requires in-depth consideration
of how answers will be analysed and conclusions drawn at the early
planning stage, rigorous piloting, and also avoiding the temptation to
collect additional information that will not ultimately serve the
research. The longer the questionnaire, the less likely people are to
respond to it. See also questionnaire fallacy, response rate, response
bias. questionnaire fallacy The belief that providing people with boxes
to tick in a questionnaire will enable you to find out what they
actually do. The main problem with this delusion (apart from its
consequences) is the way that people will always find a box to tick,
even when their behaviour is entirely unrepresented by the options.
There are other problems, too, such as the fact that people generally
lie to questionnaires (because the questions don't fit their own
­circumstances),

298

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

and the way that boxes make issues appear to be discrete categories,
whereas real life is a great deal fuzzier. quota sampling A system for
obtaining a research sample that involves identifying a set of
representative subgroups within the population, and selecting a number
of research participants from each of these subgroups. The size of each
subgroup in the sample depends on its proportional

size in the original population. For instance, in a study of student
attitudes to their college, the sample would be picked to represent the
same proportions of different types of students as were found in the
college as a whole -- if 10 per cent of the students were on day-release
courses, then 10 per cent of the sample would be drawn from the
day-release students. See also sampling procedure.

R race differences Group differences between different races identified
by the use of psychometric tests. Because these tests usually measure
something valued by elitist white Anglo-Saxon cultures, and because
their objectivity has been overestimated, findings of lower scores
(e.g. on intelligence tests) by ethnic minority groups have been used as
the basis for claims of racial superiority. These claims then led to a
rather more careful inspection of the evidence, and it is now recognised
that neither race nor intelligence can be defined or measured with
enough accuracy to justify claims about the relationships between them.
See also WEIRD samples.

and ­reporting the final composition in a given research project.

racism Discrimination, prejudice or unfair practice towards someone that
occurs purely on the basis of their ethnic group or skin colour. See
also authoritarian personality, own-race effect.

randomisation A process of sorting participants or experimental
conditions into a random order so that no consistent pattern will be
operating. For example, if you recruit 20 volunteers from a class, the
first 10 to volunteer may differ in motivation or altruism from the last
10. It would be important to randomise the order of these people in an
experiment, rather than just putting the first 10 research participants
to volunteer into the first condition and the rest into the second. See
also counterbalancing.

radial glial cells Cells that support and guide neurones in the
developing nervous system from the neural tube to their final
destination. random assignment A research procedure in which
participants are assigned at random to different research ­conditions --
that is, that any participant has an equally likely chance of being
selected for any condition. The idea is that random assignment prevents
bias by having participants with different characteristics in groups
that are to be compared. However, it can also produce groups with
unequal characteristics, especially with small samples, so it is always
worth checking

random sampling The process of selecting a sample for an experiment or
other empirical study, in such a way that any member of the population
has an equal chance of being selected. Random sampling, when carried out
appropriately, is considered to be the strongest sampling technique for
avoiding bias in participant selection. If all members of the population
have an equally likely chance of being selected, then as long as the
sample is large enough it should reflect all the characteristics of its
parent population.

range The difference between the highest and lowest values of a set of
scores. The range is the simplest and crudest measure of dispersion. See
Figure 57. rank To put a set of scores into order by size. The word can
also mean the position of an item within a set of ranked scores. Ranking
provides no information about DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

300

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience median

range semi-interquartile range

Figure 57 Range and median how far apart adjacent scores may be, and so
provides only ordinal data which must then be treated by techniques of
non-parametric statistics. See also levels of measurement. rank
correlation coefficient See Spearman's rank--order correlation coeffi­
cient. Raphé nuclei This is a cluster of nuclei located in the medulla,
which is particularly active in reward pathways in the brain. See also
orbitofrontal cortex, ventral striatum, loving. rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep A form of sleep in which the body remains comatose except for the
eye muscles, which move rapidly and continuously. When woken from REM
sleep, people often report dreaming, and if an external stimulus, such
as being lightly sprayed with cold water, is applied at this time, the
dream content is likely to reflect the stimulus -- in this example, the
person might dream of being out in the rain. REM sleep occurs in phases
throughout the night. Each phase usually lasts about 20 minutes, before
the person passes on to one of the deeper, quiescent levels of sleep.
The phases become longer and more frequent during the

course of sleep. Over the lifespan, the time spent in REM sleep
decreases from about eight hours in the newborn to about 1.5 hours in
the elderly. The function of REM sleep is disputed, with theories
ranging from those that see it as functional, either in physiological
restorative processes or as the phase in which the information acquired
during the previous day is processed, to theories that it is left over
from a previous stage of evolution. REM sleep is also known as
paradoxical sleep. See also sleep cycles. rapport A feeling of
psychological comfort in interaction with another person, based on
feelings of trust and empathy. It is used particularly about the
relationship that is necessary between a psychotherapist and their
client, or between a tester and their subject. rapport interview An
interview that is designed and carried out in such a way as to encourage
positive feeling (rapport) between the participant and the interviewer.
RAS See reticular activating system. rate coding The idea that the
informational content of a neurone may relate to the number of times it
will fire in one second. See also volley principle, summation.

R

rating scale A system of measurement, usually of attitudes, in which a
person is asked to evaluate some stimulus material or an idea on the
basis of a predetermined scale that expresses degrees of liking or
preference. See Likert scale. ratio scale See equal-interval scale,
levels of measurement. rational--emotive behaviour therapy (REBT) A form
of cognitive therapy, developed by Albert Ellis, based on the idea that
people make common logical errors (e.g. believing that it is necessary
to be competent in every way, to be loved by everyone, and to have
whatever one wants immediately). REBT takes the form of persuading the
client, by cognitive, emotional and behavioural means, to see things
differently (i.e. correctly) so that their behaviour will be less
self-destructive. rationalisation (i)

(ii) 

Providing apparently reasonable and worthy explanations for one's
behaviour that are designed to conceal from oneself, or from others, the
less acceptable cause of the behaviour (e.g. 'We don't employ older
people because the customers wouldn't like it'). The process was
identified by Freud as one of the major defence mechanisms, but it often
takes the form of the basic attributional error. The process of
adjusting information so that it makes rational sense to the receiver,
as in Bartlett's 'War of the Ghosts' study of constructive memory.

rationalism A philosophical theory most strongly represented by
Descartes, that knowledge of the world can only be obtained by the
exercise of reason. He

301

claimed as a starting point the famous statement 'I think, therefore I
am', as a demonstration both that pure reason could establish the fact
of his existence, and also that only the exercise of reason, and not
observation, could make the claim of demonstrating existence. Try 'I
send emojis, therefore I am' or 'I think, therefore I am Descartes'. See
also empiricism. Raven's progressive matrices An intelligence test that
is designed to be a culture-fair test. The test consists of a series of
grids or matrices of eight patterns, from which the ninth pattern can be
deduced logically, and a set of answers, of which one is the missing
ninth pattern and is therefore correct. The special feature of the test
is that it is entirely non-verbal, and it is even possible to administer
it to someone with whom the tester shares no language at all. Despite
the attempt of Raven to make the test independent of culture, it still
reflects some cultural assumptions and experiences. Three examples of
these assumptions are: (i) (ii) (iii)

solving a puzzle whenever it is presented to you; geometric shapes can
be manipulated according to rules; and familiarity with two-dimensional
representation (line drawings).

In some cultures, too, manipulation of and/or interest in abstract forms
of this kind are not regarded as particularly desirable human
activities. raw data Data in the form in which it was collected, before
being processed ('cooked') by statistical analysis or qualitative
methods. raw primal sketch A basic image extracted from the optic array,
and formed by linking edges and surfaces.

302

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

The raw primal sketch forms part of Marr's computational theory of
perception, which is a bottom-up approach showing how the basic elements
of the optic array can be combined to form meaningful representations of
objects. reactance In general usage the term refers to the tendency of
people to be made uncomfortable by any restriction of their freedom of
choice. Once such pressure is perceived, people will often act in
opposition to it. In psychological research, reactance is used to
describe when participation in a study changes the participant in some
way, thereby also changing the responses that they are likely to
produce. Reactance of this kind is a common but little recognised aspect
of psychological research, as human beings tend to think about and learn
from their immediate situation as well as past experience. People are
therefore very different from the naïve 'subjects' commonly assumed in
the research projects of the twentieth century. See also practice
effects. reaction formation A defence mechanism by which a person
resists and denies an unacceptable motive or experience by acting as if
the opposite were true. The classic example of a reaction formation
occurs in homophobia, in which the individual suppresses their own
homosexual inclinations so strongly that they become extremely hostile
to anyone expressing overt homosexuality. reaction time A measure of how
quickly a person can produce an accurate response to a stimulus.
Reaction time has been used by psychological researchers in a wide range
of investigations, including ageing, decision-making, drug effects and
vigilance. It provides a rapid and reliable measure that is highly
sensitive to disturbance by additional or extraneous factors. See also
additive ­factors method.

reactive aggression Aggression that arises as a direct response to a
perceived threat. See also instrumental aggression. reactive depression
Depression that occurs following an event such as a bereavement, which
is thought to be likely to have caused the disorder. reactivity Being
influenced by or responsive to something. An organism that is responding
strongly may be said to be highly reactive. reading span The largest
number of sentences, read for understanding, from which someone can
recall all of the words 50 per cent of the time. See also threshold of
response. real-world research Research that is conducted in or has very
direct application to the lives lived by people outside of the academic
context originating the research. See action research, ecological
validity, field study. realistic conflict theory A model of intergroup
conflict that emphasises competition for resources or goals as the
origin of the conflict. reality anxiety In Freud's classification of
anxiety, he included those situations in which the anxiety is justified
by a real external threat. This is reality anxiety. See also moral
anxiety. reality principle In Freudian theory, the principle on which
the ego operates. Whereas the pleasure principle is innate, the child
has to learn about reality and how to operate in order to balance its
own needs with the demands of the real world. This developmental process
is fundamental to the formation of the ego. reality testing A
fundamental human tendency to check out one's understanding of the real
world, particularly one's role in and influence on both physical

R

and social reality. From infancy through early childhood, there is
progressive development of the ability to distinguish between fantasy
and reality. People will sometimes deliberately cause an undesirable
outcome because it is more important to them to test their understanding
of reality. A failure to make the distinction in adulthood is taken as
an indication of psychosis. Personal construct theory is largely
concerned with the precise forms that reality testing takes. reappraisal
Re-evaluating information, in such a way as to see whether or not it has
acquired a new function or can be used in a different way. The term is
also used in emotion regulation, in which the person identifies and
re-evaluates their emotional responses to an event, as a first step in
changing the personal meaning of that event. reasoning A general term
given to those mental activities that are investigated in studies of
logical thinking and problem-­solving. Although underplayed for much of
the twentieth century, the study of reasoning is now a significant
aspect of cognitive psychology. REBT See rational--emotive behaviour
therapy. recall The first and strongest of the four forms of remembering
identified by Ebbinghaus, recall refers to the retrieval of information
on demand from memory storage. The other forms of remembering, in order,
are recognition, reconstruction and relearning savings. recapitulation
theory The now outdated idea that individual development retraces the
steps of the evolution of the species. See also ontogeny.
receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve In signal-detectability
theory, a graph in which the probability of hits and

303

false alarms is plotted against the signal level. recency effect A
learning effect in which the items that were presented most recently in
a sequence are more likely to be recalled than those which occurred
earlier on. See also primacy effect. receptive field The region of space
apparent to the eyes that elicits a neuronal response. The term is also
sometimes used to refer to the area of the retina that, when stimulated,
activates a particular set of neurones in the visual cortex. receptor
The term is usually used to mean sense receptor -- a specialised cell or
group of cells that picks up sensory information, either from within
(see proprioception) or from outside the body, and converts it into
electrical impulses for transmission to the central nervous system. For
example, the lightsensitive rod cells and cone cells of the eye are
receptors, as are the hair cells in the organ of Corti in the ear, and
the pressure-­sensitive cells in the skin. receptor site A location on
the dendrite of a neurone, opposite a synaptic knob, which is sensitive
to and readily absorbs a specific chemical. The appropriate chemical is
released into the synaptic cleft from vesicles on the synaptic knob of
the opposing neurone and functions as a neurotransmitter, rendering the
receiving neurone more or less ready to fire. Receptor sites may also
pick up chemicals with a similar structure, and many psychoactive drugs
exert their effect by being taken up at receptor sites appropriate for
other chemicals. The hallucinogens LSD and psilocybin are picked up at
receptor sites sensitive to the neurotransmitter serotonin, while
opiates such as heroin and morphine are picked up at sites appropriate
for the enkephalins and endorphins.

304

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

recessive gene A gene that carries a developmental characteristic that
only shows in the phenotype when the individual inherits a matching gene
on the other chromosome. If the paired gene -- the allele -- is of a
different type and dominant, then the recessive gene will not influence
that individual's development, although it could be passed on to
children. Many common characteristics, such as red hair or blue eyes,
and some genetic disorders, such as sickle-cell anaemia, are carried on
recessive genes, which means they can skip whole generations and appear
in children of later generations. recidivism Repeated legal offences,
such that the person concerned, the recidivist, appears in court on
several occasions, not just once. A certain amount of work on juvenile
delinquents reported by Rutter suggests that recidivism is strongly
linked with a continually stressful home life, at least for teenagers.
reciprocal altruism Helping behaviour that occurs in a social context
such that an individual person or animal who receives help, in turn
helps the individual who originally helped them. Reciprocal altruistic
behaviour often occurs over extended periods of time, and may not be
recognised by a shortterm ethological study. reciprocal inhibition An
approach to behaviour therapy which aims to break a learned connection
between stimuli by attaching an incompatible response to one of them
(e.g. by inducing a relaxation response to a stimulus and so breaking a
connection between that stimulus and fear). See also implosion therapy,
systematic desensitisation. reciprocal liking The name given to a
positive relationship between two or more people in which each
participant likes the other(s). Positive feelings

which are received from someone are reciprocated (i.e. the same degree
of positive feeling is directed towards that person). reciprocity A
general term for processes in which action in one direction is responded
to by an equivalent action back. It is often used in interpersonal
psychology to describe relationships in which both members contribute
equally to one another, and is used in comparative psychology to
describe mutually beneficial relationships between different animals.
The term is also used as a component of moral development, when the
child recognises that it is appropriate to return favours. recognition
(i)

(ii) 
(iii) 

The ability to know that a stimulus was present among stimuli that had
been encountered previously. Generally found to be easier than recall,
as in recognising that you met a person previously, rather than trying
to recall the person you were talking to last week. In memory theory,
the second 'level' of remembering identified by Ebbinghaus, in which the
person is unable to retrieve an item of information without cueing, but
can identify it as correct when they see or hear it. In social terms, a
level of respect or positive acknowledgement, as in the observation that
someone's community service has been recognised by an award.

Ebbinghaus, working with lists of nonsense syllables, demonstrated that
material which cannot be recalled may nonetheless be recognised as
having

R

been in a previously learned set of information. See also
reconstruction, relearning savings, face. recognition heuristic Using
information that is recognised as familiar or having been encountered
before as the basis for decision-making. recognition memory test A
memory test in which people are asked to state whether they have seen a
given item before, or not. See also recognition. recollection
Remembering specific information, usually from a particular episode.
Recollection is generally context-­dependent and can be assisted by using
relevant memory cues. See also recognition, reconstruction.
reconsolidation The updating of a memory trace which was previously
forgotten but has now been reactivated, such that it forms appropriate
connections with other memories. See also consolidation. reconstruction
Also sometimes known as redintegration, this is the third of the four
basic forms by which memory may be demonstrated, according to the work
of Ebbinghaus. Once people have learned a list of nonsense syllables, in
the event of their being unable to recognise or recall the items
learned, they are often able to reconstruct the list in its original
sequence, if provided with the relevant items. Although they will not
experience a specific memory of the list, one particular sequence 'feels
more right' than any other arrangement. See also recognition, relearning
savings. recovered memories Memories from childhood, usually traumatic
ones, that have been retrieved in later life. Some people are reluctant
to believe that memories of sexual abuse recovered during therapy are
memories of real events. See also sexual abuse.

305

recreational drugs Drugs that are consumed primarily for enjoyment or
appreciation of their effects, rather than for medicinal purposes. These
include legal drugs such as alcohol, nicotine and caffeine, and illegal
drugs such as marijuana, amphetamines and heroin. The use of
recreational drugs in some form occurs in all known human societies, and
in some cultures, it includes the use of very powerful hallucinogens
such as mescaline. In general, the more powerful drugs are consumed
within some kind of ritual setting, while less potent ones such as
marijuana are taken more casually. Within Western societies, however,
the rituals are confined to subcultural habits and are not often used as
a framework for the experience of the drug itself. red-green colour
blindness The most common form of colour blindness, in which the person
affected is unable to distinguish between wavelengths of red and the
matching wavelengths of green. It has proved difficult to explain this
in terms of the conventional trichromatism theory of colour vision, and
the predominance of red-green colour blindness has been taken as
evidence for the idea of opponent processing. redintegration See
reconstruction. reductionism A form of argument which takes the view
that an event, behaviour or phenomenon can be understood as being
nothing but its component or constituent parts. For instance, the
behaviourist insistence that human experience can be seen as nothing but
combinations of stimulus-- response learning, or the sociobiological
view that behaviour can be understood as nothing but the action of
'selfish genes', are both reductionist arguments. Although often
superficially appealing,

306

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

the reductionist argument ignores other levels of explanation, such as a
cognitive explanation or experiential/social factors, in understanding
the phenomenon, and as such can only provide a limited understanding of
the event under study. Note that even if the most extreme reductionist
position is true, and all human functioning is the result of the
activities of subatomic particles, it would be nonsense to try to
explain a human activity such as a joke in these terms. See also
emergent properties. redundancy A term used mostly in information theory
for the extent to which a message does not provide new information.
Redundant material, like the letters replaced by xs in this senxencx,
can xx put back quite easilx. Because language is highly redundant, we
can interpret messages accurately even when they are received in noisy
conditions. In fact, the lower the signalto-noise ratio, the more
redundancy is needed in the message. refereed journal A journal which
uses the peer review system -- that is, appraisal by other researchers
in the field -- to accept or reject research papers for publication. See
also publication bias. reference group A social group that is taken by
an individual as providing standards for the modelling of that person's
own behaviour. The individual concerned may not actually belong to the
reference group itself, but sees the group as directly relevant to their
own lifestyle or situation. referent informational influence A form of
influence characterised by referring to a group norm -- either real or
self-inferred. referential The use of words to refer to objects, events,
or phenomena.

reflecting The verbal technique of restating what the other person has
said, in order to ensure that the listener has gained a proper
understanding of what they meant. It is particularly important in
non-directive therapy. reflex A direct response to stimulation that
occurs automatically, without any decision-making input from the central
nervous system (e.g. the leg jerk which occurs when the knee is tapped).
Reflexes are often referred to as involuntary responses, to distinguish
them from the voluntary behaviour of deliberate action. They are usually
mediated directly by the spinal cord rather than by the brain itself,
although that subgroup is sometimes identified explicitly as 'spinal
reflexes'. See also reflex arc. reflex arc The term given to the
sequence of neurones involved in the simplest unit of behaviour, the
reflex. In its most basic form, the reflex arc consists of three types
of neurone: (i) (ii)

(iii) 

the sensory neurone, which carries the information concerning the
stimulus to the spinal cord; the connector neurone within the spinal
cord, which picks up the information from the sensory neurone and
reroutes it; and the motor neurone, which passes the message from the
connector neurone to the muscle fibres, causing them to contract and the
reflex action to occur (Figure 58). Because reflex arcs follow
well-defined paths, the failure to display an appropriate reflex can
indicate precise forms of damage to the nervous system. Reflexes are
therefore used to test newborns, where other responses are less
available. See, e.g., Babinski reflex.

R

307

Figure 58 The reflex arc reflexivity The interplay of influence and
outcome, such that the outcome becomes the influence, and produces
another outcome, which then again becomes the influence. refractory
period The period of a few milliseconds immediately after a neurone has
fired and before it is completely restored to full functioning. The
refractory period has two parts: (i) the absolute refractory period, in
which no amount of stimulation will make the neurone fire and (ii) the
relative refractory period, in which the neurone will fire only in
response to a particularly strong stimulus. refutation The challenging
or rejection of an idea or hypothesis: a central concept in
hypothetico-deductive methods of research. regression In general usage,
any return to a previous or simpler state. There are three further
contexts that adjust its meaning: (i) (ii)

In psychodynamic theory, a retreat under stress to an earlier
psychosexual stage. A technique in therapy in which the patient is
encouraged to think

(iii) 

and feel as they did at a much younger age. The usual objective is to
re-experience a traumatic event so that it can be properly dealt with in
the supportive context of therapy. Hypnosis is often used to help the
process. In statistics, measures of the extent to which one variable
depends on another. It is most commonly encountered in linear regression
-- the equation of the straight line that provides the best fit (or
smallest total discrepancy) when dependent variable scores are plotted
against the independent variable.

regression analysis A form of correlational study which applies
information about the regression line to the data in order to predict
additional or potential outcomes. See also multiple regression.
regression line The line that, when drawn through the data points of two
related variables, has the best fit to them. The regression line
indicates the direction and form of the relationship between the two
variables.

308

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

regulator One of the types of non-verbal cues classified by Ekman and
Friesen, regulators are those cues that regulate or structure social
interaction. Examples of these are the time sequences and turntaking of
conversations, small noises such as 'uh-huh' made to indicate agreement
during a conversation and to signify that someone is still listening,
and eye contact. See also affect display.

another person or in some other ­animate form.

rehearsal A term used to mean practice when applied to a memory task.
Rehearsal is the repetition of the material to be learned.

reinforcement contingencies The circumstances under which reinforcement
will be given. These may vary naturally or be systematically varied, as
in the case of behaviour shaping.

reification Treating ideas or concepts as if they were objects or facts
(e.g. starting from the fact that people can be seen to behave more or
less intelligently, and going on to assume that there is a 'thing'
called intelligence). It is easy to slip into reification when talking
about cognitive processes. For example, in Broadbent's filter model,
there is a box labelled 'filter', which is used to indicate a process.
The mistake is to represent it as if it must be a mechanism. Another
form of this error in psychology is to define a possible phenomenon and
then assume it is a fact which then has to be explained. For example,
there was a long period in which different theories were proposed to
account for some children being obedient and others being disobedient
before researchers observed real children and found that none were
either consistently obedient or consistently disobedient. The fact that
we have a good explanation for something (e.g. male aggressiveness) does
not prove that the thing exists as an entity in itself, independently of
the context in which it is manifest. See also labelling. reincarnation
The belief that after death, people are reborn either as

reinforcement The process of strengthening learning. See also
reinforcer. reinforcement affect model A theory of attraction which says
that sharing a positive experience, or at least being with someone else
at the time of a positive experience, leads to liking.

reinforcement schedule A particular pattern of applying partial
reinforcement. There are four main types of reinforcement schedules,
each of which produces a distinctive effect on the pattern of
responding. Schedules may be either fixed or variable. If they are
fixed, then reinforcement is given according to a predetermined pattern;
if they are variable, it is given according to a randomised sequence
that averages out at a particular number. Reinforcement may also depend
on the number of responses that have been made since the last
reinforcement, or the time interval which has elapsed since the last
reinforcement was given. The four schedules are fixed-ratio
reinforcement, fixed-interval reinforcement, variable-ratio
reinforcement and variable-interval reinforcement. Fixed-ratio
reinforcement produces a rapid rate of response but a low resistance to
extinction. Fixed-interval reinforcement produces a low response rate
and a low resistance to extinction. Variable-ratio reinforcement
produces a high rate of response with a high resistance to extinction.
Variable-interval reinforcement produces a steady, regular rate of
response and a high resistance to extinction. See also behaviour
shaping.

R

reinforcer Something that strengthens a learned response, and which
makes a learned response more likely to occur again. In classical
conditioning, the reinforcer is simply the repetition of the pairing of
the unconditioned and conditioned stimuli. In operant conditioning, the
reinforcer is the event that occurs as a consequence of the operant
behaviour, making it more likely to occur again, and which may be either
positive or negative. See Law of Effect. related-measures design A
design used in experiments in which the same research participants are
used in both the experimental and the control conditions. Since each
person's score is compared with one obtained from the same participant,
this technique allows the experimenter to control for individual
differences (e.g. in IQ level or motivation). However, it does mean that
order effects are likely to become important in the study, and so
relatedmeasures designs often involve the use of counterbalancing as a
control. It is also known as a repeated-measures design, or a
correlated-participants design. The paired t-test is used in
related-­measures designs only. relational self The tendency to define
ourselves in terms of our relationships with others. relative refractory
period The period after a neurone has fired when it will only respond to
a stimulus of unusual strength. This occurs after the absolute
refractory period, when it will not fire at all, and reflects the cell's
renewal of ionic resources after the burst of electrical energy in the
form of the electrical impulse. relative threshold The degree by which a
stimulus must increase in order for the increase to be perceived. The
threshold is set at the point where 50 per cent of changes of that
magnitude

309

are ­perceived. It changes in direct proportion to the intensity of the
initial stimulus. The law known as Fechner's law expresses this
relationship. See also just noticeable difference. relaxation training A
range of techniques used to bring about a relaxed state in the
individual. It is usually used as a component in therapy (e.g. in
maintaining a relaxed state in a phobic disorder patient as they
approach the feared object). Many of the techniques used in
psychotherapy are based on methods developed for meditation, such as
yoga, or are variations on hypnotic induction procedures. Edmund
Jacobson popularised the approach with a procedure in which the subject
concentrates on and relaxes, different groups of muscles in turn.
Biofeedback can also be used. See also mindfulness. relay neurone A
neurone found within the spinal cord and the brain that forms multiple
connections with several other neurones and allows information to be
routed in several different directions simultaneously. Relay neurones
are also known as connector neurones or multipolar neurones. relearning
savings The fourth (and weakest) level of remembering identified by
Ebbinghaus in his work on memory processes. He found that there were
situations where all traces of memory of a specific set of items
appeared to have been lost, in that the set could not be recalled,
recognised or reconstructed; but when the set of items was encountered
again, it would take less time to relearn than a comparable set that had
not previously been learned. releaser Something that acts as a signal to
trigger off a particular response, ­usually an inherited one. See also
IRM, sign stimulus.

310

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

reliability The consistency of a measure -- how likely it is to produce
the same results if used again in the same circumstances. Reliability is
a significant concern in the development of psychometric tests, and is
usually assessed by one of three methods: (i)

(ii) 
(iii) 

test-retest, in which the same test is administered to the same
participants after a period of time has elapsed; split-half testing, in
which the score that the person achieves on one half of the test items
is compared with that obtained on the other half (with both administered
at the same time), to see if they give similar outcomes; and
alternate-forms testing, in which two matched versions of the test are
given to the same people on two different occasions, with their results
being compared.

Reliability is an important requirement of any measure that purports to
apply to more than just a single individual or case, whether it be a
test, a physiological measurement, an observational procedure, or
whatever. The other essential requirement is validity. A major
difficulty in assessing reliability is that scores on successive
occasions may differ either because of practice effects or because the
participants have actually developed or changed in some other way.
George Kelly said that reliability is a measure of how insensitive a
test is to people changing. More broadly, reliability should be
demonstrated over the period for which the function being measured is
believed to be stable. See also reliability/validity tradeoff.
reliability coefficient A measure of the agreement between two sets of
data that

are attempting to measure the same thing. The data sets may be two
presentations of the same test, or a comparison of the two sets of
scores obtained by comparing one half of the items with the other half
(split-half reliability). The reliability coefficient is usually
calculated as a statistic of correlation indicating the reliability of
the test. reliability/validity tradeoff The argument that the quest for
perfect reliability in a research project about human beings means that
the project will therefore lose validity since human beings are
constantly changing and adapting, so it is unrealistic to expect
entirely consistent outcomes from the same individual on different
occasions. Trying to maximise reliability also runs a general risk that
it is the most superficial and unimportant aspects that are easiest to
measure which are likely to be most consistent. REM sleep See rapid eye
movement sleep. reminiscence bump The way that older people generally
remember events that happened in their twenties more clearly than those
that happened at other times in their lives. It is thought that this is
because throughout their lives there has often been more retrieval of
memories concerning this time of life than about other times. Remote
Associates Test A test of cognitive functioning that involves finding a
word which relates to three other stimulus words. repair process A
speech act in which an attempt is made to correct a misleading utterance
or some other source of misunderstanding. repeated-measures design See
relatedmeasures design. repeated-measures t-test See dependent t-test.

R

311

repertory grid A technique developed by George Kelly for utilising a
person's personal constructs to examine the significant people in their
world, and so identify actual or potential sources of psychological
discomfort or stress. The repertory grid is an idiographic technique,
which enables a therapist to see the patient's world as they see it -- a
valuable first step in most forms of therapy. The repertory grid is also
used more generally in research to indicate how people perceive and
understand their worlds.

to the way that many 'classic' findings have proven difficult to
replicate. There can be many reasons for this, e.g. inappropriate
sampling. But see also filedrawer problem, reliability/validity
tradeoff, WEIRD samples.

repetition suppression The observation that repetition of a stimulus
tends to produce lower levels of brain activity in response. See also
habituation.

(ii) 

repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation A form of transcranial
magnetic stimulation that involves repeated administration of the
stimulation in quick succession. Generally abbreviated to rTMS, it may
be inhibitory or excitatory, depending on how it is actually
administered. See also transcranial direct currrent stimulation.
replication Repeating an experiment to ensure that the results are
reliable, and not due to the particular circumstances or chance at the
time of the first experiment. Psychology experiments are particularly
open to influence from incidental factors, such as the expectations of
participants, and so should always be replicated. However, they are not,
for a variety of reasons -- it is difficult to get grants for
replications, difficult to get them published, and most experimenters
would rather run their own new experiment than someone else's old one.
The result is that many of the most famous findings have never been
replicated and are not reliable. See also file-drawer problem.
replication crisis A source of concern in modern psychology which
relates

representation (i)

In cognitive psychology, this refers to the various ways that knowledge
or information is held in the brain, such as imagery, schemata and
concepts. When one thing stands for, provides an image of, or can be
used in place of another. Theories of language are concerned with the
extent to which words represent things, while cognitive theories are
concerned with how perception represents reality.

representative sample A sample of participants in a study which has all
the important characteristics of its parent population, so that it can
be regarded as typical of that population for research purposes. There
are several different techniques for obtaining a representative sample,
which include quota sampling and random sampling. There is increasing
evidence that samples drawn from WEIRD populations (western educated
industrial rich and democratic) are not actually representative of human
beings in general. representativeness heuristic A shortcut used in
decision-making where the choice falls on the item or information that
appears to be most representative, or typical, of the whole set.
repression A defence mechanism by which unacceptable thoughts or desires
are forced into the unconscious. As with all defence mechanisms,
psychological

312

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

relief is paid for by having to distort one's perception of reality.
reproductive fitness How well an animal is suited to reproduce. Those
that have a higher degree of reproductive fitness will, in general, have
more viable offspring, so that their inherited characteristics are
likely to become more common in the population. Note that the main
interest here is in genetically coded characteristics, so while being a
rock star might increase the number of offspring, there may be no
relevant genetic characteristics to pass on. research A planned
investigation of some phenomenon which generally fulfils a number of
criteria: specifying a research question that it is trying to answer;
sometimes investigating one or more hypotheses that are specified in
advance (but see inductive methodology); using a procedure or research
protocol that can be described to other researchers; using an acceptable
method of analysing the data; drawing appropriate conclusions; making a
report in enough detail that the research can be replicated and the
findings evaluated (but see also idiographic.) research participant See
participant. research protocol The set of established procedures which
should be followed when undertaking tasks for a specific research
project. See also standardised procedures. research question The overall
aim or purpose of the research: the question(s) stated when planning the
research that the research will try to answer. This is not the same as
the hypothesis, as a single research project may evaluate several
different hypotheses in addressing the main research question, and
inductive approaches such as grounded theory, avoid stating hypotheses
in advance of data collection.

residual difference In partial correlations, this is how far an observed
set of scores actually differs from the amount of difference which would
be predicted by a linear regression. In other words, it comes from a
comparison between the difference that would have been predicted, and
the difference which has actually been obtained. resilience The ability
to 'bounce back' or recover rapidly from setbacks. Setbacks in this
context may be physical, psychological or social. Resilience is a
powerful sign of psychological health. resistance In psychotherapy, the
(often unconscious) attempts by the patient to prevent the therapist
from being effective. In psychoanalysis particularly, resistance is seen
as an inevitable response of the unconscious to the therapeutic process
of bringing significant issues to consciousness. When a patient rejects
one of the therapist's interpretations, this will be regarded as
resistance and may be taken as an indication that the interpretation was
approaching a particularly important defence mechanism. However, it must
sometimes be the case that patients reject interpretations simply
because they are wrong. resistance to extinction The length of time for
which a learned response will carry on without any further
reinforcement. Resistance to extinction is often used as a measure of
operant strength -- in other words, to indicate how strongly something
has been learned. See also spontaneous recovery. resource holding power
(RHP) An evaluation of the strength or fitness of an animal competitor,
expressed in terms of how well it is able to protect or defend its
territory or resources against competitors. respect See unconditional
respect for ­persons.

R

response bias The tendency that people have to produce experimental
responses which are socially desirable, or which they think that the
experimenter expects. For example, a study involving a comparison of
reactions to sexually explicit material with reactions to neutral
material may show a difference that results from the person's
unwillingness to appear overly concerned with sexual matters, or from
their embarrassment. If this is not directly the topic under study, it
will result in a response bias that could obscure other experimental
findings. See also confounding variable, experimenter effects. response
conflict Situations in which two or more possible responses are
available, which may be equally desirable, or in which the desired
response may not be the easiest or most appropriate. See also
approach--avoidance conflict. response generalisation The tendency to
produce a learned response in conditions that are similar, although not
identical, to those under which the response was learned. In general,
the more similar the conditions are, the stronger the response will be.
This is known as the generalisation gradient. response rate The
frequency with which a response or unit of behaviour occurs in a set
period of time. Response rate is often used as a measure of operant
strength, or as an indicator of how strongly something has been learned.
resting potential The ionic balance between the chemical composition of
the external fluid and the internal chemical components of a neurone
when it is not firing. See also action potential. resting state paradigm
A way of looking at the brain during scanning sessions, in which the
person is not asked to perform any tasks, and the functional

313

connectivity between areas of the brain or networks is measured. This
gives an idea of the brain's 'resting state', which can then be compared
with how the scan looks when the person is actively engaged in a
specific task. See also fMRI, default mode network. restricted code A
code of language use identified by Bernstein, which is characterised by
a high proportion of personal pronouns, a relatively limited vocabulary,
and a considerable reliance on shared assumptions on the part of the
speaker and listener. Bernstein saw restricted code speech as mainly
being used by working-class individuals, whereas its counterpart,
elaborated code, was mainly used by middle-class people. Because of the
high dependency on context in restricted code speech, Bernstein argued
that this made its speakers less able to deal with abstract concepts and
related forms of knowledge -- a version of the verbal deprivation
hypothesis that was highly criticised, notably by Labov, who showed that
users of restricted codes demonstrated abstract reasoning just as
readily as elaborated code users. While these criticisms were
undoubtedly justified, they also distracted attention from Bernstein's
concerns about the way that the education system systematically rewards
the use of elaborated codes of language, implying that those habitually
using restricted codes might be at a disadvantage. reticular activating
system (RAS) A set of neural pathways that are directly involved in
attention, sleep and wakefulness. The RAS appears to operate as a kind
of switching or energising mechanism for whole areas of the cerebral
cortex in the event of wakefulness and alertness. It originates in the
reticular formation, the surgical removal of which results in permanent
unconsciousness.

314

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

reticular formation A region of the lower portion of the brain
connecting the medulla and the midbrain, which has extensive neural
connections, and is generally divided into three areas: the raphé
nuclei, the parvocellular nuclei, and a set of larger cells known as the
gigantocellular nuclei. Its networks control a number of autonomic
functions, including cardiovascular control, pain modulation, sleep and
consciousness, and habituation. Lesions in different parts of the
reticular formation have been shown to produce either hypersomnia or
insomnia in animals. See reticular activating system. retina The
three-cell-deep layer on the back inner surface of the eyeball. The
layer furthest away from the lens consists of light-sensitive rod cells
and cone cells, the next layer consists of bipolar neurones, and the
third layer consists of ganglion cells with elongated axons that cross
the retina and join together at the blind spot to form the optic nerve.
The retina forms a 'screen' on which an image is projected from the
pupil of the

eye, and the image on the retina is converted into electrical impulses
by the rod and cone cells. The point on the retina where the image is
focused most sharply is known as the fovea and corresponds to the point
where visual attention is concentrated in normal perception. The rest of
the retina covers the remainder of the visual field (see Figure 59).
retinal disparity The difference in the visual image projected onto each
retina caused by the slightly different positions of the two eyes.
Closer objects produce more retinal disparity, so the visual system uses
the difference to judge distance. See also depth perception. retinal
flow The changing patterns of light on the retina which are produced by
the fact that the observer is moving around in its environment. It is a
key process in Gibson's theory of ecological perception. retinal
ganglion cells Cells that collect information from the receptive cells
in the retina, and take it into the brain, bunching together to form the

bipolar neurones ganglion cells rod cells

cone cells optic nerve

direction of light

Figure 59 The structure of the retina

R

optic nerve and terminating in the lateral geniculate nuclei of the
thalamus. retinal image The inverted image of the external world that is
cast on the retina by light rays entering the eye through the pupil, and
focused by the lens before falling on the layer of rod cells and cone
cells in the retina. retinal size The term used to refer to the size of
the image that an object casts on the retina. This will vary in
proportion to the distance away from the object. For example, a 2-metre
pole viewed from 40 metres will cast an image whose retinal size is half
that of a 2-metre pole seen from 20 metres. However, due to the process
of size constancy, the size of the object that is actually perceived by
the person does not coincide with its retinal size, and even in young
infants some amount of compensation for distance seems to occur.
retinopy See retinopic organisation. retinotopic organisation The way
that the receptive fields of neurones may be organised in a way which
reflects the way that the retinal image is organised. The phrase is
sometimes abbreviated to retinopy. See also simple cell, complex cell,
ocular dominance columns. retrieval A term used to refer to the process
of remembering things, in which the information is 'retrieved' or
brought back from some kind of storage system. See also explicit memory.
retrieval cue An item of information that links with other information
stored in memory, and so allows that other information to be brought to
the surface and recalled. See also cue. retrieval-induced forgetting
Forgetting that occurs when the retrieval of a memory causes inhibition
of related or competing memories. See also interference.

315

retrieval processes The cognitive operations involved in recalling
information stored in long-term memory. retroactive interference The
phenomenon that occurs when new information which is being learned
interferes with the ability to recall information which was learned
previously. For example, a tennis player who takes up squash may find
that their tennis deteriorates for a while. See also proactive
interference, transfer of training. retrograde amnesia The form of
amnesia (memory disorder) in which the person affected is unable to
remember things that happened before the event which rendered them
amnesiac. Retrograde amnesia usually occurs after some form of brain
damage but can occur in a minor form after a concussion. It is not
uncommon for people who have been in an accident involving severe
concussion to lose all memory of the few minutes leading up to the
accident. See also anterograde amnesia. retrograde memory Memory for
events that happened before brain damage which led to amnesia. See also
retrograde amnesia, anterograde amnesia, anterograde memory.
retrospective memory Memories of people, events or situations that have
been experienced in the past. retrospective study A study that involves
collecting data about events which happened in the past. When
information is being provided by people about their past, the
possibility of memory distortions is obvious. Many epidemiological
studies have been retrospective, using data from the previous records of
patients or clients. The weaknesses of this technique are the inadequacy
of documented information

316

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

in the recording of salient or influential events in a person's life,
and the tendency for researchers to focus exclusively on the particular
feature that they are interested in, and to ignore other information.
Where straightforward research on medical conditions is concerned, this
may not be a problem, but the technique has been used for far broader
research, notably Bowlby's work on maternal deprivation, which greatly
influenced views of childcare practice from the 1950s to the 1970s.
reversal learning Learning that an act or process which had previously
been rewarded is no longer rewarded. See also extinction. reverse
inference This is the process of arguing backwards from neural
activation to infer that a particular cognitive process is going on.
reversibility The operation of returning something to its original state
by reversing the process that transformed it in the first case. The
concept of reversibility plays an important part in Piaget's theory of
cognitive development. Understanding that an operation is reversible
allows one to understand important aspects of the world. For example, if
a ball of Plasticine can be rolled out into a sausage shape, it can also
be rolled back into a ball; if A is larger than B, then B is smaller
than A; if 3 squared is 9, then the square root of 9 is 3. Piaget saw an
understanding of reversibility as an essential part of the concrete
operational stage. In particular, it is necessary before conservation
can be acquired. reward Something that is provided for an organism,
animal or human after a desired piece of behaviour has occurred, and
which takes the form of something that the organism wants, needs or
likes. The behavioural definition of reward is that it is a stimulus
which an animal will

work to maintain. The concept is particularly important in the theory of
operant conditioning, where reward forms positive reinforcement for
learned behaviour. reward pathway There appear to be several 'reward
pathways' in the brain. However, the term is generally used to refer to
a series of neural connections involving the neurotransmitter dopamine,
which connects an area of the midbrain to the ventral striatum of the
forebrain, and also receives inputs from the limbic system and the
prefrontal cortex, and which is sometimes referred to as the mesolimbic
pathway. It is linked with pleasure, positive reinforcement, and the
salience of incentives. See also ESB, orbitofrontal cortex. rhetoric The
study of how language is used to persuade others. Rhetoric was an
important part of education from the early Greeks to the mid-nineteenth
century but came to be seen as inferior to the search for scientific
certainties. As it explicitly recognises the extent to which thinking is
affected by ideology, it is favoured by social constructionists. See
also social constructionism, discourse analysis. rhodopsin A
light-sensitive chemical in the retinal cells of the eye, which responds
to changes in light or dark. See also rod cells, photopsin. rhinal
sulcus A deep groove in the base of the temporal lobe of the brain, at
the point where the cortex is folded underneath itself. A number of
fundamental aspects of memory are located alongside this sulcus. See,
e.g., medial temporal cortex. Rhine cards See Zener cards. RHP See
resource holding power. ribonucleic acid (RNA) A chemical found in the
cells of the body, which is involved in genetic protein synthesis,

R

317

and is capable of duplicating genetic material, DNA, for use elsewhere
in the body. It is generated from an unzipping of the two strands of DNA
and is much more active and changeable than DNA. So it can carry
messages based on the structure of DNA and bring about changes in the
body based on the individual's genetics. It has also been thought to be
involved in learning processes. See messenger RNA.

(i.e. riskier than the average of the individual decisions). There are
several possible explanations for the risky shift, one being that it is
an example of diffusion of responsibility, and a second being the 'risk
as value hypothesis', that risktaking is socially valued and so people
will want to be seen by the group as more daring. However, some
psychologists question whether it really happens consistently. See group
polarisation.

Ribot's law The observation that ­people with amnesia still typically
retain memories from early in their lives.

rite of passage A ritual that marks the progress from one stage of life
to the next. All societies have their own rites of passage, with
weddings, funerals, and those rituals that mark the transition from
childhood or adolescence into adulthood having been most studied by
anthropologists.

right brain A commonly used term indicative of a popular misconception
about brain functioning. See hemisphere bias. right hemisphere The half
of the ­cerebrum situated to the right side of the head. It is mainly
concerned with the functioning of the left side of the body, and of the
right side of the retina in each eye. Following a series of split-brain
studies by Sperry, it was found that this half of the brain was
particularly adept at spatial and artistic tasks, whereas the left
hemisphere was more readily concerned with language and number. The
implications of this observation subsequently became greatly
exaggerated: see hemisphere bias. rigour A term used to refer to the
meticulousness and accuracy of research methods and procedures.
Ringlemann effect The observation that the efforts individuals put into
a task is likely to decrease with the number of others involved. See
also social loafing. risky shift The finding that when a group of people
makes a decision, it tends to be riskier than the decision that they
would each have made i­ndividually

ritual A strictly defined pattern of behaviour that carries a
significant social meaning in a well-defined context. Marriage
ceremonies are a clear example of culturally defined rituals, but the
term is used more widely to include any meaningful patterns of behaviour
carried out according to strict rules, such as the handwashing ritual of
an obsessional person, Sunday dinner, or a task that a family might be
asked to undertake regularly as part of therapy. ritualisation Types of
animal communication that take the form of stereotyped sequences of
actions, communicating species-specific messages, such as opposition to
intruders or intent to mate. Ritualised actions of this kind are
genetically determined, and not easily modified according to the demands
of the situation. See also innate releasing mechanism. RNA See
ribonucleic acid, messenger RNA. robotics The area of research that
involves the development of mechanical systems which can perform a set
of

318

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

actions in a manner comparable to that of a human being. Many highly
successful robotic systems have been developed and applied, particularly
in the manufacturing industries. They have involved considerable
research, not just into movement systems, but also into the development
of such techniques as optical scanning devices, which can identify and
respond to anomalies or changes in the appearance of the material being
manufactured. As such, robotics is generally considered to form a major
branch of research into artificial intelligence. robustness The ability
of a statistical test to operate in a reasonably appropriate manner,
even if it is used inappropriately, with the wrong type of data. The
concept of robustness is relatively ­little understood but is often used
as an

excuse to apply parametric tests such as the t-test to data that would
really warrant non-parametric statistics. See also test power. ROC curve
See receiver-operating characteristic curve. rod cells Light-sensitive
cells in the retina of the eye, which respond to very small amounts of
light but are not sensitive to colour. They contain the photosensitive
chemical rhodopsin and are found in all parts of the retina except the
fovea, which is made up of cone cells. Rod cells are most concentrated
towards the edge of the retina, where their extreme sensitivity provides
acute detection of movement in peripheral vision, and allows very faint
objects to be seen. Night vision is due to the sensitivity of rod cells.
See also dark adaptation.

Rogers, Carl R. (1902--1987) Carl Rogers was one of the most significant
humanistic psychologists of the 1950s and 1960s. He regarded human
beings as having two basic needs -- for positive regard and for
self-actualisation, which he saw as a process rather than as a goal
state. His therapy emphasised providing the client with unconditional
positive regard, which would free them from approval-seeking so that
they could explore their own self-actualisation needs. To this end,
Rogers developed client-centred therapy, which focuses on helping the
client (not the patient) grow in their own way, and so is non-directive.
It also emphasises the development of a positive self-concept, and helps
the client to challenge impractical conditions of worth brought about by
an unrealistically perfect ideal self-image. Part of client-centred
therapy involves the therapist honestly reflecting their understandings
and feelings back to the client -- a practice that aims to reduce
incongruence between how clients see themselves and how others see them.
Rogerian A term applied to methods of counselling or psychotherapy that
are based on the work of Carl Rogers. See also non-directive therapy.
role The part that each individual is expected to play in a social
situation. This

has been studied particularly in groups in which a role is likely to be
allocated to each member -- leader, fixer, clown, loyal member, etc. Any
individual is likely to play different roles in different groups, and
may t­ herefore ­experience role con-

R

flict when two groups come into contact (e.g. when adolescents encounter
their family while in the company of their friends). Roles may be held
very briefly (e.g. the one who has the next turn), over long periods
(e.g. child), or permanently (e.g. gender role). See also role
behaviour, role confusion, role count, role expectation, role play. role
behaviour Behaviour that is considered to be appropriate for someone who
is playing a specific social role. For instance, someone playing the
role of a shop assistant is expected to behave in certain ways, to be
smart and alert, and to demonstrate specific behaviours such as asking
if a customer needs to be served or requires information about prices,
etc. Other kinds of behaviour of which the person may be equally capable
(e.g. ballroom dancing) are completely inappropriate to the social role
of shop assistant. See also role expectation. role confusion In
Erikson's developmental theory, a state in which the identity is not
well defined. It may be regarded as a temporary state (this can occur at
any time of life, but is particularly common during adolescence) or as
the long-term consequence of having failed to establish a clear identity
during adolescence. See also psychosocial stages. role count The sum
total of social roles that an individual plays. The concept becomes
particularly important in the case of those who have recently retired.
The process of retirement results in a drastic reduction in the number
of social roles played by the individual, and some researchers consider
that it is important for the retired person to replace at least some of
those social roles in alternative social activities. See also
disengagement. role expectation The implicit but nonetheless very clear
ideas that members of

319

a society have concerning the ways in which people ought to behave when
they are playing a social role in that society. Behaviour that does not
conform to role expectations, at least in general terms, will usually
meet with social sanctions of some kind (e.g. the exclusion of the
person from the group). role play Adopting a particular role temporarily
and behaving, as nearly as possible, like a person who actually holds
that role. Role play is widely used in training situations and is an
effective way of helping people to understand what it feels like to have
the given role. It also allows them to practise the role before being
fully committed to it. Acting out a role often shifts a person's
opinions towards those they have been working with. Preparatory role
play may also help to reduce anxiety and improve performance in
stressful situations such as interviews. Rorschach inkblot test A
projective test based on psychoanalytic theory, in which participants
are shown large and elaborate inkblot patterns, and invited to interpret
them in terms of images that the blots might represent. The idea is that
the responses which they make will indicate the concerns of the
unconscious mind. The Rorschach test has been found to have poor
reliability. Rosenthal effect The finding by Robert Rosenthal and others
that people's expectations can have an effect on an outcome that is
being observed. The term is used particularly in connection with the
finding that when teachers were told that a group of children were very
bright, those children subsequently performed better than a similar
group that the teachers had been told were generally dull. The term is
also used for various forms of experimenter effect and self-fulfilling
prophecy. See also labelling.

320

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Rosch, Eleanor (1938--) Eleanor Rosch is a cognitive psychologist
specialising in linguistic and nonlinguistic aspects of cognitive
representation. Her work on categorisation led to the prototype theory
of concept formation which argued that concepts were built around a
central typical model. She was also responsible for opening up research
into natural categories, and the subsequent distinction between basic
and higher-level concepts.

Rowe, Dorothy (1930--2019) Dorothy Rowe contributed significantly to the
understanding of depression. Through her work, she showed how the
medical model of mental illness failed to deal with the underlying
mental models and beliefs of depressive patients, and how personal
construct theory provided a useful alternative approach. She made
several significant media appearances, during which she promoted the
idea that 'just world' beliefs exacerbated fear and anxiety as responses
to disasters, which in turn led to considerable improvements in therapy
for depressed people. rostral To do with the anterior side of a body
part, organ or whole animal. See also caudal. rTMS See repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation.

rule-based errors Errors that arise because an established set of rules
or procedures have been misapplied -- in other words, used in
inappropriate c­ ircumstances.

Rutter, Michael (1933--2021) Sir Michael Rutter was knighted for his
services to child psychology and child psychiatry. His re-evaluation of
the concept of maternal deprivation in the early 1970s did much to bring
attachment theory into a modern context, challenging the oversimplified
views of maternal influence and clarifying how disturbed social
relationships could produce problems in both childhood and adolescence.
His later research into school experiences highlighted a number of
social and experiential factors affecting both school performance and
delinquency.

S saccade Rapid, unconscious jerks and tremors that are made
continuously by the eye and are thought to be instrumental in preventing
habituation of the retinal image. SAD See seasonal affective disorder.
sadism A psychosexual disorder in which a person obtains sexual arousal
by inflicting pain or humiliation on another person. See also masochism.
safety needs The second level of Maslow's hierarchy of human needs,
safety needs refer to needs for security, shelter and freedom from
attack. These needs become important once basic physiological needs have
been satisfied. Once the safety needs in turn have been satisfied,
according to Maslow, the next level of needs, namely social needs,
become important. salience Something that is particularly noticeable,
relevant or likely to be perceived. The salience of an object or event
may be due to its physical properties, such as brightness and clarity,
or it might arise because the object or event relates to needs,
emotional states or meanings on the part of the perceiver. sample A part
of a population which is studied so that the researcher can make
generalisations about the whole of the original population. Samples can
be gathered by means of several different procedures, which include
quota sampling and random sampling. Nearly all psychological research is
carried out on samples because the size of populations or some other
factor makes studying the

whole of the original population impossible. Many statistical techniques
are concerned with indicating the reliability of a conclusion based on a
sample, but cannot identify whether the sample is typical of that
population or not. A considerable amount of experimental methodology is
concerned with ensuring, as far as possible, that the samples involved
in the study are representative of their population, but there is
accumulating evidence that even if a sample is representative of its
immediate population (e.g. Americans), it may not represent human beings
in general. See WEIRD populations. sampling error The extent to which
the results obtained from research may not be truly representative of
their population, simply because of the fact that they have been
obtained in the real world, and, in psychology, from real human beings
each of which is unique. Most statistical techniques can be seen as ways
of addressing or minimising sampling error (Figure 60). See also null
hypothesis, statistical analysis. sampling procedure The procedure by
which a sample is acquired. Sampling procedures need to be carefully
defined and reported so that it is possible to judge whether the results
obtained for that sample can be generalised to the population or to
other samples. Technically, the ideal form is random sampling, in which
members of a population are selected at random, with each having had an
equal chance of being chosen. In practice, truly random DOI:
10.4324/9781003158899

322

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Figure 60 Sampling error ­sampling is difficult to achieve because of
such influences as volunteer bias. A further disadvantage is that a
random sample needs to be quite large to ensure a close fit to the
parent population. More sophisticated forms, such as stratified
sampling, are designed to represent the population in all important
aspects, and so allow reliable conclusions to be drawn from a smaller
sample. However, in practice, opportunity sampling is probably the most
common technique. sanction Some kind of deliberate negative consequence
that is applied to a person or group in response to undesired behaviour.
Sanctions may include the withdrawal of privilege or opportunity, as
well as direct punishment or other unpleasant consequences. Sapir--Whorf
hypothesis The idea that our thinking and understanding are determined
by the properties of the language we use for thinking and communicating:
in other words, the theory of linguistic determinism. Benjamin Lee Whorf
developed the theory in the 1950s, arguing that people in different
societies have different understandings of the world, and sometimes of
interpersonal interaction, because the words available to them shape
their understanding and are not the same as those in other languages.

satiation Satiation is defined operationally as the point at which an
animal will no longer seek food. It is usually used in investigations of
hunger or other motivational states, and it implies that the underlying
need is temporarily satisfied. satisficing The heuristic strategy in
decision-­making that involves settling on the first solution which
satisfies the person's minimal requirements. The alternative extreme is
maximising, in which the person attempts to find the perfect solution.
People who repeatedly attempt maximisation spend a lot of time being
disappointed. saturation This term is usually used with reference to
colour, and indicates how 'rich' a particular hue is. However, it may
also refer to other forms of stimuli, and in general it is concerned
with the intensity of content. For instance, 'saturation advertising'
occurs when an advertising campaign is so intense that it is considered
to have achieved the maximum effective exposure to its target audience.
savant syndrome See idiot savants. savings method A method of measuring
memory identified by Ebbinghaus in 1885, in which material that appears
to have been entirely forgotten can nonetheless be relearned more
quickly than

S

similar material being encountered for the first time. See also
relearning savings. scaffolding The setting up of psychological support
structures that help someone to build a firmer foundation for their
choices, beliefs or learning. The term is used in personal construct
theory and is also a significant part of Vygotsky's model of adult
influence on the child's cognitive development. See zone of proximal
development. scaling The process of organising recorded measures into a
scale. By doing this, measures can be given values with known
arithmetical relationships to each other, and statistical analyses can
be undertaken. Scaling is particularly important in psychology because
many of our phenomena cannot be measured directly, being either
subjective or too complex. See also z-score, stannine score, levels of
measurement. scanning See brain scan. scapegoat theory The idea that
prejudice arises from people seeking to blame others for their own
negative circumstances. According to scapegoat theory, poor living
conditions, economic depression and frustrating situations lead people
to react in hostile ways to others, and this reaction is likely to focus
on any individuals who are present but do not belong to the person's own
peer group. Scapegoat theory has been put forward as an explanation for
the growth of racism and sexism during times when economic circumstances
are difficult. scattergram Also sometimes called a scattergraph, this is
a diagram used to illustrate correlations, in which the vertical axis
(the ordinate) represents the values of one set of scores, and the
horizontal axis (the abscissa) represents the other set. Each pair of
scores is plotted as a point on the diagram. This means

323

that the relationship between the two variables can be seen in the way
in which the scores are scattered within the area described by the
diagram (see Figure 61). More widely scattered points indicate a weaker
correlation. See also line of best fit. scatterplot See scattergram.
schedule of reinforcement See reinforcement schedule. schema A
hypothetical model of the way in which information is stored by the
brain. It is used to direct action, and in understanding the
relationships between events. A schema would include all of the
information relating to a particular event or type of event, including
representations of previous actions, theoretical and practical knowledge
about the event, and ideas and opinions about it. The idea of the schema
was used by Bartlett to explain how memories become adjusted to existing
knowledge; formed a major part of the theory of cognitive development
put forward by Piaget; and was also central in Neisser's cognitive
theory. The idea of schemata, and their extension and development
through experience, provides a useful model for understanding

Y

X

Figure 61 A scattergram

324

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

how many different levels of comprehension can be involved in both new
and familiar situations. See also anticipatory schema, constructive
memory. schizoid Showing tendencies towards schizophrenia, but not the
extreme form. The term is therefore used for any indication of a
mismatch between thought and feeling, and a lack of interest in and
ability to form social relationships. schizophregenic families The idea
that some families operate in a way that makes it likely that the
children will become schizophrenic. One therapist claimed that it takes
three generations to create a schizophrenic. The claim has been largely
abandoned, partly because of a lack of evidence, but also because it
became used to blame the parents of schizophrenic people, sometimes
unreasonably. schizophrenia A broad group of psychoses in which emotion
is blunted or is not coordinated with thought and behaviour, and in
which thought appears to be disordered. Typical symptoms of
schizophrenia are hallucinations, incoherent speech and thought, and
delusions. People suffering from schizophrenia are unlikely to maintain
social relationships or to look after themselves adequately. There is
considerable controversy over whether schizophrenia is an organic
disorder, or whether it happens as a result of life experiences,
particularly growing up in certain kinds of family. One of the reasons
why this dispute has not been resolved is that there is no very clear
and widely accepted definition of schizophrenia, and the diagnosis of
the condition varies widely in different countries. See also Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, existentialism. school
refusal (school phobia) The insistence by a child on staying at home
rather than going to school. It used to

be thought of as resulting from a fear of the school, hence the term
'school phobia', but is now often seen as being a fear of being away
from the home. This is usually associated with the fear either of some
disaster happening to the mother or of the parents leaving during the
child's absence. Sometimes these fears have a rational basis (e.g. when
there is serious discord between the parents or when the child has often
been threatened with abandonment). See also attachment, separation
anxiety. Schwann cell A fatty cell that wraps itself around the axon or
dendron of a neuron, to form the myelin sheath. scientific rigour The
degree of objectivity and precision required to ensure that research
observations are valid as evidence for their research topic, and not
merely anecdotal or idiosyncratic. See anecdotal evidence, rigour.
scotoma A small area of blindness in the visual field, originating in
the primary visual cortex. SCR Skin conductance response. More commonly
referred to as galvanic skin response. script A concept that was
particularly articulated by Schank and Abelson (1977), this term refers
to the implicit set of social expectations and assumptions which operate
in the course of everyday interaction. People act in accordance with
these expectations as if their part was 'scripted'. The classic example
of this is the restaurant script, in which the roles of customer,
waiter, etc. are highly prescribed, with certain actions being expected
at certain times. Schank and Abelson demonstrated that the application
of a particular script to a given situation can channel and structure
what is perceived from that situation -- a different script will lead

S

to the individual noticing different features and remembering different
facts as salient. Scripts are, for the most part, unconscious and
assumed. It is noticeable that people are more likely to remember
deviations from a script (e.g. not being asked if coffee is wanted at
the end of a restaurant meal) than they are to remember events which
conform to the script itself. See also schema, social representations.
sd See standard deviation. seasonal affective disorder (SAD) A
disturbance of affect in the form of depressed mood, which coincides
with the reduction of daylight during winter months. People who suffer
from SAD experience major depressive episodes each year. Naturally, the
condition only operates in populations that live a long way from the
equator. It can be treated by prolonged exposure to bright light, called
'phototherapy'. seasonal territoriality A form of territoriality that
occurs only for a particular period, such as the mating season or the
time of rearing young. Most forms of territoriality among animals are
seasonal (i.e. most animals only actively defend their territories
against potential competitors at relevant times of the year). secondary
appraisal A term used in stress and coping therapy to describe the
person's assessment of the coping resources they have available for use.
See also primary appraisal, transactional model of stress. secondary
circular reactions Circular reactions that have progressed beyond
involving the infant's own body, and which now operate through
manipulating objects, although still in a fixed repeated pattern.
secondary drives Within drive-reduction theories of motivation, the
attempt to

325

include psychological needs by claiming that they must have acquired
drive properties through association with primary drives such as hunger.
secondary process In psychoanalytic theory, secondary process refers to
conscious rational thought. It is so-called in order to distinguish it
from primary processes, which are the workings of the unconscious.
secondary reinforcement Something that has acquired the property of
being able to reinforce learned behaviour because it has previously been
associated with a primary reinforcement. For example, if a 'click' is
sounded each time a rat in a Skinner box is rewarded with a food pellet,
the noise becomes associated with the reward. If the behaviour then
undergoes extinction, it can return and be maintained simply by making
the sound of the 'click', with no food reward being necessary. Moreover,
a new behaviour can be increased if it is just followed by the click.
The noise has developed reinforcing properties and has become a
secondary reinforcer, simply as a result of its association with the
primary reinforcer. There are many different kinds of secondary
reinforcer -- in human terms, the most frequently encountered one is
almost certainly money. secondary sexual characteristics Physical
characteristics such as beards or breasts that are normally found in
mature members of one sex only, but which are not the actual sex organs.
See also primary sexual characteristics. second-order conditioning A
two-stage conditioning process, in which an initial association with a
stimulus is learned, and then another condition or stimulus becomes
associated with the learned one and is learned in its turn.

326

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

second-order intentionality A degree of intentional stance which makes
the inference that the individual acting has not only beliefs and
desires but also has beliefs about other people's beliefs. So an act may
represent an attempt to get others to respond in certain ways. See also
first-order intentionality, third-order intentionality. secure
attachment A type of attachment in which the infant (or older person) is
confident in the relationship, and therefore able to cope easily with
separation. Securely attached infants will show moderate degrees of
upset on being left by their primary caregiver, but this soon passes,
and they will greet the person positively when reunited. See also
insecure attachment. sedative A drug that has a calming effect on the
individual, usually producing drowsiness. This is often achieved by
dampening the activity of the autonomic nervous system. Sedatives are
known to produce considerable tolerance in the body, with progressively
increasing amounts of the drug being required to produce the same
effect. The most well-known sedatives are the barbiturates, which were
traditionally prescribed as sleeping tablets, although this practice is
now less common. Although there are known to be large numbers of people
who are addicted to barbiturates, the addiction is usually induced
through medical ­prescription -- barbiturates are not commonly used as
recreational drugs. segementation The process of dividing things into
parts. In cognitive psychology, this generally refers to dividing the
sounds of speech, which are ­virtually continuous, into separate words or
p­ honemes. selective attention Attention that is channelled towards
certain stimuli and ignores the presence of others. The

most well-known example of this occurs when someone is concentrating on
one particular conversation amidst a large amount of background noise,
some of which may actually be louder than the conversation being
attended to. This was dubbed the cocktail party effect in the 1950s, and
gave rise to a considerable amount of research, often involving dichotic
listening tasks and split-span tests. The research gave rise to several
different filter models, which eventually showed that there is a
considerable amount of unconscious semantic processing even of
unattended information. See also exogenous orienting. selective exposure
A preference to receive cognitive input that will strengthen our
existing views, and a tendency to avoid information which will challenge
them. See also confirmation bias. selective perception The human
tendency to perceive what is expected or anticipated. The term is not
only broader than selective attention but also has to do with sets and
expectations. See also anticipatory schema. selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) The collective name for a group of antidepressant
drugs that affect the uptake or reuptake of the neurotransmitter
serotonin (e.g. Prozac). self-actualisation A concept central to the
humanistic theories of both Maslow and Rogers, although used in a
different way by each. Broadly speaking, self-actualisation refers to
the making real (actualising) of human potential, so it involves the
individual developing their abilities to the full, exploring options and
skills, and experiencing life as fully as possible. For Maslow,
self-actualisation takes the form of a 'peak experience', which is only
attained once all of the 'lower' levels of the hierarchy of needs have
been

S

satisfied (i.e. needs such as safety needs and physiological needs).
Accordingly, self-actualisation is seen as a relatively uncommon event,
which occurs only in a few special individuals. In Rogers' theory, by
contrast, self-­ actualisation is seen as a continuous process of
self-exploration and development that forms an undeniable need for the
individual. Most people have ways of developing their potential in
day-to-day living, through hobbies, interests and the like, and most
recreational pursuits involve some degree of trying to learn or to
improve one's abilities. However, in some individuals, the need for
selfactualisation comes into conflict with the need for positive regard
from others. Self-exploration is seen as potentially threatening, in
that it might incur disapproval and censure from other people.
Accordingly, such people suppress their need for self-actualisation, and
Rogers sees this as the foundation of neurosis, because the person
experiences a discrepancy between the way that they actually act, and
their 'inner self'. However, if they have a relationship involving
unconditional positive regard from someone, the person becomes able to
explore their need for self-actualisation, and to balance the two needs
in such a way as to achieve personal growth and maturity. Providing such
unconditional positive regard forms the basis of Roger's clientcentred
therapy. self-awareness The conscious feeling of an ongoing, consistent
sense of being a particular person. self-categorisation A process of
deciding that we, personally, fit into certain social, psychological or
physical categories. See social identity theory. self-concept The sum
total of the ways in which the individual sees themselves.

327

Self-concept is often considered to have two major dimensions -- a
descriptive component, known as the self-image, and an evaluative
component, known as self-esteem, although in practice the term is more
commonly used to refer to the evaluative side of self-perception.
self-consciousness An exaggerated awareness of one's own behaviour,
feelings and appearance, combined with a belief that other people are
equally aware, interested and critical. Selfconsciousness is often
particularly extreme during adolescence. self-efficacy beliefs The
belief in one's own power to act effectively, or to influence events.
Particularly associated with the work of Albert Bandura (e.g. Bandura,
1997), self-efficacy theory argues that high self-efficacy beliefs
contribute directly to a positive sense of agency in dealing with the
world. They are therefore closely linked with an internal locus of
control. People with high self-efficacy beliefs have been shown to make
more efforts to achieve results and to respond productively to feedback,
whereas those with low self-efficacy beliefs show a tendency to give up
easily and to fail to use feedback to improve their performance.
Although they are closely linked with and perceived as a major
contributor to self-esteem, selfefficacy beliefs can be highly specific,
relating only to particular types of task. However, there is some
suggestion that people do show a general tendency towards high or low
self-efficacy beliefs in a wide range of contexts. Bandura argues that
it is often psychologically healthier for an individual to have slightly
higher self-efficacy beliefs than the evidence would warrant since that
will encourage them to take on more difficult tasks, and to persist at
those tasks in the face of initial difficulty.

328

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

This in turn increases their likelihood of success. Some developmental
psychologists believe that a strong sense of self-efficacy is built up
in infants and small children through contingencies provided by
caregivers. See also Dunning-Kruger effect, mindset. self-esteem The
personal evaluation that individuals make of themselves, their sense of
their own worth, or their capabilities. Excessively low self-esteem is
regarded as indicating a likelihood of psychological disturbance and is
particularly characteristic of depression. High self-esteem is generally
seen as a positive adjustment and can be a goal of therapy, although
people like Hitler and Donald Trump appear to have had very high
self-esteem. There are several simple questionnaires that have been
developed for measuring self-esteem, as well as more sophisticated tests
such as the Q-sort. self-fulfilling prophecy A statement that comes true
as a result of having been made. The classic example of the
self-fulfilling prophecy in action came from work by Rosenthal and Fode,
in which undergraduate students were given a set of experimental rats to
train in maze-running. Despite the fact that there were no observable
behavioural differences between the rats at the start of the experiment,
the students were told that they could expect some to be very quick at
learning the maze, while others would be very slow. The rats performed
according to these predictions, because the predictions had induced
expectations on the part of the students that affected how they handled
the animals during training. Further studies by Rosenthal and his
colleagues demonstrated the power of expectations held by teachers
towards their pupils, and the self-fulfilling prophecy -- sometimes
referred to as the Pygmalion

effect -- is now considered to be a major social influence that needs
control in psychological investigation. See also double-blind control,
experimenter effects. self-handicapping A tendency to set up personal
situations or challenges in such a way that failure is inevitable.
self-image The internal picture that individuals have of themselves; a
kind of internal description, which is built up through interaction with
the environment and feedback from other people. The self-image may
include knowledge about hair colour (although not attitudes towards it),
and the social roles played by that individual. The person's attitude to
self-image plays an important part in their level of self-esteem. Most
people operate a self-image that gives an exaggerated idea of their own
attractiveness, and this seems to be necessary for psychological
well-being. See also body image, identity. self-monitoring Being alert
to how we come across to other people so that we can improve, or at
least predict more effectively our effect in social situations. Talking
to oneself can also be a form of self-monitoring behaviour.
self-perception theory The idea that we gain knowledge about ourselves
by observing our own behaviour (e.g. 'I must have been hungry because I
ate an extra sandwich'). Overtly, such an approach may appear naïve, yet
there is considerable evidence to suggest that people do make
attributions about their own behaviour, based on how they have seen
themselves acting or reacting. self-persuasion The modification of a
person's beliefs to become consistent with what they observe about their
own behaviour. self-presentation The process of showing a public self to
others. Self-presentation

S

commonly involves enhancing those features believed to be regarded by
others as positive, while restricting those that might be seen as more
negative. See impression management. self-report Data in the form of
reports that people make about their own actions or experiences. More
broadly, any data provided directly by research participants when they
fill in questionnaires or inventories. self-serving bias A bias in a
person's thinking that serves a personal purpose, such as maintaining
self-esteem or cognitive consistency. The concept is

329

used particularly in attribution theory to refer to causal beliefs that
are adopted because they are favourable to the ­individual. semantic To
do with meaning; the intended communication or meaning that underlies
any utterance or signal. The word 'semantic' is usually used in contrast
with syntactic, referring to the structure of the communication (e.g.
sentence structure). Such contrasts are particularly useful in examining
the use of language in communication. semantic coding Storing
information in memory on the basis of its meaning,

Seligman, Martin E.P. (1942--) Martin Seligman first achieved fame by
reporting a personal experience of prepared learning when he became sick
after eating his favourite sauce. His interest in one-trial learning led
to research into responses to aversive stimuli, which in turn led to his
observations of learned helplessness, in which dogs gave up attempting
to escape from shock as a consequence of previous futile attempts to
escape. Seligman drew parallels with depression in humans, but the
theory was not fully supported in subsequent research until it was
reformulated by bringing in aspects of attribution theory. This resulted
in the idea of a depressive attributional style, which proved useful in
various forms of therapy. Seligman continued to study the prediction of
behaviour from attributional style, and subsequently developed the
theory of learned optimism and the area of the discipline known as
positive psychology.

Selye, Hans (1907--1962) Hans Selye was responsible for developing the
fundamental model of stress and how it affects the body that is still
used today. His early work on endocrinology led to observations about
how stressful situations produce hormonal changes; and by examining the
effects of both short- and long-term stress, Selye was able to identify
what became known as the general adaptation syndrome, later linked to a
number of illnesses and maladaptations. Although some of the specifics
of his model have been challenged, its overall validity remains widely
accepted, and it has proved the jumping-off point for much further
research, not least into the health benefits of positive thinking.

330

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

rather than using other characteristics, such as imagery. semantic
conditioning A conditioning process that uses a stimulus--response form
of learning such as operant or classical conditioning, in which the
individual is trained to respond to the meaning of a word or phrase.
Although the perception of meaning is a cognitive rather than a
behavioural event, studies of semantic conditioning are reported to show
all the characteristics of behavioural conditioning, such as
generalisation and discrimination. However, there is a certain amount of
evidence to indicate that semantic conditioning only 'works' if the
research participants catch on to what the study is about, and decide to
cooperate. semantic dementia This is a progressive degenerative neural
disorder that involves a gradual loss of semantic memory. Most commonly,
the patient gradually loses their awareness of the meanings of words,
which means it is also sometimes classified as a progressive aphasia.
semantic differential A technique developed by Osgood for discovering
the underlying nuances and features that people associate with
individual words. Research participants are provided with bipolar lists
of features and asked to rate each word according to those features.
Usually, a small number of rather general features (e.g. weak--strong,
active--passive, good--bad) emerge as providing most of the variation.
semantic memory Memory that is concerned with meaningful facts and
processes (i.e. how to do things). For example, people with amnesia may
forget knowledge-based information, but they rarely forget such things
as what a dog is, how to walk, boil a kettle or write. These are all
examples of semantic memory. See also episodic memory, procedural
knowledge, hub-and-spoke model.

semantic priming A form of cognitive priming that is based on meaning,
as opposed to visual appearance or other features. semantic relations
grammar A theoretical approach to understanding the way in which very
small children put words together, which emphasises the meaning, or
intention, underlying the utterance. The short sentences and limited
utterances of the child are viewed as telegraphic speech, signalling the
most important parts of the communication, and only becoming more
refined in terms of additional words or word endings later on. The
theory was developed by Roger Brown in opposition to the view of
language acquisition developed by Chomsky, which largely ignored what
the child was intending to communicate and concentrated instead on the
structure of the utterance. See also psycholinguistics. semanticisation
The cognitive process by which episodic memories can gradually change
into semantic memories over time. semantics The study of meaning.
semicircular canals Structures in the inner ear that detect the overall
movement of the body, and are particularly concerned with the sense of
balance. The canals are filled with a fluid that contains small bony
particles known as otoliths, in suspension. As the fluid moves in the
canals, the otoliths make contact with hair cells that line the edges,
which produce an electrical impulse. This is then passed to the brain,
particularly to those regions of the cerebellum that are concerned with
balance and equilibrium. semi-interquartile range The central half of
the interquartile range, cutting out the uppermost and lowermost
quartiles, and so excluding extreme scores from the analysis. This
measure can give a rough

S

indication of the variance of ordinal data. semiology The study of
symbolism and meanings in everyday life. Semiologists are interested in
the metaphors, rituals and symbols that form a large part of our
everyday activity, but of which we are almost entirely unconscious.
semiotics The study of patterns in communication of all kinds, including
language, ritual, non-verbal communication and animal communication.
Although primarily concerned with the meanings within such
communication, the study of semiotics also sees the form of the
communication as providing important clues to that meaning. In other
words, a clear distinction between meaning and form is not considered
appropriate, as the form will influence the meaning, and the intended
meaning will affect the choice of the form. For example, a reminder from
the boss to staff in an office about switching off unnecessary lights
could be delivered as spoken communication, a handwritten memo, or a
formally typed memo. Although the words might be identical, the form
affects the meaning of the communication. semi-structured interview An
interview in which the respondent is encouraged to talk freely, but is
guided by topics which need to be addressed. Some semistructured
interview schedules require that topics are addressed in a particular
sequence, while others allow the conversation to flow freely and address
omitted topics by direct questions towards the end of the session. See
also focus group, structured interview, openstructure interview. senile
dementia A loss of intellectual capacity that apparently occurs through
a deterioration of the brain. The deterioration may not be directly
attributable to ageing, and is often

331

due to d­ egenerative conditions such as Alzheimer's syndrome, which can
also affect younger people. See also dementia. sensation Anything that
is experienced through the senses; a general term which is used to refer
to sound, visual experiences, smell, taste, tactile or kinaesthetic
experiences. It is usually used when it would be inappropriate or
misleading to describe the particular form that the experience will take
or has taken. See also perception. sensation seeking An approach to
everyday choices in which the person deliberately selects options that
will maximise emotional or physical challenges. Sometimes considered to
be a personality trait in its own right. sensitive period A time period
during development in which a given capacity or form of learning can be
acquired most easily. Sensitive periods are distinguished from critical
periods by the fact that the capacity can be acquired outside the set
period, although with greater effort. sensitivity training Training in
interpersonal skills, such as effective listening and encouragement.
Training for counsellors, psychotherapists and clinical psychologists
almost always involves some form of sensitivity training. sensorimotor
stage The first of Piaget's four stages of cognitive development, in
which the immediate cognitive task that the child faces is the decoding
of sensory information and the coordination of motor action. The first
step in achieving this, according to Piaget, is the reduction of the
infant's egocentricity to the point where it can distinguish between
'me' and 'not me', and has formed its first schema, the body-schema.
Another important milestone during this period is the development of
object constancy.

332

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

See also concrete operational stage, formal operational stage,
preoperational stage. sensorimotor transformation The connection between
knowledge of the position of the body and the position of objects in
space, which allows us to act on objects in our environment. sensory
adaptation The process by which our senses adjust their sensitivity to
the surrounding environment. For instance, at night when background
sound levels tend to be low, the ear will detect sounds that are far
fainter than those which can be detected during the daytime. Similarly,
the rod and cone cells of the retina become more sensitive in dim light
and less sensitive in bright light. See also dark adaptation. sensory
memory An ephemeral fastfading memory of very recent stimuli. Includes
echoic memory and iconic representation. sensory-functional distinction
The idea that semantic features are grouped together in the brain
according to their function and physical properties. However, there are
cases where the two types of property have been shown to be distinct
(e.g. some people show selective impairments in category-specific
cognition, but not for functional tasks). See also autopagnosia. sensory
illusion An illusion that is specific to one particular sense. The most
common of these are visual illusions, sense receptor in skin

but we may also experience auditory, tactile and gustatory illusions, or
illusions from any other sense. See also phantom pain, phantosmia.
sensory neurone A neurone that carries information from a sense organ or
sensory receptor to the central nervous system. Sensory neurones are
usually bipolar, which means that the cell body occurs in between the
two ends, each of which branches into dendrites. They are also
myelinated, which allows them to transmit information extremely quickly
(see Figure 62). sensory pathways Groups of neurones in the brain and
nervous system which work together and in sequence to route sensory
information from the sense receptors (eyes, ears, etc.) to the areas in
the brain which are involved in processing that information and making
it meaningful for the organism. Sensory pathways typically pass through
several different brain structures -- the thalamus, for example,
contains significant decoding points for auditory and visual information
-- and the major senses often transmit information along more than one
neural pathway. See also olfaction, gustation, nociception. sensory
projection area Areas of the cerebral cortex that receive sensory
information, usually via the thalamus. There are four major sensory
projection areas on each cerebral hemisphere, namely the somatosensory
projection area, the visual

cell body node of Ranvier

myelin sheath direction of impulse

Figure 62 A sensory neurone

synaptic knobs

axon

dendrites

S

333

cortex (also sometimes referred to as the striate cortex), the auditory
cortex and the olfactory cortex. As there appears to be some kind of
correlation between the amount of stimulation and the amount or region
of the sensory areas stimulated, it was originally thought that the
sensation was 'projected' onto the area as if onto a screen, hence the
name. The actual process is inevitably far more complex. See, e.g.,
ventral visual stream, also motor cortex.

septum pellucidum See septum.

sensory threshold The point at which 50 per cent of stimuli will be
detected. The nature of the stimulus will depend on the sense being
investigated (e.g. faintness of light or speed of exposure for visual
thresholds, and volume or pitch of sound for auditory thresholds). See
also threshold.

serial position curve A graph which shows the probability of recalling
an item against the position that item had in the original list of items
that was learned. The curve shows higher probabilities for the earliest
and latest items in the list, indicating primacy and recency effects.
The curve has also been used to distinguish the operation of long-term
and short-term memory, although this is rather more contentious.

separation anxiety The signs of anxiety and distress shown by a young
child or other animals when a caregiver to whom they have an attachment
leaves them alone in a strange situation. Traumatic experiences of
separation, or repeated threats of abandonment ('If you're bad, we'll
put you in a home') in early childhood are believed to produce
'separation anxiety', in which the child is in a continual state of
anxiety about the possibility of losing its primary caregivers. School
refusal may also reflect separation anxiety. See also strange situation
technique. septum The septum is a thin double membrane, located below
the corpus callosum, which links the corpus callosum with the fornix. It
is sometimes known as the septum pellucidum. This structure is not the
same as the septal nuclei, or septal area, which is located next to the
olfactory areas. Rather, it is linked with the nucleus accumbens and
appears to be associated with pleasurable sensations.

sequence organisation The way that a conversation follows a particular
pattern of alternating contributions. See conversation analysis,
discourse analysis, social organisation. serial Occurring in sequence,
one item at a time. For instance, a serial memory search occurs when the
memory is searched for items with a definite pattern, one item after
another.

serial processing The processing of information one item at a time. Many
early cognitive models assume serial processing in, for example,
problem-solving or the decoding of language, although recent evidence
suggests that in fact information is often processed on several levels
simultaneously (parallel processing). serial reaction time task A
measure of implicit learning in which people are presented with sets of
items that involve a repeating sequence, and are asked to respond as
quickly as possible to each item. serial reproduction A research
technique developed by Bartlett and used for studying the distortions
produced by memory. In the classic model, one research participant is
given information and then reports it to a second person, who then
passes it on to a third, and so on. An alternative approach is for the
same per-

334

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

son to produce successive versions of the material. The progressive
distortions in the information provide insight into the types of changes
that occur as the material is stored in memory. serotonin A
neurotransmitter that is involved in a variety of brain processes,
especially those concerned with moods, and including motivation,
sleeping, relaxation and pain. The hallucinogens LSD and psilocybin
appear to be picked up at serotonin receptor sites, although the precise
mechanisms by which these drugs operate are not fully understood. In
some texts, serotonin is referred to as 5-hydroxytryptamine, or 5-HT.
set A state of preparedness or readiness for a particular type of
experience. Set has been demonstrated with most forms of cognitive
process, but the most striking examples of it are perceptual set and
learning set. In each case, information that is relevant to the prepared
state is picked up far more quickly and easily than information that is
not relevant. See also anticipatory schema. set weight A predetermined
body weight, which seems to form the 'natural' weight of the animal
concerned. The idea of set weight arose from studies of the
hypothalamus, in which it was observed that rats with lesions in
particular areas of the hypothalamus would eat more than usual. At
first, it was thought that these areas represented 'feeding centres',
but later findings showed that the increased intake only lasted until
they had reached a certain body weight. At that point, the rats would
adjust their food intake to stay at that level. Experimental lesions in
other areas of the hypothalamus produced effects in the opposite
direction -- rats would cease to eat until their body weight had dropped
to a certain point, whereupon

they would resume eating but would eat only enough to maintain the new
body weight. It has been suggested that similar mechanisms might be
implicated in the case of obesity in humans. See also satiation. setting
The social, personal, economic, environmental or other type of context
within which a study takes place. Settings can be important in
generating expectations and mental sets from research participants,
which in turn can influence research outcomes. The clinical psychologist
Timothy Leary emphasised both set and setting as important aspects of
understanding the experiences produced by hallucinogenic and other
psychoactive drugs. sex differences Differences between the sexes. Some
psychologists reserve this term for biologically based differences, with
gender differences being used for socially derived features. However,
the distinction is difficult to apply in practice, and it seems likely
that few differences between the sexes are either purely biological or
purely social in origin. sex-linked trait An inherited tendency that
appears only in members of one sex. The genes for such traits are
carried on the pair of chromosomes that determine the biological sex of
the individual. Because the structure of this pair of chromosomes
differs substantially in males and females, sex-linked traits operate
differently for the two sexes. For example, colour blindness, which is
recessive and carried on the X-chromosome alone, will only be apparent
in females who have inherited it on both of their X-chromosomes. If it
is carried on only one of them, then the gene for normal colour vision
on the other X-chromosome will dominate. However, colour blindness will
always

S

appear in males who carry it on the only X-chromosome they have. There
are therefore more colour-blind men than colour-blind women. It is worth
noting, however, that very few biological sex-linked traits of this type
appear to have any direct connection with psychological processes. This
is partly because genetic psychological processes, if they exist at all,
are likely to be polygenic. In human psychology, it is the ­phenotype
--the ever-developing outcome of the interaction between genetic and
environmental influence -- that is the focus of interest. See also
haemophilia, Y-chromosome. sex-role behaviour Behaviour that is
influenced by the person's beliefs about what is appropriate for members
of their own sex. The term can also be used to refer to behaviour that
conforms to society's definition of appropriate gender behaviour.
sex-role learning The processes by which a child or adolescent acquires
an understanding of what is appropriate behaviour for their own sex, as
opposed to appropriate behaviour for members of the other sex. Sex-role
learning starts very early in life, and three-year-olds have quite a
clear idea of which genderrelated behaviours their parents think are
appropriate. sex stereotypes Beliefs that are held in the culture about
sex differences and appropriate sex-role behaviour. Like all
stereotypes, they make a useful starting point for knowing what to
expect from a person, but they easily become misleading if used in
preference to observing what the person is actually like. sexism
Discrimination against a person on the basis of their sex. It is often
more subtle than racism because it is likely to be based on assumptions
about sex differ-

335

ences that are widely held in society. As many of these assumptions have
been developed to justify an unfair treatment of women (see
rationalisation), sexism is often taken to mean discrimination against
women. sexual abuse Sexual abuse is a form of child abuse in which a
child or young person is forced or enticed to take part in sexual
activities, whether or not the child knows the meaning of what is
happening. The activities may involve physical contact, including
assault by penetration (for example, rape or oral sex) or
non-penetrative acts such as masturbation, kissing, rubbing and touching
outside of clothing. They may also include non-contact activities, such
as involving children in watching sexual activities, internet
pornography, encouraging children to behave in sexually inappropriate
ways, or grooming a child in preparation for abuse (including via the
internet). Sexual abuse is not solely perpetrated by adult males. Women
can also commit acts of sexual abuse, as can other children. See child
abuse, emotional abuse. sexual reproduction Forms of reproduction that
depend on combining genetic material from a male and a female. The term
is usually used in contrast to 'asexual reproduction' in which the
offspring is produced entirely from genetic material provided by a
single parent organism. Sexual reproduction has the major advantage of
producing new combinations of genetic material and so increasing the
diversity of the species. As the process requires cooperation between
two members of the same species, it has resulted in the development of a
great variety of interesting features, such as courtship rituals, an
ability to refrain from eating the sexual partner before their
contribution to reproduction is

336

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

complete, and biological motivations to ensure that the behaviour is
undertaken, however unlikely the required activities appear. Sexual
reproduction is also widely regarded as being more fun than asexual
reproduction. sexual selection The idea that a particular trait has
evolved because it enhances the chances that the individual will be
selected for mating by members of the other sex in their species.
shadowing A task extensively used in studies of selective attention.
Shadowing involves the audible repetition of a spoken message as it is
received by the listener. In the classic experiments, participants were
presented with two messages simultaneously, one through each side of a
pair of headphones (a dichotic listening task). They were asked to
attend to only one of these messages, and in order to ensure that they
were doing so, they would be required to 'shadow' the message. In this
way, the effects of information input to both the non-attended and the
attended ear could be assessed, as the spoken words would show what the
person was consciously noticing, and indicate whether key words in the
unattended message, such as their own names, had been registered. sham
rage An extreme form of uncontrolled rage, produced by direct action

Figure 63 Shape constancy

on the brain, usually electrical stimulation of the limbic system, and
which ceases abruptly when the stimulation is switched off. See also
ESB. shape constancy The perceptual adjustment which is made by the
visual system when viewing objects from different angles, such that the
retinal image varies. For instance, a cup seen from above casts a
retinal image that is very different from that of a cup seen from the
side, yet it is perceived as having a constant shape (see Figure 63).
See also colour constancy, size constancy. shaping See behaviour
shaping. shared variance The amount by which correlations measuring
different variables overlap. shock therapy See electroconvulsive
therapy. short-term memory (STM) Memory that lasts for only a few
seconds (e.g. the kind of memory that is used when entering a digital
security key into a secure website). The concept of shortterm memory was
first introduced by William James (1890) and has been used extensively
in psychological theories of memory ever since. One of its notable
characteristics is its vulnerability, either through a rapid decay of
the

S

337

Sherif, Carolyn (1922--1982) Carolyn Sherif (née Carolyn Wood) trained
as a social psychologist before WWII and became interested in Mustafer
Sherif's social norms and attitude change. From 1944, they worked
closely on many projects and also married, but due to the prevalent
sexism of the time she was not credited as a coauthor: their joint work
was accredited only to her husband (they married in 1945). Despite this,
she pioneered research into group conflict, notably the famous Robbers
Cave Experiment, and co-wrote several books and papers. In later years
she conducted research into gender identity and became actively involved
in promoting the involvement and recognition of women in US psychology.

memory trace or through displacement by new material. This means that in
order to retain material for any length of time, it is necessary to
rehearse it continuously. Another characteristic is its limited
capacity, with old information being displaced to make room for new.
This limited memory was identified by Miller as consisting of 7 ± 2
items, but the amount of information contained in those seven items
could be extended by chunking information into meaningful larger units.
Some theorists, notably Atkinson and Shiffrin, see short-term memory as
an initial stage for material entering long-term memory, although they
also see it as a completely different type of memory store. In recent
years, the levels of processing approach to memory has implied that the
existence of two separate memory stores is an unnecessary refinement,
and that the characteristics of STM can be seen simply as the effects of
the very superficial processing that information receives when it is
first perceived. See also working memory, graphemic buffer.

sibling rivalry The commonly observed jealousy between siblings, which
may start from a competition for attention and affection from the
parents, but can then generalise to other aspects of their lives.

sibling A word used to refer to a brother or sister, which has the
advantage of not denoting the gender of the person being referred to.

signal-detectability theory A theory about how weak signals are detected
despite the presence of background noise. By making simplifying
assumptions

SIDS See sudden infant death syndrome. sign stimulus A stimulus that
triggers a fixed action pattern in a particular species. sign test The
simplest of non-parametric statistical tests. When the phenomenon being
studied can only take one of two values with known probabilities, the
difference between the observed frequency and the expected frequency can
be checked for significance. The simplest case for this simple test is
when the two values are equally probable, as in tossing an unbiased
coin, or the gender of participants selected randomly from the
population. It can also be used as a simple test of equal numbers when a
continuous distribution is divided into two parts e.g. the number of
adults aged less than or more than 50 years.

338

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

(in particular, that only the level of noise and the level of signal are
to be considered, and that when both are present the levels simply add
to the total sensation, rather than interacting or cancelling each other
out), it has been possible to produce a mathematical analysis of the
process of detecting signals. This approach has been effective in
certain restricted cases, and much of the theory is incorporated in the
receiveroperating characteristic (ROC) curve. signal-detection task A
task used to investigate how long a person can perform effectively when
asked to identify one particular type of signal appearing at random
intervals amid other distracting stimuli. The task might be auditory
(e.g. a tone lasting slightly longer than other tones that are sounded
at intervals), or it might be visual (e.g. the detection of one special
shape appearing among other shapes). Some signal-detection tasks are
replications of the displays that a radar operator would scan, allowing
researchers to identify potential sources of error and to investigate
possible alleviating measures. See also sustained attention.
signal-detection theory (i) A mathematical approach to understanding a
person's response to information in terms of their physiological
sensitivity to it, or alternatively (ii) their decision threshold of
responding. signal-to-noise ratio The ratio obtained by dividing a
measure of the strength of the information in a signal by a measure of
the noise that surrounds it during transmission. It gives a measure of
how easy it will be to perceive the signal accurately. For example, a
human voice in a loud disco will have a low signalto-noise ratio and
will be difficult to understand. significance See statistical
significance.

significance level A level at which it is judged that a statistical
finding is unlikely to have occurred by chance. Because chance variation
is unlikely, the finding is taken to suggest that a genuine effect may
be operating. The significance level has to be set before research
begins, and should relate to the implications that a finding would have.
The lowest significance level conventionally used in psychological
research is a probability of less than 0.05 (expressed as p\<.05). But
this level of 'significance' would still occur in 1 out of every 20
studies on average if no effect at all was operating. So obtaining this
level could just mean that yours was that 1 in 20 chance. If practical
use is to be made of a finding, it is more usual to require a
probability of less than 0.01, or a 1 in 100 likelihood that it could
have occurred by chance. If you were going to use the research to claim
that a proven treatment for a serious condition should be abandoned and
replaced by a new one, you would demand a much higher significance
level. Note that however extreme the significance level, it will never
totally exclude the possibility that the finding was due to chance.
Therefore, while the possibility that no effect is operating (the null
hypothesis) may be rejected, it can never be disproved. See also effect
size. significance testing The process of using statistical tests to
estimate the probability of how far a set of results have differed from
a random set, and may therefore reflect a true influence or factor. See
also null hypothesis. significant difference A difference between two
sets of scores that has achieved a specified significance level.
similarity principle One of the Gestalt principles of perception which
holds that

S

in the absence of other information, we will tend to group together
stimuli that are similar, and regard them as somehow 'linked' or
'belonging' to one another. See also closure. simple cell A type of
neurone found in the lateral geniculate nuclei of the thalamus, and also
in the visual cortex, which will fire only when a very specific stimulus
occurs within the visual field. First identified by Hubel and Wiesel,
simple cells will respond either to a particular dot or line in a
specific part of the visual field, or to a line at a particular
orientation in any part of the visual field. There is also evidence that
something like 90 per cent of these cells can adapt their functioning if
early visual experience is limited. After a critical period, their
functioning becomes relatively fixed. It is thought possible that
disorders of the arrangements of simple or complex cells may produce
astigmatism. See also hypercomplex cell. simulation Any process of
modelling or imitating an actual real-life event. The term is often used
in psychology to refer to apparatus that mimics a real situation in
which training can be more safely carried out (e.g. aeroplane cockpit
simulators), to people who act as if they have psychological or physical
conditions (e.g. faking epileptic seizures) and in computer simulation.
simulation theory The idea that we can begin to understand other
people's emotions or mental states by simulating that state in
ourselves. See also facial feedback hypothesis, mirror systems.
simultanagnosia The inability to perceive more than one thing at a time.
For example, someone with simultanagnosia might have difficulty in using
vision to guide their hand movements towards an object, as they are not
able to perceive the location of their hand

339

at the same time as the location of the object. See also optic apraxia.
simultaneous conditioning A variant of classical conditioning in which
the unconditioned stimulus is presented at exactly the same time as the
conditioned stimulus. See also delayed conditioning, trace conditioning.
single-blind control An experimental control in which the research
participants in a study are unaware of the hypothesis that is being
investigated, but the researcher is aware of it. See also double-blind
control. single-case design See case study. single-unit recording See
single-cell recording. single-cell recording Also known as single-unit
recording or micro-electrode recording, this is the measurement of the
electrical reaction of a single neurone in response to a stimulus.
Because it is an invasive method, it is usually only conducted on
animals or people already undergoing brain surgery. Research into
neuronal activity in the temporal lobe has shown a high degree of
­specificity -- for example, in one case, a person showed activity in a
single neurone when looking at a picture of the Eiffel Tower, but not to
other famous monuments; while in another, a specific cell was activated
when looking at pictures of a famous film star, but not to other film
stars, or even to pictures of the same star when she was with her
husband. The idea is that these cells have learned to 'tune in' to
specific features of the environment. See also hypercomplex cell,
grandmother cell. SIT See social identity theory. situational
attribution In attribution theory, this refers to explaining a person's
behaviour or experiences as arising from

340

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

the situation that they are in, rather than from the personality or
other internal characteristic of that person (which would be a
dispositional attribution). See also fundamental attributional error.
size constancy The perceptual process by which objects are judged to be
consistent in size, regardless of the actual dimensions of the image
that they cast on the retina of the eye. An object viewed from a
distance will produce a retinal image that is very different in size
from the same object seen at close quarters, but the perceptual system
adjusts its recognition of the object, such that in both cases the size
is seen as being the same. In extreme conditions, size constancy may
break down (e.g. when cars or people are viewed from the top of a
skyscraper). See also colour constancy, shape constancy. skewed
distribution curve A version of the normal distribution curve which is
not symmetrical, in that one side is extended further than another. For
example, a curve plotted from measurements of simple reaction times will
be skewed, because while there is a physiological limit to how quickly
someone can react to the stimulus, there is no limit to how long they
can take. So a curve drawn from such measures will tend to 'lean'
towards the left but have a 'tail' that stretches out to the right. This
is known as a positive skew. A curve that 'leans' in the other direction
is referred to as negatively skewed (see Figure 64). See also measures
of central tendency, kurtosis.

skill The performance of a task at a high level of competence. Motor
skills (e.g. riding a bicycle) and cognitive skills (e.g. playing chess)
have been studied separately, although many common skills (e.g. writing
an exam essay) involve components of both. Skills improve through
feedback and through the deliberate use of strategies. Master chess
players spend up to four hours each day analysing moves and working out
the strategies by which they may have discovered the optimal move. So
just doing a lot of handwriting or taking notes in lectures does not
necessarily make you better at it. skill acquisition The processes by
which skills are learned or acquired. There have been several models of
skill acquisition, but all of them include the idea that informed
practice, with feedback, is absolutely necessary. See also autonomous
stage of skill acquisition, cognitive stage of skill acquisition.
skill-based errors Errors that have come about because the individuals
concerned did not have the expertise or training to deal with the
situation. See also knowledge-based errors. skin conductance response
(SCR) See galvanic skin response. Skinner box A device developed by B.F.
Skinner for investigating operant conditioning. A typical Skinner box
will contain a lever, a food delivery

mean median mode

Figure 64 A skewed distribution

S

341

Skinner, Burrhus Frederick (1904--1990) Skinner has been described as
the most important American psychologist of the twentieth century. His
work began with an investigation of the ways in which environments could
produce regularities in behaviour, leading him to invent the Skinner box
and the cumulative recorder. This led him to the principles of operant
conditioning, which extended the work of Pavlov and Watson by accounting
for the production of novel behaviour. Skinner's work was largely
responsible for the widespread influence of behaviourism in American
psychology throughout the twentieth century, and his later books such as
Verbal Behaviour, Walden Two and Beyond Freedom and Dignity reflected
his belief that all human experience could be explained in behaviourist
terms. He worked at Harvard for most of his career, and received a
tremendous number of awards in recognition of his contribution to
psychology, including no less than 25 honorary doctorates.

chute and a signal light. When a hungry small animal such as a
laboratory rat is placed in the box, its exploratory behaviour
eventually results in its pressing the lever, at which point a food
pellet is delivered. This reinforces the lever-pressing action,
rendering the animal more likely to repeat it. The process results in
the learning of lever pressing as a means of obtaining food, although
the experience of one of the authors suggests that this only happens if
the animal feels inclined to

food pellets

light lever food delivery dish

Figure 65 A Skinner box

cooperate, and is not inevitable. The preliminary phase of getting the
animal to push the lever for the first time will be quicker if a
behaviour-shaping procedure is employed. The signal light can be used as
a discriminatory stimulus, and the Skinner box may be set to deliver
partial reinforcement according to a reinforcement schedule (see Figure
65). sleep cycles Patterns of sleeping that involve changes in EEG
recordings produced by a sleeper, and corresponding

342

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

differences in how easy the person finds it to wake up. During a typical
night, sleepers pass through the different ­levels of sleep in a cyclic
fashion between five and seven times. Levels 1 and 2 are light sleep
characterised by irregular EEG patterns; the deeper levels 3 and 4 show
regular wave patterns in EEG recordings. Typically, the sleeper will
cycle through the levels every 40 to 80 minutes, and then enter REM
sleep for a period before starting a new cycle. During a period of
normal sleep, deeper stages become shorter and then cease completely,
while the REM stage becomes longer. See also orthodox sleep, rapid eye
movement sleep (see Figure 66). sleep spindles Distinctive patterns on
EEG sleep records, which show short bursts of very rapid, high-amplitude
activity contrasting with the less intensive and lower-amplitude pattern
that is dominant most of the time. See also sleep cycles. sleeper effect
An experimental effect that is not apparent immediately but which may
appear later. For example, an item might be stored in memory but

not be accessible on testing soon after the acquisition. However, it may
be recalled the next day. slippery slope argument The argument, often
made, that an innocent or innocuous first step will eventually lead to a
much larger and undesirable outcome. See also fallacy. SMA See
supplementary motor area. smoothing A process used in brain mapping
studies in which the random activity of neurones is smoothed out by
describing the probability of activity generated by each voxel according
to a normal distribution curve. Similar approaches have been used in
other areas, e.g. in psychophysics, where conversion of scores (e.g. of
light detection) into their logarithmic values produced a smoother curve
(e.g. Fechner's law, decibel scale). snapshot methodologies Methods of
conducting research into complex systems which occur once only -- for
example, questionnaire studies administered on a single occasion -- and
so are unable to take into account changes over time. See also
questionnaire fallacy.

0 REM

level of sleep

I

REM

REM

REM

REM

II III IV

1

Figure 66 Sleep cycles

2

3 4 5 hours after falling asleep

6

7

8

S

SNARC effect This stands for 'spatial-­ numerical association of response
codes' and has to do with the connection between motor and brain
activity. Typically, people who are asked to make judgements about
numbers such as whether they are odd or even tend to react faster with
their left hand for small numbers, but faster with their right hand for
larger ones. The effect is reduced if transcranial magnetic stimulation
is applied to both lobes of the brain. snowball sampling A method of
obtaining research participants whereby a small group is selected, who
in turn find other participants, who in their turn find others. In other
words, a sampling technique that taps into pre-existing social networks
in order to obtain a reasonable sample size. See also random sampling,
representative sample, sampling procedure. sociability The ability to
engage in an appropriate range of social relationships and activities.
The different forms that sociability takes at different ages and the
means by which it develops is one of the major topics of developmental
psychology. social attribution A branch of attribution theory that
attempts to integrate the social orientations of European social
psychology with analysis of the nature of individual everyday
explanation. Where more traditional versions of attribution theory, such
as the covariance approach, have treated attribution as the product of
individual cognitive processes, social attribution emphasises the social
nature of many of the explanations adopted by people, and tends to focus
more on intergroup similarities and differences than on individual
problem-solving. See also lay epistemology, social identity theory,
social representations.

343

social bonds These are connections between individuals or between an
individual and the group, which involve a sense of loyalty towards the
individual or group, and often a sense of well-being or positive affect
in its presence. See also friendship, relationship, social
identification. social class The classification of people according to
their occupations and economic circumstances. Naturally, such a
classification generates all kinds of problems, but the finding of
widespread differences between different classes is consistent enough to
motivate researchers to continue to categorise people in this way. The
term socio-economic status is generally used in current practice, in
order to avoid the undesirable implications of 'class'. It is important
to recognise that social class in itself cannot be an explanation of
anything, although it is often used as one. A problem in interpreting
social class differences is that, since different classes can differ in
almost every way possible (education, income, health, smoking, religious
attitudes, etc.), it is not usually possible to say what is the cause of
any particular difference. The most commonly used criterion for
allocating social class in the UK is called the Registrar General's
Classification, which consists of a list of occupations allocated into
groups from 1 to 5. social cognition (i)

The branch of social psychology concerned with people's understanding of
what is going on in social interaction. This tends to be mainly
concerned with identifying different forms of social assumptions and
social explanation. Social cognition therefore includes the study of
social schemata

344

(ii) 

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

and scripts, as well as social representations and social attribution.
In developmental psychology, an approach to cognitive development which
states that social interaction is the most important factor in the
development of the young child's cognition. Work in this field has
produced some reevaluation of the classic Piagetian findings concerning
conservation and egocentricity, as it appears that the traditional
responses obtained from children were more a product of the child's
interpretation of the social demands of the experimental situation
(saying what the experimenter wanted to hear, etc.) than with any
inability to conserve or decentre on the part of the child. Work by Judy
Dunn and others indicates that children show cognitive abilities within
social interactions at much earlier ages than they can show them in the
context of physical science, which was the basis of Piaget's
investigations. Other studies have examined the influence of social
expectation and modelling in cognitive development.

social comparison Social comparison is concerned with the way we
automatically draw comparisons between different groups and individuals.
It leads to a number of outcomes, including social identification, as
people assess the relative status, power, etc. of their own group
relative to others. Festinger also proposed that social comparison leads
to a tendency towards shared beliefs, particularly with respect to
social judgements. In the case of beliefs about the physical world,
beliefs can be directly tested -- we can observe directly that glass is
fragile

by breaking some. However, in the case of social beliefs (e.g. whether a
socialist form of government leads to greater prosperity), we have no
such access to direct factual information and consequently will come to
depend more on the views of others. Here, social comparison comes into
play, as we will be more likely to accept the views of those we consider
to be similar to ourselves than of those we see as different. See also
social ­representations. social constructionism The position taken by
some social psychologists that social reality is constructed between
people, rather than being an objective phenomenon of which there can
only be one true description. More broadly, it is a position in the
social sciences that meaning is socially constructed through
interaction, especially through discourse. Therefore, it is more useful
to study the social construction of meaning than to attempt to study the
'reality' that our meanings are about. See also account analysis,
constructivism, positivism, transaction, discourse analysis. social
desirability scale A set of items hidden in psychometric tests or
self-report questionnaires that detects whether the person taking the
test is exaggerating their positive qualities in order to appear more
socially acceptable. social determinism The view that human behaviour
and experience are caused by social and cultural forces. Therefore,
culture and society should be studied as existing in their own right,
and not just explained as the outcome of the actions of large numbers of
­individual people. social exchange theory The idea that social
functioning operates according to a basic rule that people should b­
enefit from a social exchange to about the

S

same extent as they have contributed to it. See also equity theory.
social exclusion A term, becoming popular with politicians, that refers
to the effect of conditions that prevent people from benefitting from
full participation in society. Poverty and disability are what people
usually have in mind, and referring to social exclusion suggests that
problems arise more from the ways in which society excludes these people
than from lack of money, learning or mobility. See also labelling.
social facilitation The finding that performance is usually improved by
the presence of others. Simple and well-rehearsed tasks are most likely
to be facilitated, so if the presence of others is a source of arousal,
the phenomenon follows the Yerkes-- Dodson law. See also coaction.
social identification The process by which individuals identify
themselves with the groups to which they belong, especially by searching
for differences between their group and other groups. See social
identity theory. social identity theory (SIT) The theory, developed
particularly by Tajfel, which proposes that membership of social groups
actually forms a highly significant part of the self-concept, rather
than being a kind of external act or role. Social identity theory draws
on two fundamental psychological mechanisms. The first of these is the
cognitive mechanism of categorisation, whereby objects, events and
people are classified into categories. The second is the tendency for
people to seek sources of positive self-esteem. The outcome of these two
processes is social identification, as the tendency to categorise also
leads people to compare their social groups with others. If their group
membership provides a source of positive

345

self-esteem, the individual will come to identify with the group and to
incorporate group membership as part of their self-image. If such
comparisons do not reflect positively on the self-concept, the
individual will seek to leave the group (social mobility), to distance
themselves from it, or to alter the perceived status of the group to
which they belong (social change). Social identification may also lead
to the emergence of shared beliefs, or social representations, within a
given group. Social identity theory is a core theory in the school of
thought known as European social psychology. This school is particularly
distinguished from the majority of social psychological theories by its
emphasis on the realities of social and political experience in terms of
differences in social status, relative power and access to economic
resources. Other theories of this school include social representation
theory and some versions of attribution theory. See also social
comparison, minimal group paradigm. social impact theory An American
social psychological theory proposed by Latané, in which the strength of
social impact in phenomena such as conformity is perceived as increasing
with the number, immediacy and strength of the sources. In other words,
social impact or social pressure is higher if there are more people
exerting it, if those people are closer to the individual rather than
distant, and if they are important people rather than simply random
strangers. The second aspect of the theory concerns diffusion of impact,
proposing that the strength or influence of a source decreases with the
number, immediacy and importance of the targets towards which it is
directed. Social impact theory has been hailed by some social
psychologists as p­ roviding

346

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

a higher-order model that can account for a number of diverse findings
in social psychology. However, it has also been sharply criticised for
its reductionist approach, in that it sees social influences simply as
the product of the actions of individuals, and fails to take account of
either the emergent properties of social groups, or the importance of
social contexts. It therefore represents a direct contrast to the school
of thought in social psychology known as European social psychology.
social influence The influence exerted on an individual by other people,
social groups, social institutions, or internalised social norms or
beliefs. See also conformity. social intelligence The ability to
understand complex social interactions and to respond appropriately in
complex social situations. See also emotional intelligence. social
intelligence hypothesis The idea that the need for high levels of social
intelligence produced the evolutionary pressure that resulted in the
evolution of higher cognitive processes and other aspects of
intelligence such as increased brain size. social interaction A process
in which two people or animals directly influence each other's
behaviour. Social interaction is the core phenomenon of social
psychology, and the complex regulation of forms of social interaction is
an important part of the young child's socialisation. social learning
theory An approach to child development which states that children
develop cognitively through learning from the other people around them.
Social learning theory emphasises the processes by which children come
to adopt the rules, norms and assumptions of their society (e.g. operant
conditioning,

imitation and identification). In general, social development is seen as
a continuous learning process, rather than as happening in stages, and
many theorists consider that it continues throughout adult life. See
also stage theories, modelling, locus of control. social loafing The
situation that occurs when a person engaged in collective action becomes
less active, allowing the rest of the group to put in the effort. Social
loafing is considered to be one of the factors involved in crowd
behaviour, but contrasts with deindividuation. social media Internet
platforms which facilitate interaction between individuals, such as
Instagram and Facebook, rather than simply presenting information. See
aso algorithm, deindividuation, trolling. social needs The third level
in Maslow's hierarchy of human needs is concerned with group identity
and membership, love, and positive interaction with others. According to
Maslow, social needs become important once the basic physiological needs
and safety needs have been satisfied. Once the social needs have been
adequately met, aesthetic needs become important. At the top of the
hierarchy is self-actualisation, which Maslow considers to be possible
only once all the other levels of need are satisfied. Many psychologists
criticise this model of human needs on the grounds that it does not
account for many instances of human behaviour in which 'higher' needs
are apparently put before basic ones, the classic example being the case
of the 'starving poet'. There are also many examples of prosocial
behaviour in the face of physical deprivation. social networking
Interpersonal interaction which takes place through specific platforms
on the internet which

S

are designed to facilitate interaction between individuals, rather than
to convey information as such. Communication through social networks may
consist of verbal comment or report, video-­ sharing or images. See
social media. social neuroscience A growing field that links social
behaviour to neurological processes within the brain. See, for example,
mirror systems. social norms Forms of behaviour that are widespread
within a society and/ or are widely accepted as appropriate. Often it is
the second condition that is more important. For example, there are
probably more people in society who abuse children than who work
professionally for their welfare and protection. Yet concern for
children, rather than abuse of them, is accepted as the norm. Acceptance
of a person in a society is usually based on the extent to which that
person follows, or at least expresses agreement with, social norms. See
also conventional norms. social organisation The pattern of social
conventions and assumptions underlying human activity. See also sequence
organisation, discourse analysis. social psychology The branch of
psychology that is particularly concerned with the nature and form of
social interaction and how people come to influence each others'
behaviour. As such, it includes the study of social phenomena, such as
conformity, obedience and non-verbal communication, as well as aspects
of social cognition such as social perception, attitudes and
attribution, and constructivist approaches such as discourse analysis.
One significant distinction in social psychology is between the
problem-centred and individualistic (some say reductionist) approaches
to the understanding of social phenomena

347

seen as particularly typical of American social psychology, and the
groupbased, highly contextual form of social ­psychology that has become
known as European social psychology. social referencing In neuroscience,
this refers to the way that a previously neutral stimulus may become
associated with someone else's positive or negative emotional response,
and as a result, be either regarded positively or avoided by another
person. social representations A concept developed and articulated by
Moscovici (e.g. Moscovici, 1984), social representations are the shared
beliefs adopted by groups of people and used to explain social
experience. Social representations vary in scope from the large-scale
ideological beliefs shared by a society in general, to smaller-scale
beliefs adopted by members of a specific social group or subculture.
Despite their shared nature, social representations are dynamic,
negotiated through social interaction and conversation, and modified or
adapted as they become incorporated into the world knowledge of the
individual. One of the major contributions to the group of theories
known as European social psychology, social representations act as the
cognitive interface between individual action and ideology, and have
been studied in terms of several social movements, including changes in
health and dietary beliefs over time. See also lay epistemology, social
attribution. social responsibility of science The principle that
scientific research occurs within a social context and affects real
people, and therefore should reflect ethical and responsible values and
practices. See ethical issues. social revolution The period between the
1990s and 2010s in which the influ-

348

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

ence of social factors became increasingly recognised in different areas
of psychology. See also cognitive revolution. social role See role.
social schema A form of schema that is particularly concerned with
social cognition and social interaction. As with other forms of schema,
the social schema serves not just to assimilate and interpret
experience, but also to direct action. A number of different types of
social schema have been identified, among them scripts, role-schemata,
which are particularly concerned with the social roles to be played in
society, and person-schemata, which are concerned with structuring and
applying knowledge about people. In view of the overwhelming evidence
for the importance of social factors in the development of the
self-concept, the self-schema has also been identified as a type of
social schema. social sciences A collective term for those academic
disciplines that involve the study of human beings interacting with one
another. As such, it includes psychology, sociology, anthropology,
linguistics, economics, history and geography. social self The aspect of
one's self that is shown to other people. social skill learning The
approach to social interaction that treats it as a learned skill. With
this basis, socialisation is understood using learning theories and
studies of skill acquisition. Social skills training has been used to
help people with psychological problems (e.g. loneliness). socialisation
The processes by which a child becomes integrated into society by
adopting its norms and values, acquiring the necessary skills of social
interaction, and learning to adopt acceptable roles.

sociobiology A reductionist approach to the study of social behaviour,
in which the identification of a 'unit of natural selection' that could
possibly form the basis for a social phenomenon is taken as an
'explanation' for the phenomenon. The 'unit of natural selection' is
referred to as a 'gene', although it is not biologically equivalent to
the gene as studied by geneticists. All behaviour is seen as being
directed towards the perpetuation and replication of genes. Even
altruistic behaviour is interpreted in terms of the perpetuation of the
'selfish gene', through the mechanism known as kin selection. There are
many weaknesses in the sociobiological approach, one of which is its
retrospective approach to methodology, in which explanation involves
three stages: (i) (ii)

(iii) 

the identification of some kind of 'universal' in behaviour; the
identification of a possible 'unit of natural selection' that could
produce such behaviour; and the development of a plausible account of
how that behaviour could (or, more often, 'must') have evolved.

Other objections stem from the highly selective approach both to the
'universals' of behaviour -- which usually emphasise only the more
negative human traits -- and those examples of animal behaviour taken as
evidence, in which behavioural variations are largely ignored, and only
cases that support the argument are acknowledged. sociocognitive
conflict A form of discontinuity or contradiction between the
individual's personal awareness or

S

cognitions, and their knowledge of what is accepted or acceptable in
their society. The avoidance of sociocognitive conflict can be a
significant motivator for people, acting in a similar way to cognitive
dissonance. socio-economic status An elaborate way of referring to
social class while attempting to avoid the unwanted implications and
problems of definition and distinctions involved in the concept of
class. sociolinguistics The study of social forms of language, and the
ways in which language is used in society. Sociolinguistics inevitably
shows considerable overlap with, and can make contributions to, social
psychology (e.g. in the study of the social influence of accents and
dialect and in the study of elaborated and restricted codes of
language). sociology The systematic study of societies and other social
institutions, their effects on people, and how people operate within
them. There is some overlap between sociology and social psychology.
sociometry An approach to attitude measurement that involves charting
the links and affiliations in a particular group of people. Sociometric
diagrams usually consist of circles representing the individuals, with
arrows representing the direction of influence or affiliation between
those people. sociopathy A personality disorder marked by an inability
to form lasting commitments or relationships, egocentric and impulsive
thinking, and a disregard for social consequences. It has been noted
that relatively high numbers of successful business people and
politicians score strongly on psychometric measures of sociopathy,
without it being regarded as a clinical problem. In clinical terms, it

349

is now generally referred to as antisocial personality disorder.
solipsism The belief that only oneself and one's experience exists. It
refers to a philosophical position adopted in order to explore the
question of what we can know, rather than to a psychological
disturbance. soma The cell body. somatic To do with bodily structure or
functioning. somatic marker hypothesis The idea that states of the body
(such as emotional states or moods) which have been associated with
previous behaviours can be a significant factor in decision-making.
Somatic markers are thought to form a link between the cortical memories
of events or behaviour, and the emotional feelings registered in the
amygdala and associated areas. It has been proposed that these somatic
markers are stored in the ventromedial frontal cortex. somatic nervous
system The network of nerve fibres that carries messages from around the
body to and from the central nervous system. 'Somatic' means 'of the
body', and this nervous system consists mainly of sensory and motor
neurones throughout the body, linked by the spinal cord and the brain.
This allows bodily sensations, movement and experience to be recognised
in the central processing areas of the nervous system. See also
autonomic nervous system. somatic theory of emotion The idea that
emotion arises as a result of bodily changes. See also James--Lange
theory. somatic therapies The treatment of psychological disturbance by
using physical techniques that have a direct effect on the body
(e.g. chemotherapy, ECT or psychosurgery).

350

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

somato- A prefix indicating 'to do with the body'. somatosensation
Sensory information about the state of the body. There are many
different forms of somatosensation, which includes internal senses such
as kinaesthesia, nociception and information about internal discomfort,
as well as information about equilibrioception, proprioception, etc.
somatosensory projection area A strip running alongside the central
fissure, in the parietal lobe of the cerebral cortex. Also known as the
sensory projection area, this is particularly concerned with the
sensation of touch. Different parts of the somatosensory area correspond
to different areas of the body; those parts of the body that are more
sensitive have a correspondingly greater amount of surface area on this
strip of the cortex. somatotype An overall body shape, which has been
thought by some researchers to provide an indication of personality. One
of the most famous researchers in this area was Sheldon, who classified
human bodies into three main groups: (i) ectomorphs, with a tall,

endomorph

Figure 67 Somatotypes

slender physique; (ii) endomorphs, who were plump and rounded in shape;
and (iii) mesomorphs, who were sturdy and muscular. Sheldon saw this as
indicative of personality, considering that ectomorphs tended to be
introverted and were often nervous and intellectual types, endomorphs
tended to be friendly and relaxed people, and mesomorphs tended to be
noisy, hearty and often callous in their interpersonal interactions.
Although Sheldon's studies involved an impressive sample size, they were
methodologically flawed and took little account of experimenter bias
(see experimenter effects) or self-fulfilling prophecies (see Figure
67). spaced practice See distributed practice. spastic Affected by
muscular spasms. The term used to refer to people suffering from
cerebral palsy, but as it then entered the common language as a
derogatory label for clumsiness, it is now rarely used within
psychology. spatial intelligence The ability to recognise and manipulate
shapes, patterns, areas or locations. See also multiple intelligences.

mesomorph

ectomorph

S

spatial resolution How accurately it is possible to measure the exact
location of something, or how close it is to something else. In digital
records, it has to do with the accuracy of an image when enlarged. See
also temporal resolution. Spearman's rank--order correlation coefficient
A measure of correlation that can be applied to ordinal data and which
is usually used for small samples. In the event of it being used for a
larger sample (e.g. over 60 pairs of scores), the final coefficient
obtained from the test is considered to be equivalent to a Pearson's
product--moment correlation coefficient. See also scattergram. special
child A term adopted to refer to all children whose qualities or
abilities are well outside the normal range. It represents an attempt to
avoid the automatically negative implications of terms such as 'mentally
handicapped' and 'retarded', and to make an association between children
who need special resources because of some disadvantage and those who
need special attention because they are exceptionally gifted in some
way. More recently, the expression 'children with special needs' has
been adopted to reduce the possibility of labelling. special needs
Generally used for children with extra educational needs because of
learning disabilities such as dyslexia. Children with an official
designation of having special needs are entitled to relevant extra
resources. See specific learning difficulties. species-specific
behaviour Behaviour that occurs in all members of a given species and
which does not appear to take place in animals of other, even closely
related species. One obvious example is language in humans. Whether or
not one believes that other animals

351

(particularly primates) can be taught a language, the fact remains that
only humans develop this complex means of communication spontaneously,
and it occurs in all human societies, so making it a species-specific
behaviour. There are many other examples of species-specific behaviour.
Courtship rituals in different species have been extensively studied,
and it is thought that the development of elaborate mating patterns
serves to prevent inappropriate cross-mating between members of similar
species. It is usually assumed that if a behaviour is species-specific,
it is likely to have an innate component. specific hunger Hunger that is
directed towards a specific food or kind of food (e.g. a hunger for
sweet foods or for salt). Specific hungers are often experienced during
pregnancy and may serve the function of supplying specific nutritional
needs. specific learning difficulty (SpLD) This is a general term used
to describe difficulty with particular aspects of learning. The most
common SpLDs are dyscalculia, dysgraphia, dyslexia and dyspraxia, and,
more contentiously, ADHD. Use of these terms aims to avoid stigma and
labelling by placing the emphasis on neurological deficits which may be
open to specific remedial interventions. It remains to be seen how long
this will endure before these in their turn become stigmatised. See
mental handicap, neurodiversity. spectrogram A graph that plots the
frequency of sound against time, so an intense sound will make a taller,
denser (and therefore darker) image, while a faint one will make a
small, lighter image (see Figure 68). speech acts Segments of speech
that are intended to bring about some effect.

352

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

software were notoriously inaccurate, but modern versions have proven
invaluable in alleviating the mind-numbing process of transcription,
which is generally seen as an essential part of analysing interview
data. Figure 68 A sound spectrogram The focusing of attention on to
speech acts is one attempt to narrow down the study of language to more
specific areas so that it becomes more manageable, and is also an
attempt to draw attention to the way that people use language to achieve
particular ends. See also discourse analysis. speech register A mode of
language use that is tailored to the social context in which it is used,
and which involves different styles of grammar and often a different
vocabulary. Speech registers range from the formal, used in highly
structured social situations such as an official address or a lecture,
to the intimate, used only between those with very close relationships
and comprising a number of shared assumptions and a high level of
implicit meaning. Conversations with friends, using an affiliative
speech register, will involve different kinds of language use from the
consultative register involved in, for example, asking a stranger for
directions. See also accent, dialect, psycholinguistics.

speed-accuracy tradeoff The relationship between the time taken to
perform a given task, and the accuracy with which it is completed. The
speedaccuracy tradeoff is a negative correlation since accuracy tends to
decrease as speed increases. It is therefore also sometimes formulated
as a deliberate option in strategic decision-making. spillover effect In
reading, rare words are looked at for longer than common words. An
increased length of visual fixation applies to the word immediately
following it as well, which is the spillover effect.

speech therapy The profession that helps people who have some kind of
problem with verbal communication. Speech therapists use many techniques
from psychology, particularly behavioural methods, and are increasingly
paying attention to social factors in the disruption of communication.

spinal cord The bundle of nerve fibres that runs up the channel within
the stacked array of bones forming the spine. The spinal cord forms a
pathway between the somatic nervous system and the brain, mediates some
basic functions such as pain reflexes and, in the higher segments, some
of the functioning of the autonomic nervous system. In cross-section,
the spinal cord can be shown to consist of an outer layer of white
matter, with an inner part of grey matter, and a small central canal at
the core, which contains cerebrospinal fluid. As the spinal cord is the
medium through which the brain transmits information to the body,
lesions of the spinal cord can result in paralysis. The extent of the
paralysis depends on how far up the spinal cord the lesion occurs:
lesions closer to the brain tend to produce a more total paralysis.

speech-to-text software Computer applications that convert spoken words
to written text. Early versions of this

spinoreticular pathway A pathway of nerve fibres passing from the spinal
cord through the reticular formation and into

S

the thalamus. It is particularly involved in nociception. SpLD See
specific learning difficulties. split-brain studies Studies of people in
whom the corpus callosum and the optic chiasma are severed -- a
procedure known as commisurectomy. Originally resulting from an
operation on humans as an attempt to control severe epilepsy, the
condition was found to permit the study of the independent functioning
of the two cerebral hemispheres. This work extended knowledge of
localisation of function in the brain (e.g. the finding that
logical/mathematical functioning tends to be stronger in the left
hemisphere, while artistic abilities and spatial awareness are more
highly developed in the right hemisphere). It also led to the discovery
that the two halves of the brain could operate virtually independently
as decision-making and intelligent structures, and could be
independently conscious. Experiences such as anarchic hand syndrome
could result if the two halves of the brain were in conflict. See also
hemisphere bias. split-half reliability A technique for assessing the
reliability of a psychometric test by calculating a score from the first
one-half of the items and then the other half, in order to see whether
the two scores agree. split-personality See multiple personality. Do not
see schizophrenia! split-span tests Tests first developed by Broadbent
to study selective attention, in which a succession of digits is
presented to an individual through headphones, with two different digits
presented simultaneously, one to each ear. Broadbent observed that, when
asked to repeat the digits they had heard, research participants did not
mix

353

digits from different ears, but instead reported a succession from one
ear only or from each ear in turn, thus implying a 'filtering' approach
to attention. See also sustained attention, filter models. spontaneous
recovery The sudden reappearance of a habituated or a learned response
after it has undergone extinction due to lack of reinforcement.
Spontaneous recovery occurs during a period in which the eliciting
stimulus is not presented, and has been demonstrated in both operant and
classical conditioning. If the spontaneous response is reinforced, it
can lead to the reappearance of the learned behaviour at full strength,
very quickly. spontaneous remission When an illness or disorder
disappears and appears to have been 'cured' without any particular
medical treatment or therapy. spoonerism An error of speech that
involves swapping the initial consonants of words -- as in the classic
phrase 'fighting a liar' as opposed to 'lighting a fire'. spreading
activation theory The idea that activating a set of neurones which
correspond to a particular concept or word in the brain will cause
neural activation to spread to other, related words or concepts. While a
popular idea in cognitive psychology, it depends on a oneto-one
correlation between neurones and concepts that has yet to be
demonstrated. SPSS The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences: A
computer calculation package commonly used in quantitative research,
capable of undertaking complex statistical analysis with very large
samples. SQUID A device used to detect changes in the tiny magnetic
fields generated by

354

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

electrical activity from neurones in the brain. The acronym stands for
'superconducting quantum interference device'. See also brain scan.
SSRIs See selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. stabilised retinal
image The ­finding that rod and cone cells in the retina habituate
quickly if they are exposed to a stable image. This does not normally
occur because of saccades, but has been achieved experimentally by the
use of small projectors and screens attached to contact lenses. The
effect of maintaining the image of an object at a fixed position on the
retina is that the person ceases to be able to see it (see Figure 69).
stable attributions Attributions in which the cause that has been
identified is of a kind that will apply again in similar situations in
the future. For example, believing that you have failed a summer exam
because of your hayfever is a stable attribution, in that you are likely
also to have hayfever for future summer exams.

stage theories Many theories in developmental psychology are based on
the concept of development from stage to stage. Major examples are
Freud's psychosexual stages, Gesell's maturational stages, Piaget's
cognitive stages, Erikson's psychosocial stages and Kohlberg's stages of
moral development. In all cases, it is assumed that each stage must be
completed more or less successfully before the next stage can be
adequately tackled. This means that stages will occur in a fixed order
since later stages depend on earlier ones. The theories differ in
whether they see the transition from one stage to the next as gradual or
abrupt, and in what happens to the earlier stages. Some, such as
Kohlberg's, assume the earlier stage becomes irrelevant and is abandoned
once a new stage is reached. Freud sees the earlier stage as something
to be relinquished if possible, but likely to continue to exert an
influence. Piaget, Erikson and Gesell see earlier stages as built on and
incorporated into later functioning, but no longer used in their
original form. Another developmental

mini-projector

screen

contact lens

Figure 69 Creating stabilised retinal images

S

stage theorist, Heinz Werner, saw earlier stages as more primitive modes
of functioning that may still have their uses in certain circumstances,
and which can still be used when the occasion arises -- a rather more
positive view of the process that Freud identified as regression.
Broadly speaking, stage theories imply qualitative differences in
functioning at different ages and can be contrasted with behavioural
approaches such as social learning theory, which assume that the same or
similar processes apply throughout the lifespan. standard deviation (sd)
A statistical measure of dispersion in a normally distributed
population. Calculation of the standard deviation is a basic step in
parametric statistics. Simply knowing that two scores are five points
apart tells you nothing unless you know how widely the scores in the
population are dispersed. If the sd is 1, then a difference of five
points indicates a wide divergence on what is being measured. If the sd
is 100, five points represent no real difference at all. The sd is the
square root of the variance (see Figure 70). See also z-score. standard
error A measure of variance, which expresses the standard deviation of a
particular sample or set of samples. standard scores Scores that have
been converted to a standard form, generally but not inevitably in
relation to the

standard deviation. The conversion used most often is to z-scores, and
these are sometimes referred to as standard scores. See also stannine
score. standardisation Establishing a set of standardised procedures for
a test, with the aim of ensuring that results are comparable when
obtained in different settings. The term can refer either to procedures
for administering the test, or to data that indicate the expected range
of scores in specified populations (norms). standardised instructions A
predetermined set of instructions which is given in the same manner and
using the same words to each person taking part in a given experimental
procedure. The use of standardised instructions is intended to provide a
control against experimenter effects in research or testing, but its
somewhat robotic quality renders it of dubious value when dealing with
human beings. standardised procedures A set of experimental procedures,
or a sequence of events, which has been established in advance such that
it will be carried out in the same way for each person. This is one way
of controlling unconscious experimenter effects that could influence the
results of a study. standardised responses Preestablished and regularly
patterned ways of respond-

68%

95% −3

−2

−1

355

0 mean

Figure 70 Standard deviations from the mean

1 2 standard deviations

3

356

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

ing to questions or situations. Often used in questionnaires, they
present problems in that they often present an unrealistic picture of
what people actually do or think. See e.g. questionnaire fallacy.
Stanford--Binet test An extensively used intelligence test, which was
developed at Stanford University in 1916, using Binet's test as a
starting point. The test has been revised several times but has a major
limitation in only giving a single IQ score. Later tests such as the
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale and the British Abilities Scale
provide independent measures of various aspects of intelligence.
stannine score A form of standard score which has been obtained by
dividing the range into nine sectors and taking the middlemost score as
the typical one. See also ordinal data, median. startle-eyeblink measure
A measure obtained by placing electrodes under the eye, which can detect
the tightening of the eye muscles of an eyeblink, as a startle response.
The eyeblink becomes more frequent in response to threat or fear, and
can also be elicited by sudden stimuli that startle the individual.
startle probe A stimulus designed to elicit a startle response so that
the researcher can observe consequent changes in behaviour or neural
activity. startle response A pattern of rapid reactions to a sudden and
unexpected stimulus. It can vary from whole body flexion, particularly
in infants, to a brief reflex action of the eye muscles. In infants, it
is similar to the Moro reflex but not quite identical. state A term with
many meanings, but in psychological contexts usually used to describe a
temporary condition influenced by the immediate environment and
contrasted with an ongoing

condition such as a personality trait. For example, state anxiety might
reflect anxiety brought about by, say, a testing situation, while trait
anxiety would reflect a more general and ongoing tendency towards
anxious behaviour. Other states might include hunger, sexual desire or
expectation. See also emotion. state anxiety Anxiety that can be
explained by the situation the person is in rather than being seen as a
characteristic of that person. See trait anxiety. state-dependent
learning Learning that is recalled most effectively when the individual
is in the same physiological state as when the information was
originally learned. For instance, information learned when someone is
under the influence of alcohol is often most readily recalled at times
when the person is again under the influence. State-dependent learning
has been demonstrated with a range of drugs, including amphetamines and
tranquillisers. statistic A number expressing a measure of some aspect
of a sample. Measures of a population are called parameters. statistical
independent variable A factor that is known to have influenced the data
in a statistical test, and which may be the direct focus of analysis.
See also independent variable. statistical significance A statement of
how likely it is that the outcome of a study or comparison has simply
occurred through chance factors. Statistical significance is usually
expressed in terms of a ratio of 'p' (e.g. 'p is less than \[or equal
to\] 0.05' or 'p is less than \[or equal to\] 0.01'). In such
expressions, 'p' stands for the probability that the null hypothesis is
correct (i.e. the probability that the results have simply occurred
through sampling error). Before a study is conducted, the level of
significance considered to be

S

acceptable to the researcher will have been decided; p\<.05 means that
there is only a 5 per cent chance (or less) of the null hypothesis being
correct, and this may be acceptable to the researcher. Alternatively, in
a study with important social or ethical implications, such as the
testing of a new drug, a far more stringent level of significance might
be required, such as p\<.0001, and this too will have been decided in
advance. Given the highly variable nature of the subject matter in
psychology, the concept of statistical significance is at the core of
most psychological research. See also Type I error. statistical test A
mathematical procedure designed to identify whether it is likely that a
particular set of results has occurred purely by chance. There are many
different statistical tests, each of which is appropriate for different
conditions and types of data. Selecting the appropriate test for the
research is rather important because using the wrong test can give
completely invalid results. See also statistical significance, t-test,
Type I error, Type II error. statistics Mathematical techniques designed
to summarise raw data and indicate the conclusions that can be drawn.
Statistical techniques are largely concerned with either summarising
information (descriptive statistics) or determining whether a given
result could easily have been obtained by chance (inferential
statistics). See also hypotheticodeductive method, non-parametric
statistics, parametric statistics. status The perceived measure of
social worth or measure of an individual's standing in a social group.
See also face, power. status quo bias Not a preference for heavy rock
bands, but a general prefer-

357

ence for keeping things the way they are rather than acting to change
them. It is a common heuristic in decision-making but frequently
encountered in other walks of life as well. stem and leaf diagram An
elementary form of graphical representation in which a set of numbers is
shown with the tens arranged vertically as a 'stem' and the units
arranged horizontally as 'leaves'. See also pie chart, histogram. stem
cell A non-differentiated cell that has the capacity to develop into a
variety of specialised cells depending on its chemical and neurological
environment. Stem cells are plentiful in embryos and neonates, producing
physical development, and in adults can be found in blood marrow and
some other areas of the body. One of the most exciting developments in
modern physiology, stem cell therapy offers the potential for
self-repair of damaged organs and regeneration of nerve tissue. See also
neuroblast. stereopsis Another term for binocular disparity: the small
differences between the retinal images received by the two eyes, which
is a significant cue in depth perception. stereoscope A device much used
by early investigators of perception, which allows a researcher to
present two different pictures to a research participant simultaneously,
one to each eye. Also popular as an early recreational device, a
stereoscope can also produce 3d images, if the two pictures are similar
but differ enough to mimic binocular disparity. stereoscopic vision
Vision that allows direct perception of depth or of a threedimensional
image. It is achieved by integrating information received through two
eyes simultaneously. The cortex integrates the information from equiva-

358

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

lent parts of the retina, which will be receiving slightly different
patterns from the same source because of the distance between the eyes,
and uses those differences to construct stereoscopic vision. This can
only occur in animals with frontally mounted eyes, such as humans and
other primates, cats and owls, and cannot take place in animals such as
rabbits or blackbirds, which have eyes at the side of the head.
Stereoscopic vision is particularly useful for the accurate judging of
distance, through the process of binocular disparity, and it is thought
that this may provide an evolutionary explanation for its development in
the largely arboreal (tree-living) primate group. stereotactic
normalisation The first step in the process of dealing with individual
differences in brain functioning by averaging them out to produce a
common map of functioning. This first step involves mapping each
individual brain (which will vary in size and proportions) onto a
standard reference brain. This is followed by a smoothing process, in
which the individual differences in results from all of the different
brains are averaged out, by redistributing brain activity from
neighbouring voxels so that they emphasise the main activity and
minimise other, irrelevant neural activation. See also stereotaxis,
Talairach coordinates.

stereotaxis A technique for identifying precise locations within the
brain. It uses an external 3D frame of reference based on three
orthogonal coordinates, generally labelled x, y and z. See also
stereotactic normalisation. stereotype A belief about a class of people
that is then applied to individual members of the class, to express
expectations about the person. Stereotypes enable us to begin
interaction with strangers with an expectation of better than chance
success in choosing an appropriate style and topic of conversation. They
can therefore be seen as highly functional in a setting that involves
frequent interactions with people of whom one has limited knowledge. The
view of stereotypes as undesirable arises from assuming either that they
will be inaccurate or that they will persist despite contrary
information. Neither assumption is necessarily true. If a stereotype is
inaccurate, negative and adhered to despite contrary information, it
qualifies to be called a prejudice. Neurological studies have shown that
the two involve quite different areas of the brain, with stereotyping
involving cognitive activity in the prefrontal cortex, while prejudice
involves activity in the amygdala, implying a strong emotional element.

Sternberg, Robert (1949--) Robert Sternberg presented a major critique
of IQ tests and measures of intelligence, arguing that the practical and
creative aspects of intelligence were just as important as the
relatively limited number of abilities tested by conventional IQ tests,
and proposing a triarchic theory of intelligence as an alternative.
Sternberg also conducted research into loving and cognitive styles and
has had a productive career as an American educational psychologist,
academic and consultant.

S

steroid hormones Hormones that are able to get inside a cell and bind to
DNA structures. In this way, they influence the creation of new proteins
inside the body. stigma A mark or identifier that singles out a person
for social shame, and is therefore likely to be a source of
embarrassment. stimulants Drugs that produce heightened activity of the
central nervous system often used to combat fatigue or tedium. The most
commonly used stimulant is probably caffeine, which is consumed daily in
the form of tea, coffee or cola by many people worldwide. In medical
use, amphetamines are one of the most common groups of stimulants and
have also been used as recreational drugs for the same purpose, as is
cocaine. One of the more common uses of amphetamines is as an appetite
suppressant, and many other stimulants appear to have similar
properties, although to a lesser degree. stimulus Any event to which an
organism -- human, animal or plant -- responds. 'Stimulus' is a general
term that avoids specifying the form in which stimulation is presented.
Essentially, it refers to anything that is detected by the sensory
equipment possessed by the organism. stimulus deprivation An
experimental condition in which sensory input is reduced to a minimum.
Early studies found that the condition produced extreme cognitive
disturbances, but later replications found much weaker consequences.
stimulus discrimination The form of discrimination shown in stimulus--
response learning in which a response will occur to one specific
stimulus but

359

will not occur in the presence of similar ones. Unlike stimulus
generalisation, which occurs without prior training, stimulus
discrimination is learned by the organism through reinforcement.
Responses made in the presence of one stimulus are reinforced, while
those made to the other are not. In this way, the organism comes to
discriminate between the two. stimulus generalisation The phenomenon
that occurs when a learned response is produced to a stimulus different
from the one to which it was originally learned. Stimulus generalisation
often shows a generalisation gradient whereby the response is strongest
to those stimuli that are most similar to the original.
stimulus--response learning Learning that occurs as a result of the
association between a stimulus and some kind of behavioural response. In
general, there are thought to be two basic forms of stimulus--response
learning -- classical conditioning and operant conditioning. Some
psychologists classify one-trial learning, in which such an association
is formed as a result of only one learning trial or experience, as a
third form, while others regard it as a special form of classical
conditioning. STM See short-term memory. storm and stress A model of
adolescence which holds that hormonal disturbances coupled with a battle
for increasing independence make it almost inevitable that the
adolescent's relationship with its parents at this time will be
characterised by temper tantrums and rebellion. However, this is only
one model of adolescence, and in many cases, adolescents experience a
much more peaceful passage into adulthood.

360

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

strange situation technique A standardised method developed by Mary
Ainsworth to study attachments in oneyear-old children. The child is
brought into an unfamiliar environment by its mother, then a stranger
enters and the mother leaves. Finally, the mother returns. The reactions
of the child are recorded in a standard way, and the quality of the
attachment is judged. Ainsworth classified attachments as either secure
(Type B), anxious (Type A) or ambivalent (Type C). This technique has
made it possible to study the consequences of these different forms of
attachment. stratified sampling A technique of collecting a sample that
is designed to make the sample represent, as accurately as possible, the
population from which it was recruited. The major groupings (e.g. social
class) in the population are identified, and the sample is recruited
from each of these groupings so that each can be analysed separately if
necessary. See also opportunity sampling, quota sampling, random
sampling. straw man fallacy Appearing to challenge or discredit an idea
by misrepresenting it and then refuting the misrepresentation. stress
Usually, the effect on a person of being subjected to noxious
stimulation, or the threat of such stimulation, particularly when they
are unable to avoid or terminate the condition. Major changes in one's
life (life events) have been found to be a common source of stress that
leave people vulnerable to depression. Hans Selye found similar
physiological and psychological reactions to prolonged stress,
regardless of the nature of the source (see general adaptation
syndrome). While stress is unpleasant and often damaging, it is also
recognised that it may be actively

sought (as when apparently sane people jump out of aeroplanes for fun)
and is an important source of motivation. The term is also sometimes
used for the source of the stress (noise, poor housing, etc.), although
it would be clearer if such conditions were always called 'stressors'.
stressor Something that causes stress. striate cortex See visual cortex.
striatum The part where the brainstem joins the bottom of the cerebral
hemispheres, forming part of the basal ganglia. stroboscopic motion The
phenomenon that forms the basis of film projection, whereby a series of
separate pictures shown in rapid succession will seem to produce a
continuous movement. Stroboscopic motion can also be demonstrated using
lights that flicker on and off, as in the phi phenomenon, and takes its
name from the brief appearance of each image; in the same way that a
stroboscope (a light that flashes rapidly on and off) produces a
succession of 'flash pictures'. stroke A general term for the disabling
problem arising from the disruption to the blood supply of the brain,
caused by bleeding or the blocking of a blood vessel. A common mnemonic
to inform people about what to do if they think someone is having a
stroke is the acronym FAST, which stands for: •• ••

••

Face weakness. Is one side of the person's face drooping? Can they smile
properly? Arm weakness. Can the person raise both of their arms, and
keep them raised for ten seconds or more? Speech problems. Can they
speak clearly, or has their speech become slurred?

S

••

Time. If the person has any of these three symptoms, you should call
medical help immediately, so normal blood supply can be restored as
quickly as possible.

See also aneurism. Stroop effect A reliable experimental effect that
demonstrates how powerful routine cognitive processing can be. The
Stroop effect is normally demonstrated using colour names. Two sets of
different colour names (orange, red, blue, etc.) are written on cards.
One set is written in the appropriate colour for the word, while the
other set is written in a different colour (e.g. 'orange' written in
green ink). On being asked to identify the colours in each list,
research participants take longer to process the information on the
cards that contain the discrepant information. Reading the colour name
occurs as an automatic cognitive subroutine, which interferes with the
recognition of the colour itself. See also problem-solving, go/no-go
test. structuralism An approach to theory in which psychological
phenomena are explained as the natural outcome of the way in which the
organism is structured. The proposed structures may be physical and open
to direct examination (e.g. accounts of aggression based on interpreting
brain structure) or hypothetical. Examples of the latter are Freud's
personality structure and Piaget's cognitive structures. Structuralist
approaches in anthropology and sociology are concerned with the social
structures within which people function, although these are often taken
to be outward manifestations of mental structures. The term is also
applied to attempts to understand how language works by examining its
structure. Structural theories are contrasted with functional
approaches.

361

structured interview An interview which follows a predetermined script,
in which the questions, prompts and sequencing are all determined
beforehand and little is left to the discretion of the interviewer. In
this respect, a structured interview is essentially a verbally
administered questionnaire. See also semi-structured interview.
structured observation A form of observing in which the behaviour that
is to be observed has been carefully precoded, and the observation takes
the form of recording when and how often these precoded behaviours
occur. See behavioural coding. STS See superior temporal sulcus. study
skills The set of techniques, strategies and behaviour patterns that
form a structured approach to learning, often based on psychological
theory, but also on experiences acquired and transmitted less formally.
Study skills can be related to the theoretical area of metacognition,
but are usually treated as a separate topic in their own right -- as in
Appendix 2 of this book. They include such features of effective study
as reading skills, effective revision techniques, organising study time
and examination strategies. See also mnemonic. subconscious Material of
which the person is not consciously aware but which could be made
conscious if required. The term has the same meaning as preconscious but
is not so strictly tied to Freudian theory. In popular discourse, it is
often confused with the Freudian unconscious. subcortex A general name
for the parts of the brain below the cerebral cortex -- that is, for all
of the brain except the cerebrum itself. subcortical structures Those
parts of the brain that are found below the

362

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

­cerebrum -- in other words, all the parts of the brain except for the
cerebral hemispheres (see Figure 71).

result in energy being made available for purposes that are valued by
society. A more general term is displacement.

subgoals Goals that allow a person to progress some way towards an
ultimate goal but are easier to reach. See also superordinate goals.

subliminal perception Perception which occurs in such a way that the
person is unconscious of it. Several studies have demonstrated that
information may be absorbed by the perceptual system extremely rapidly,
and in such a way that it does not penetrate to consciousness, but may
nonetheless influence people at an unconscious level. Studies that
involved presenting threatening or offensive stimuli subliminally have
demonstrated marked alteration in the person's arousal level as a
consequence. Subliminal advertising is prohibited in the UK by the
Broadcasting Act but is permitted in private locations such as
supermarkets, provided that a notice is displayed informing the public
that this is occurring. In such cases, it normally takes the form of
faint auditory messages embedded in music.

subjective Subjective impressions are ideas that originate from the
individual's own personal ideas or experience. This is not quite the
same as phenomenological, although it is similar, but subjective
impressions or interpretations may also incorporate external
information. Subjective information has typically been mistrusted in
classic psychological research because it is personal and liable to be
open to bias. More recently, subjective data has been recognised as
potentially valuable research material. See, e.g., new paradigm
research, account analysis. sublimation In Freudian theory, the
redirection of instinctual energies towards more socially acceptable
goals. During development, direct expression of psychosexual drives is
prohibited and the energies are diverted into substitute activities that
are more acceptable. In this way, society's restrictions on the direct
gratification of instinctual needs

thalamus hypothalamus

subscales Measuring scales that form smaller parts of more general
measuring scales. For example, a general measure of verbal intelligence
might actually consist of a number of subscales, each testing a
different aspect of people's abilities to use words (e.g. a
comprehension test, a

cerebrum corpus callosum

pituitary gland pons reticular activating system medulla

cerebellum spinal cord

Figure 71 Subcortical structures

S

vocabulary test and a sentence completion test). subset A group or set,
usually of data, which forms a distinctive or identifiable part of a
larger set. substantia nigra A part of the basal ganglia which plays an
important role in attachment and reward. It has been shown to be
particularly activated by maternal love. See also loving. subtising The
capacity to identify immediately, and without counting, an exact
quantity of objects. subvocal speech Using features of speech without
producing speech sounds. The term is often used about movements of the
vocal apparatus while reading or talking to oneself. It was of interest
to early behaviourists who wanted to study thinking but believed it was
only possible to study observable behaviours. They therefore suggested
that thinking is really invisible subvocal speech. However, studies
involving curare showed that this idea, although convenient, was not in
fact true.

363

sulci The plural of sulcus. sulcus A groove or fissure in the cerebral
cortex. sum of squares A calculation used in analysis of variance, which
indicates the amount of variation in each of the different subgroups of
the analysis. It is obtained by calculating how much each score differs
from the mean, squaring each difference, and adding them up. summation
The cumulative effect of several neurones transmitting information to
one neurone at the same time. If a single synaptic transmission is
received, from one other neurone only, it is unlikely to be enough to
produce a response in the next cell. However, the total effect brought
about by several receptor sites receiving the neurotransmitter at the
same time will produce the effect. See also synapse.

successive approximation See behaviour shaping.

sunk-cost effect A common decisionmaking trap in which people continue
to invest additional resources to justify a previous commitment that has
so far not been achieved ('We've put too much in to give up now'). See
also entrapment.

sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) Also called cot death or crib death.
Babies appear to go through a vulnerable period at around two to four
months of age, and during this time a significant number are found dead
in their cots, having shown little or no sign of illness or any other
warning signal. Some research suggests that it may be associated with a
failure to learn how to restart breathing early in life following
apnoea, but most research has concentrated on possible medical causes.
Cot deaths are of major concern to psychologists because they are not
uncommon and form an extremely distressing form of bereavement.

superego In Freudian theory, the third component of personality, which
forms after the id and ego have become established. The superego is
formed in early childhood by internalising the parents' system of
rewards and punishments so that the child comes to operate according to
these rules even when the parents are not present. It is not quite the
same thing as the conscience, as it retains an infantile version of the
parents' rules, which according to Freud are likely to be severe and
intolerant. The adult conscience is more realistic and sophisticated,
and so may come into conflict with the superego. See also
psychoanalysis.

364

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

superior Towards the top, or above. See also inferior, posterior,
anterior. superior colliculi A group of cells in the midbrain that form
part of the visual system by playing a significant role in processing
incoming visual information. superior olivary nuclei Nuclei in the
medulla that are involved in auditory perception. superior parietal
lobule Part of the temporal lobe which is tucked down deep into the
central fissure. It has been shown to become active in happiness, and
also in changes of state such as sinking into sleep. Characteristically
happy people have been shown to have more grey matter in this area than
those who report themselves as generally unhappy. superior temporal
sulcus (STS) This is a groove at the top of the temporal lobes which
defines an area concerned with facial recognition and detecting and
interpreting social cues. It responds to the changeable aspects of a
face -- important for identifying cues in social interaction and
interpreting speech, but less so for face recognition. See also empathy,
language areas, fusiform face area. superordinate goals Overarching
goals that shape and give general structure to more immediate goals. For
example, someone might have a general goal of becoming a professional
athlete. This would involve several subgoals such as winning
competitions. But they might also have a superordinate goal of
ultimately becoming an Olympic champion, which would influence how they
approached competing and training. superposition One of the monocular
depth cues in which an object that obscures another is perceived to be
nearer to the viewer. Sometimes incorrectly written as superimposition,
which is a tautology.

superstitious learning An operant conditioning process in which the
occurrence of a cue at the same time as a reinforcer gives that cue
control of the operant behaviour. If you notice that a particular person
is nearby every time you win on a slot machine, the presence of that
person may make it more likely that you will play. It is a form of
autoshaping but is so named because it usually refers to situations
where the association is accidental, so the conditioning produces an
arbitrary or superstitious connection. See also one-trial learning.
supplementary motor area (SMA) Another name for the medial premotor
cortex. This is the part of the premotor cortex that receives
proprioceptive information about how parts of the body are positioned,
important in preparing and planning movement. See also pyramidal motor
system. supramarginal gyrus This is an area on the rear underside of the
cerebrum which forms part of the general fusiform face area. It becomes
particularly active when dealing with the meanings of words, and with
word choices. Interestingly, it is also active in empathy, which might
explain its links with adjacent areas concerned with the decoding of
facial expressions. surface dysgraphia A condition that results from
brain damage, and results in poor spelling of irregular words but with
reasonable spelling of regular words and often the ability to spell
non-words 'correctly'. See dysgraphia. surface dyslexia Dyslexia in
which the problems are only with the forms of the words themselves, and
the person has no difficulties with their meaning. See also deep
dyslexia. surface structure The term coined by Chomsky to refer to the
pattern of

S

grammar and sentence structure that is found in a particular language,
and which distinguishes it from other languages. The term is used in
contrast with deep structure, which, Chomsky argues, is common to all
languages and which forms the fundamental set of principles inherited by
the young child, which it uses to decode the surface structure of the
language that it hears around it from birth. The process of
transformational grammar was developed as a method of identifying the
deep structure components of specific phrases or sentences in a
particular language. survey A technique of investigation that involves
collecting information, attitudes or opinions from large numbers of
people, usually by the use of careful sampling procedures. Although a
survey rarely allows for in-depth investigation of a topic, it can be
extremely valuable for investigating general patterns of human behaviour
such as surveys of sleeping habits or attitudes. sustained attention
Also referred to as vigilance in many accounts, this refers to an
extended period of concentration on a relatively simple task. Studies of
sustained attention became important during the Second World War with
the development of complex defence technology, since errors brought on
by fatigue or distraction could have serious effects, especially in the
case of radar surveillance. Overall, studies of sustained attention have
tended to take the form of signal-detection tasks. Performance on these
has been shown to be positively affected by such variables as the
presence of others, a limited amount of extraneous noise, a high degree
of introversion in the individual concerned, and, common during the war,
the influence of amphetamine. One theoretical explanation which has been

365

suggested is that all of these factors relate to the degree of arousal
experienced by people as they are carrying out the task. See also
selective attention. switch cost The additional time taken for a
cognitive task which involves rejecting a previous schema and adopting a
new one. syllogism A type of problem that involves two statements or
premises, and a conclusion. This type of problem is often used in
studies of deductive reasoning, where the conclusion may or may not
follow logically from the premises. symbol grounding problem The problem
of defining exactly what a concept is (i.e. what a symbol represents)
without actually referring to that concept. symbolic interactionism A
way of understanding social behaviour by describing it in terms of
social roles and role behaviour. The use of symbolic interactionism
allows researchers to distance themselves from the individual people
concerned, and to look at what is happening in terms of social
behaviour, expectations and assumptions. symbolic representation The
third of the modes of representation described by Bruner, in which
information is stored as symbols, such as numbers, words or signs.
Bruner argued that this mode of representation enables the child to
organise and categorise information, and to perceive relationships which
might not otherwise have been readily identifiable. As such, he regards
the development of symbolic representation, especially through the use
of language, as being of paramount importance in cognitive development.
See also enactive representation, iconic representation. sympathetic
division One of the two divisions of the autonomic nervous system, the
sympathetic division is the set of nerve fibres that, when stimulated,

366

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

increase arousal and may trigger off the fight or flight response,
producing a rapid burst of energy and preparing the body for action. The
operation of the sympathetic division is accompanied by the release of
adrenaline into the bloodstream, which serves to maintain the activated
state of the body over a longer period of time. See also stress,
anxiety. sympathy A feeling of compassion for another person, brought
about by awareness of their negative circumstance or situation.
synaesthesia A condition in which information from different sensory
modes becomes confused, so sounds may be perceived as tastes, or touch
as sound. While pure synaesthesia is relatively rare, synaesthetic
imagery appears to be a reasonably frequent form of memory coding.
synapse The term given to a junction point between two neurones by means
of which information is transmitted from one neurone to the next.
Synapses may be inhibitory or excitatory (i.e. they may render the next
neurone less or more likely to fire). Normally, stimulation from several
synapses (summation) will be required for the full effect on the next
neurone to be achieved (see Figure 72).

synaptic button See synaptic knob. synaptic cleft The small gap between
a synaptic knob and the receptor site on the adjacent neurone. synaptic
knob A swelling at the end of the dendrite, which contains small pockets
known as synaptic vesicles. Each vesicle contains a small amount of a
particular neurotransmitter, which is released into the synaptic cleft
when stimulated by an electrical impulse passing along the dendrite.
synaptic plasticity The ability of synapses to grow and become more
effective when frequently activated. Although the idea was first
proposed by Donald Hebb back in 1949, synaptic plasticity used to be
thought of as relatively rare and limited to pre-pubertal children.
However, studies of recovery from strokes and other forms of brain
damage indicate that high levels of synaptic growth and adaptation in
adults are not only possible but likely, given sufficient effort and
motivation. See neural plasticity. synaptic transmission The
transmission of information from one neurone to another by means of
electrochemical processes. When the neural impulse

synaptic cleft synaptic knob

dendrite of next neurone

synaptic vesicles receptor site direction of impulse neurotransmitter

Figure 72 The synapse

S

arrives at the end of the dendrites of a given neurone, it reaches a
small button known as the synaptic button. Vesicles in the synaptic
button release a neurotransmitter into the synapse -- the gap between it
and a dendrite of the opposing neurone. That part of the dendrite is
specialised to form a receptor site, which will pick up only that
neurotransmitter, or a chemical with a similar structure. The absorption
of the neurotransmitter produces chemical changes in the cell. Should
enough receptor sites be stimulated in this way, the next neurone will
either fire, or have a raised threshold of response such that it will
not fire easily. See also summation, inhibitory synapse, excitatory
synapse. synaptic vesicle The small reservoirs found on the synaptic
button which contain the neurotransmitter chemical. See also synapse.
synaptogenesis The process by which the axons and dendrites of nerve
cells grow and form new synapses. It is aided by a protein known as NGF,
or nerve growth factor. See neural plasticity. synchronicity A concept
developed by Jung, in which he argued that certain events and ideas
possess a resonance with deeper, more meaningful layers of experience
than most, and so have far greater psychological or even psychic
implications than ordinary events or ideas. syndrome A set of symptoms
or physiological events that tend to occur together, forming a
functional group. syntactic To do with grammatical structure and
organisation, rather than with meaning. See also semantic, syntax.
syntax The set of rules and principles concerning the structure of a
language; how the words should be combined to

367

form what is accepted by users of the language as a grammatical sentence
or phrase. system 1 thinking This is a term used to describe our
everyday thinking, which tends to be rapid and intuitive, but is also
often inaccurate and subject to bias. The distinction between this and
system 2 thinking was clarified by Daniel Kahnemann, based on several
decades of research into decision-making and everyday heuristics. system
2 thinking By comparison with system 1 thinking, this is logical,
deliberate thinking, which is usually precise and more accurate, but
slower. systematic desensitisation One of the ways in which classical
conditioning has been applied to the treatment of phobias. The process
of systematic desensitisation involves the learning (conditioning) of
new responses to the feared stimulus. The new response is deliberately
incompatible with the old response of fear so that once it has been
learned, the phobia is extinguished. Usually, relaxation training is
used to provide the new response, and the person gradually learns to
relax in the presence of the stimulus. A hierarchical list of feared
stimuli is drawn up, and the training process begins with the least
frightening situation. Once the new response to this has been learned,
the person moves on to the next situation. Since the learning takes
place gradually, with each stage building on the gains of the previous
one, the new response gradually comes to supplant the old one and the
phobia dies. See also implosion therapy. systematic review An attempt to
evaluate relevant published research papers in a specific area for the
purpose of discussing explanations or hypotheses.

368

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

The use of the term makes a claim that the review has followed rigorous
criteria in identifying and selecting the material, and in the processes
of analysing and combining it, while also acknowledging that a fully
comprehensive review of all research papers in the area may not be
practical. See also narrative review, meta-review. systems analysis The
analysis of a complex process. In social sciences, the term is taken to
mean analysing interconnected groups of people and the social systems
that influence them. Systems analysis also includes the use of com-

puters to analyse complex systems and develop ways of improving their
functioning. systems theory A set of theories based around the idea that
all complex systems will share certain properties. Thus, it should be
possible to transfer ideas obtained from studying one kind of system to
one that is very different. Often this has meant taking principles from
engineering systems (including guided missiles) and applying them to the
behaviour of individuals or to groups such as families. See also family
therapy, cybernetics, negative feedback.

T T group A form of encounter group popular in the 1960s and 1970s,
which was intended to produce a close, therapeutic relationship between
the group members. T groups were free-floating and unstructured,
involving a high degree of self-revelation on the part of members. The
aim was to break down established defence mechanisms and remove barriers
to open communication with other people. However, they fell out of
popularity as an alternative view emerged that defence mechanisms should
not be broken down unless the person also receives constructive help in
dealing with whatever it is that they were defending against. For this
and other reasons, T groups were accused of being more destructive than
helpful and are now largely extinct. T maze A device used to assess
learning in laboratory rats or other animals, consisting of a straight
passage from a starting box leading to a junction at which the animal is
obliged to make either a right or left turn to reach a goal box, which
may or may not contain a reward. T scaling A way of adjusting test
results that have produced skewed distribution curves, such that they
end up with a shape which is close enough to a normal distribution to
justify the use of parametric statistics. See also kurtosis. T scores
Commonly used in educational research, these are an alternative to
z-scores which avoids the problem of negative numbers from those below
the mean. The conversion is achieved by

multiplying the scores by 10, adding 50 and rounding up the result to
the nearest whole number. Although this changes the means and standard
deviations of the scores, it retains the proportions of the data so
enabling it for use with correlations and other statistical tests.
t-test Probably the most widely used statistical test within psychology,
t is a parametric statistic that is obtained by comparing the means of
two data samples in order to determine whether any differences which
occur between them are statistically significant. The null hypothesis of
any given study will predict that any differences which have occurred
between two sets of data have occurred simply by chance. In other words,
all of the scores have come from the same population, and differences
between the means are simply due to random variation. On the other hand,
if the means of the two sets of data are very different, it is unlikely
that they have come from the same population; they are more likely to
have resulted from two different populations. In that case, the null
hypothesis would be refuted. The t-test looks at the mean of each set of
data, bearing in mind the standard deviation of each one. By giving a
final statistic that expresses the strength of the differences between
the two samples, it allows the user to assess just how likely it is that
these differences have arisen by chance. The t-test is one of the more
powerful tests in that it is able to detect significance when present,
and it is also very robust (i.e. it can cope if the conditions of its
use do not conform strictly DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

370

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

to those for parametric tests). See also F ratio, test power. TA See
transactional analysis. tabula rasa A blank slate. It is used as a
summary term for Locke's theory that humans are born with no knowledge
or mental structures, so that their mental processes are entirely formed
by experience. Since slates have not been used in education for some
time, the metaphor of a new smartphone with no apps might convey the
idea more effectively. tachistoscope (t-scope) A device used to present
visual stimuli for precise amounts of time and/or at precise levels of
intensity. Tachistoscope studies are frequently used to demonstrate the
power of set in perception and were used extensively by cognitive and
social psychologists during the 1950s and 1960s. tactile stimulation
Information that is received through the sense of touch. Talairach
coordinates These are ways of describing precise locations in the brain.
They relate to an atlas of the brain created by Talairach and Tournoux
in 1988, which used the anatomical data from a single post-mortem brain
to define x as

locations on the left/right axis, y as locations on the front-back axis,
and z as locations on the top-down axis. task switching The cognitive
act of changing from one cognitive framework to another -- for example,
making a conscious effort to change schema or perspective. See also
Wisconsin cardsorting test, multitasking. task-resource artefact The
finding that performance on a task will suffer if another task or
activity is taking up the relevant cognitive resources. See system 2
thinking. taste buds See taste receptors. taste receptors These are
cells which are grouped into sets, known as taste buds, which are the
main source of gustatory perception. They are mainly located on the
tongue, around the rest of the mouth, and in the upper part of the
digestive tract. Their role is the transduction of chemical inputs from
food or other substances into electrical impulses which are then
transmitted to the areas of the brain concerned with sensory perception.
See also gustation. TAT See thematic apperception test.

Tajfel, Henri (1919--1982) Following his experiences as a Polish Jew in
the Holocaust, Tajfel developed a major analysis of prejudice and
intergroup conflict. His work began with explorations of the cognitive
dimensions of prejudice, but it soon led him to recognise the importance
of motivational factors, and in particular the sense of belonging
involved in group membership. Tajfel conducted experiments in which
'minimal groups' were artificially put together on some unimportant
basis, and showed that the members still developed loyalty to their own
group, and intergroup rivalry if put in conflict for resources. Tajfel
saw group membership as fundamental to an individual's identity, and his
social identity theory in which the identity and functioning of the
individual are seen as a product of their social and cultural setting
was a major factor in the development of European social psychology.

T

taxonomy A system of classification that groups members of a data-set
into successive levels. The classic taxonomy is the biological
classification of organisms that includes 'orders', each of which
contains many kinds of 'genus', which in turn contain many 'species'.
tDCS See transcranial direct current stimulation. tectopulvinar pathway
Like the geniculostriate pathway, this transmits information from the
retina through the lateral geniculate nuclei to the primary visual
cortex. In fish, reptiles and amphibians it is the only pathway
connecting these areas, suggesting an earlier evolutionary history. It
plays a significant role in the coordination of vision and movement.
telegraphic speech Concise speech that leaves out redundant words, as in
a telegram, but still conveys the essential meaning. Telegraphic speech
is used by children of around two years of age, who typically combine
only two or three words at a time in each utterance. Identified as such
by Roger Brown, it formed the basis of his approach to language
acquisition, which rejected the prevailing structural approaches to
infant speech and instead focused on the child's communicative
intentions. The overall approach was known as semantic relations
grammar. telemetry Sending measurements over a distance, using radio
frequencies or more recently, WiFi or Bluetooth. Telemetry is used to
monitor the physiological responses of freely moving individuals such as
athletes, children at play and migrating birds. telencephalon Part of
the forebrain, which consists of the two cerebral hemispheres, the basal
ganglia and the limbic system.

371

teleology A form of logical reasoning in which the outcome is regarded
as responsible for the cause (e.g. 'It rains to make the flowers grow').
This type of thinking is regarded by logicians as a mistake, by
developmentalists as immature thinking, and in systems theory as valid
in some circumstances. In philosophy, teleology refers to the study of
ultimate purpose -- a teleological approach to scientific investigation
is one in which describing the function that something has is considered
to be an adequate form of explanation, as in many biological
explanations, or in sociobiology. telepathy The communication of
cognitions (thoughts, etc.) by means other than those understood in
conventional science. There is considerable dispute as to whether the
phenomenon occurs, and its definition precludes rational explanation --
if a communication can be explained, it is not telepathy. See also
extrasensory perception, parapsychology. temperament The stable aspects
of the character of an individual, which are often regarded as
biologically rooted and as providing the fundamental dispositions that,
through interaction with the environment, produce the personality.
template An abstract model or schema that indicates what something is
usually like, or how it generally fits together. template matching
theory A theory of pattern recognition which holds that we identify
objects by comparing their images to general templates that we have
stored in memory and assessing the degree of 'fit' between them.
temporal Concerning time, or the experience of time. temporal coding
Conveying information through the timing of events. In

372

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

neuroscience, this generally refers to the way that populations of
neurones synchronise their firing in response to different strengths of
signal. See also volley principle. temporal contiguity Two events
occurring next to each other in time. Temporal contiguity is an
important factor in conditioning since it is usually necessary for the
unconditioned stimulus to be close in time to the response or
reinforcement. A common cognitive error is to assume that because B
happens soon after A, A must have caused B. temporal lobe The area of
the cerebrum found below the lateral fissure at the side of each
cerebral hemisphere. It was once thought to be the seat of the soul, and
of time perception, although there is little formal evidence for this.
The temporal lobe does, however, contain the olfactory cortex and the
auditory cortex. It tucks underneath itself at the sides, and this is
where important personal areas such as those for memory and person
recognition are located. See also temporoparietal junction, hippocampus,
fusiform gyrus. temporal resolution How accurately it is possible to
measure when something is happening, or how long it takes. See also
spatial resolution. temporal summation A situation where the
accumulation of stimuli arriving close together in time produces an
effect that would not happen if the stimuli arrived at longer intervals.
Some nerve impulses are passed from one neurone to another through
summation. temporoparietal junction An area of the brain where the
temporal and parietal lobes meet. It incorporates information from the
visual, auditory and somatosensory systems, and also from the thalamus
and the limbic system. It is known to

play a significant role in theory of mind, and damage to this region can
produce impairment of moral decision-making and sometimes out-of-body
experiences (OOBs). It is connected to the frontal lobes by the arcuate
fasciculus. tender-mindedness A personality characteristic put forward
by William James, and later elaborated by H.J. Eysenck, characterised by
a gentle, optimistic and idealistic approach to the world. Its opposite,
tough-mindedness, is characterised by a harsher, more pessimistic
approach. teratogens Substances or agents that can affect foetus
development, such as alcohol or pollution. terminal button See synaptic
knob. territoriality The defence and protection of one area to the
exclusion of other members of the species. It has been studied mainly by
ethologists, with particular reference to those aggressive acts that
deter potential sexual competitors. The concept has been extended
speculatively, and with varying degrees of sense, to account for all
manner of human behaviour, ranging from international warfare to crowd
violence and stress in high-density housing. See also personal space.
tertiary circular reactions The final stage of circular reactions in
Piaget's theory of cognitive development, in which the infant introduces
variations in the repeated behaviour. These variations change
successively, eventually becoming very different from the behaviour with
which the infant started out. tertium quid The possibility that what
looks like a relationship between two variables may actually have been
caused by a third variable, acting independently on each of the others.

T

test A standardised means of assessing the abilities or characteristics
of individuals. See also intelligence, personality, projective test,
psychometrics, reliability, validity. test administration A standard way
of presenting a psychometric test to ensure that results obtained from
respondents by different testers are comparable. See also standardised
instructions. test assumptions The criteria which data should meet in
order for a given test to give accurate results. See, e.g., parametric
test, levels of measurement. test battery A combination of psychometric
tests that provides a comprehensive account of an individual's
functioning, such as a set of tests used for the assessment of memory
disorders or reading skills. test construction The process of developing
a psychometric test. Test construction is a complex process, involving
many stages. For example, each individual test item must be evaluated in
terms of its own discriminatory power and also against relevant group
norms, following which any combination of test items must be appraised
through factor analysis and other forms of multivariate analysis in
order to establish construct validity. The final test must also undergo
reliability evaluations, and will need to be interpreted in terms of
relevant and recent group norms. It is the test construction process
which distinguishes a valid psychometric test from a simple
questionnaire. test items The individual items in a psychometric test.
test power The potential that a particular statistical test has to
detect significance if it is there in the data. Some tests are better at
this than others, and these tests are often more popular

373

with users than the data would strictly warrant. See also levels of
measurement, robustness, t-test. test profile The (usually graphic)
portrayal of the characteristics of an individual as assessed by a test
or test battery. A test profile involves the presentation of a range of
scores from a series of subtests, rather than a single overall score,
and is therefore generally used in presenting the outcomes of
­personality inventories. test-retest A method of assessing the
reliability of a measure by applying the same measure, or test, on two
separate occasions and correlating the results. test standardisation The
administration of a test to a large sample of the population, ideally a
representative sample, which serves to provide norms against which the
results of particular individuals or groups can be compared. test
statistic The final number obtained when a statistical test has been
carried out. The test statistic is then compared with the appropriate
critical value for that test, in order to identify whether the results
have achieved statistical significance. testee An ugly word for a person
to whom a test is administered. testes Male gonads -- glands that form
part of the endocrine system of the body, which are particularly
responsible for the manufacture of androgens. testing effect The way
that learning is enhanced by spending some of the learning time
retrieving information, rather than concentrating on committing it to
memory. An important thing to know when revising for exams. testosterone
A male sex hormone (androgen) that is responsible for the

374

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

development of the primary sexual characteristics of males and plays a
major role in sexual and related activities throughout life.

unconscious mind. Typically, research participants will be shown about
eight or ten different pictures and asked to explain what is happening
in each one.

tetrachromatism A theory of colour vision which assumes that there are
four primary colours -- red, blue, green and yellow. See also
trichromatism.

thematic qualitative analysis A form of qualitative analysis in which
the salient material is organised into distinct themes. The themes may
be data-driven, in which case they are identified during the analysis
itself by grouping together recurrent ideas or concepts that seem to
represent significant concerns which are being expressed by the
interviewees. Alternatively, themes may be identified before the data
are collected, in which case they have generally been derived from
theory, and will usually relate to explicit hypotheses. See also
grounded theory.

texture gradient The loss of visual definition of objects with
increasing distance, such that the details are seen less clearly and
general textures appear to be smoother. Gibson's ecological perception
theory argues that textural changes in the visual field are the source
of most depth perception, and that top-down models of perception which
assume that it relies on hypothesis testing are largely unnecessary in
the explanation of usual experience in everyday life. thalamus A
structure of the brain found just below the cerebrum, in which
information is received from the sensory receptors and relayed to the
cerebral cortex. It is involved in some basic information processing --
for example, Hubel and Wiesel found the basics of pattern perception to
be related to the arrangement of simple, complex and hypercomplex cells
in the lateral geniculate nuclei of the thalamus. Thanatos The name of
the Greek god of death, which was used by Freud to refer to the death
instinct -- a concept he developed in order to account for the
interpersonal and intrapersonal aggression of the First World War.
thematic apperception test (TAT) A projective test in which research
participants are asked to interpret and explain ambiguous scenes. The
nature of their response (e.g. whether they perceive a recumbent figure
as dead, drunk or sleeping) is taken as an indicator of hidden anxieties
or defences of the

themes The general term used to refer to topics or ideas which can be
grouped together in some meaningful way, and occur repeatedly during the
course of a qualitative analysis. theory An overall explanation given
for a set of observations, which links them all into a coherent pattern
or model. According to the generally accepted approach, scientific
theories are of no value unless they give rise to hypotheses that can be
tested against reality and can be shown to be false. However, exceptions
to this are often made in the case of theories that are particularly
appropriate to the mood of their times, such as sociobiology or
psychoanalysis. See also hypothetico-deductive method, positivism.
theory-driven analysis An approach to data analysis, particularly common
with thematic qualitative analysis, in which the essential issues or
themes that are being used to structure the data have been derived
beforehand, from theory. This contrasts with data-driven techniques,

T

which tend to be more reflexive, and in which the themes of the analysis
emerge from the data themselves -- for example, in grounded theory.
theory-led investigation An approach to research in which the topic of
study, and/or the way in which it is undertaken, has been derived
entirely from theoretical perspectives rather than from empirical
research or social need. theory-theory Particularly used in
neuroscience, this is the idea that human social understanding is based
on formulating theories about mental states and how they govern
behaviour, and storing them as explicit knowledge. See also personal
constructs. theory of mind (TOM) An approach in child psychology in
which the child's understanding of other people's cognitions and
emotions is the focus of study. The idea is that the child develops a
theory of mind between four and six years of age as a fundamental aspect
of its cognitive development, which means that it becomes able to
understand that other people may not think the same way as the child
itself. The area has generated many interesting ideas and issues that
are being vigorously investigated. Many characteristics shown by
autistic children can be summarised by the idea that they have not
developed a theory of mind. See also paracingulate cortex,
mindblindness, false belief task. theory of reasoned action The idea
that intention determines behaviour, and that intention itself is
determined by perceived norms, attitudes and behavioural control. theory
of the humours A type theory of personality originating from the
secondcentury bc, and popular throughout the Middle Ages. It identified
four main types of personality, each of which was supposed

375

to come about through the action of particular body fluids. The four
types are: (i)

(ii) 
(iii) ( iv)

choleric, thought to result from an excess of yellow bile and producing
an impatient, easily angered personality; sanguine, from blood,
producing a cheerful and relaxed individual; melancholic, from black
bile, producing a depressive and mournful person; phlegmatic, from
phlegm, producing a calm, unmoved and sometimes insensitive individual.

That this was a popular theory can be seen in the way in which many
words have retained meanings that derive directly from the theory, such
as sanguine or phlegmatic. It was this theory of the origins of human
personality that led to the word 'humour', which had previously only
meant bodily fluid, coming to mean 'mood' or 'temper', as in being in a
good or bad humour. (see Figure 73). See also humours. therapeutic A
term used to refer to something that is useful as an agent or tool in
therapy. therapy The treatment of an individual by physical or
psychological means. When applied to physiological treatments, the term
implies that the client is ill and should be cured. See also behaviour
therapy, client-centred therapy, cognitive therapy, family therapy,
Gestalt therapy, medical model, psychoanalysis, psychotherapy,
rational--emotive behaviour therapy, systemic therapy, transactional
analysis. thermoreception The perception of temperature by specialised
receptors in the skin. theta rhythm This is a distinctive, highamplitude
and rhythmical pattern of

376

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

extraverted sociable outgoing talkative responsive easygoing lively
carefree leadership

sanguine

active optimistic impulsive changeable exciteable aggressive restless

choleric

touchy

stable

unstable

calm

even-tempered reliable controlled peaceful

moody

phlegmatic

thoughtful careful

melancholic

anxious rigid sober pessimistic

passive

quiet

reserved unsociable

introverted Figure 73 The humours and the EPI dimensions electrical
activity which is shown by the brain during normal waking activity. See
EEG. time dimension Change over time, or of previous history/experience.
It has been argued that the time dimension should be more explicitly
recognised as a factor in research with human beings, in view of their
dynamic and ever-changing nature. See snapshot methodologies. thinking A
general term which can be defined in several different ways, for
example: (i) (ii) (iii)

The use of symbolic processes by the brain. Any chain or series of
ideas. Ideation, the sequence of producing ideas concerned with the
solving of specific problems or incongruities in models of reality.

Thinking is usually taken to mean conscious cognitions. Unconscious

processes such as those referred to in psychoanalytic literature are
seen more as responses of affect or motivations. Most psychological
investigations of thinking have concentrated on problemsolving or
concept formation. See also creativity, system 1 thinking. third-order
intentionality A degree of intentional stance which makes the inference
that the person who is acting holds beliefs about what other people may
believe about things or people, and that these are directing that
person's actions. An example might be acting in the belief that your
friend knows that another friend of theirs knows how to sort out your
computer. It may sound complicated, but it happens remarkably often in
day-to-day living. See also second-order intentionality, first-order
intentionality. third turn repair A process identified in conversation
analysis, in which the individual tries to repair a misunderstanding

T

or failure to communicate the next time they have a turn in the
conversation. thought disorder A tendency to produce sequences of ideas
that appear unconnected or illogical to the observer. It is a symptom of
schizophrenia. threat display A form of inherited behaviour in which an
animal acts in a manner that serves to emphasise its size and strength,
and so discourages competitors, or attempts to do so. Threat displays
often involve exhibitions of natural weaponry (horns, tusks, teeth,
etc.), of power and strength (beating the chest, roaring) and also of
size (standing tall, engaging the pilomotor response). All of these
behaviours are designed to intimidate the other animal as much as
possible. threshold The lowest level of stimulation at which an event
can be detected. Although the term 'absolute threshold' may also be
used, there is nothing absolute about it. There is no fixed point at
which a stimulus changes from invisible to visible, just an increasing
probability that it will be detected. A threshold is therefore usually
set at the point where 50 per cent of the signals are detected by the
person. This point itself is easily influenced by factors such as
sensory adaptation, set and fatigue, so the threshold obtained will
depend very much on the conditions of the experiment. See also relative
threshold, word recognition threshold. threshold of response The point
at which a stimulus, or a change in a stimulus, becomes detectable.
Since these can fluctuate from moment to moment, the threshold itself is
taken as the point where 50 per cent of trials indicate that the
stimulus has been detected. An absolute threshold is the point where the
presence of a stimulus has been detected

377

50 per cent of the time, while a relative threshold is the point at
which a change in the intensity of a stimulus has been detected.
Differences between relative thresholds are sometimes referred to as
just noticeable differences (jnds). timbre The tonal quality of a sound,
especially used of voices. Combinations of different tones and harmonics
give the sound its distinct timbre. time and motion A method of
analysing working patterns developed by F.W. Taylor in 1911, involving a
systematic breakdown of movements and skills. By breaking down work
sequences into sequences of actions with maximum economy and minimum
effort, Taylor showed how productivity in industry could be dramatically
increased, and his work is often considered to be the foundation of
ergonomics. Although it is still used from time to time, it has proved
to be of only limited value on the factory floor, as people have an
understandable aversion to being treated as if they were robots.
time-based prospective memory A form of prospective memory that involves
remembering to do things at the appropriate time. time perception The
subjective awareness of the passage of time, which does not correspond
precisely with objective time. Time perception has been studied
experimentally to determine the effect of various forms of cognitive
tasks, and of psychoactive drugs. time sampling An observational
technique in which the occurrence of specified events is noted during
successive time intervals. The observer may use a grid with each column
representing, say, 60-second units, and each row being a defined event.
The observer moves to a new column every

378

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Tinbergen, Niko (1907--1988) Nikolaas Tinbergen was a Dutch ethologist
who conducted extensive research into the role of inherited recognition
signals and other aspects of animal behaviour. In 1973, he shared the
Nobel Prize with Karl Frisch and Konrad Lorenz for their contributions
to ethology. Among other things, Tinbergen identified the importance of
sign stimuli in setting off innate releasing mechanisms and is best
known for delineating the 'four questions' that need to be addressed in
order to understand animal behaviour. These are causation, ontogeny,
evolution and function. 60 seconds, and a tick is placed against every
event that occurs during the next 60 seconds. The technique is used for
observational studies of relatively frequent events. See also event
sampling.

the direct operation of conditioning. See also Hawthorne effect.

tip-of-the-tongue (TOT) phenomenon A phenomenon of memory in which the
individual experiences the feeling of knowing the desired information
but is temporarily unable to bring it to consciousness.

TOM See theory of mind.

tit-for-tat A strategy in which participants adopt matching approaches,
such that cooperation leads to cooperation, while non-cooperation leads
to noncooperation. See also game theory. TMS See transcranial magnetic
stimulation. token economy The application of B.F. Skinner's techniques
of operant conditioning to establish an environment in which desired
behaviour is reinforced with tokens that can then be exchanged for goods
or privileges. Token economy is proposed as an efficient way of
modifying behaviour, especially of long-stay institutionalised patients.
However, there is some evidence that any improvements found in patients
using token economy systems may be a by-product of raising morale
through providing them, and the staff, with apparently meaningful tasks,
rather than through

tolerance Adaptation to the effects of a drug so that increasing doses
are needed to achieve the same effect. tomography A method of
investigation of brain functioning, mostly used for medical purposes,
which involves building up a three-dimensional picture of the brain
through a succession of X-ray photographs or ultrasound images, in order
to identify abnormal structures or growths. See brain scanning. tone The
quality of sound expressed in terms of the number of different
frequencies which make up that sound. A pure tone consists of sounds of
one frequency only, but most sounds are combinations of several
different frequencies at differing strengths, often with one frequency
being dominant over the others, which then becomes identified as the
pitch of the sound. tonotopic map A conceptual map of responses to high-
and low-pitched sounds produced by the primary auditory cortex. See also
tonotopic organisation. tonotopic organisation The principle that sounds
which are close to one another in frequency stimulate neurones which are
also close to one

T

another. This appears to be how neurones in the organ of Corti in the
cochlea are organised. See also tonotopic map. top-down An approach to
research that emphasises the general or higher-order functions of the
processes being studied as the first stage of analysis, by comparison
with bottom-up approaches which begin with the details and aim to
combine them to understand higher-order levels. See also levels of
analysis. top-down processing A model that explains the nature of
psychological processing using general or social functions as the
starting point. A good example is Gregory's theory of perception, which
works on the principle that the brain is actively hypothesising about
meanings for the information it is receiving, and that those hypotheses
determine how a stimulus is perceived. See also bottom-up approach, raw
primal sketch. TOT See tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon. TOTE Abbreviation
of 'Test Operate Test Exit', proposed as the basic component of planned
actions by Miller, Galanter and Pribram (1960). They proposed that the
organism 'tests' the environment, 'operates' on it to bring about
change, 'tests' again to see whether the outcome is satisfactory, and,
if so, 'exits' from the sequence. See also negative feedback.
tough-mindedness A personality trait characterised by an unsentimental,
practical and sometimes harsh approach to others. See tender-mindedness.
Tourette's syndrome This is a psychiatric disorder considered to have
neurological origins, which is characterised by repetitive actions such
as motor tics or repeated vocalisations. Although sometimes those
repetitions are of

379

obscene or offensive language, this is not typical of all Tourette's
sufferers. It is thought to begin in early childhood and has similar
characteristics to ­obsessive--compulsive disorder. trace conditioning A
form of classical conditioning in which the conditioned stimulus is
presented immediately before the unconditioned stimulus, rather than
simultaneously. See also delayed conditioning, simultaneous
conditioning. trace decay The vanishing of a memory trace with time. See
also echoic memory. tradition A distinctive pattern of behaviour or
customary approach to doing things that is shared by members of a social
group, and transmitted to new members over time. trait An aspect of
personality, such as sociability, impulsiveness and conventionality. See
also trait theory. trait anxiety A source of personal anxiety, or
tendency towards anxiety, which is believed to come from a personality
trait rather than an immediate reaction to situations. See also state
anxiety. trait theory A theory of personality in which personality is
considered to consist of a collection of differing, usually measurable
traits. One of the bestknown examples is that of R.B. Cattell, whose
personality inventory measures 16 different personality factors (and so
is called the 16PF). See also Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventory, trait anxiety. trance An altered state of awareness in which
decision-making and executive functions are partially suspended, and
attention is highly focused. Trance can be achieved by hypnosis,
meditation, some drugs and some clinical conditions. See also
mindfulness.

380

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

tranquilliser A drug used to reduce stress or anxiety temporarily.
transaction A chain or sequence of interactions between two or more
individuals which is based on the idea that interactions can only be
understood if it is recognised that each person influences the other.
Each person acts on the basis of the meaning they give to how the other
treats them, and that treatment is itself the product of an attribution
made by the other person. For example, a baby becomes upset while
feeding, the mother responds by being anxious during feeds, and this
makes her treat the baby differently, causing further upset to the baby,
and so on. In general, transactions mean that two people negotiate the
environment in which they will both have to function in the future,
rather than one person defining the environment for the other. The
concept of transactions is particularly useful in the analysis of
interactions between parent and infant, but can also be applied to most
areas of social behaviour. See also coevolution, social constructionism,
parent--infant interaction. transactional analysis (TA) A scheme
developed by Eric Berne for interpreting the way in which ego-states
lead people to relate to one another during interpersonal interaction.
Each person in a given pair or dyad may operate as a Child, an Adult or
a Parent. Acting in a submissive, dependent manner (Child) may provoke
the partner of the dyad to adopt a parental role. Acting in a dominating
manner (Parent) may produce submissive behaviour from the other, etc.
Transactional styles can become habitual without the participants
realising it, leading to dysfunctional relationships. The TA model has
been usefully applied in individual and group psychotherapy,
particularly by uncovering the recurrent patterns of social interactions
described in Berne's 1973 book Games People Play.

transactional model of stress A model of stress and coping in which the
person first appraises the stressor, and then assesses the resources
they have available to deal with it. See also primary appraisal,
secondary appraisal. transactional theory A theory of perception
developed by Ames in 1951, which states that perception develops as a
result of constant interaction with the environment. transcendental
meditation A technique, derived from Hindu practice, of sustained
concentration on a brief phrase (mantra) in order to induce relaxation.
See also altered states of awareness, hypnosis, trance. transcoding The
conversion of symbols from one form to another (e.g. from written
symbols to spoken words). transcortical aphasia The term is used to
refer to a group of aphasias involving different areas across the
cortex, but all of which interfere with speech production and
recognition in some way. See also language areas. transcortical sensory
aphasia A ­condition in which the person is able to repeat spoken words,
but has very l­ittle comprehension of both spoken and written language.
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) This is a procedure that
involves stimulating the brain externally, using a coil held over the
scalp. By interrupting the brain's functions in that region, it is
considered to produce a 'virtual lesion' in that particular area. See
also transcranial magnetic stimulation, cathodal tDCS, anodal tDCS.
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) A method of investigating brain
function by using short bursts of magnetic stimulation, which can
disrupt brain function in very localised areas of

T

the cortex, producing a 'virtual lesion', and allowing researchers to
explore how this interferes with task processing. See also repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation, transcranial direct current
stimulation, cathodal tDCS, anodal tDCS, brain scan. transcription The
process of converting audio or videotape recordings into written text.
Preparing transcripts is an essential early step in many forms of
qualitative research. A reasonably competent typist will take about six
hours to transcribe one hour of tape, so even a basic transcript is
quite an investment of effort. Some research methods such as
conversation analysis require much more detailed transcripts in which
intonations, stresses, the exact length of pauses, grunts, etc. are
precisely indicated. In this context, the development of speech-to-text
software has been enthusiastically welcomed. transcription factor A
chemical product of a particular gene that affects how other genes
function. transducer (i)

(ii) 

A device used to convert a biological signal such as heartbeat or skin
resistance into an electrical signal suitable for recording. More
generally, any sort of device or receptor cell that converts energy into
a different form.

transduction A term that is usually used of sensory receptors which
receive information and convert it into electrical impulses -- for
example, the conversion of photons \[light\] into electrical energy by
rod and cone cells in the retina, or vibrations (sound waves) into
electrical energy by hair cells in the cochlea. See also transducer.
transfer of training A phenomenon in which the learning of one
particular task either helps or hinders the learning

381

of a subsequent task. Positive transfer involves the facilitation of
subsequent learning, while negative transfer impedes it. See also
proactive interference. transfer RNA (tRNA) This is a form of nucleic
acid that can move from one cell or part of the body to another. It is
closely related to and works alongside the genetic information contained
in DNA. See also messenger RNA. transference The way in which feelings
derived from a previous relationship may be transferred to someone new.
This is particularly relevant in psychoanalysis, in which the analyst
deliberately maintains a neutral, colourless personality so that such
transfer becomes easy for the patient (e.g. when the therapist is
responded to as the patient's father). Transference is similar to
projection, and was first regarded by Freud as a nuisance, but is now
regarded as an essential source of information about the patient's early
relationships. Interpretation of transference has been claimed as the
major or only source of therapeutic change. See also
counter-transference. transformational grammar A set of rules that
specify how one sentence can be transformed into another in a language,
particularly converting deep structure into surface structure. The
concept was originally proposed by Chomsky as part of his explanation of
how children acquire language. In this model, a complete set of
transformational rules amounts to a grammatical description of a
language. transgenerational transmission The passing on of
environmentally acquired characteristics to subsequent generations
(e.g. the underfeeding of one generation of rats at a critical period
may result in reduced size of the adult rats two generations later).
Similarly, extreme malnutrition for a pregnant

382

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

woman may have subsequent effects on the child.

own sex and sex role, and do not usually experience problems of sexual
identity.

transmitter substance See neurotransmitter.

trapezoid body The area in the pons where information from the auditory
nerves from the two ears meets, and some crosses over, before it is
passed on to the thalamus and auditory cortex. This area is instrumental
in locating the origin of sounds, as sounds from each ear arrive at
different times, unless the origin of the sound is directly ahead or
behind. Compare optic chiasma.

transparency assumption This is the assumption that lesions in the brain
will not produce entirely new cognitive systems. Instead, they are
thought simply to influence pre-existing cognitive systems. The
transparency assumption is a major assumption of much cognitive
neuropsychology, justifying the use of data from damaged or abnormal
brains to infer functioning in the normal brain. However, it has been
challenged by discoveries of neural plasticity (e.g. in accident victims
where the recovery from damage to specific pathways has sometimes been
shown to generate entirely new pathways within the brain). transsexual A
person who changes sex, either from male to female or from female to
male, usually through a course of hormone therapy and surgery. Although
typically transsexuals have always experienced themselves as being
'really' the other sex, the main part of transsexualism involves the
learning of a new sex role. Many transsexuals have to spend an extensive
period of time, usually a couple of years, passing as a member of their
desired sex before being allowed treatment which will lead to
physiological change. Using drugs to block puberty makes the later
transition easier but requires an assumption that children can give
informed consent to an extreme change and so is controversial.
transvestite A person who enjoys dressing as a member of the opposite
sex, and may do so quite elaborately. Most transvestites are
heterosexual, although transvestism can sometimes be associated with
homosexuality. Transvestites in general tend to be contented with their

trauma (i)

(ii) 

An experience that, because of its intensity and unexpectedness, is
damaging. The initial reaction is shock, which may or may not be
followed by recovery (see posttraumatic stress disorder). Freud came to
believe that all neuroses were caused by childhood traumas that remained
unresolved in the adult. In medicine, bodily injury caused by an
external object.

triadic interactions In social psychology, this generally tends to mean
interactions between three people, but it may also be used to refer to
interactions between two people and an object. trial-and-error learning
Learning that takes place as a result of trying out a variety of
responses to a given stimulus, until one response achieves the desired
effect, whereupon it becomes more likely to be repeated. Thorndike
proposed that trial and error was the basis of all learning, but work on
latent learning by Tolman brought this into question, as has subsequent
cognitive research. triangular theory of love A theory of love developed
by Sternberg in 1987 that identifies three significant

T

components: passion, intimacy and commitment. In Sternberg's model,
different forms of loving involve different proportions of the three
components. triangulation A method of research that involves adopting
several different approaches or methods of study, enabling comparison of
their different outcomes. This makes it possible to 'home in' on an idea
if all the studies give similar results or have similar implications.
For example, it is not possible to undertake research that provides
definitive proof of a connection between social violence and the content
of the mass media, yet many different research methods have shown strong
correlations between the two. While no single method provides definitive
evidence, the very similar findings and implications of many different
approaches indicate that there may be something valid in the argument.
In family therapy, triangulation refers to a communication system in
which one person is caught in the communications between two others. It
is often seen in families where a child is being used so that the two
parents can send contradictory messages without coming into direct
conflict with each other. triarchic intelligence A theory of
intelligence, outlined by Robert Sternberg, which consists of three
separate subtheories. Each sub-theory concerns a different aspect of
manifest intelligence: (i) (ii)

Contextual intelligence, which is concerned with intelligence in its
sociocultural setting. Experiential intelligence, which is concerned
with how the individual's own past experience influences the way in
which they approach a given task or situation.

(iii) 

383

Componential intelligence, which is concerned with the cognitive
mechanisms by which intelligent behaviour is achieved. The componential
sub-theory incorporates an earlier theory of intelligence (Sternberg,
1977), in which components of intelligence are classified in terms of
function and level of generality.

The triarchic theory is therefore distinctive in that it treats
intelligence as a mental activity that is directed towards purposive
activity in the real world, rather than as a reified, contextfree
cognitive ability. By integrating sociocultural and experiential
intelligence with the specific tasks generally involved in intelligence
testing, it also provides a theoretical framework for the selection of
appropriate content for intelligence tests. See also reification,
multiple intelligences. trichromatism A theory of colour vision which
proposes that it results from perceiving combinations of the three
primary colours for light -- red, blue and green (not the same as the p­
rimary colours of red, blue and yellow for ­pigments). tricyclic
antidepressants Antidepressant drugs that work by increasing the amount
of serotonin and noradrenaline available to the synapse. trigram A
standard item in studying memory for meaningless material. It consists
of three letters in the order of a consonant, a vowel and a consonant
(e.g. GIK). tRNA See transfer RNA. trolling A social media practice in
which individuals repeatedly denigrate or abuse other individuals.
Although

384

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Triesman, Anne (1935--2018) The career of Anne Triesman as a
psychologist spanned the areas of attention, object perception and
memory. However, she is best known for her attenuation model of
selective attention, and later for her development of feature
integration theory: an approach to the study of attention which
emphasises the way that different kinds of attention may contribute to
the experience of attention as a whole. trolling is a minority practice,
the widespread nature of the internet means that it has become a
frequent experience of those in the public eye. The anonymity offered by
media platforms has been shown to exaggerate this type of aggression,
which can contribute significantly to anxiety disorders on the part of
the recipient, particularly in adolescents. See also deindividuation.
Turner's syndrome A genetic disorder in which the individual has one
fewer chromosome than normal, resulting in sexual abnormalities. twin
study A research method which involves exploring the similarities and
differences between pairs of identical twins which have been separated
from infancy. The idea is that differences between them will have arisen
from environmental influences, while similarities must be genetic.
Results from these studies have contributed to the nature/nurture
debate, but have always been contentious; partly due to dubious
statistical manipulations and even fraudulent data in widely cited early
studies; partly due to the way that adoption agencies have tended to
find adoptive parents of similar culture and socio-economic backgrounds,
and partly due to the way that similarities have been exaggerated and
differences largely ignored or explained away. See nativism. two-factor
theory A model of intelligence proposed by Spearman, who

argued that any intelligent act originates from two different
intelligence factors -- a 'g' (general) factor, common to all behaviour,
which is characteristic of the individual's general functioning, and an
's' factor, specific to the problem in hand, which is the relevant skill
for that particular behaviour (e.g. mathematical, verbal, spatial and
manipulative). two-factor theory of emotion The idea that emotion
results from both our physiological state and our cognitive assessments
of what is going on. The cognitive appraisal determines the emotion we
experience, while the physiological state determines its intensity.
Contrast with somatic theory of emotion. two-point threshold A test of
tactile sensitivity that involves touching the skin with two points
close together and measuring how far apart they have to be before the
person feels two points, not one. two-process theory of memory First
proposed by William James, and developed further by Miller and by
Atkinson and Shiffrin, this theory holds that two distinct forms of
memory exist, each with its own characteristics -- ­immediate or
short-term memory (STM) and long-term memory (LTM). There is a dispute
as to how far these forms of memory are in fact distinct. See also
levels of processing, dual-memory theory, working memory.

T

two-tailed hypothesis A hypothesis that predicts a result from either
end of a frequency distribution of the null hypothesis. For example, a
prediction that scores will vary on a task from one day to the next
would be two-tailed, whereas a prediction that scores would improve from
one day to the next would be one-tailed, as only one of the two kinds of
outcomes (improving or getting worse) is predicted. two-tailed test The
use of a statistical test to investigate a two-tailed hypothesis.
Suppose the research hypothesis is that distraction by loud noise will
affect the amount remembered. When you examine the memory scores of the
distraction group, you need to test whether they are significantly
higher or lower than the mean for the control group. This may amount to
a significance level of p\<.05, meaning that their mean falls either
within the lower 2.5 per cent or the upper 2.5 per cent of the normal
distribution. Compare this judgement with that for a one-tailed test.
two-way ANOVA An analysis of variance applied to two sets of data. When
two or more data sets are analysed in this way, it becomes possible to
test for the significance not just of differences between groups, but
also of the interactions between the variables. two-way mirror A sheet
of glass with a light coating of reflective material which, when
inserted in a wall, looks like a mirror from the brightly lit side but
acts as a window from the dark side. Two-way mirrors are used to observe
without being seen so that people do not know they are being watched
(which is no longer ethically acceptable without prior consent in
psychological research). They are used in focus group research and
family therapy so that researchers

385

or therapists can take notes, discuss and undergo training without too
much interference in the group process. Type I error A statistical term
for the mistake of rejecting the null hypothesis when it should have
been retained. In experimental as opposed to correlational studies, this
would mean concluding that a difference in the dependent variable is
attributable to the independent variable when in fact it was due to
other factors (e.g. deciding that a difference in the performance of two
classes was due to different teaching methods when in fact it derived
from individual differences in the students concerned). Statistical
significance levels are usually set so as to make Type I errors
unlikely, but in some circumstances, one would tolerate a high risk of
Type I error (e.g. a cheap, safe and easy way to prevent cancer). See
also alpha level. Type II error A statistical term for the mistake of
retaining the null hypothesis when it should have been rejected. In
experimental studies, this would mean concluding that the independent
variable had no effect on the dependent variable, when in fact it did
have some influence. This is usually regarded as the less costly kind of
error (see Type I error). Note that this is not a statistical error, as
statistics merely assess the probability of relationships. The error
arises in the conclusions that are drawn from the statistics. Type A and
Type B behaviour As outlined by Friedman and Rosenman (1974), these
refer to styles of working shown by company executives. Type A
individuals are typically anxious, driven people, who find it difficult
to delegate tasks to other people, and who tend to worry about their
work when at home. Type B individuals may work just as hard

386

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

but have a more relaxed style, and they have an easy-going approach to
problems, dealing with each difficulty as it arises rather than worrying
about them all. Friedman and Rosenman found these styles to correlate
strongly with susceptibility to heart disease, Type A individuals being
far more likely to suffer heart attacks than Type B individuals. type
theory A theory of personality in which people are classified according
to common characteristics. Sheldon grouped people according to types of
physique -- their somatotype -- with personality characteristics
supposedly associated with particular kinds of bodily

build. Jung also grouped people according to personality type, most
famously introversion and extraversion, and his theory forms the basis
of the controversial MBTI personality test. The theory of the humours
provides another example of an early type theory of personality. A more
restricted approach in the study of personality is the 'narrow-band'
approach, involving the identification of a single type, such as the
authoritarian personality. typicality effect The way that categorisation
happens more quickly with a 'typical' example of the category than it
does with an example which differs more strongly.

U ultimate attribution error The way that people make attributions that
will enhance or defend their own in-group, while making more negative
attributions for out-groups. See also fundamental attributional error.
ultrasound Sound that is too highpitched to be detected by human beings.
Ultrasound can be detected by many animals, including dogs (it is the
basis for 'silent' dog whistles) and cats. It has also been shown, by
dedicated researchers, that rats emit an ultrasonic screech after
mating. See also infrasound. unaccounted variance The proportion of the
data provided by a correlation test which has not been explained by the
influence of other factors. See partial correlation. unconditional
positive regard A prerequisite for mental health and personal growth,
according to Carl Rogers. Rogers identifies two basic human needs -- the
need for positive regard from other people, and the need for
self-­actualisation. The person must satisfy both of these needs, but if
their only experience of positive regard is conditional upon 'good' or
appropriate behaviour, then much of their behaviour will be directed
towards obtaining that approval from others. This means that they will
not feel free to explore their own potential and their need for
self-actualisation because of the fear of engendering social
disapproval. However, most individuals have at least one person at some
time in their life who gives them unconditional positive regard. In that
relationship,

they can be sure of the other person's affection and warmth, and this
means that they can feel free to develop and explore new aspects of
themselves. Unconditional positive regard is usually provided by parents
during childhood, although Rogers believes that it is not tied to the
early years of life. The formation of such a basis of unconditional
positive regard is at the heart of Rogers' client-centred therapy.
unconditional respect for persons The recognition that each person is an
autonomous individual entitled to respect as a human being and the
acknowledgement of their personal integrity. Although this is the basis
of most human rights manifestos and political constitutions, it has been
under-represented in psychology. However, the increased emphasis on
ethical issues and qualitative research means that it is now becoming a
significant concept. unconditioned response (UR) A response that occurs
automatically to a particular stimulus, and does not have to be learned.
For example, pulling the hand away from an intensely hot surface is an
unconditioned response -- it happens as a reflex, without the need for
conscious recognition of what is happening. See also classical
conditioning, conditioned response, conditioned stimulus, unconditioned
stimulus. unconditioned stimulus (UCS) A stimulus that automatically
produces a response in an organism (animal or human being). The term
'unconditioned' means 'not learned' -- a stimulus of this DOI:
10.4324/9781003158899

388

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

kind will produce an effect automatically, with no learning being
necessary. It forms the basis for classical conditioning as the new,
conditioned stimulus becomes linked with the unconditioned one.
unconscious Lacking in conscious awareness. The most important use of
the term is in psychoanalytic theory as a reference to mental activity
that is not available to consciousness because it concerns material
which is too threatening to the ego to be recognised directly. Freud
believed that the unconscious has its own way of working (see primary
process) which is different from that of the conscious mind. For
example, there is no awareness of time in the unconscious, so all
threats are felt as if they were still present, even if the source of
the threat disappeared years ago. See also preconscious. unconscious
motive A motive of which the person is unaware but which continues to
have an effect on behaviour. For example, a student may underachieve
during exams owing to an unconscious rebellion against parental pressure
to succeed. Although consciously they will be trying to do as well as
possible, their chosen revision strategies are ineffectual, relying on
rote learning or simply reading through notes, which ensures that the
student does not do as well as they could. Unconsciously, they have
shied away from being too successful. Human behaviour is often
influenced by such unconscious motives, and disentangling them such that
the person becomes aware of what is going on can be one of the main
tasks of a psychotherapist. unconscious transference In eyewitness
testimony, this is the observation that a familiar but innocent face is
sometimes misidentified as the perpetrator of a crime.

underadditivity The observation that there is less brain activity when
two tasks are performed together than if each is performed separately.
underspecification The use of simplified expressions to reduce the
cognitive demands of speech processing. uniform connectedness The
observation in visual perception that objects which are next to one
another and have uniform or very similar properties (e.g. similar
colours) will be seen as linked. See also Gestalt principles of
perception, Law of Prägnanz. unilateral neglect A problem encountered in
clinical neuropsychology in which the person ignores information coming
from one side of the visual field. Although the retina and optic nerve
appear to be working normally, there is no cognitive recognition of
input from that side, and as a consequence images, appraisals and other
types of output become unbalanced. unipolar depression A depression that
is similar in form to a bipolar depression, but in which the manic phase
is absent. The person simply has the depressive periods without the
swings to mania. universal grammar The theory that there is some kind of
basic, elementary grammar underlying all human languages. It is not
known whether such a thing exists, but it is a significant article of
faith among most structural linguists and considered to be the source of
the young child's ability to acquire language easily and fluently. See
also transformational grammar. universalistic meanings Meanings of words
or phrases that are abstract or general and not tied to a specific
context or social meaning, e.g. 'fairness'. See also particularistic
meanings.

U

unplanned comparisons In analysis of variance, these are checks for
significance or other relationships which have only been identified as
useful after the analysis has been carried out. They are different from
planned comparisons, because they are affected, or even directed, by the
findings from the analysis, and therefore require more stringent
significance levels to be considered relevant. unresponsive wakefulness
syndrome See vegetative state. unusualness heuristic The use of unusual
events or findings to stimulate or

389

introduce new areas of enquiry or lines of research. Urbach Wiethe
disease A brain disease that results in the destruction of the amygdala
and areas near to it. utterance Something that is said; a simple unit of
speech or language. The term is often used when describing spoken
language, as it avoids making assumptions about the grammatical form of
what was said. Describing something as a 'sentence' or a 'phrase' might
not be accurate, but calling it an 'utterance' merely makes the
assumption that it was actually uttered.

V V1 See primary visual cortex. V4 A region just outside the striate
cortex that has been shown to respond distinctively to colour. See also
achromatopsia. V5 A region just outside the striate cortex that has been
shown to respond distinctively to movement. It is also sometimes known
as MT, which stands for the middle temporal visual cortex. See also
akinetopsia. valence A positive or negative weighting (e.g. of emotional
experience). validity Validity refers to how far a given measure
assesses what it was intended to measure. There are generally considered
to be three main types of validity -- surface or face validity,
criterion validity and construct validity. Surface validity is judged
simply in terms of how far the measure seems appropriate -- it is an
assessment of how plausible the chosen measure is. A questionnaire item
asking how people feel about sex discrimination has surface validity in
that it appears, on the surface, as though it will allow us to find out
about sex discrimination. Criterion validity occurs when the measure
being used is compared with some other measure or standard which
assesses the same thing. Criterion validity may be of two basic forms.
Predictive validity involves the measure being compared with some future
event, such as assessing the validity of IQ tests by looking at how well
they correlate with later examination success. Concurrent validity DOI:
10.4324/9781003158899

involves the measure being compared with a measure obtained at the same
time, such as comparing stated attitudes towards sex discrimination with
behavioural measures of participation in housework. More usually, a new
test may be compared with the results from an existing and widely
accepted test. Construct validity refers to how far the measure being
examined truly represents the theoretical construct that it is supposed
to measure. The most wellknown example of this is the question of how
far intelligence tests truly measure intelligence. In this case,
'intelligence' would be the theoretical construct, and the IQ score the
measure being assessed for construct validity. The assessment would be
made by examining whether people with higher IQ scores in fact behave in
ways that would be judged as more intelligent. See also ecological
validity. values Ideas or principles that are of central importance to
the individual, and which are used to form an evaluative standard
against which your own or other peoples' actions or ideas are judged.
variable Anything that varies; something that can have different values.
Any measure of performance or behaviour taken in a study is referred to
as a variable because it can have different values depending on
circumstance. If its value depends on the particular experimental
situation that was set up, then it is known as the dependent variable.
The conditions set up by an experimenter in

V

a formal experiment also vary. Typically, there is an experimental and a
control condition, and often there may be several variations of the
experimental condition. For this reason, that, too, is known as a
variable -- the independent variable. Other features of a study can also
vary (e.g. background noise or time of day). If these variables are
randomly distributed, so that they can affect any of the conditions of
the independent variable equally, then they are referred to as random
variables. However, if they are likely to affect certain conditions of
the independent variable more than others, they are known as confounding
variables. variable-interval reinforcement A reinforcement schedule in
which the delivery of a reinforcement depends on the amount of time that
has passed since the last one was given. The amount of time between each
rewarded response varies but works out to a set average within a given
time period. For instance, a VI 10 schedule would mean that an average
of 10 seconds would have to elapse after each reinforcement before
another reward could be obtained, but the actual time might be less or
more than that on any given trial. Variable-interval reinforcement
schedules tend to produce a steady response rate that is highly
resistant to extinction. See also partial reinforcement. variable-ratio
reinforcement Reinforce­ ment given during operant conditioning in such a
way that not every response made is reinforced, only a certain
proportion of them. The ratio of reinforced to nonreinforced responses
varies randomly but will average out to a preset proportion. For
instance, a reinforcement schedule of VR 10 would mean that, on average,
1 in every 10 responses would be rewarded, but the number of responses
which had to be made before each reward given would be randomly varied.
Variable-ratio reinforce-

391

ment produces a very rapid response rate that is highly resistant to
extinction. Many naturally occurring reinforcement schedules are in the
form of a variable ratio. For example, a child who demands attention may
only receive it unpredictably, and this would result in a high level of
demanding, which is very resistant to extinction. See also partial
reinforcement. variance A parametric measure of dispersion, obtained by
subtracting each score from the mean of the sample, squaring these
differences, and averaging them. Mathematically, it has the advantage
that scores which are only slightly different from the mean have very
little effect, while more extreme scores have more influence because the
differences are squared. The square root of the variance is the standard
deviation. See F ratio. variance ratio A statistical measure that
describes precisely the way that scores are spread out around the mean.
variation (i)

(ii) 

In statistics, it is the degree to which scores in a set differ from the
measure of central tendency of that set. Variation is assessed in
different ways depending on the data and can be measured using the
standard deviation or the semiinterquartile range, among others. In
evolutionary or biological theory, it is the extent to which the
individuals in a particular species differ from one another. Individual
variation is the ultimate basis for evolutionary change: if all members
of a species were identical, natural selection would be impossible.

variation ratio A descriptive statistic that expresses the proportion of
scores

392

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

in a data-set which are not modal, as opposed to those which are.
vasoconstriction Constriction of blood vessels. It occurs in the skin in
response to cold, and also in conditions of threat (when it would have
the effect of reducing bleeding from a wound). It can therefore be used
as an indicator of anxiety. vasodilation Dilation of blood vessels. It
occurs when attention is activated because it increases the blood supply
to the brain and supports the processing of information. vasopressin A
peptide hormone released by the pituitary gland, which is involved in
attachment formation and may also have a wider role in reducing anxiety.
See also oxytocin. VBM See voxel-based morphometry. vegetative state A
condition in which people appear totally inert, although measures of
brain activity indicate that they are in a state of partial arousal. It
is classified as a disorder of consciousness, and after four weeks
becomes described as a persistent vegetative state. Legal definitions
vary in different countries, but after three to six months it may be
classified as permanent, raising debates about euthanasia, although the
fact that a few people have recovered from this condition makes such
decisions tricky. The existence of brain activity means that some prefer
to call it unresponsive wakefulness syndrome rather than a vegetative
state. ventral Towards the bottom, sometimes referring to the front or
forward part of the body or body part. 'Ventral' comes from the Latin
word for 'belly'. See also dorsal, lateral, medial. ventral auditory
stream This neural pathway is concerned with identifying specific sounds
and working out what they are or mean. It passes along the

lower side of the auditory cortex to the anterior temporal lobe. See
dorsal stream, dorsal auditory stream. ventral stream Like dorsal
stream, this is a term used in two different contexts: one concerning
neural pathways in the visual system, and the other concerning neural
pathways in the auditory system, so it is important to establish the
relevant context if using or reading the term. However, both ventral
streams are concerned with identification, either of objects or sounds,
while the dorsal streams are primarily concerned with their locations.
See ventral auditory stream, ventral visual stream. ventral striatum
This is a part of the basal ganglia near the cerebellum, which is
particularly associated with the limbic circuit. It is active in
learning the emotional value of an action, and the reward value of a
decision, and has been shown to be involved in attachments and positive
emotions as well as rewards. ventral tegmental area A part of the
midbrain that is believed to be the origin of the dopaminergic system
associated with rewards. See also reward pathway. ventral visual stream
This neural pathway is primarily concerned with identifying objects and
events, regardless of where they actually are. For that reason, it is
involved in memory and semantics as well as object recognition. It forms
a pathway that extends from the visual cortex to the temporal lobes. See
also dorsal visual stream, fusiform face area, ventral stream. ventricle
Hollow areas in the brain that contain cerebrospinal fluid.
ventrolateral prefrontal cortex A part of the prefrontal cortex in the
frontal lobe of the cerebrum, located at the side and towards the bottom
of each hemisphere. This area has been shown to be

V

involved in cognitive control and rule following -- for example, keeping
attention focused on the road while driving. See also dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex. ventromedial frontal
cortex The area on the frontal lobe of the brain towards the bottom and
also towards the midline of the two hemispheres. It is thought to be
associated with decision-making. See also Iowa gambling task, somatic
marker hypothesis. ventromedial nucleus (VMH) A region of the
hypothalamus that seems to be particularly concerned with satiation.
Stimulation of this region in rats will cause them to cease eating even
when previously they have shown strong signs of hunger, and lesions in
the region result in rats becoming obese through overeating. It is
thought that some cases of human obesity may arise from some kind of
disorder within this region of the hypothalamus. ventromedial prefrontal
cortex The part of the prefrontal cortex towards the bottom of the
frontal lobe and tucked into the middle of the brain. This area responds
strongly when we are interacting with friends, but not with strangers,
and it plays an important role in emotional regulation, particularly
regulating aggressive behaviour in interaction. It is also actively
involved in processing fearful situations and evaluating risk. See also
friendship, aggression, amygdala. verbal behaviour Speech or
speechrelated actions, such as sign language. The term was made popular
by B.F. Skinner, who used it as a way of denying the relevance of
cognitive processes in speech or language. verbal communication
Communication that uses words to convey important messages.

393

verbal deprivation hypothesis The idea, put forward by Bernstein and
others, that the form of language learned by a child could be a
disadvantage when it came to learning or handling abstract forms of
information. Bernstein argued that restricted codes of language, with
their relatively limited vocabularies and reliance on shared assumptions
on the part of the listener, meant that children would find the kind of
conceptual and abstract learning which they encountered in school
inherently more difficult than children who use elaborated codes. This
idea was hotly disputed by many researchers, notably Labov, who
demonstrated that children who used highly restricted codes of language,
such as Black American English, were perfectly capable of handling
abstract and theoretical concepts, so long as those concepts were
introduced in a setting in which the children felt confident. verbal
memory (i)

(ii) 

The storing of mental images by using words as a form of coding for
information. In this case, verbal memory is simply a variation of
symbolic representation, with all the associated features and
advantages. Memory for words. Much laboratory research on memory,
especially in the early years, concentrated initially on asking people
to memorise lists of words, partly because they were able to state
clearly exactly what they remembered, which was not always easy with
visual or auditory images. However, there is considerable recent
evidence to suggest that this form of learning is qualitatively
different from the way in which people remember

394

(iii) 

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

connected prose or speech, and even more different from everyday memory.
In its most general sense, the term verbal memory includes memory for
speech and prose.

verbal skills These refer to the ability to use spoken communication in
ways which will have the desired impact on the listener. They include
aspects of non-verbal communication to do with spoken language, as well
as the effective use of speech registers. See also linguistic
intelligence, speech register. vesicle A small reservoir found at the
synaptic knob that contains a neurotransmitter, and which breaks open
and spills that neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft if it is
stimulated by the arrival of an appropriate electrical impulse.
vestibular system The sense receptors that inform the body of
orientation and balance, brought about by the arrangement of
semicircular canals in the inner ear. It is important in the two senses
of proprioception and kinaesthesia. vicarious learning Learning through
observing what happens to others. Vicarious learning was particularly
investigated by Bandura in studies of imitation in children. He found
that thick glass sheet

"deep" side

Figure 74 A visual cliff

children who saw others being rewarded for aggressive acts were more
likely to imitate them. Behaviour patterns may be acquired or abandoned
as a consequence of seeing other people being rewarded or punished for
them. See also identification. vigilance See sustained attention.
vignette A brief verbal story or account used in research and clinical
studies in order to create impressions, attitudes or assumptions that
can then be examined. visual To do with vision. visual buffer A brief
short-term memory store, proposed as a kind of echoic memory but for
visual rather than auditory information. visual cache The part of the
visuo-­spatial scratch pad that stores information about shape and
colour. See also working ­memory. visual cliff Apparatus designed by
Gibson and Walk to investigate whether animals have an innate perception
of depth. A newborn animal (e.g. a chick or goat kid) is placed on a
centre board over a sheet of strong glass that covers a steep drop. If
the animal shows fear or refuses to cross over the drop, it is assumed
that the ability to perceive depth is present. Since the animal is

centre board

checked pattern

"shallow" side

V

newly born, this cannot have been learned, and therefore must be
regarded as innate. The results are more difficult to interpret when
human babies are used since they are not mobile at birth (see Figure
74). visual cortex That part of the cerebral cortex which is responsible
for the decoding of visual information. The visual cortex is found at
the back of the brain, in the occipital lobe. Also known as the striate
cortex, this area forms the main sensory projection area for vision.
Electrical stimulation of this area produces vivid visual sensations.
visual discourse This is the set of meanings and implications which are
communicated by visual images, and can in themselves be the objects of
discourse analysis. See also semiotics, discourse. visual field The
'scene' or expanse of visual information that is encompassed by the
retina at any moment. When we are looking at something, the object of
our attention is at the centre of the visual field, and we see it most
clearly. However, we also receive a visual impression of our
surroundings, and this stretches for quite a long way around the focus
of vision. A slight movement

the Poggendorf

Figure 75 Some visual illusions

395

at the side of the visual field will usually cause us to turn slightly
and focus on a new centre of visual attention. The visual field then
covers a different, but overlapping, range of visual stimuli. visual
form agnosia The inability to recognise or identify specific forms, or
shapes, visually, even though the same forms or shapes may be recognised
by that person using touch. visual illusions Figures that appear to be
other than they really are, as a result of the ways in which the brain
interprets information. Visual illusions have been extensively studied
by psychologists, as it is thought that investigation of the errors of
perception can throw light on how normal perceptual processes work
(e.g. they formed a significant aspect of Gregory's inferential theory
of perception). The visual illusions most commonly studied by
psychologists fall into three main categories: (i) (ii) (iii)

the Müller-Lyer

geometric illusions, usually in the form of simple line drawings (see
Figure 75); illusions of movement, such as the phi phenomenon or the
waterfall effect; and colour illusions.

the Ponzo

396

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

visual perception The analysis and interpretation of information
received and processed through the visual system. See also perception.
visual representations Images or pictures which convey ideas through
graphics and illustration rather than by using words. visual search The
process of scanning, or looking for particular types or items of
information in the visual field. visual stimulation Any form of light
that reaches the retina and causes the rod or cone cells to react. The
term is usually used to refer to a visual image that is received by the
eye. See also stimulus. visual system The general name given to the set
of neurones and brain structures involved in the processing of visual
information. The visual system includes the eye, in particular the
retina, the optic nerve, the optic chiasma, the lateral geniculate
nuclei of the thalamus and the visual cortex. These areas and others are
linked by a number of pathways, the most important of which are the
dorsal visual stream and the ventral visual stream (Figure 76). See also
lateral inter-parietal area, ocular dominance columns.

Figure 76 Visual pathways

visuo-spatial scratch pad A component of working memory that is
considered to be a temporary memory store used particularly to contain
visual or graphical images for very brief periods of time. See also
inner scribe. visual word form area (VWFA) An area in the ventral visual
stream that responds preferentially to the visual presentation of
strings of letters. VMH See ventromedial nucleus. vocalisation The
production or articulation of audible speech sounds. The term is
particularly used when referring to the babbling or crying noises made
by babies before they have recognisable speech. vocational guidance
tests Psychometric tests that are designed to help people to find out
what kinds of jobs they are best suited for. voice recognition systems
Computer systems that can analyse the distinctive features of the human
voice, and respond to key words which have been spoken. The development
of voice recognition systems forms a major area of research in the field
of a­ rtificial intelli-

V

gence, but represents no easy task, owing to the wide differences in
articulation shown by different people. Systems have now been developed
that can interpret continuous speech (i.e. they do not depend on the
speaker saying each word separately), but they still need to learn the
pronunciation of the speaker. This is usually achieved by the individual
concerned reading out a set of key words and phrases, which the computer
system uses as a baseline for identifying their characteristic speech
patterns, and retains for when information is next received from that
person. See also artificial intelligence, expert systems. voice stress
analyser A device for analysing the acoustic properties of the voice,
which examines in particular the minute variations of tone and pitch
that occur as vowel sounds are produced. In a relaxed voice, there are
many of these variations, but they occur rapidly, and the overall
impression is that the sound is smooth and regular. The variations can
be seen clearly on a spectrograph, which gives a visual image of the
sound. If someone is under stress, even though they may try to keep
their voice sounding normal, and although it may sound the same to a
listener, the effort of keeping their vocal cords steady will mean that,
when analysed by a spectrograph, the sound appears to be 'flattened
out', without the normal small variations. Accordingly, the analysis of
speech by a spectrograph provides a sensitive and reliable measure of
stress. Voice stress analysers are sometimes used in an attempt to
detect when a speaker such as a politician or someone doing business on
the telephone is lying. See also galvanic skin response, polygraph.
voice timbre See timbre. Völkerpsychologie One of the earliest forms of
social psychology, which was the

397

study of the collective mind developed by Wilhelm Wundt in the 1890s.
volley principle In audition, and in several other sensory systems, the
intensity of a stimulus is signalled by means of the rate at which
electrical impulses are fired to the brain. This signal can be achieved
by each neurone firing very rapidly, but owing to the absolute and
relative refractory periods, there is a limit to how fast each neurone
can fire. In the case of very intense stimuli, the neurones fire in
relays or volleys -- a set of neurones will fire, closely followed by
another set, and then another. In this way, the brain receives a series
of impulses at a rate that would not be possible for the neurones if
each was firing singly. voluntary behaviour Behaviour that forms a
deliberate action on the part of the individual. Such behaviour is
usually contrasted with involuntary, or reflexive, behaviour. Operant
conditioning and the higher forms of learning are usually concerned with
the training of voluntary behaviour, except in the case of biofeedback.
Classical conditioning is typically concerned with involuntary
behaviour. volunteer effects Research outcomes that result from
participants trying to be helpful, or to behave in ways that they
believe are appropriate for the study because they have volunteered and
want to be cooperative. volunteer sample A method of sampling that
consists of using people who have volunteered to take part in the
research project. See also volunteer effects. voxel The 3D equivalent of
a pixel (i.e. a minimal volume-based unit). voxel-based morphometry
(VBM) A technique used to separate and measure differences in the
concentration of white and grey matter.

398

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

vulnerability model The idea that certain people have a predisposition
to conditions such as schizophrenia, but that these dispositions are not
deterministic

and the condition will only develop under certain conditions of stress
or damage. See also diathesis-stress model. VWFA See visual word form
area.

Vygotsky, Lev Seminovich (1896--1934) Vygotsky was one of the Soviet
psychologists in the early twentieth century who worked closely with the
neuropsychologist Luria in an attempt to develop a psychology in keeping
with the ideals of Marxist ideology. However, he was well informed about
European psychology, including the work of Piaget in Switzerland.
Although he managed to continue to operate effectively while alive,
after he died (of tuberculosis), his work was suppressed by Stalin's
regime, and it only re-emerged in the early 1960s. Vygotsky's approach
was distinctive in that he was concerned with the interaction of
cultural and educational influence with the child's cognitive
development. This led to the concept of the zone of proximal
development, as a result of which his theory has now become a major
influence in modern developmental psychology. His model of thought and
language showed how language was used for both cognitive structuring and
communication by the young child.

W Wada technique A method for detecting which cerebral hemisphere is
dominant for speech, which consists of anaesthetising one half of the
brain and seeing whether the person's speech is immediately affected or
not. WAIS See Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. warrior gene A term
given to a polymorphism of the monoamine oxidase A gene that is
associated with increased aggression, particularly in males. waterfall
effect A special case of a negative aftereffect involving the perception
of steady movement. If someone looks steadily at movement that occurs
consistently in one direction (e.g. if they

gaze at a waterfall), then when they look away at a stable background,
they experience an illusion of movement in the opposite direction. In
the case of the waterfall, this involves the impression that the bank or
surroundings are moving steadily upwards. If the effect is a result of
the movement of a train, then the train may appear to be moving
backwards when it stops at a station. weapon focus Studies of eyewitness
testimony have shown that some aspects of a scene (e.g. a weapon)
attract so much attention that it impairs memory of other details. See
also eyewitness testimony. Weber's law A law discovered by Ernst Weber
in the early years of psychology,

Watson, John B. (1878--1958) J.B. Watson is best known as the father of
behaviourism. His main work was conducted at Johns Hopkins University in
America, where he rose to lead the psychology department at the age of
31 years, following a scandal that caused the resignation of the
previous professor. (Another scandal forced his own resignation in 1920,
whereupon he left academic psychology and pursued a successful career in
advertising.) His work on learning in laboratory rats led him to develop
a model of stimulus--response learning, based on Pavlov's research into
conditioned reflexes, which he cited in his APA presidential address in
1915. In this address, he first introduced the concept of behaviourism.
He continued to develop the idea, and his book, Psychology from the
Standpoint of a Behaviourist (1919), could be argued to be the most
influential in the history of psychology. Another book, written with his
ex-secretary and now wife Rosalie Watson (née Rayner), entitled The
Psychological Care of Infant and Child (1928), attracted tremendous
public debate, as a result of which behaviourism became even more widely
known and influential. Much of the history of Western psychology in the
second half of the twentieth century can be viewed as attempts by
psychology to break free of the influence of behaviourism. DOI:
10.4324/9781003158899

400

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

during which psychophysics was being developed. The law states that the
amount by which a stimulus needs to be changed in order for the change
to be noticeable (the just noticeable difference) is a constant
proportion of the strength of the stimulus. The value of this constant
proportion is known as Weber's constant. In practical terms, the
implication of Weber's law is that stronger stimuli will need to
increase or decrease by greater amounts than do smaller stimuli before
they are perceived as being different. See also Fechner's law, power
law. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) One of the major
intelligence tests, produced by David Wechsler. Although it produces an
overall IQ score, this can be subdivided under two general headings of
verbal IQ and performance IQ, each of which is composed of different
sets of items (six sets for verbal and five sets for performance IQ). In
principle, it is possible to identify specific kinds of disability or
deficit using such tests, but in practice, for differences between
subset scores to be large enough to be significant, the deficit in the
person's performance would be obvious anyway. Wechsler Intelligence
Scale for Children (WlSC) A version of the WAIS designed for use with
children. It will measure IQ from 6 to 16 years. WEG Acronym for warmth,
empathy and genuineness -- the three therapist attributes that have been
proposed as the most important factors in the effectiveness of
psychotherapy. WEG is thought to be more important than any specific
therapeutic technique. WEIRD samples Samples which have been drawn
exclusively from populations from Western Educated Industrial Rich and
Democratic socie-

ties. Extensive research has shown that these are in almost all respects
not representative of humanity in general. See representative sample.
well-being A positive condition of mental and physical health, often
identified as a goal in positive psychology. Wernicke's area The area of
the cerebral cortex that is particularly concerned with the
interpretation and understanding of language. Damage to this area
produces aphasia or difficulties in the comprehension of speech. See
also angular gyrus, Broca's area, language areas, planum temporale.
Westermarck effect The tendency not to feel sexually attracted as an
adult towards someone who was familiar in the earliest years of life
(e.g. a close sibling). See incest. white matter The term used to refer
to the densely packed masses of myelinated nerve fibres that are found
in the central nervous system. In the brain, this is found on the
inside, with grey matter (consisting of unmyelinated fibres and cell
bodies) covering the outer surface. In the spinal cord, this is
reversed, the white matter being on the outside and the grey matter
being on the inside, surrounding the central canal. Whorfian hypothesis
See Sapir--Whorf hypothesis. Wilcoxon signed-ranks test A statistical
test used for repeated-measures designs and ordinal data to identify
significant differences between two samples. WlSC See Wechsler
Intelligence Scale for Children. withdrawal symptoms Temporary physical
disorders that occur as a result of someone failing to receive their
normal dose of a drug on which they have

W

become dependent. Withdrawal symptoms can be quite severe, depending
both on the drug concerned and on the extent to which the person has
become habituated to the drug. Many ordinary drugs, such as caffeine,
can produce strong withdrawal symptoms if the individual has previously
had a high regular intake and suddenly ceases to take the drug
altogether. The existence or otherwise of withdrawal symptoms is one of
the main indicators of physiological addiction. within-group variance A
statistical measure of the variation within a group. It may be used to
indicate something about a population, or as a measure of variability in
the scores within an experimental condition, especially when using an
analysis of variance. within-subjects design A form of research design
that takes two or more sets of measures from the same individuals,
thereby controlling for individual differences such as age or
personality. See also related-measures design. Wisconsin card-sorting
test This is a test of executive functioning in which people are asked
to match up cards containing numbers, shapes and colours, according to
one of those three criteria. After a few goes, they are asked to change
criteria. Typically, people with prefrontal cortex damage show
perseveration (i.e. they fail to shift from the previous criterion to
the new one). wolf children Children found living in the wild, whose
behaviour led people to believe that they had been brought up by wolves.
Also known as feral children, such children were of great interest to
psychologists in order to identify critical periods for abilities such
as language acquisition. However, it is suspected that in most cases,
the children had

401

been abandoned relatively recently because of severe mental disturbance,
and that it is that disturbance which is responsible for their unusual
behaviour and restricted abilities. word blindness See alexia. word
length effect The finding that verbal memory span is decreased if longer
words are presented. word meaning deafness A specific condition in which
the person has impaired understanding of spoken language, although they
have no difficulty understanding the written word. word recognition
threshold A measure of the minimum degree of exposure to a word
necessary for someone to identify it. The normal procedure is to vary
the time during which the word is exposed. Other conditions could
involve presenting the word more or less faintly, or at different
distances. The threshold is usually taken to be the point at which the
word is recognised 50 per cent of the time, as the exposure necessary
will vary according to the conditions under which the word is presented.
Recognition thresholds were traditionally measured using a
tachistoscope, but modern research is more likely to utilise
computerised presentation. word superiority effect The way that letters
can be detected more rapidly if they are presented in the context of a
word than if they are presented in a nonsense or random letter string.
See also word recognition threshold. working memory An alternative to
short-term memory, proposed by Baddeley and Hitch, who put forward the
idea that immediate memory may be like a computer's working memory. The
basic working memory system comprises a central executive, a
visuo-spatial

402

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

scratch pad, an articulatory loop and an input register. See also
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. working memory capacity The amount of
information that can be held in working memory.

worrying Cognitive activity characterised by repetitive
anxiety-provoking thoughts. It is one of the main symptoms of anxiety
disorders.

Wundt, Wilhelm M. (1832--1920) Wundt is widely regarded as the 'father
of experimental psychology'. He became Professor of Psychology at
Leipzig University in 1875 and established the first experimental
psychology laboratory, where he investigated a number of different
topics, the most well known of which were investigations of the role of
sensations, association and attention on consciousness, which led to the
publication of his textbook Grundzüge der physiologische Psychologie
(Fundamentals of Psychology) in 1873. Less well known in Britain and
America, however, were a series of investigations in social psychology,
which led to his 10-volume Völkerpsychologie, published between 1900 and
1920. His wide interests, his development of systematic research
methods, and his central influence in academic circles meant that many
others were attracted to his laboratory, and took his approach as the
model for the new discipline.

X x A term normally used to represent a raw score in a set of data,
usually plotted as the abscissa (or horizontal axis) of a graph. The
term is also used for any unknown score or the value of an independent
variable. X An abbreviation often used to refer to the mean of a set of
scores. x-axis The horizontal axis of a graph or chart. X-chromosome A
distinctive chromosome, named for its appearance under the microscope,
which carries information that directs the development of sexual
characteristics. In women, the X-chromosome is paired with another,

similarly structured X-chromosome, but in men, it is paired with a
small, truncated chromosome known as a Y-chromosome (Figure 77). X-ray
tomography See tomography. xenophobia An irrational and excessive fear
of strangers or strange (foreign) cultures, which can become converted
into intense, jingoistic patriotism and/ or racial or cultural
prejudice. XX An abbreviated reference to the combination of chromosomes
shown by women. Men are referred to as XY. See also X-chromosome,
Y-chromosome. XXY syndrome ­syndrome.

female

male

XX

XY

See

Klinefelter's

Figure 77 X and Y chromosomes

DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

Y y A term used for scores from a second set of data usually plotted as
the ordinate (or vertical axis) of a graph; x is the term used to refer
to those from the first set. See also z-axis. y-axis The vertical axis
of a graph or chart. See also ordinate, abscissa. Y-chromosome A
distinctively shaped chromosome whose presence as one of a pair
indicates that an individual is male. The other of the pair will be an
X-chromosome. See also sex-linked trait. Yates's correction This is a
statistical correction used in a 2 × 2 chi-square test, which allows for
the fact that human behaviour is generally complex and multivariate, so
attempting to describe it using such a limited number of categories is
much too simplistic to represent the samples accurately. See also
representative sample. YAVIS A term used to describe the typical client
considered suitable for psychoanalysis. The term stands for 'young,
attractive, verbal, intelligent and suc-

cessful'. Those who do not fit these criteria are frequently allocated
to other less expensive forms of treatment (e.g. behaviour therapy).
Although this idea is only semi-serious, it contains more than a grain
of truth in terms of the types of people with whom many psychoanalysts
feel they can be most effective. Yerkes--Dodson law An expression of the
relationship between a person's state of physiological arousal, and his
or her performance of a task or job. When plotted on a graph, it takes
the form of an inverted U-curve. Up to a point, increased arousal
improves performance, but beyond that point, further increases in
arousal will cause performance to deteriorate. Furthermore, the shape of
the curve will vary with the complexity of the task, simple tasks being
less affected by or even benefitting from high levels of arousal, and
showing a wider, flatter curve, and complex tasks reaching their optimal
level at a relatively lower state of arousal, increasing and falling off
more sharply (Figure 78).

standard of performance

optimum level

level of arousal

Figure 78 The Yerkes--Dodson law DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

Y

Yerkish An artificial 'language' developed during experiments in
chimpanzee language training at the Yerkes primate laboratory in
Georgia, USA. Initially developed for use with a chimpanzee named Lana,
it consists of a series of symbols used in a fairly arbitrary fashion to
stand for concepts and conjunctions. There is considerable debate as to
just how far Yerkish can be regarded as a language rather than just an
arbitrary set of symbols. yoked control An experimental set-up in which
the experimental group and the control group are paired, such that any
member of the experimental group has one of the control group receiving
exactly the same experiences. The pairs are linked ('yoked') in such a
way that

405

what happens to one also happens to the other (e.g. if one receives a
reward or punishment, the other does, too). This makes it easier for the
experimenter to ensure that any differences which arise between the two
are produced by the independent variable, rather than by variations in
experience. Young--Helmholtz theory A theory of colour vision which
argues that colour is perceived through the stimulation of receptors
which are sensitive to red, green and blue light. Other colours can be
perceived by combinations of these three, in the same way as the
coloured dots on the screen of a colour television produce a complete
spectrum by combination. See also opponent processing.

Z z-axis The axis of a three-dimensional graph that is at right angles
to both the x-axis and the y-axis. z-score A measure of how much a
specific score differs from the mean of its group. Each raw score is
converted to a standard score, the z-score, which is the number of
standard deviations by which the score differs from the mean. In a
normal distribution, knowing the z-score gives a direct measure of the
significance level. For example, a z-score of 1.96 identifies the point
in a normal distribution beyond which only 5 per cent of the scores will
fall. Zeigarnik effect A consistent feature of memory which is that a
task or activity is more likely to be remembered if it has been
interrupted before completion. zeitgeber A German word meaning
'time-giver'. The term is used mainly in studies of circadian rhythms,
referring to environmental events that provide the organism with a
precise timing to which

Figure 79 Zener cards DOI: 10.4324/9781003158899

their innate rhythms can be attached. For example, the daily alternation
of light and dark is a zeitgeber that enables the circadian rhythm to
adjust to precisely 24 hours. zeitgeist The 'spirit of the times' -- in
other words, the social and cultural climate within which an event
occurs or a theory is developed. Scientific theories are very rarely, if
ever, independent of their cultural climate, and the form that a theory
takes and the information which counts as acceptable evidence for a
theory can vary dramatically from one period to the next. By and large,
those scientific theories that become popular tend to be the theories
which 'fit' the zeitgeist best. See also paradigm. Zener cards A
standard set of cards used in experimental studies of extrasensory
perception. There are usually 25 cards, each bearing one of five simple
symbols: cross, wave, circle, star or square (Figure 79). In a typical
experiment, research participants are asked to guess

Z

which pattern is on a card that another participant (out of sight) is
looking at. These cards are also sometimes called Rhine cards See also
parapsychology. zero-order intentionality A level of intentional stance
in which it is assumed that the actor is acting directly (e.g.
instinctively) without having any particular beliefs or desires.
zero-sum game In games theory, the class of games in which a fixed
quantity of resources is distributed between the players so that for
anyone to do better, someone else must do worse. Zero-sum games are of
particular interest to social psychologists because it has been found
that people may operate according to the same principles even when they
are not in a zero-sum situation. That is, people will sometimes work
hard to ensure that others fare worse than them even if this has no
effect on their own gains, and in some cases may even mean sacrificing
them.

407

the area of competence that a child is ready to develop into if provided
with the appropriate environmental and social stimulation. It is
identified as that which children cannot learn on their own, but would
be able to learn with appropriate help. It is important that parents and
educators work within the ZPD because this is where the development of
competence can occur. zoology The study of animals. Zoology includes the
study of animal physiology and animal behaviour. In the latter area, it
frequently overlaps with comparative psychology. zoom fatigue The mental
and physiological exhaustion brought about by excessive hours spent
videoconferencing. zoom lens model The idea that our visual attention
can be either narrowed and tightly focused or broadened out -- much like
the zoom lens on a camera. zoomed out

Zöllner illusion A particularly powerful visual illusion in which
parallel lines appear to converge as a result of being crossed by short
diagonal lines set at angles to the main ones (Figure 80).

(i) 

zone of proximal development (ZPD) The term proposed by Vygotsky for

(ii) 

A mechanism, for example with a camera, of expanding the field of view.
Often used as a metaphor for taking a wider perspective on a problem A
specific state of exhaustion resulting from too much time

Zimbardo, Philip (1933--) Philip Zimbardo is a social psychologist best
known for the Stanford Prison experiment, a prison simulation in which
he showed that interpersonal brutality is not particularly dependent on
manifest personality, but under certain conditions could be manifest by
people who would normally not act in such ways. Zimbardo went on to
study shyness and other features of social interaction, and also
conducted an extensive research programme investigating how ordinary
people become capable of torture. More recently, his research has
focused on the more positive area of how ordinary people can become
heroes. See also deindividuation.

408

A--Z of psychology and neuroscience

Figure 80 The Zöllner illusion in teaching and meetings conducted using
videoconferencing.

of ­psychoanalysis after his break with Freud. Jung's method is referred
to as analytical psychology.

ZPD See zone of proximal development.

zygote An ovum, or egg, which has been fertilised and so is capable of
developing into a young member of the species.

Zurich school The group of psychoanalysts who joined Carl Gustav Jung as
he developed an alternative school

Appendix 1 Key references

Adler, A. (1930) What Life Could Mean to You. Center City, MN: Hazelden.
Adorno, T.W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D.J. and Sanford, R.N.
(1950) The Authoritarian Personality. New York: Harper & Row. Ainsworth,
M.D.S. (1979) Attachment as related to mother--infant interaction.
Advances in the Study of Behaviour, 9, 2--52. Allport, G. (1937)
Personality: A Psychological Interpretation. New York: Holt, Rinehart, &
Winston. Ames, A. (1951) Visual perception and the rotating trapezoidal
window. Psychological Monographs, 65(7), 324. Argyle, M. (1987) The
Psychology of Happiness. London: Methuen. Asch, S.E. (1956) Studies of
independence and conformity: a minority of one against a unanimous
majority. Psychological Monographs, 70(9), 1--70. Atkinson, R.C. and
Shiffrin, R.M. (1971) The control of short-term memory. Scientific
American, 224, 81--90. Baddeley, A.D. and Hitch, G. (1974) Working
memory. In: G.H. Bower (ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation
(vol. 8), pp. 47--90. New York: Academic Press. Bandura, A. (1977)
Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. Bandura, A.
(1997) Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New York: W.H. Freeman &
Co. Bartlett, F.C. (1932) Remembering: A Study in Experimental and
Social Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bateson, G.,
Jackson, D., Haley, J. and Weakland, J. (1956) Towards a theory of
schizophrenia. Behavioural Science, 1(4), 251--64. Baumrind, D. (1964)
Some thoughts on the ethics of research: after reading Milgram's
'Behavioural study of obedience'. American Psychologist, 19, 421--3.
Beck, A.T. (1976) Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders. New
York: International Universities Press. Berkowitz, L. (1965) The concept
of aggressive drive. In: L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology 2. 301--329. New York: Academic Press. Berlyne, D.
(1960) Conflict, Arousal and Curiosity. New York: McGraw Hill. Berne, E.
(1973) Games People Play. Harmondsworth: Penguin. Bernstein, B. (1964).
Elaborated and restricted codes: Their social origins and some
consequences. In: J.J. Gumperz and A.D. Hymes (eds), The ethnography of
Communication 66(6), Part 2, 55--59, American anthropologist, series.
Ardent Media (Reprint 1967). Binet, A. and Simon, T. (1905) Méthodes
nouvelles pour le diagnostic du niveau intellectuel des anormaux.
L'Année Psychologique, 11, 245--336. Bowlby, J. (1951) Child Care and
the Growth of Love. Harmondsworth: Penguin. Bowlby, J. (1969) Attachment
and Loss 1: Attachment. London: Hogarth.

410

Key references

Broadbent, D.E. (1958) Perception and Communication. Oxford: Pergamon.
Brown, R. (1973) A First Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press. Bruce, V. and Young, A. (1986) Understanding face recognition.
British Journal of Psychology, 77, 305--27. Bruce, V. and Young, A.
(2012) Face Perception. London: Psychology Press. Bruner, J.S. (1973)
Beyond the Information Given: Studies in the Psychology of Knowing. New
York: W.W. Norton. Burt, C. (1958) The inheritance of mental abilities.
American Psychologist, 13, 1--15. Campbell, H.J. (1973) The Pleasure
Areas. London: Eyre Methuen. Cannon, W.B. (1929) Bodily Changes in Pain,
Hunger, Fear and Rage. New York: Appleton. Cattell, R.B. (1946)
Description and Measurement of Personality. New York: World Book
Company. Chomsky, N. (1957) Syntactic Structures. The Hague, The
Netherlands: Moulton. Craik, I.F.M. and Lockhart, R.S. (1972) Levels of
processing: a framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behaviour, 11, 671--84. Cumming, E. and Henry, W.H. (1961)
Growing Old: The Process of Disengagement. New York: Basic Books. de
Bono, E. (1966) Lateral Thinking. Harmondsworth: Penguin. Deutsch, J.A.
and Deutsch, D. (1963) Attention: some theoretical considerations.
Psychological Review, 70, 80--90. Donaldson, M. (1978) Children's Minds.
London: Fontana/Collins. Dunn, J. (1988) The Beginnings of Social
Understanding. Oxford: Blackwell. Ebbinghaus, H. (1885) Memory: A
Contribution to Experimental Psychology. Republished 1964. New York:
Dover. Ekman, P. and Friesen, W.V. (1969) The repertoire of non-verbal
behaviour: categories, origins, usage and coding. Semiotica, 1, 49--98.
Ellis, A. (1977) The basic clinical theory of rational-emotive therapy.
In: A. Ellis and R. Grieger (eds), Handbook of Rational--Emotive
Therapy. 3--34. New York: Springer. Erikson, E.H. (1963) Childhood and
Society (2nd edn). New York: Norton. Eysenck, H.J. (1953) The Structure
of Human Personality. London: Methuen. Eysenck, H.J. (1985) The Decline
and Fall of the Freudian Empire. Harmondsworth: Penguin. Fairbairn,
W.R.D. (1952) An Object-Relations Theory of the Personality. New York:
Basic Books. Festinger, L. (1954) A theory of social comparison
processes. Human Relations, 7, 117--40. Festinger, L. (1957) A Theory of
Cognitive Dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson. Festinger, L.,
Riecken, H.W. and Schachter, S. (1956) When Prophecy Fails. Minneapolis:
University of Minneapolis Press. Freud, S. (1900) The Interpretation of
Dreams (trans. J. Strachey, 1953). London: Allen & Unwin. Freud, S.
(1901) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life. Republished 1953. In: J.
Strachey (ed.), The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works
of Sigmund Freud Vol 6. London: Hogarth. Friedman, M. and Rosenman, R.H.
(1974) Type A Behaviour. New York: Knopf. Galton, F. (1883) Enquiries
into Human Faculty and Its Development. London: J.M. Dent & Co. Galton,
F. (1884) Hereditary Genius. New York: Appleton. Garcia, J. and
Koelling, R.A. (1966) The relation of cue to consequence in avoidance
learning. Psychonomic Science, 4, 123--4. Gardner, H. (1985) Frames of
Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences. London: Paladin. Garfinkel,
H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall. Gesell, A. (1929) Maturation and infant behaviour patterns.
Psychological Review, 36, 307--19. Gesell, A. and Ilg, F.L. (1949) Child
Development. New York: Harper.

Key references

411

Gibson, E.J. (1969) Principles of Perceptual Learning and Development.
New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts. Gibson, E.J. and Walk, R.D. (1960) The
visual cliff. Scientific American, 202, 64--71. Gibson, J.J. (1950) The
Perception of the Visual World. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. Gould,
S.J. (1981) The Mismeasure of Man. New York: Norton. Gregory, R.L.
(1966) Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing. New York: McGraw Hill.
Harré, R. (1979) Social Being. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Haxby, J.V.,
Hoffman, E.A. and Gobbini, M.I. (2000) The distributed human neural
system for face perception. Trends in Cognitive Science, 4(6), 223--33.
Hayes, N.J. (1995) The magic of sociobiology. In: N.J. Hayes (ed.),
Psychology in Perspective. 141--161. Basingstoke: Macmillan. Hayes, N.J.
(1998) Psychological processes in organisational cultures I: social
representations and organisational semiotics. Human Systems, 9(1),
59--65. Hebb, D.O. (1949) The Organisation of Behaviour. New York:
Wiley. Heider, F. (1944) Social perception and phenomenal causality.
Psychological Review, 51, 358--74. Hering, E. (1878) Outlines of a
Theory of the Light Sense. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Herzberg, F. (1959) The Motivation to Work. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Hewstone, M. (1989) Causal Attribution: From Cognitive Processes to
Collective Beliefs. Oxford: Blackwell. Holmes, T.H. and Rahe, R.H.
(1967) The social readjustment rating scale. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research, 11, 213--18. Hubel, D.H. and Wiesel, T.N. (1979) Brain
mechanisms of vision. Scientific American, 241(3), 150--62. James, W.
(1890) Principles of Psychology. New York: Holt. Jensen, A.R. (1969) How
much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement? Harvard Educational
Review, 33, 1--123. Jung, C.G. (1933) Psychological Types. New York:
Kegan Paul. Jung, C.G. (1964) Man and His Symbols. New York: Doubleday.
Kelley, H.H. (1973) The processes of causal attribution. American
Psychologist, 28, 107--28. Kelly, D. (1955) The Psychology of Personal
Constructs. New York: Norton. Kempe, C.H., Silverman, F.N., Steele,
B.F., Droegemueller, W. and Silver H.K. (1962) The battered child
syndrome. Journal of the American Medical Association, 181, 71. Klein,
M. (1932) The Psycho-Analysis of Children. London: Hogarth. Kohlberg, L.
(1969) Stages in the Development of Moral Thought and Action. New York:
Holt, Rinehart, & Winston. Köhler, W. (1925) The Mentality of Apes. New
York: Harcourt Brace. Kruglanski, A.W. (1980) Lay epistemo-logic,
process and contents: another look at attribution theory. Psychological
Review, 87, 70--87. Labov, W. (1972) Language in the Inner City: Studies
in the Black English Vernacular. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press. Laing, R.D. (1965) The Divided Self. Harmondsworth:
Penguin. Lamarck, J.B. (1914) Zoological Philosophy. London: Macmillan.
Lashley, K.S. (1929) Brain Mechanisms and Intelligence. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press. Latané, B. (1981) The psychology of social
impact. American Psychologist, 36, 343--56. Lewin, K. (1936) Principles
of Topological Psychology. New York: McGraw Hill. Lewin, K. (1946)
Action research and minority problems. Journal of Social Issues, 2(4),
34--46. Locke, J. (1700) An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (4th
edn). Republished in 1959. New York: Dover.

412

Key references

Loftus, G.R. and Loftus, E.F. (1975) Human Memory: The Processing of
Information. New York: Halsted Press. Lorenz, K. (1958) The evolution of
behaviour. Scientific American, 199(6), 67--78. Lorenz, K. (1966) On
Aggression. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World. Marler, P.R. (1982) Avian
and primate communication: the problem of natural categories.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioural Reviews, 6, 87--94. Marler, P.R. (2005)
Ethology and the origins of behavioral endocrinology. Hormones and
Behavior, 47, 493--50. Marr, D. (1982) Vision: A Computational
Investigation into the Human Representation and Processing of Visual
Information. San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman & Co. Maslow, A.H. (1970)
Motivation and Personality (2nd edn). New York: Harper & Row.
McGarrigle, J. and Donaldson, M. (1974) Conservation accidents.
Cognition, 3, 341--50. Milgram, S. (1973) Obedience to Authority.
London: Tavistock. Miller, G.A. (1956) The magical number seven, plus or
minus two: some limits on our capacity for processing information.
Psychological Review, 63, 81--97. Miller, G.A., Galanter, E. and
Pribram, K.H. (1960) Plans and the Structure of Behaviour. New York:
Holt, Reinhart & Winston. Mischel, W. (1968) Personality and Assessment.
New York: Wiley. Monitz, E. (1936) Tentatives opératoires dans le
traitement de certaines psychoses. Paris: Masson. Moreno, J.L. (1946)
Psychodrama Volume 1. Beacon, NY: Beacon House. Moscovici, S. (1980)
Towards a theory of conversion behaviour. In: L. Berkowitz (ed.),
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 13, 209--39. Moscovici, S.
(1984) The phenomenon of social representations. In: R.M. Farr and S.
Moscovici (eds), Social Representations. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. Neisser, U. (1976) Cognition and Reality: Principles and
Implications of Cognitive Psychology. San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman.
Osgood, C.E. (1966) Dimensionality of the semantic space for
communication via facial expression. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology,
7, 1--30. Pavlov, I.P. (1927) Conditioned Reflexes: An Investigation of
the Physiological Activity of the Cerebral Cortex. New York: Dover.
Perls, F., Hefferline, R.F. and Goodman, P. (1951) Gestalt Therapy.
Harmondsworth: Penguin. Piaget, J. (1952) The Origins of Intelligence in
Children. New York: International Universities Press. Piaget, J. (1959)
The Language and Thought of the Child. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Popper, K. (1959) The Logic of Scientific Discoveries. London:
Hutchinson. Reich, W. (1933) The Mass Psychology of Fascism. London:
Condor Books. Rogers, C.R. (1951) Client-Centred Therapy. London:
Constable. Rogers, C.R. (1961) On Becoming a Person: A Therapist's View
of Psychotherapy. London: Constable. Rosch, E.H. (1973) Natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 328--50. Rosenthal, R. and Fode,
K.L. (1963) The effect of experimenter bias on the performance of the
albino rat. Behavioural Science, 8, 183--9. Rotter, J.B. (1966)
Generalised expectancies for internal vs external control of
reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80(1), 1--28. Rutter, M. (1981)
Maternal Deprivation Reassessed (2nd edn). Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Schank, R. and Abelson, R. (1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals and
Understanding: An Enquiry into Human Knowledge. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schjelderuppe-Ebbe, T. (1922) Beiträge zur Sozialpsychologie des
Haushuhns. Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 88, 225--52. Seligman, M.E.P.
(1975) Helplessness: On Depression, Development and Death. San
Francisco, CA: Freeman.

Key references

413

Seligman, M.E.P. (1991) Learned Optimism. New York: Knopf. Seligman,
M.E.P. and Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An
introduction. American Psychologist, 55(1), 5--14. Selye, H. (1956) The
Stress of Life. New York: McGraw Hill. Sheldon, W.H. (1954) Atlas of
Men: A Guide for Somatotyping the Human Male at All Ages. New York:
Harper & Row. Simons, D.J. and Chabris, C.F. (1999) Gorillas in our
midst: sustained inattentional blindness for dynamic events Perception,
28, 1059--74. Skinner, B.F. (1938) The Behaviour of Organisms. New York:
Appleton-Century Crofts. Skinner, B.F. (1948) Walden Two. New York:
Macmillan. Skinner, B.F. (1957) Verbal Behaviour. New York:
Appleton--Century--Crofts. Skinner, B.F. (1972) Beyond Freedom and
Dignity. Harmondsworth: Penguin. Spearman, C. (1923) The Nature of
'Intelligence' and the Principles of Cognition. London: Macmillan.
Sperry, R.W. (1964) The great cerebral commissure. Scientific American,
210, 42--52. Spitz, R.A. (1945) Hospitalism: an inquiry into the genesis
of psychiatric conditions in early childhood. Psychoanalytic Studies of
Childhood, 1, 53--74. Sternberg, R.J. (1977) Intelligence,
Information-Processing and Analogical Reasoning: The Componential
Analysis of Human Abilities. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Sternberg, R.J.
(1985) Beyond IQ: A Triarchic Theory of Human Intelligence. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. Sternberg, R.J. (1987) The Triangle of Love.
New York: Basic Books. Stevens, S.S. (1957) On the psychophysical law.
Psychological Review, 64(3), 153--81. Stratton, P.M., Heard, D., Hanks,
H., Munton, A., Brewin, C.R. and Davidson, C.R. (1986) Coding causal
beliefs in natural discourse. British Journal of Social Psychology, 25,
299--313. Tajfel, H. (1981) Human Groups and Social Categories: Studies
in Social Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Talairach,
J. and Tournoux, P. (1988) A Co-Planar Stereotactic Atlas of the Human
Brain. Stuttgart: Thieme Verlag. Taylor, F.W. (1911) The Principles of
Scientific Management. New York: Harper & Row. Tennov, D. (1979) Love
and Limerence: The Experience of Being in Love. New York: Stein & Day.
Thorndike, E.L. (1911) Animal Intelligence: Experimental Studies. New
York: Macmillan. Thurstone, L.L. (1938) Primary Mental Abilities.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Tinbergen, N. (1953) Social
Behaviour in Animals. London: Methuen. Toffler, A. (1970) Future Shock.
New York: Random House. Tolman, E.C. (1932) Purposive Behaviour in
Animals and Man. New York: Century. Torrance, E.P. (1972)
Characteristics of creatively gifted children and youth. In: E.P. Trapp
and P. Himmelstein (eds), Readings on the Exceptional Child: Research
and Theory. 273--291. New York: Appleton--Century--Crofts. Triesman, A.
(1964) Verbal cues, language and meaning in attention. American Journal
of Psychology, 77, 206--14. Vernon, P.E. (1971) The Structure of Human
Abilities. London: Methuen. Vygotsky, L.S. (1962) Thought and Language.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Ward, J. (2015) The Student's Guide to
Cognitive Neuroscience (3rd edn). London: Psychology Press. Watson, J.B.
(1924) Behaviorism. New York: J.B. Lippencott. Watson, J.B. and Rayner,
R. (1920) Conditioned emotional reactions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 3, 1--14. Werner, H. (1957) The concept of development from
a comparative and organismic point of view. In D. Harris (ed.), The
Concept of Development. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

414

Key references

Whorf, B.L. (1956) Language, Thought and Reality. New York: MIT Press.
Whyte, W.F. (1934) Street Corner Society: The Social Structure of an
Italian Slum. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Wiener, N. (1948)
Cybernetics: or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Woollett, K. and Maguire, E.A. (2011)
Acquiring 'the knowledge' of London's layout drives structural brain
changes. Current Biology, 21(24), 2109--14. Wundt, W. (1900--1920)
Völkerpsychologie: Eine Untersuchung der Entwicklungsgesetze von
Sprache, Mythus und Sitte, 10 vols. Leipzig: Engelmann. Wynne-Edwards,
V.C. (1962) Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behaviour. New York:
Hafner. Zimbardo, P. (2007) The Lucifer Effect: Understanding How Good
People Turn Evil. New York: Random House.

Appendix 2 Study notes -- how to write an essay An essay has two
purposes. One is that it is an attempt to answer a question (in French,
essayer means "to try"). The other is to show off to the person marking
the essay just how much you know about the subject and how good you are
at organising that knowledge.

Work out your answer So the first thing you need to consider when
choosing an essay topic is what your answer should be. Not the details
of your answer -- its essence. Ask yourself what you would say if a
friend asked you that question in the cafeteria (it may be unlikely, but
that's what your imagination is for!). If your answer would be 'I
dunno', then that probably isn't the right essay question for you --
either that or you haven't really thought about it enough. To write a
good essay, you need to be able to adopt a position -- to give an answer
to the question -- and then describe arguments or evidence which show
that your position or answer is the best one to adopt or at least a
really good one. The idea is to convince other people that you really
know what you are talking about. That means giving your essay a good,
clear structure, and making sure that what you have said all leads to
the conclusion you draw -- in other words, your answer. Essays work best
if you plan them out. If you don't, you can end up just rambling, with
no clear direction. If you and the person reading your essay don't know
what your question is, you'll never know if you have succeeded in
answering it! But once you know the short answer to your essay question,
you know where your arguments are going, and what your conclusion will
be. Your plan will set those out, which helps you to stay on track.

Select your evidence Your essay needs to be organised, and for that, you
need to use paragraphs. So the best way to plan your essay is as a list
of paragraphs. Each paragraph should make just one point, and back it up
with some kind of argument or evidence -- whatever counts as important
in the particular subject you are taking. For example, in English
literature, the evidence you would use would be reference to things in
the text or direct quotations. In creative writing, it would be examples
drawn from your ideas, imagery or experience. In history, it would be

416

Study notes -- how to write an essay

reference to source material of some kind. In psychology, it would
always include reference to psychological research, or critiques that
have challenged research evidence. Sometimes an important part of the
essay question includes discussing a theory, where critical evaluation
becomes part of the evidence, along with relevant research. Learning any
subject involves learning what counts as evidence and what doesn't. By
the time you are writing an essay, you should have a pretty fair idea of
what kind of evidence matters for that particular subject. You are
likely to find some of that material from internet sources. But remember
that there's all sorts of rubbish on the internet, as well as good
information, so you have to be very clear which is which. Make sure that
you only use material which has come from, and has been attributed to, a
reliable source. And if you take material directly from an existing
publication or internet source, even if you make small changes to the
wording, make sure you clearly attribute it. For example, you might
write: 'discussing research ethics, Hayes says "all types of observation
... raise ethical issues"' (Hayes, 2021, p. 86). Failing to identify the
text as not having been written by you is plagiarism. That's basically
educational theft, and it is taken very seriously. It will almost
certainly be detected because examiners and lecturers use efficient
software which trawls the net and identifies identical material.
Plagiarism always results in some kind of penalty, which could make all
the difference to your overall grade. Also, we are sure this won't apply
to you, but paying to have the essay written for you is another form of
educational malpractice, which is almost always detected and carries the
most severe penalties.

Plan your paragraphs A paragraph states an idea and then amplifies it.
Usually, it will be between 50 and 100 words long. (How long paragraphs
should be all depends on how much you need to say to amplify the point
that it is making.) Knowing this means that you can work out how many
paragraphs you will need, according to how long your essay is supposed
to be. A 500-word essay will usually need about eight paragraphs, while
a 1,500-word essay will need about 12--18 or so. If it's an exam essay,
begin by working out how much time you are supposed to give to the
essay. In some exams, you can calculate this by how many marks are given
to the question, by comparison with the other questions you have to
answer. In all-essay exams, just divide the time of the exam by the
number of essays you need to write. Then deduct five minutes per essay
for planning (believe us, it's worth it!) and allow five minutes for
writing each paragraph. So 45 minutes of exam time means eight
paragraphs plus five minutes' planning time. Bearing that in mind, you
can make up your essay plan as a list of paragraphs. Two of them are
done for you: the first, where you introduce the subject and outline the
main argument you are making -- if you like, where you give the short
answer to the question -- and the last, where you sum up how all that
evidence shows that your short answer was the best answer for this
question. In between comes the detail of your essay, so on the plan,
number your paragraphs and list briefly what each point is going to be.
Don't go into any details -- a one-word reminder is plenty. Once you've
got your plan, you can expand all the points into paragraphs, and while
you're writing you'll know pretty well what you are going to say next.
That

Study notes -- how to write an essay

417

means that you can keep your arguments clear and incisive, and avoid
unnecessary repetition. Remember, though, that in many essays, you don't
just want to give your own arguments -- you also need to show that you
are aware of any opposing ideas or other arguments which might lead to
different conclusions. A paragraph describing one of those would begin
by stating what it was (to prove that you know it) and then give
evidence or arguments for why it is wrong or irrelevant to this
particular question. So some paragraphs will be criticising other ideas,
and some will be backing up your own. In a well-balanced essay, this
would normally be about half and half, but it can vary depending on your
subject. In a science essay, for example, the ideas you are criticising
might just be very old-fashioned ones, which would only need a couple of
paragraphs to describe, or in an English essay, you might concentrate
more on producing the evidence to support your own idea and not bother
as much with what other people have said. But if you are writing about a
controversial topic, or one where people have very strong views, then
you definitely need to show that you are familiar with the arguments on
both sides of the case -- and then challenge the arguments of the side
that you disagree with, saying why you don't think they should really
count.

The essay task How you go about organising your paragraphs and deciding
what to put into them depends on the task that your essay is trying to
do. Often, the essay title itself will give you an idea of how you are
meant to go about writing the essay. Here is a list of some of the more
common essay tasks, and what they expect you to do. Essay task

What you have to do

Compare and contrast

Write about the similarities (compare) and the differences (contrast)
between two things. That means writing some paragraphs describing things
they have in common, and roughly an equal number of paragraphs
describing ways that they are different. Write about the weak points of
the topic, theory or idea that you are writing about, or say what you
think is wrong with it. Describe criticisms that other people have made,
as well as giving some of your own if you can. But remember to begin
with at least one paragraph showing that you do understand the idea or
thing that you are criticising. Write about both the good points and the
bad points of your topic, and try to look at whether there are any
implications or conclusions that would follow naturally from it. Try to
look at it from more than one point of view. Write about the topic
plainly and simply. Give as much detail as you can in the time or number
of words, but stick to the plain facts -- don't give your own opinions,
or if you do keep them for a very limited contribution right at the end.

Criticise

Discuss

Describe

418

Study notes -- how to write an essay

Explain

Illustrate

Outline

Give a set of reasons for why something happens or has come about. That
often means writing about the stages or steps which have led up to it.
Give specific examples that highlight or amplify the particular topic
which you are writing about (but don't forget to describe the topic
first). Do not draw pictures as your answer, unless you are sure that
this is appropriate. It usually isn't. Simply describe the main facts of
the topic, but leave out all of the unimportant details. Give as much
information as someone would need in order to be able to understand the
most important features of the topic you are describing.

Write clearly Make sure, too, that you really have said what you mean to
say. Even a small difference in spelling can change the meaning of a
sentence, so it looks as though you mean something completely different.
To affect something, for example, means to influence it. But to effect
something means to bring it about or make it happen. Confusing the two
won't be picked up by a spellchecker because they are both real words.
You don't want a little spelling mistake to make it look as though
you're talking nonsense, do you?

Getting it right Not only that, but carelessness with grammar or
spelling makes a really bad impression. So here are 16 of the most
common spelling and grammatical problems -- errors which you need to
avoid and rules which you need to follow: 1 2

Be consistent in singular and plural. Not 'there is 23 of them'. Latin
words that end in 'a' tend to be plural (e.g. data and media).
Therefore, 'data are reported'. 3 Apostrophes give endless trouble. They
indicate either a possessive (something which belongs to the noun
concerned) or an abbreviation (a word or part of a word which has been
shortened). But APOSTROPHES NEVER INDICATE A PLURAL! 'The department's
student's...' implies they only have one student and you are about to be
told about something that person possesses. If the possession refers to
several people, then the apostrophe comes after the s (e.g. if it comes
from several students, it is the students' opinion). If the word is
already plural, such as people, the apostrophe comes after the plural
word: people's party. Sometimes the spelling changes: the plural of
family is families, but the possessive relating to one family is
family's. The possessive of many families is families'. 4 The usual use
of an apostrophe as in 's is as an abbreviation for his, hers or its
(e.g. "A student's opinion" = one student -- her opinion). 5 The other
main use of an apostrophe is when it is used to indicate an
abbreviation, or something missing, as in don't for 'do not'.

Study notes -- how to write an essay

6 7 8 9 10

11

12

13

14 15

16

419

'Its' is already possessive. It only gets an apostrophe if it is
functioning as an abbreviation of 'it is', as in 'it's a lovely day'.
'There' is a place, 'their' refers to possessions. So do not write 'we
solved there problems'. Sentences in the form of a question should
always have a question mark at the end. Try to split up sentences that
have become too long and complicated. It's generally a good idea to do
the same for paragraphs when they become too long, too. When a sentence
or, worse, a paragraph starts with 'this', it is often unclear what, in
the preceding material, it refers to. Think of it as a vague hand-wave
backwards to what you have recently written. Make a rule to avoid using
'this' unless you say what 'this' is, or unless it is so clear that
there couldn't possibly be any other subject. This (referring to the
first sentence of this paragraph) also reminds me that it is important
to minimise the use of commas, but even more important to use them
correctly. While we're on the subject, A COMMA IS NOT THE SAME AS A FULL
STOP! A comma indicates that you are developing, or amplifying, the idea
behind your sentence. A full stop tells you that that particular
statement or idea has been completed. If you want to say more, you
should introduce the next idea -- another point on the same topic, like
this one -- in the next sentence. Using commas when you should be using
full stops makes you appear illiterate. That's not an impression you
want to give to anyone, really. 'Effect' and 'affect' often cause
problems for psychology students. They have different meanings when they
are used as nouns or verbs. For example, something can have an effect
(noun). But if something 'effects a change' it means to bring about a
change. Similarly, an affect (noun) means a feeling or emotion, while to
affect things (verb) means to influence it. If in doubt, look up these
words in the main text of this dictionary. A similar confusion between
noun and verb occurs with practice (noun) as in 'the practice of
psychotherapy' and practise (verb) as when you 'practise your guitar
solos'. People do not usually get confused between 'advice' and
'advise', which follow the same rule, so you may find you can use that
to remember whether you want to say practice or practise. For some
reason, when writing about activating a response, instead of writing
'elicit' people often write 'illicit', which is an adjective meaning
that it is underhand or illegal. Try not to confuse the two. 'This
finding highlights that value for money is an important issue for
customers'. Do not use 'highlights' -- it is a cop-out to save you
thinking of the word you should really use. It makes the sentence
ungrammatical, when it would have been simpler and more informative to
have used 'shows' or 'suggests'. Or should it have been 'proves' or
'emphasises'? Don't begin a sentence with 'So,...' unless it is
genuinely a logical conclusion from the sentence or paragraph you have
just written. It should not be used as a general beginning for a topic,
no matter how often you might hear people using it that way in everyday
life.

420

Study notes -- how to write an essay

Pay attention to presentation Finally, make sure you present your essay
as neatly as you can. In an exam, there's not all that much you can do,
but do remember that you are trying to impress your examiner, and you
won't do that if your handwriting is so bad that they can't decipher
what you have written. If you have an identifiable condition, like
dyspraxia, you can ask to use a computer in your exams. If you are
writing an essay for an assignment, make sure that you print it out, or
if you really don't have access to a printer, write it out very neatly.
Separate your paragraphs clearly, choose a clear font and a readable
line spacing, and leave proper margins. It might not get you extra
marks, but it all contributes to the impression that you really know
what it is that you are supposed to be doing, and have made an effort to
do it well. And that can only be a good thing! Happy writing! Nicky
Hayes and Peter Stratton

Appendix 3 List of abbreviations

5-HT AA ACTH ADD ADHD AI AIDS AIP ANN ANOVA ANS BAS BOLD CA CAL CAT CDS
CNS CR CS CT db df DLPFC DNA DSM-V DTI DZ EBA ECG ECT EEG efMRI EI EMA

5-hydroxytryptamine ambulatory assessment adrenocorticotrophic hormone
attention deficit disorder attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
artificial intelligence acquired immune deficiency syndrome anterior
intraparietal area artificial neural network analysis of variance
autonomic nervous system British Ability Scale blood oxygen level
dependency conversation analysis computer-assisted learning (scan)
computed axial tomography child-directed speech central nervous system
conditioned (or conditional) response conditioned (or conditional)
stimulus (scan) the same as CAT scan decibel degrees of freedom
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex desoxyribonucleic acid Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th edition diffusion tensor
imaging dizygotic extrastriate body area electrocardiogram
electroconvulsive therapy electroencephalogram event-related functional
magnetic resonance imaging emotional intelligence Ecological Momentary
Assessment

422

List of abbreviations

EMG electromyography EPI Eysenck Personality Inventory EPQ Eysenck
Personality Questionnaire event-related potential ERP ESB electrical
stimulation of the brain ESM Experience Sampling Method ESN
educationally subnormal ESP extrasensory perception EST electroshock
therapy FBA fusiform body area FDR False Discovery Rate frontal eye
field FEF FI fixed-interval reinforcement scale fMRI functional magnetic
resonance imaging FR fixed-ratio reinforcement scale FRU face
recognition unit FTT failure to thrive FWE Family Wise Error g general
intelligence factor GAF Global Assessment of Functioning scale GAS
general adaptation syndrome GDPR General Data Protection Regulation GIGO
garbage in garbage out GPS general problem-solver GSR galvanic skin
response (or resistance) GWAS genome-wide association study HCI
human--computer interaction HPA hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis HRF
hemodynamic response function HRTF head-related transfer function Hz
hertz IAT implicit association test ICD  International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems ICSS intercranial
self-stimulation IPA interpretive phenomenological analysis IQ
intelligence quotient IRM innate releasing mechanism jnd just noticeable
difference LACS Leeds Attributional Coding System LAD language
acquisition device language acquisition system LAS LH lateral
hypothalamus lateral inter-parietal area LIP LOC locus of control LSD
lysergic acid diethylamide

List of abbreviations

LTM LTP MA MANOVA MBD MEG MMN MMPI MMR MNI MPOA MRI MS MT MVPA MZ nAch
nAff NAI NEO NGF NIRS nm NREM ns NVC ODD OFA OOB p PALS PDD-NOS PDP PET
PIN PK PRP PSE PSP PTSD QA RAS REBT REM RET RHP

long-term memory long-term potentiation mental age multivariate analysis
of variance minimal brain dysfunction magneto-encephalography mismatch
negativity Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory moderated
multiple regression template Montreal Neurological Institute template
medial pre-optic area magnetic resonance imaging multiple sclerosis
middle temporal multi-voxel pattern analysis monozygotic need for
achievement need for affiliation non-accidental injury neuroticism,
extraversion and openness to experience nerve growth factor
near-infrared spectroscopy nanometer non-rapid eye movement (sleep)
nanosecond non-verbal communication oppositional defiant disorder
occipital face area out-of-body experience probability Psychological
Applied Learning Scenarios pervasive developmental disorders not
otherwise specified parallel distributed processing positron emission
tomography person identity node psychokinesis psychological refractory
period point of subjective equality post-synaptic potential
post-traumatic stress disorder qualitative analysis reticular activating
system rational emotive behaviour therapy rapid eye movement (sleep)
rational emotive therapy resource holding power

423

424

List of abbreviations

RNA ribonucleic acid ROC receiver operating characteristic rTMS
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation seasonal affective disorder
SAD SCR skin conductance response sd standard deviation SIDS sudden
infant death syndrome SIT social identity theory SMA supplementary motor
area SNARC spatial-numerical association of response codes S--O--R
stimulus--organism--response specific learning difficulty SpLD SPSS
statistical package for the social sciences SQUID superconducting
quantum interference device S--R stimulus--response SRT social
representations theory SSRIs selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors STM
short-term memory STS superior temporal sulcus t-scope tachistoscope TA
transactional analysis TAT thematic apperception test tDCS transcranial
direct current stimulation TMS transcranial magnetic stimulation TOM
theory of mind TOT tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon TOTE Test, Operate,
Test, Exit tRNA transfer RNA UCS unconditioned (or unconditional)
stimulus UR unconditioned (or unconditional) response VBM voxel-based
morphometry VI variable interval reinforcement schedule VMH
ventro-medial nucleus VR variable ratio reinforcement schedule VWFA
visual word form area WAIS Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale WEG warmth,
empathy and genuineness WEIRD Western, Educated, Industrial, Rich and
Democratic WISC Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children WYSIWYG what
you see is what you get YAVIS young, attractive, verbal, intelligent and
successful ZPD zone of proximal development


