Discovering Psychology 4e THE SCIENCE OF MIND John T.

Cacioppo University of Chicago

Laura A.

Freberg California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo

Stephanie J.

Cacioppo University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine

Australia ● Brazil ● Canada ● Mexico ● Singapore ● United Kingdom ●
United States

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic
rights restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed.
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not
materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher
reserves the right to remove content from this title at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on
pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#,
author, title, or keyword for materials in your areas of interest.
Important Notice: Media content referenced within the product
description or the product text may not be available in the eBook
version.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Discovering Psychology: The Science of Mind, Fourth Edition John T.
Cacioppo, Laura A. Freberg, Stephanie J. Cacioppo

WCN: 02-300

SVP, Higher Education & Skills Product:

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
herein may be

Erin Joyner

reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, except as
permitted by U.S.

VP, Higher Education & Skills Product:

© 2022, 2019, 2016 Cengage Learning, Inc.

Unless otherwise noted, all content is © Cengage.

copyright law, without the prior written permission of the copyright
owner.

Thais Alencar Product Director: Laura Ross

For product information and technology assistance, contact us at

Product Manager: Colin Grover

support.cengage.com.

Cengage Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706 or

Product Assistant: Jessica Witczak

For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all
requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.

Learning Designer: Natasha Allen Senior Content Manager: Christy Frame
Digital Delivery Lead: Allison Marion Director, Marketing: Neena Bali

Library of Congress Control Number: 2020952162 Student Edition:

Marketing Manager: Trisha Salata

ISBN: 978-0-357-36323-2

IP Analyst: Deanna Ettinger

Loose-leaf Edition:

IP Project Manager: Nick Barrows Production Service: Anubhav Kaushal,
MPS Limited Designer: Bethany Bourgeois Cover Image Source:
petekarici/istockphoto

ISBN: 978-0-357-36330-0 Cengage 200 Pier 4 Boulevard Boston, MA 02210
USA Cengage is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with
employees residing in nearly 40 different countries and sales in more
than 125 countries around the world. Find your local representative at
www.cengage.com. To learn more about Cengage platforms and services,
register or access your online learning solution, or purchase materials
for your course, visit www.cengage.com.

Printed in the United States of America Print Number: 01 Print Year:
2021

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

To our family and friends for their heartfelt support. In everlasting
loving memory of John, Stephanie is also grateful to all of those who
have expressed continuing support and love to John and our family.
John's legacy will live on through his seminal theories and through all
of us whose minds had the privilege of his visionary influence. J.T.C.
AnD S. J. C.

To my family---Roger, Kristin, Scott, Marcus, Karen, and Karla---for
their unwavering support, encouragement, and belief in my ability. L. A.
F.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

About the Authors

John T. Cacioppo

John T. Cacioppo

(1951--2018) was the Tiffany and Margaret Blake Distinguished Service
Professor and director of the Center for Cognitive and Social
Neuroscience at the University of Chicago. He was a past president of
several scientific societies, including the Association for
Psychological Science, the Society for Social Neuroscience, the Society
for Personality and Social Psychology, and the Society for
Psychophysiological Research, and a past chair of the Psychology Section
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Among the
numerous awards that he received are the Troland Award from the National
Academy of Sciences, the Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award
from the American Psychological Association, a Method to Extend Research
in Time (MERIT) Award from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the
Scientific Impact Award from the Society of Experimental Social
Psychology, the Award for Distinguished Scientific Contributions from
the Society for Psychophysiological Research, and the Campbell Award and
the Theoretical Innovation Prize from the Society for Personality and
Social Psychology. Dr. John Cacioppo was a member of the President's
Committee on the National Medal of Science during the Obama
administration; the chair of the Board of Behavioral, Cognitive, and
Sensory Sciences at the National Research Council; a member of the
National Science Foundation Advisory Committee for the Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences Directorate; a former member of the
Council for the NIH Center for Scientific Review; and a former member of
the Council for the National Institute on Aging.

Roger Freberg

Laura A. Freberg is a professor of psychology at California

Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly SLO), where she
teaches courses in introductory psychology and biological psychology.
She is the author of four editions of Discovering Behavioral
Neuroscience: An Introduction to Biological Psychology for Cengage
Learning. She is the lead author for an online research methods
textbook, Research Methods for Psychological Science (2017) and serves
as Psychology Consultant to the New York Times InEducation program.
Dr. Freberg's teaching career began more than 40 years ago, when she
taught her first college course at Pasadena City College at the age of
23. She has received Faculty Member of the Year recognition from Cal
Poly Disabilities Resource Center three times (1991, 1994, and 2009) for
her work with students with disabilities. She enjoys experimenting with
technology and social media in the classroom and collaborating with
daughters Kristin Saling (systems engineering, U.S. Military Academy at
West Point) and Karen Freberg (communications, University of Louisville)
on a variety of research projects in crisis management and public
relations, as well as in psychology. She served as president of the
Western Psychological Association (WPA) in 2018--2019.

iv Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Stephanie J. Cacioppo

Stephanie Cacioppo

is an Assistant Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience in
the University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine and serves as the
director of the school's Brain Dynamics Laboratory. Named a "Rising
Star" by the Association for Psychological Science (APS) for her
innovative and "outstanding contributions to the science of psychology
in the areas of research, teaching, and/ or application," Dr. Steph
Cacioppo is considered a world authority on emotion-driven brain
dynamics and well-being. Her work focuses on the dynamics of emotions
and social connections and their impact on brain health and human
performance. She has a demonstrated history of working in woman's
health, motivation, and neuropsychology, and with elite and everyday
athletes in emotional fitness, high-performance brain dynamics, and
human potential. Dr. Steph Cacioppo is also the first female president
of the Society for Social Neuroscience. She has authored more than 120
scientific publications and has been interviewed by prestigious outlets
like the New York Times, Scientific American, Washington Post, Discover
Magazine, and National Geographic.

About the Authors

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

v

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Brief Contents 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

The Science of Mind THE DISCIPLINE OF PSYCHOLOGY 3 The Measure of Mind
THE SCIENTIFIC METHODS OF PSYCHOLOGY 35 The Evolving Mind NATURE AND
NURTURE INTERTWINED 71 The Biological Mind THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF
BEHAVIOR 105 The Perceiving Mind SENSATION AND PERCEPTION 149 The Aware
Mind ELEMENTS OF CONSCIOUSNESS 193 The Feeling Mind EMOTION AND
MOTIVATION 231 The Adaptive Mind LEARNING 277 The Knowing Mind MEMORY
317 The Thinking Mind THINKING, LANGUAGE, AND INTELLIGENCE 361 The
Developing Mind LIFE SPAN DEVELOPMENT 407 The Individual Mind
PERSONALITY AND THE SELF 459 The Connected Mind SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 499
The Troubled Mind PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS 549 Healing the Troubled Mind
THERAPY 597 The Healthy Mind STRESS AND COPING, HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY, AND
POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 639

References R-1 Name Index N-1 Subject Index/Glossary S-1

vii Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Contents

1

The Science of Mind THE DISCIPLINE OF PSYCHOLOGY

What Is Psychology? 5 Psychology as a Hub Science Why Is Psychology a
Hub Science?

5

Why Do We Study Psychology? 6 What Are Psychology's Philosophical roots?
8 What Are Psychology's Natural sciences roots? 8 the two Disciplines
Merge to Create a New science Summary 1.1

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Where Did Psychology Originate? 7 9

10 A New Connectivity: Integrating Psychology's Five Perspectives 26

How Did the Science of Psychology Begin? 10 Wilhelm Wundt and
structuralism

Diverse Voices in Psychology Culture and Diversity as "Cross-cutting
Themes" in Psychology 27

10

Connecting to research The First Official Psychology

Thinking Scientifically Can the Use of a Single

Experiment 11 Gestalt Psychology 12 William James and Functionalism 12
Clinical roots: Freud and the humanistic Psychologists

What Does It Mean to Be a Psychologist? 28

sigmund Freud 13 humanistic Psychology

Experiencing Psychology Testing Reaction Time 14 Summary 1.2

15

Use Relationships to Illustrate Psychological Perspectives? 30

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Tackling the Problem of a
Pandemic

20

31

Summary 1.3

32 Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

What Are Psychological Perspectives? 22 What Are the Five Perspectives
of Psychology?

13

28

Interpersonal relationships How Can We

14

the behaviorists and the Cognitive revolution

Perspective Be Misleading?

32

22

viii Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2

The Measure of Mind THE SCIENTIFIC METHODS OF PSYCHOLOGY

What Is Science? 36 how Do We Develop a scientific Mindset? the
Importance of Critical thinking 37

36

Experiencing Psychology Using Critical Thinking to

scientific Theories 40 Generating Good hypotheses 41 Communicating
science 42 Thinking Scientifically Does Psychology Have a Replication
Problem? 43 Summary 2.1

Central tendency 58 Variance 59 The Normal Curve 59 Descriptive
statistics with two Variables 60

44

How Do Psychologists Conduct Research? 44 Descriptive Methods

Connecting to research Do You Believe in ESP? 61

44

The Case study 44 Naturalistic observation The survey 46

Inferential statistics 62

Psychology as a Hub Science The Invention of Factor

46

Analysis

Diverse Voices in Psychology How Do We Recruit Diverse Research
Participants? 47 Correlational Methods 48 experimental Methods 51

How Can We Conduct Ethical Research? 64 Interpersonal relationships The
Methodological Perspective

55

67

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Research

How Do We Draw Conclusions from Data? 56 the Importance of Valid and
reliable Measures Descriptive statistics 57

64

human Participants 65 Animal subjects 66

Meta-analyses 53 The Importance of Multiple Perspectives 54 how Do We
study the effects of time? 54 Summary 2.2

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Evaluate Popular Press Reports 38 the scientific enterprise 40

56

Methods for Studying a Pandemic

68

Summary 2.3

69 Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

69

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ix

3

The Evolving Mind NATURE AND NURTURE INTERTWINED

Why Do We Say That nature and nurture Are Intertwined? 72 What Are the
Building Blocks of Behavior? 73 Experiencing Psychology The Genetics of
Cats 75

Which Fields of Genetics Are Relevant to Psychology? 77 behavioral
Genetics and heritability 78

Diverse Voices in Psychology Avoiding Social Prejudice in Genetic
Research 80 the search for Candidate Genes epigenetics 83

82

Thinking Scientifically The "Warrior Gene" and Criminals 84

Psychology as a Hub Science Understanding the Epigenetic Influences of
Nutrition

86

Connecting to research Can Transgenerational Epigenetic Change Occur?

87

Summary 3.1 88

How Does Evolution Occur? 89 Mechanisms of evolution 89 Adaptation 91
evolution of the human brain 92 the Contemporary human brain 93

x

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Genetic Variation 76 relatedness 76 sex Chromosomes 76

Summary 3.2 94

How Does Evolution Influence Behavior? 95 the evolutionary Psychology
Perspective origins of social behavior 95 sexual selection 98

95

Parental Investment 98 traits Possibly Influenced by sexual selection 99
Culture 99

Interpersonal relationships The Evolutionary Perspective

101

Psychology Takes On real World Problem Can Genetics Explain Differing
Responses to COVID-19 Social Distancing? 102 Summary 3.3 103

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

103

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4

The Biological Mind THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF BEHAVIOR

What Is Biological Psychology? 106 Diverse Voices in Psychology What Is
Cultural

How Is the nervous System Organized? 110 What Are the Structures and
Functions of the Central nervous System? 111 the spinal Cord, brainstem,
and Cerebellum subcortical structures 116

113

The Thalamus 116 The basal Ganglia 116 The hypothalamus 117 The
hippocampus 117 The Cingulate Cortex 117 The Amygdala 117 The Nucleus
Accumbens 118 the Cerebral Cortex 118

Summary 4.1 128

the somatic Nervous system 129 the Autonomic Nervous system 129 the
endocrine system 132 Summary 4.2

119

Localization of Functions in the Cerebral Cortex 119 The Frontal Lobe
121 The occipital Lobe 122 The temporal Lobe 122 The Parietal Lobe 123
Psychology as a Hub Science Law, Responsibility, and the Brain 123
Mirror Neurons 124 right brain and Left brain 124

Connecting to research Mirror Systems and Predicting Tennis Serves

Experiencing Psychology Handedness 127

The Peripheral nervous System (PnS) and the Endocrine System 129

Thinking Scientifically Why Does Moving Your Eyes Reduce Negative
Emotions?

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Neuroscience? 107 early Attempts to understand biological Psychology 108
Contemporary Approaches in biological Psychology 109

125

133

How Do neurons Communicate? 134 Neurons and Glia 134 Neural signaling
137 electrical signaling 137 Chemical signaling 141 types of
Neurotransmitters 143

Interpersonal relationships The Biological Perspective

144

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Social Distancing, Loneliness,
and the Nervous System

145

Summary 4.3 146

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

147

right--Left brain Myths 126 The Function of Lateralization 126

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xi

5

The Perceiving Mind SENSATION AND PERCEPTION

How Does Sensation Lead to Perception? 150 sensory Information travels
to the brain 150 the brain Constructs Perceptions From sensory
Information 151 Measuring Perception 153 signal Detection 153 Argosy
Publishing, Inc.

Summary 5.1 156

How Do We See? 156 the Visual stimulus 156 the biology of Vision 157
Photoreceptors 158 Visual Pathways 159 Visual Perception and Cognition
Color Vision

Developmental and Individual Differences in Audition sociocultural
Influences on Auditory Perception 177 160

160

Psychology as a Hub Science Color and Accessible Web Design

161

recognizing objects 162 Gestalt Psychology 163 recognizing Depth 164
Developmental and Individual Differences in Vision

166

Connecting to research Do Children with Autism See the World
Differently?

168

Diverse Voices in Psychology Culture Shapes Eye Movements

169

Thinking Scientifically The Roger Shepard Parallelogram Illusion:
"Turning the Tables"

170

Summary 5.2 171

Pitch Perception 175 Perceiving Loudness 175 Localization of sound 176
Auditory Groupings 176

xii

How Do We Feel Body Position, Touch, Temperature, and Pain? 178 body
Position touch 179 Pain 181

179

How Do We Process Smells and Tastes? 183 olfaction 183 Gustation 184
Perception and Cognition in the Chemical senses Developmental and
Individual Differences in the Chemical senses 186

185

Experiencing Psychology Are You a Supertaster? 186 sociocultural
Influences on the Chemical senses

187

Interpersonal relationships Sensation and Perception

How Do We Hear? 172 the Auditory stimulus 172 the biology of Audition
172 Auditory Perception and Cognition

177

Perspectives

188

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Social 175

Distancing, Loneliness and the Perception of Social Threat 189 Summary
5.3

190 Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

191

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6

The Aware Mind ELEMENTS OF CONSCIOUSNESS

What Does It Mean to Be Conscious? 194 195

Consciousness as Variations in Alertness 195 Consciousness as an
Awareness of Ongoing Sensations 195 Consciousness as Self-Awareness 195
Psychology as a Hub Science Can Machines Become Conscious? 196 Searching
for Consciousness in the Brain 197 Summary 6.1

199

What Happens to Consciousness During Waking and Sleep? 199 Circadian
Rhythms

199

Modern Living and Circadian Rhythms 200 Individual Variations in
Circadian Rhythms 201 Waking 202 Sleep 203 Stages of Sleep 203

Experiencing Psychology The Epworth Sleepiness Scale 204 The Benefits of
Sleep

206

The Special Benefits of REM Sleep 207 Dreams 208 Sleep Disorders 208
Nightmares and Sleep Terrors 208 Insomnia 209 Narcolepsy and Cataplexy
209 Breathing-Related Sleep Disorders 209 Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
(SIDS) 210 Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) 210 Summary 6.2

211

How Is Consciousness Affected by Brain Damage? 211 Specific Areas of
Brain Damage and Consciousness 211 Coma, Vegetative State, Brain Death,
and Near-Death 212

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The Evolution of Consciousness

Coma 212 Vegetative State (VS) 212 Brain Death 212 Near-Death
Experiences 213 Seizures 213

How Do People Intentionally Alter Their States of Consciousness? 214
General Features of Psychoactive Drugs Tolerance and Withdrawal 215
Addiction 215 Commonly Used Psychoactive Drugs Marijuana

215

216

216

Thinking Scientifically Do Hallucinogens Have Therapeutic Potential?

217

LSD 218 Caffeine 218

Connecting to research Psychedelics and Consciousness

218

Diverse Voices in Psychology Entheogens Across Cultures

219

Nicotine 220 Cocaine and Amphetamines 221 Methylphenidate (Ritalin) 222
MDMA (Ecstasy) 222 Alcohol 222 Opioids 223

CONTENTS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xiii

Nondrug Methods for Altering Consciousness

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Sleep

224

During a Pandemic

hypnosis 224 Meditation 225 other Methods for Altering Consciousness 225

228

Summary 6.3

228 Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

229

Interpersonal relationships The Consciousness Perspective How Does
Imitation Influence Liking?

7

227

The Feeling Mind EMOTION AND MOTIVATION

How Are Emotion and Motivation Related? 232 Why Are We Emotional? 233
theories of emotion

233

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The James--Lange Theory of emotion 233 The Cannon--bard Theory of
emotion 235 The schachter--singer two-Factor Theory 236

Connecting to research Botox and the Ability to Read the Emotions of
Others

236

Contemporary Approaches to emotion 238 The sensation of hunger 254 The
sensation of satiety 256 obesity 257 Anorexia Nervosa, bulimia Nervosa,
and binge-eating Disorder 260 sexual Motivation 262

the evolution of emotion 239 the biology of emotion 241 The Autonomic
Nervous system 241 The hypothalamus 242 The Amygdala 242 The Insula 243
The Cingulate Cortex 243 The basal Ganglia 244 The Cerebral Cortex and
emotion 244 expressing emotion 245 Interpreting emotion 248

biology and sexual Motivation 262 sexual and emotional satisfaction 264
sexual orientation 264 Cognitive and social Motives 267

Experiencing Psychology Emotional Regulation 248 Diverse Voices in
Psychology Emotional Expressivity, Smiling, and a History of Immigration

249

Psychology as a Hub Science Lie Detection and the Law

250

Summary 7.1

The Motivation to Affiliate 267 Achievement Motivation 268 Thinking
Scientifically Do Participation Trophies Affect Entitlement and
Competitiveness? 270 Motivational Priorities 271 Approach and Avoidance
271 Motivational Theories 271

252

Interpersonal relationships The Emotional Perspective 273

What Does It Mean to Be Motivated? 252

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Prioritizing

hunger and eating

xiv

253

Motives During a Pandemic

274

Summary 7.2 274

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

275

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8

The Adaptive Mind LEARNING

How Do Animals Respond to Their Environment? 278 What Are the Three Main
Types of Learning? 280 What Is Classical Conditioning? 281 Classical
Conditioning terminology 282 Classical Conditioning Phenomena 283
Acquisition 283 extinction and spontaneous recovery 284 Inhibition 285
Generalization and Discrimination 285 higher-order Conditioning 286
Latent Inhibition 286 Cognitive and biological Influences on Classical
Conditioning 286

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Summary 8.1 281

schedules of reinforcement 300

The element of surprise 287 taste Aversion 288 Applying Classical
Conditioning 289

Fixed ratio schedules 301 Variable ratio schedules 302 Fixed Interval
schedules 302 Variable Interval schedules 302 Partial reinforcement
effect in extinction 303 Comparing schedules 303 the Method of
successive Approximations (shaping) 304 Cognitive, biological, and
social Influences on operant Conditioning 305

overcoming Fear 289 Addiction 290 Attitudes and Prejudice 290 Creativity
and schizophrenia 291

Cognitive Influences on operant Conditioning 305 biological Influences
on operant Conditioning 306 social Influences on operant Conditioning
307 Applying operant Conditioning 307

Connecting to research Classical Conditioning and Opioid Overdose

292

Psychology as a Hub Science Classical Conditioning Informs Wildlife
Conservation Summary 8.2

293

token economies 308 behavior Therapies 308

Experiencing Psychology How Do I Break a Bad Habit?

309

Summary 8.3

294

310

What Is Operant Conditioning? 295

What Is Observational Learning? 310

types of Consequences 296

Albert bandura and Aggression 311 Cultural transmission of Learning 312

Positive reinforcement 296

Thinking Scientifically Is Too Much Praise Bad for Children?

297

Negative reinforcement Punishment 299

Interpersonal relationships The Learning Perspective

298

Diverse Voices in Psychology Does Physical Punishment Have Different
Effects in Different Cultural Contexts? 300

313

Psychology Takes on real-World Problem Can People Learn to be Less
Lonely?

314

Summary 8.4

315 Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

315

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xv

9

The Knowing Mind MEMORY

What Is Memory? 318 Memory and the Continuum of Information Processing
Memory Provides an Adaptive Advantage 319

318

How Are Memories Processed? 319

Moving Information into Long-term Memory 325 Differences between Working
and Long-term Memory 326

What Are the Different Types of Long-Term Memory? 328 Declarative
Memories 329 Nondeclarative Memories 330 Procedural Memories Priming 331

330

How Is Long-Term Memory Organized? 333 Connectionist theories 333
Inferences: using schemas 334 334

How Do We Retrieve Memories? 335 retrieval From short-term Memory 335
retrieval from Long-term Memory 336 The role of Cues 336

Diverse Voices in Psychology What Is the "Own-Race 336

tip of the tongue 337 reconstruction During retrieval 338 retrieval of
emotional events 340 Psychology as a Hub Science How Reliable Are
Eyewitnesses? 341 Summary 9.2 342

Why Do We Forget? 342 Decay

343

xvi

CoNteNts

344

What Is the Biology of Memory? 345

Declarative Memories and the hippocampus 347 Declarative Memories and
the Cerebral Cortex 347 Procedural Memories and the basal Ganglia 348
biochemistry and Memory 349

How Can We Improve Memory? 350

Experiencing Psychology Schemas and False

Bias" in Memory for Faces?

Interference 343 Motivated Forgetting

Memory at the Level of the synapse 345 Working Memory and the brain 347
Long-term Memories and the brain 347

Summary 9.1 332

Memories

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

sensory Memory 320 short-term Memory 321 Long-term Memory 325

Distribute Practice over time

350

Thinking Scientifically Does Using a Laptop or Longhand to Take Notes
Make a Difference? take tests 352 Interleaving 352

351

Connecting to research How Can We Protect Memory Retrieval from Stress?
exercise 354 sleep 354 recite 354 use Mnemonics 355

353

Interpersonal relationships The Memory Perspective

356

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Compliance with Social
Distancing and Working Memory 357 Summary 9.3

358 Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

358

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10

The Thinking Mind THINKING, LANGUAGE, AND INTELLIGENCE

What Do We Think About? 362 thoughts as Images 363 thoughts as Concepts
363

How Do We Solve Problems? 368 understand the Problem Make a Plan 370

370

Generating solutions 370 Decide on a solution 374 Carry out the Plan 376
Look back 377 Computer Models of Decision Making 377 the biological
Psychology of Decision Making

What Is Intelligence? 392

377

Experiencing Psychology What Is Your Decision Style?

380

brain structure, brain Activity, and Intelligence 395

Psychology as a Hub Science How Beliefs About 396

Genetics and Intelligence 397

How Does Language Influence Behavior? 382 the origins of human Language
383 the basic building blocks of Language 384 the biological Psychology
of Language 384 Lessons From Language Disorders 385 Are Nonhuman Animals
Capable of real Language? 386 how Do We Learn Language? 387

Diverse Voices in Psychology Is the "Language Gap"

Dyslexia 389 Multilingualism 390 signed Languages 391

Assessing Intelligence 392 General and specific Abilities 392 emotional
and social Intelligence 394 biological Influences on Intelligence 395

Intelligence Impact Education

Summary 10.1 382

Real? 388 Variations in Language Processing

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Prototypes and exemplars 365 Concepts as Theories 366 Concepts and
schemas 367 Concepts and the brain 367

389

Connecting to research What Is Collective Intelligence? 398 extremes of
Intelligence

399

Intellectual Disability 400 Giftedness and Genius 401 Thinking
Scientifically Can Children's IQ Scores Be Increased with Special Baby
Videos? 402

Interpersonal relationships The Cognitive Perspective

403

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems COVID-19 and the Availability
Heuristic

404

Summary 10.3 404

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

405

Summary 10.2 391

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xvii

11

The Developing Mind LIFE SPAN DEVELOPMENT

What Does It Mean to Develop? 408 Nature and Nurture Intertwined 409
Continuity or Discontinuity 409 universal or ecological Development 410

How Do We Change Prenatally? 411 413

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Genetic risks to Development 412 environmental risks to Development

What Can newborns Do? 416 the Newborn's reflexes 416 the Newborn's
Activity 416 the Newborn's sex and Gender Development the Newborn's
senses 418 Summary 11.1 419

How Do Social and Emotional Behaviors Change During Infancy and
Childhood? 432

What Physical Changes Occur in Infancy and Childhood? 420

Connecting to research The Evolution of Attachment

417

temperament 432 Attachment 433 Behavior 433 Parenting styles 436

Nervous system Development 421 Motor Development 421 Gender Development
in Childhood 423

Summary 11.2 438

Diverse Voices in Psychology What Are the Implications of Gender
Assignment?

425

How Does Cognition Change During Infancy and Childhood? 425 Jean
Piaget's theory of Cognitive Development

426

The sensorimotor stage 427 The Preoperational stage 427 The Concrete
operational stage 428 The Formal operational stage 428 Criticisms of
Jean Piaget's Theory 428 Alternative Approaches to Cognitive Development
Lev Vygotsky 429 Information Processing Naïve Theories 430 Theory of
Mind 430

429

What Does It Mean to Be an Adolescent? 438 Physical Changes in
Adolescence

439

sex, Gender, and the Adolescent 439 The Adolescent brain 439

Experiencing Psychology How Risky Are You? 440

429

Cognitive and Moral Development in Adolescence

442

Adolescent Cognition 442 Moral reasoning 442 social and emotional
Development in Adolescence

443

Identity Formation in Adolescence 443 The benefits of ethnic Identity
444 Family and Peer Influences 444

What Is It Like to Be an Emerging or Young Adult? 446 Physical status in
emerging and Young Adulthood

xviii

446

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cognition in emerging and Young Adulthood: Postformal thought 446

Cognition in Late Adulthood 450 social and emotional Aspects of Late
Adulthood 451

Thinking Scientifically Are Younger Generations More

Psychology as a Hub Science Psychology and the Well-

Narcissistic Than Previous Generations? 447 relationships in emerging
and Young Adulthood 448

being of Older Americans 452

Interpersonal relationships The Developmental Perspective

What Happens During Midlife? 448 Physical and Cognitive Aspects of
Midlife social Changes in Midlife 449

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Pandemic

449

Anxiety Across the Lifespan

12

455

Summary 11.3 456

What Is Late Adulthood Like? 450 Physical Changes in Late Adulthood

454

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

456

450

The Individual Mind PERSONALITY AND THE SELF

What Is Personality? 461 Historical Approaches to Personality 462 462

The Id, ego, and superego 462 Freudian Defense Mechanisms 463
Psychosexual stages of Development 463 Contemporary Assessments of
sigmund Freud's Approach 464 The Neo-Freudians 464 Classic behaviorist
Approaches to Personality 465 how Do humanistic Psychologists Approach
Personality? 466

How Do Trait Theories Explain Personality? 467 early trait theories 468
the big Five theory 468

How Do Situations Affect Personality? 470

What Are the Biological Bases of Personality? 473 temperament and
Personality 473

Connecting to research Temperament Traits Can Be Contagious 474 Genetics
and Personality 475 Personality, brain structure, and brain Function 476
the evolution of Personality 477

How Do We Assess Personality? 478

Experiencing Psychology A Short Version of the Big Five Inventory 470
Locus of Control 472 reciprocal Determinism and self-efficacy If--then
relationships 473

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

how Do Psychodynamic theories View Personality?

472

Personality Inventories

478

Thinking Scientifically Evaluating the Validity and Reliability of
Personality Tests 480 Projective tests 481 the ethics of Personality
testing 482

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xix

Diverse Voices in Psychology Diversity and Personality Assessments

482

Summary 12.1 483

What Does It Mean to Have a Self? 483

491

The Interpersonal self 493 Cultural Influences on the self 493

Interpersonal relationships The Personality

self-Concept 484 self-Awareness 485 self-esteem 486

Perspective

sources of self-esteem 486 Gender, race, and Culture and self-esteem 487
using self-enhancement to Protect self-esteem 488 The Advantages of
self-esteem 489 Psychology as a Hub Science Self-Esteem, Academic
Performance, and Aggression 490

13

self-regulation 491 the brain and the self the social self 493

494

Psychology Takes on real-World Problem Personality and Responses to a
Pandemic

496

Summary 12.2 497

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

497

The Connected Mind SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY

Why Are Humans So Social? 500 How Accurate Are First Impressions? 501
Experiencing Psychology The UCLA Loneliness Scale

502 Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Why Did That Just Happen? 505 the Correspondence bias and the
Fundamental Attribution error 505 Defensive Attributions 506

Connecting to research Farming, Collectivism, and

the Neuroscience of Persuasion

Individualism 507 Cultural Influences on Attribution 508

Summary 13.1 516

How Are Our Attitudes Influenced by Others? 509 Attitude Formation 510
Cognitive Dissonance 510

512

Psychology as a Hub Science Social Media, Persuasion, and Fake News

xx

Why Are We Prejudiced? 516 sources of Prejudice and stereotyping
outcomes of Prejudice 518 reducing Prejudice 519

516

Diverse Voices in Psychology The Shooter Bias 520

Why Does Persuasion Happen? 512 the elaboration Likelihood Model routes
to Persuasion 512

515

Why Do We Go Along with the Group? 522 Conformity 523

514

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Compliance 524 obedience 524 the Power of one 527

Competition and Cooperation in Animals 535 Individual Differences in
Cooperation and Competition 536 the Influence of Culture on Competition
and Cooperation 536 Choosing between Cooperation and Competition
Altruism and helping 537

How Do Groups Work Together? 527 social Facilitation 527 social Loafing
528 Deindividuation 528 Group Polarization 528 Groupthink 529

Why Are We Aggressive? 539 the biological Psychology of Aggression
Learning and Aggression 541 Preventing Aggression 541

Summary 13.2 530

539

Thinking Scientifically Brain Damage and Criminal

How Well Do We Get Along with Others? 531

Behavior

542

Interpersonal relationships The Social

Attraction and Liking 531 building relationships 533 Maintaining
relationships 533 ending relationships 534

Perspective

544

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Persuasion During a Pandemic

545

Summary 13.4 546

Summary 13.3 534

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

Why Do We Cooperate in Some Situations and Compete in Others? 535

14

536

546

The Troubled Mind PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS

What Does It Mean to Have a Psychological Disorder? 550 How Are
Psychological Disorders Diagnosed? 553 Argosy Publishing, Inc.

What Do the Psychological Perspectives Tell Us About Disorders? 554
Which Disorders Emerge in Childhood? 555 Autism spectrum Disorder (AsD)

Diagnosing ADhD 558 Causes of ADhD 560

555

Diagnosing AsD 555 Causes of AsD 556 Attention Deficit hyperactivity
Disorder (ADhD)

Summary 14.1 561

558

What Is Schizophrenia? 561 symptoms of schizophrenia

562 CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxi

Causes of schizophrenia

562

biological Factors in schizophrenia 562 environmental Factors in
schizophrenia 565 Thinking Scientifically Does Cannabis Use Increase
Risk of Schizophrenia? 566

What Is Major Depressive Disorder (MDD)? 568

biological explanations for PtsD 583 Learning explanations for PtsD 584
social and Cultural explanations for PtsD

Learning explanations for MDD 569 Cognitive explanations for MDD 570
social explanations for MDD 571 biological explanations for MDD 571

Connecting to research Recognition of Facial Expression 572

stress and MDD 573

Diverse Voices in Psychology Race, Ethnicity, Gender, Summary 14.2 575

What Is an Anxiety Disorder? 576 specific Phobias 576 social Anxiety
Disorder Panic Disorder 578

577

biological explanations for Panic Disorder 578 Cognitive explanations
for Panic Disorder 578 social explanations for Panic Disorder 579
Integrating the Perspectives 579 Agoraphobia 579 Generalized Anxiety
Disorder 580 biological explanations for GAD 580 Cognitive explanations
for GAD 580

xxii

obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (oCD) 581

What Is Posttraumatic Stress Disorder? 582

Prevalence of MDD 568 Causes of MDD 569

Sexual Orientation, and Prevalence of Suicidality

OCD and Related Disorders 581 biological explanations for oCD 581
Learning explanations for oCD 581 social explanations for oCD 582 body
Dysmorphic Disorder 582

What Is Bipolar Disorder? 567

by People with Depression

social explanations for GAD 580 Integrating the Perspectives 580

574

584

What Are Dissociative Disorders? 584 What Are Somatic Symptom Disorder
and Related Disorders? 585 What Are Personality Disorders? 586
Antisocial Personality Disorder (AsPD) 586 borderline Personality
Disorder (bPD) 587 Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD) 587

Psychology as a Hub Science The "Dark Side" of Leadership

588

Experiencing Psychology Assessing Narcissism 590 Interpersonal
relationships The Clinical Perspective

592

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Is COVID-19 Making Cases of OCD
Worse?

593

Summary 14.3 594

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

595

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15

Healing the Troubled Mind THERAPY

How Do Psychologists Provide Therapy? 598 biological Approaches 599
Psychological Approaches 600 evidence-based Practice 601 Clinical
Assessment 602 the therapists 602 Delivering Psychotherapy 605
Variations in Length of treatment 605 Alternatives to Individual Therapy
605 Innovative Delivery systems 606

Diverse Voices in Psychology Psychotherapy with Native Americans 607
Contemporary Challenges in treatment 608 Summary 15.1 608

Historical Approaches to Psychotherapy 609 Psychoanalysis 609 humanistic
therapies

619

treating ADhD 620 treating schizophrenia 623 treating bipolar Disorder
624 treating Major Depressive Disorder (MDD)

624 627

Experiencing Psychology Progressive Relaxation 629 treating body
Dysmorphic Disorder treating PtsD 630

630

Psychology as a Hub Science Using Virtual Reality (VR) 614

What Are Biological Therapies? 614 615

Perspective

634

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Online

How Are Specific Disorders Treated? 618 treating Neurodevelopmental
Disorders

to Treat Anxiety and PTSD 630 treating Dissociative Identity Disorder
631 treating somatic symptom Disorders 632 treating AsPD 632 treating
borderline Personality Disorder 632 treating NPD 632 Integration of
specific treatments 633

Interpersonal relationships The Treatment

Summary 15.2 618

treating AsD

(ASD) Be Treated?

of Relapse in Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) treating Anxiety Disorders
628 treating oCD 629

Contemporary Approaches to Psychotherapy 612

Medication 615 electroconvulsive therapy Psychosurgery 615 brain
stimulation 616 Neurofeedback 617

Thinking Scientifically Should Autism Spectrum Disorder

Connecting to research Mindfulness and the Prevention

610

behavioral therapies 612 Cognitive therapies 613 biopsychosocial
Approaches

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Approaches to treatment 599

618

Therapy During the COVID-19 Pandemic

635

Summary 15.3 636

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

637

618 CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxiii

16

The Healthy Mind STRESS AND COPING, HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY, AND POSITIVE
PSYCHOLOGY

What Is Stress? 640 the stress response 640

Experiencing Psychology What Is Your Stress Mindset? 641 sources of
stress 643

stress and the Amygdala 645 stress, the sympathetic Adrenal--Medullary
system, and the hypothalamic--Pituitary--Adrenal Axis 647 the
epigenetics of stress 648 Gender Differences in the stress response 649
socioeconomic status and stress 649

How Does Stress Affect Our Health? 650 stress and the Immune system
stress and heart Disease 651

650

Connecting to research Social Challenges Early in Life Affect the
Developing Immune System 652 stress, Mood, sleep, and obesity 652 An
Integrated View of stress and health 654

Psychology as a Hub Science Belongingness, Stress, Achievement, and
Health

655

How Can We Cope Effectively With Stress? 656 Managing stress 656 three
types of Coping 658 resilience: Individual Differences in response to
stress 659 Summary 16.1 660

What Is the Relationship Between Psychology and Health? 660 behavior and
health 662 tobacco use 663 Nutrition 665 Alcohol 666 exercise 668
Loneliness and health 669

xxiv

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

What Are the Biological and Social Correlates of Stress? 645

Culture and health 670 An Integrated understanding of health behaviors

671

Summary 16.2 672

What Is Positive Psychology? 672 Positive emotions 673 What Is
happiness? 674

Diverse Voices in Psychology Optimism Across Race and Ethnicity

674

happiness and Marriage 675 happiness and Wealth 675 Thinking
Scientifically Does Parenting Increase Happiness? 676 Can We Increase
happiness? 678 Positive traits 680 Positive Institutions 681 Positive
Psychology and the Future 682

Interpersonal relationships The Health Psychology Perspective

682

Psychology Takes on real-World Problems Resilience in the Face of a
Pandemic

683

Summary 16.3 684

Key terms: the Language of Psychological science

684

References R-1 name Index N-1 Subject Index/Glossary S-1

CoNteNts

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface

Political Science

Law

International Relations History

Sociology Psychiatry

SOCIAL Geography SCIENCES

Gerontology

Communications

PSYCHOLOGY Nursing Ophthalmology

Management Library and Information Sciences Statistics Psychology

Education

Public Health

Economics

Computer Science

MATHEMATICS Robotics Electrical Engineering

Applied Mathematics

Astronomy and

Biomedical Construction Astrophysics Engineering These unprecedented
times call for an even better underNeuroscience Nuclear Neurology
Anthropology Mechanical Radiology Sports Engineering Geoscience
Emergency standing of the mind than ever before. In 2020, our minds
Meteorology Sciences PHYSICS Medicine Toxocology Paleontology Cardiology
Condensed Otorhinolaryngology have been challenged, stressed, calmed,
and stressed again. Matter Material General Gastroenterology Genetics
Fuels Marine Surgery Medicine Sciences Zoology Biology Geoscience
Physical There is a need, as a society, to better comprehend the
healPharmacology Obstetrics/ Chemistry Gynocology Fish Ecology
Environmental Polymers Pediatrics ing and connecting power of the mind
to keep transforming Respiratory Soil EARTH Endocrinology Chemical
Analytical Hematology Agriculture Urology Engineering Chemistry
adversity into an opportunity to grow stronger and healthier toSCIENCES
Rheumatology MEDICINE Physical Plant Biochemistry Chemistry Sciences
gether. over the past months, we learned that we can be physiOncology
CHEMISTRY Dairy Urology Nutrition Biochemistry cally distant yet remain
emotionally connected with our friends and Immunology Entomology
General/ Organic Dermatology family---we also realized that the same
situation can feel extremely Biotechnology Virology Plant Pathology
Microbiology friendly or extremely ostracizing---just with the power of
our mind and Pharmacology Food Sciences Veterinary Dentistry our inner
dialogue. The way we interpret a situation may drive our reMedicine
Parasitology sponse to it---and in turn, our response to a situation may
have consequences for our mental health and well-being. The more we
understand the mind, the more we can adapt and reframe our perspectives
on current and future life stressors, develop evidence-based coping
mechanisms, and improve our mental well-being. This textbook offers a
rare opportunity to further discover the powerful psychological science
of the mind. In line with our first edition, this fourth edition of
Discovering Psychology: The Science of Mind is a textbook that reflects
Dr. John Cacioppo's visionary mission to write a textbook as a bridge to
the future. Discovering Psychology: The Science of Mind describes the
psychological science of mind as a hub science---a discipline whose work
provides foundational material for many other scientific fields and a
wide range of applications from eating habits to real-world problem
solving. Psychological science is also inherently interdisciplinary, and
we wanted to write a textbook that presents psychology not as a series
of isolated areas of inquiry, but as an integrated, holistic science of
mind. Contemporary psychological science is also a global affair, and we
sought to produce a textbook that draws on evidence from diverse samples
of healthy participants and patients, as well as studies of animals.
These goals and our implementation of them resonated with all of us:
both instructors and students using our previous editions. In honor of
John, we have stayed true to his mission and have attempted to expand
its implementation in this, our fourth edition. The science of
psychology developed in the 20th century as a collection of loosely
organized, independent subspecialties. Now, in the second decade of the
21st century, the discipline is moving rapidly toward maturity as an
integrative, multidisciplinary science. Not only are psychologists
forming rich collaborations with scholars in other fields, from medicine
to business to education to law, but we are returning to original
conceptions of psychology put forward by thinkers such as William James,
who sought a complete understanding of the human mind and was not
content to view psychology from narrow, isolated perspectives. We share
a mutual excitement about this evolution of psychological science, and
we marvel at the speed at which new developments are emerging in the
theory, methods, and applications of psychological science. This fourth
edition is designed to capture some of the most important developments
that have emerged in recent years and to reflect the power of
psychological science to help us manage the types of challenges that
emerged in 2020. For many years, the introductory psychology course has
served primarily as a jumping-off point for advanced courses in the
field, and the textbooks prepared to support the course have reflected
this goal. each chapter in these conventional textbooks provided a
capsule of stand-alone information designed to acquaint students with
the terminology and hypotheses of a single psychological perspective.
human behavior is influenced by factors across multiple perspectives,
however. We see our introductory textbook as providing a unique
opportunity to discuss all of psychology, in one place and at one time.
This approach allows us to reflect on the intersections among various
perspectives as they inform the whole of our understanding of the human
mind. Given that most students

xxv Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We see the introductory course as providing a unique opportunity to
discuss all of psychology in one place and at one time.

in our introductory classes will take only this one course in the field,
we have a responsibility to provide a comprehensive structure that will
support their lifelong learning and understanding of human behavior. our
goal is to engage our students in the fascinating, integrated discipline
of psychological science as it exists in the 21st century, and we view
the fourth edition of Discovering Psychology: The Science of Mind as
another plank in the bridge toward this goal. The structure of the
bridge is a traditional chapter organization. The piers on which the
bridge rests are the foundational theories of the discipline developed
in the late 19th, 20th, and early 21st centuries. The steel beams of
which the bridge is composed consist of the theories and research
painstakingly developed throughout the 20th century until today, and the
rivets, trusses, and tie rods that hold the bridge together are
integrative themes that have been reinvented in the past decade or so.
Finally, the smooth roadbed that transports students across the bridge
is a clear, inviting, warm, and lively writing style and visual
narrative. As active instructors in the introductory psychology
classroom, we recognize the balance that busy faculty members must find
between their preparation for class and their many other duties,
especially while navigating an online delivery system. our intent is to
make the transition to a 21st-century textbook as seamless and
effortless as possible for faculty and students alike. our discussions
of complex and emerging issues, such as epigenetics, include sufficient
information and explanation to provide a sense of mastery. Clear
writing, frequent examples, visual narratives, and engaging pedagogy
energize students and provide the support needed for success. After
completing the course, students will be able to appreciate the
distinction between how laypeople and psychologists think about human
behavior. As citizens of the so-called CoVID era, community leaders,
influencers, and college graduates will need a firm foundation in the
understanding of human behavior and critical thinking to cope with
stressors and confront successfully the myriad issues of social
isolation, health, privacy, free will, human dignity, public policy, and
well-being that might face them again in the future. This fourth edition
of Discovering Psychology: The Science of Mind is designed to provide
that foundation.

Our Integrative and Functionalist Approach early writings about
psychology were integrated and inclusive. Diverse elements of behavior
were combined into the whole. William James (1890) cautions us about the
risks of missing the big picture by breaking the phenomenon of mind into
little pieces. Mental life for James was not an entity that can be
"chopped up in bits" (p. 233). Despite the long-lived popularity of his
dominant psychology textbook, James did not prevail. Psychology soon
split into camps of scholars who viewed behavior and mental life through
their own single, narrow perspectives, rarely speaking with those who
held different views and producing curricula and textbooks that
emphasized the parts rather than the whole. There are good reasons for
specialization in science, but introductory psychology provides an
opportunity to put these pieces back together. Doing so shows students
how much our notions have changed regarding how the mind and behavior
work, and how much this understanding can improve their lives. As
psychological science became increasingly siloed in the 20th century,
its origins in the late 19th century as a unified whole were forgotten.
In 20th-century introductory psychology textbooks, the writings and
experiments of Wilhelm Wundt, edward titchener, and James are described
as the discipline's prehensile tail, long ago lost and interesting only
from a historical perspective. The organization of the study of mind
into separate, disconnected chapters not only transformed the topics of
psychology into islands without bridges, but actually built barriers to
students' understanding of the connectedness among them. A memory cannot
be fully understood from one isolated point of view; only when the
social and personality, cognitive, biological and evolutionary,
developmental, and clinical perspectives are combined can it be
thoroughly grasped. James (1890, vol. 1, p. 1) warns us that when mental
phenomena are

xxvi

PreFACe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

"superficially considered, their variety and complexity is such as to
leave a chaotic impression on the observer." This confusion,
unfortunately, is the legacy for many of our students exposed only to
outdated textbooks in psychology. breaking from the approach of other
textbooks, we reflect throughout our text on the integrative influences
of the founders in our functionalist approach to the material. We seek
not only to describe behavior, but also to answer questions about why a
particular behavior occurs. Viewed through this lens, behavior is
neither random nor unexplainable, and it shifts into focus when we
consider its goals and functions. For example, people do not just
experience feelings of loneliness; instead, loneliness acts as a warning
signal to remind us of the importance of social connectedness. our book
is subtitled The Science of Mind, and unlike other contem- Integration
in this textbook extends in two porary texts with their occasional
references to mind, the word appears in directions, both within
psychology and between each of the chapter titles, highlighting the
scientific study of the nature and psychology and other disciplines. We
hope to behavior of the theoretical construct of the mind. Throughout
the book, we emphasize the relationship between rigorous scientific
methods and ob- highlight for students the many connections servations,
as well as the implications of these observations for competing within
the discipline of psychology, as well as its theories about the
structure and operations of the human mind. connections with other
disciplines.

Implementing the Goals of Integration Many introductory psychology
textbooks are marketed as "integrated," but saying that you are
integrated and actually implementing integration are two different
things. We have spent a great amount of time and effort discussing ways
to provide a truly integrated presentation of the science of mind.
Integration in this textbook extends in two directions, both within
psychology and between psychology and other disciplines. We hope to
highlight for students the many connections within the discipline of
psychology, as well as its connections with other disciplines. Many
introductory psychology textbooks share our goal of providing
integration, but we would like to make our methods of achieving this
goal explicit: 1. Within the body of each chapter, we make frequent
connections to material in other chapters, forming bridges that connect
subtopics. In the electronic version of the textbook, these connections
will be hyperlinked for the convenience of the reader. For example, in a
discussion of the causes of anxiety disorders in our chapter on
psychological disorders (Chapter 14), we say: A reasonable place to
start looking for correlates of anxiety in brain structure and function
is the fear circuit involving the amygdala, which is discussed in
Chapters 4 and 7. the amygdala is particularly rich in receptors for
GAbA, a neurotransmitter that inhibits brain activity. As discussed in
Chapter 6, drugs such as alcohol and the benzodiazepine tranquilizers
(e.g., Valium) have their main anxiety-reducing effects at these GAbA
receptors. 2. We use frequent examples from other parts of the
discipline to illustrate principles within a chapter. For example, when
we discuss latent inhibition in our chapter on learning (Chapter 8), we
illustrate that principle by linking to clinical research about latent
inhibition, creativity, and schizophrenia and to social psychology
research on prejudice. 3. We specifically identify and explore five
integrative perspectives that weave the standard topics more closely
together: social and personality psychology, cognition, biology and
evolution, development, and clinical psychology. the need to consider
major perspectives in psychology was reinforced in a report titled
"strengthening the Common Core of the Introductory Psychology Course,"
published in 2014 by the American Psychological Association (APA board
of educational Affairs Working Group, 2014) and expanded upon by the
APA's Introductory Psychology Initiative. In keeping with the standard
organization of introductory psychology textbooks, the fundamentals of
these perspectives are covered in distinct chapters, but the threads of
each perspective are woven into all the chapters. these perspectives are
explained in greater detail in the following section. PreFACe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxvii

4. each chapter includes eight features, which are described in more
detail in a later section: Chapter opener, Psychology as a hub science,
experiencing Psychology, thinking scientifically, Connecting to
research, Perspectives on Interpersonal relationships, Diverse Voices in
Psychology, and Psychology takes on real-World Problems. these features
are designed to promote active learning and to increase student
interest. Four of these in particular (Chapter opener, Perspectives on
Interpersonal relationships, Psychology takes on real-World Problems,
and Psychology as a hub science) also contribute to our integrative
approach. In the chapter openers, we show how multiple psychological
perspectives address a phenomenon by zooming in to see the biological
approach and then zooming out again to gain insight from the
developmental, cognitive, individual difference, social, and clinical
perspectives. each Perspectives on Interpersonal relationships feature
shows how a particular perspective colors questions about successful
relationships, so by the end of the textbook, the student can see how
integrating 16 approaches to a single issue enriches our understanding
of a psychological phenomenon. Psychology takes on real-World Problems
tackles the issue of the CoVID-19 pandemic, highlighting research
relevant to each chapter that can be applied to understanding behavior
during a pandemic and developing thoughtful policy. the Psychology as a
hub science features address the larger integration picture of where
psychology stands in the context of the scientific community.

Integrative Features in Detail extensive literature supports the idea
that an engaged and cognitively active student is more likely to master
content. Although students are accustomed to textbooks, their approaches
to learning have been affected by technologies that transfer information
at an ever-increasing pace, with a strong emphasis on rapidly presented
visual images. Consequently, it becomes all too easy to go through the
motions of reading a text without really thinking about what they have
read. We have incorporated the following eight features, designed to
model good textbookreading practices in students while maintaining a
high level of interest and understanding.

Chapter Opener to introduce and engage interest in upcoming chapter
material, many

textbooks use a vignette or case study, accompanied by either a fine art
piece or a photo that is not discussed further. We begin each chapter
with a combination of two images---one gives the big picture, and the
other gives the microview of the same topic. The chapter opener guides
the student through the significance of the images. We use the terms
zoom in and zoom out to emphasize the need to understand the
underpinnings of a psychological phenomenon without losing the impact of
its larger context. For example, in the biological psychology chapter
(Chapter 4), the opening images show a woman accompanying two friends
(zoom out) and a beautiful image of a white blood cell exiting bone
marrow (zoom in). Does the woman feel like part of a group of friends,
or does she feel left out? Depending on how she perceives her social
situation, biological cascades are set in motion that prepare her immune
system The integrative hub feature broadens the discussion of a for
fighting either the viruses found in close social contact psychological
topic to include ways in which it is engaged in or the bacteria that
might be more of a risk when a person is cooperative science with other
disciplines, from medicine to solitary. The reader is drawn into the
reciprocal relationships that exist between biology and behavior. the
social sciences.

Psychology as a Hub Science This integrative feature broadens the
discussion of a psy-

chological topic to include ways in which psychology engages in
cooperative science with other disciplines, from medicine to the social
sciences. It is accompanied by a graphic adapted from a citation
analysis by boyack, Klavans, and börner (2005) that shows psychology
citations as nodes with connections to other related disciplines.
tailored to each of the 16 features, this graphic highlights the
connections between psychology and the relevant disciplines of
psychiatry, nursing, public health, emergency medicine, pharmacology,
computer science, law, education, management, and the other social
sciences. Given these connections, psychology has a central role to play
in our efforts to deal with economic collapses, the spread of pandemics,
energy conservation, the spread of terrorism, rising health care costs,
and our crumbling educational system. For

xxviii PreFACe Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May
not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to
electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the
eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any
suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning
experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional
content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

example, cardiovascular disease is surely a medical condition, but
contemporary scientists recognize that a full understanding of this
killer requires consideration of psychological domains, including stress
appraisal, reactivity to stressors, individual resilience, and a
person's social context. seeing the impact of psychology on many
disciplines makes the introductory course relevant for students of all
majors, as well as rekindling some "psych pride" in those of us in the
field.

Experiencing Psychology This interactive feature provides ways for
students to connect

the course material to their own lives and interests. some hands-on
examples are the epworth sleepiness scale in the consciousness chapter
(Chapter 6), Coren's handedness scale in the biological psychology
chapter (Chapter 4), the bFI-10 personality test in the chapter on
personality and the self (Chapter 12), and the hypersensitive Narcissism
scale in the chapter on psychological disorders (Chapter 14). In other
cases, this feature provides longer-term opportunities for students to
apply their learning, such as working to reduce the frequency of a bad
habit (Chapter 8).

Thinking Scientifically This interactive feature models critical
thinking skills for students

by providing them with opportunities to critique the progress of
science. For example, in the chapter on research methods (Chapter 2),
students review the current controversies about replication in
psychology. In the chapter on psychological treatments (Chapter 15),
students are asked to evaluate whether autism spectrum disorder (AsD) is
simply a difference or something requiring treatment.

Connecting to Research to emphasize psychology as a science, this
feature explores either a classic or a contemporary study relevant to
the chapter's material and comments on its significance to the field.
sections on the question, methods, ethics, results, and conclusions
provide a guided introduction for the student to the essentials of the
peer-reviewed literature. From Wundt's classic studies of reaction time,
to the discovery of mirror neurons, to distinctions between romantic
love and lust in the brain, students are given insight into what
psychological scientists do. Perspectives on Interpersonal Relationships
In keeping with the integrative

mission of this textbook, the goal of this feature is to demonstrate how
the information in a particular chapter can be applied to a single
topic---building and maintaining important relationships. This issue is
personally meaningful to college students, especially first-year
students, and it applies across the board---regardless of gender, race,
age, ethnicity, sociocultural background, sexual orientation, or level
of academic preparation. The feature has two main purposes: (1) to
engage and maintain student interest throughout the text and (2) to
stitch together into an integrative, thematic quilt the patchwork of
traditional introductory psychology topic areas.

Diverse Voices in Psychology The American Psychological Association
(APA) report on best practices for introductory psychology (Gurung et
al., 2016) emphasized the inclusion of culture and diversity as a
"cross-cutting theme" (p. 112). Although we concur with trimble,
stevenson, and Worell (2003; see later discussion in this forward)
regarding the need to integrate diversity across topics in an organic
way, which guided all four editions of this textbook, we thought
additional in-depth discussions would be useful. This feature explores
timely topics such as the shooter bias (Chapter 13) and culturally
competent counseling and psychotherapy with Native Americans (Chapter
15). Psychology Takes on Real-World Problems Introductory psychology
courses

provide a unique opportunity to not only prepare students for continued
study in psychology, but also to provide tools to majors and nonmajors
alike that can be used to tackle significant human problems. once again
taking a cue from the APA's introductory psychology report, we have
incorporated aspects of the "big Problems" activity described in the
report's appendix into this feature. For this fourth edition, we
selected the topic of the CoVID-19 pandemic, which is not only
top-of-mind for today's students, but also provides opportunities to
apply multiple aspects of psychological science. We provide a template
for policy development, emphasizing the utility of psychological science
to real-world problems. each chapter highlights ways in which its
material can be used to address the causes of and solutions to problems
related to the pandemic, emphasizing the practical significance of
psychological science and encouraging students to apply their learning
to policy evaluation and change. PreFACe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxix

Integrative Perspectives in Detail The separate perspectives taken by
psychologists are reviewed for students in the context of the historical
discussion in Chapter 1. In each subsequent chapter, we pay especially
close attention to the contributions of each of the following
perspectives to the topic at hand.

Social and Personality english writer and poet John Donne was correct in
stating that

"no man is an island." The cultural differences that are increasingly
apparent as we become a more global world are a testament to how
strongly social structures and processes affect the operation of factors
from other perspectives. We are a social species, and much of our
behavior can be understood in terms of how it maintains our social
relatedness with one another. The consequences of failing to maintain
connectedness are severe. For example, chronic feelings of social
isolation are associated with poor mental and physical health and
premature mortality, and longitudinal studies in humans and experimental
studies in animals indicate that perceived isolation contributes to
these outcomes. In short, feeling left out can be toxic. behavioral
systems are particularly prone to variation, and we illustrate how such
variation can be regarded as a source of important data in its own
right. In addition to exploring individual differences within the
context of personality, we integrate this facet with other perspectives.
For example, we discuss how individual differences in responses to
stress are best understood by considering epigenetics, learning, and
social factors.

Cognitive The human is above all else a thinking organism, and the way
that we process in-

formation affects our behavior. Whether we are considering the
development of behavior, learned behavior, or the aberrations of
behavior that accompany psychological disorders, an understanding of how
we think provides considerable insight. For example, we understand that
an effective way to improve depressed people's moods is to help them
restructure the way that they process information. Instead of students'
thinking that flunking an exam means they are not good enough to attend
college, we can encourage them to think that although flunking an exam
isn't fun, it's not the end of the world either, and they can make some
changes that will lead to better performance next time.

Biological and Evolutionary We believe that all introductory psychology
students, even

those who will never take another psychology course, will gain a better
understanding of contemporary psychology in the context of the
relationships between biological processes and behavior. For example,
when we discuss attraction and close relationships, we mention data
showing that viewing a photograph of somebody we love, as opposed to
somebody we like, activates the brain's reward circuits and decreases
activity in areas associated with social judgment. Not only is love
somewhat socially blind, but it really does feel good. Throughout the
textbook, we stress the role of evolutionary pressures in shaping both
the structures and the functions of the mind. We devote a complete
chapter to providing students with a foundation for understanding the
interactions between genes and environment, including a basic primer on
epigenetics. The importance of gene--environment interactions is woven
throughout our discussion of development, but it is also highlighted in
other contexts, including discussions of children's responses to being
bullied.

Developmental The structures and processes of behavior, as well as
behavior itself, change over time. Knowing that most children achieve a
theory of mind by the age of 4 years not only is relevant to our
understanding of children and their behavior, but also informs
discussions of the development of language and social skills and the
deficits found in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (AsD). The
importance of the developmental perspective does not end in childhood
either. January 1, 2011, marked the date at which the oldest of the baby
boomers turned 65. From that date, about 10,000 people will turn 65
every day for the next 19 years. As a result of these demographic
changes, the percentage of the u.s. population whose social role is
retiree is projected to increase dramatically in the coming decades.
understanding developmental changes across the life span is therefore
increasingly important.

xxx

PreFACe

Clinical We can understand behavior by observing what works, but it is
also highly useful to see what happens when things go wrong. Just as the
neuroscientist learns about normal brain function by observing changes
following the damage caused by a stroke, we can learn much about
behavior by observing how it changes because of a psychological
disorder. For example, we consider the effects of schizophrenia on
classical conditioning in the chapter on learning (Chapter 8).

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Delivering Complex Content to Contemporary Learners We were delighted to
see that our first three editions were embraced by faculty working with
students representing a wide range of preparation, from community
colleges to elite, private universities, as well as by international
faculty teaching students with first languages other than english. our
teaching philosophy rejects the common construct of a textbook "level."
Instead, we believe that all students can master complex content if it
is presented in the right way. As this text goes to press, we are unsure
about the direction institutions will take regarding virtual versus
face-to-face instruction. As active instructors of introductory
psychology, we have shared the journey of many of our colleagues as we
navigate the online teaching space. one of our authors (LF) has more
than ten years of experience in a completely online environment (Argosy
university online), and we have attempted to keep the needs of online
students and instructors top of mind as we revise this latest edition.
Many students and faculty are using electronic text resources for the
first time, and we are hearing concerns about screen fatigue and other
perceived challenges of this medium. Developing an electronic version of
a text is not about converting a print book to pdf files. Instead,
proactive strategies such as breaking material into reasonable sections
and providing sufficient illustrations work for both print and
electronic versions alike.

Student-Friendly Writing and Pedagogy our goal in writing this textbook
is to provide students with the best science possible, which means that
we do not avoid complex topics or dumb down the material. to make
psychological science accessible to students with wide ranges of
preparation, we rely on a student-friendly writing style with supportive
pedagogy. We break chapters into meaningful chunks, and we use thumbnail
images of chapter photos and figures in our summary tables as a mnemonic
device that students can use to recall where they read about a topic.
Margin definitions and carefully selected key terms help the students
focus their learning. one of our reviewers had this to say about the
first chapter of our textbook, which can be one of the most difficult to
write: "I am impressed with the history of Psychology chapter in
Cacioppo/Freberg. The figures, timeline, interesting AND relevant
pictures, and examples throughout the text are fantastic and engaging.
It is one of the best history/intro chapters I've read." This reviewer
also noticed another one of our goals---to use all photos and figures as
teachable moments, not just repetitions of the narrative or pretty
placeholders.

Implementation of Guidelines for "Inclusive Psychology" today's college
and university students represent a wide range of diverse demographic
variables, and these variables should be reflected thoughtfully in the
textbooks that they read. As this textbook goes to press, issues of
diversity and fairness are especially salient in our conversations and
news reports. on behalf of the APA, trimble, stevenson, and Worell
(2003) provided considerable guidance to textbook authors and publishers
regarding opportunities for including diversity content in an
introductory psychology textbook. They focus on the following types of
diversity: age, culture, race/ethnicity, gender, disability, language,
and sexual orientation. Gurung et al. (2016, p. 112), also writing on
behalf of the APA, emphasized the need to present culture and diversity
as "cross-cutting themes" throughout the introductory psychology course.
We have used these papers as a blueprint for incorporating the dimension
of diversity in our textbook. We adamantly concur with trimble et
al. (2003, p. 2) when they state, "Culture, race/ethnicity, gender,
disability, sexual orientation, language, and age can be integrated into
the main text of every textbook chapter. highlighting these issues only
in special sections or boxes fosters the continued marginalization of
members of nondominant groups." We incorporate diversity issues
seamlessly throughout the narrative and in illustrations and examples.
For example, while PreFACe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxxi

we note that roland Fryer was the youngest African-American professor to
obtain tenure at harvard university, we do so in the context of how his
childhood and youth shaped his approaches to educational incentives
within a discussion of motivation. Although trimble et al. (2003) appear
to dislike feature boxes, we have found it useful to augment the
discussion of culture and gender in the narrative by highlighting
special topics in our Diverse Voices in Psychology feature. We believe
that this combination represents the antithesis of the biggest concern
raised by trimble et al. (2003)---isolated, disconnected discussion of
diversity in boxes alone. trimble et al. (2003) provide extensive,
detailed suggestions for specific content, such as inclusion of
stereotype threat and gender and cultural issues in eating disorders,
that we have found useful. For interested faculty and students, we have
a comprehensive, separate document with chapter and page references
indicating how we have implemented these recommendations. Please feel
free to email lfreberg@calpoly.edu to obtain a copy. In addition, great
care has been taken to adhere to APA standards on language. The
illustrations feature individuals of diverse races, ethnicities, ages,
abilities, and gender. When possible, they show people in a positive
light (e.g., no sad older adults feeding pigeons) and avoid traditional
depictions (e.g., male therapist helping female client). Large numbers
of illustrations feature cross-cultural examples. Cross-cultural
research is featured whenever possible, such as global studies of
subjective well-being.

A Complete Course---Teaching and Learning Supplements A rich array of
supplements accompanies Cacioppo/Freberg/Cacioppo's Discovering
Psychology: The Science of Mind, 4th edition, including several that
make use of the latest technologies. These supplements are designed to
make teaching and learning more effective. Many are available free to
professors or students. others can be packaged with this textbook at a
discount. Contact your local sales representative for more information
on any of the listed resources.

MindTap Mindtap for Discovering Psychology: The Science of Mind creates
a unique learning path that fosters increased comprehension and
efficiency. It engages students and empowers them to produce their best
work---consistently. In Mindtap, course material is seamlessly
integrated with videos, activities, apps, and more. For students:
Mindtap delivers real-world relevance with activities and assignments
designed to help students build critical thinking and analytical skills
that can be applied to other courses and to their professional lives. ●
Mindtap serves as a single destination for all course materials so that
students can stay organized and efficient and have the necessary tools
to master the content. ● Mindtap shows students where they stand at all
times---both individually and compared to the highest performers in the
class. this information helps to motivate and empower performance. ●

In Mindtap, instructors can do the following: Control the content.
Instructors select what students see and when they see it. Create a
unique learning path. In Mindtap, the Discovering Psychology: The
Science of Mind text is enhanced with multimedia and activities to
encourage and motivate learning and retention, moving students up the
learning taxonomy. Materials can be used as is or modified to match an
instructor's syllabus. ● Integrate their own content. Instructors can
modify the Mindtap reader using their own documents or pulling from
sources like rich site summary (rss) feeds, Youtube videos, websites,
Google Docs, and more. ● ●

xxxii

PreFACe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

●

Follow student progress. Powerful analytics and reports provide a
snapshot of class progress, time students spend logging into the course,
and completion to help instructors assess level of engagement and
identify problem areas.

The Instructor Companion Site The Instructor Companion site for this
title includes an Instructor's Resource Manual, which provides a wealth
of teaching tips and classroom resources; Cengage Learning Testing
Powered by Cognero featuring questions correlated to learning
objectives, bloom's taxonomy level, and difficulty; and PowerPoint
slides providing concept coverage with dynamic animations, photographs,
and video.

Changes in the Fourth Edition An obvious change in the fourth edition is
the addition of steph Cacioppo to our author team. steph not only
collaborated closely with John (they shared a desk), but she brings her
own unique perspectives as a licensed clinician to the textbook.
Progress in psychological science continues to move forward at a
blistering pace, and this fourth edition has been updated to include
many new photos and figures and several hundred new references that
reflect the advances in the field since the last edition went to press.
A sample of the content updates and revisions to each chapter include
the following:

Chapter 1 The Science of Mind: The Discipline of Psychology expands ties
between the textbook and the pillars and cross-cutting themes
recommended by the APA Introductory Psychology Initiative. ● Added new
section explicitly outlining the advantages of studying psychology for
contemporary students. ● expanded discussion of perspectives to include
APA divisions that are not typically covered in intro psychology
textbooks. ● Includes a table of common myths in psychology. ● refreshed
the Psychology Takes on Real-World Problems feature (cyberbullying in
3e) to a discussion of pandemics. Includes specific information on
policy development. ●

Chapter 2 The Measure of Mind: Methods of Psychology updated discussion
of confirmation bias. Added section on "truthiness" or how we can be
fooled into thinking false information is true. ● updated section on
hypothesis testing and the null hypothesis. ● expanded discussion of
quasi-experiments. ● expanded discussion of correlations and mistakes in
interpretation. ● updated discussion of descriptive statistics and
central tendency with new examples. ● updated and clarified discussion
of statistical significance and effect sizes. ● refreshed Experiencing
Psychology feature to the use of critical thinking to evaluate popular
press reports of scientific findings. the example used is a report about
depression and social media use. ● updated the Hub Science feature to
discuss the development of factor analysis. ● the Psychology Takes on
Real-World Problems feature discusses the application of the research
methods covered in the chapter to a specific question with policy
implications: Why do people wear masks in some situations and not
others? ● ●

PreFACe xxxiii

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 3 The Evolving Mind: Nature and Nurture Intertwined Emphasized
application of genetics to understanding of causes of psychological
disorders and their potential treatments. ● Discussed rates of gene
expression as differentiating between species, e.g. humans and other
primates. ● Clarified discussion of heritability. ● Uses a study about
blood type and risk of COVID-19 severity to illustrate genomewide
association studies (GWAS). ● Updated Flynn effect discussion. ●
Refreshed Experiencing Psychology feature with an activity for
identifying your cat's genome related to length of fur and fur coloring.
● Reformatted Warrior Gene Thinking Scientifically feature to include
critical thinking questions discussed in Chapter 2. ● Refreshed
Real-World Problems feature with a discussion of the impact of genetics
on responses to social distancing recommendations. ●

Chapter 4 The Biological Mind: The Physical Basis of Behavior Refreshed
Thinking Scientifically feature to discuss eye movement desensitization
and reprocessing therapy (EMDR). ● Updated Hub Science feature to
discuss the use of neuroscience in courts to assess "dangerousness" at
parole hearings. ● Refreshed Real-World Problems feature to cover social
distancing, loneliness, and the brain. ●

Chapter 5 The Perceiving Mind: Sensation and Perception Inclusion of
ganglion cells related to circadian rhythms and sensitivity to
brightness. Added discussion of perfect pitch and autism spectrum
disorder. ● Inclusion of a "hermunculus," or an attempt to map parts of
the body to the sensory cortex in females (instead of the traditional
homunculus, or male version). ● Update of Diverse Voices feature to
include new research on culture and vision. ● Perceptions of taste and
culture---including crispy tarantulas! ● Refreshed Real-World Problems
feature to look at social distancing and the perception of threat. ● ●

Chapter 6 The Aware Mind: Elements of Consciousness Expanded coverage of
the default mode network (DMN) relative to conditions such as autism
spectrum disorder. ● Update on "social jet lag." ● Update on sleep
spindles, learning, and Alzheimer's disease. ● Update on screen time and
insomnia. ● Update on brain death. ● Update on LSD's mode of action. ●
Update on opioid epidemic. ● Refreshed Connecting to Research feature
with discussion of the effects of psychedelics on consciousness. ●

xxxiv PREFACE Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May
not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to
electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the
eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any
suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning
experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional
content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

refreshed Thinking Scientifically feature to discuss the potential for
using hallucinogens in therapy. ● refreshed Real-World Problems feature
with discussion of sleep during a pandemic. ●

Chapter 7 The Feeling Mind: Emotion and Motivation Added discussion of
"power posing" and its replication issues to the facial feedback
section. ● Added discussion of somatic markers (without using that term,
however). ● updated section on female sexual interest. ● updated section
on genetics and sexual orientation with discussion of the important
Ganna et al. (2019) GWAs study. ● expanded discussion of achievement
motivation. ● Added application of Maslow's hierarchy of needs to
understanding behavior during CoVID-19. ● refreshed Thinking
Scientifically feature with a discussion of participation trophies and
motivation. ● refreshed Real-World Problems feature with discussion of
CoVID-19 and motivational priorities. ●

Chapter 8 The Adaptive Mind: Learning expanded discussion of operant
conditioning applications to spanking practices and behavior in hoV
lanes. ● Discussion of classical conditioning and opioid overdose. ●
expanded Hub Science feature on taste aversion and endangered species to
include the marbled murrelet and the quoll in addition to the Mexican
wolf. ● refreshed Thinking Scientifically feature to discuss appropriate
ways to praise children. ● refreshed Real-World Problems feature to
discuss whether people can learn to be less lonely during social
distancing. ●

Chapter 9 The Knowing Mind: Memory Added discussion of reconsolidation
following retrieval. Added discussion of caffeine and memory. ● Added
discussion of interleaving to study skills recommendations. ● refreshed
Thinking Scientifically feature with a discussion of taking notes
longhand or using a computer. ● refreshed Real-World Problems feature
with discussion on compliance with social distancing and working memory.
● ●

Chapter 10 The Thinking Mind: Thinking, Language, and Intelligence
updated discussion of neuromarketing. expanded discussion of rumination
in problem solving. ● update and revision of section on heuristics. ●
Added explicit best practices for decision making. ● update and revision
of section on dyslexia. ● update and revision of section on bilingualism
and multilingualism. ● revision of section on emotional and social
intelligence. ● update and revision of section on brain structure and
intelligence. ● ●

PreFACe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxxv

updated section on giftedness with discussion of acceleration effects.
updated Thinking Scientifically section on baby videos, e.g. baby
einstein. ● refreshed Real-World Problems section with a discussion of
the availability heuristic and CoVID-19. ● ●

Chapter 11 The Developing Mind: Life Span Development update on
teratogens, including acetaminophen (tylenol/Anacin), and ADhD and
autism spectrum disorder. ● Addition of research on CoVID-19 effects on
the fetus. ● revision of discussion of sex chromosomes and intersex. ●
Added discussion of research on infant's understanding of social power.
● expanded discussion of attachment to include cross-cultural data and
correlations with adult romantic attachments. ● expanded discussion of
indulgent parenting, which has become more common in recent years. ●
Addition of other theories of moral reasoning following Kohlberg's. ●
Addition of stage of emerging adulthood, with contrasts to adolescence
and young adulthood. ● update and revision of cognitive changes in later
adulthood. ● refreshed Relationships feature with a discussion of a
"perfect" time to get married. ● refreshed Real-World Problems feature
with a discussion of pandemic anxiety across the lifespan. ●

Chapter 12 The Individual Mind: Personality and the Self updated
discussion of serotonin transporter gene and culture. Added discussion
of ambiverts. ● updated discussion of genetics, brain structure, and
personality. ● updated discussion of personality assessment to reflect
changes in the most recent version of the MMPI. ● updated discussion of
gender, race/ethnicity, and self-esteem. ● updated discussion of
individualistic versus collectivistic cultures. ● refreshed Diverse
Voices feature with discussion of diversity and personality assessment.
● refreshed Real-World Problems feature with discussion of personality
and responses to a pandemic. ● ●

Chapter 13 The Connected Mind: Social Psychology updated discussion of
first impressions. revised section on the neuroscience of cognitive
dissonance. ● Added section on the neuroscience of persuasion. ●
expanded discussion of social identities. ● expanded section on reducing
prejudice. ● updated and expanded Hub Science feature on social media
and fake news, including explicit hints for avoiding belief in fake news
stories. ● refreshed Thinking Scientifically feature with a discussion
of brain damage and criminal behavior. ● refreshed Real-World Problems
feature to discuss persuasion during a pandemic. ● ●

xxxvi PreFACe Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May
not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to
electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the
eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any
suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning
experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional
content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 14 The Troubled Mind: Psychological Disorders Included update on
the 11th edition of ICD. update of causal factors related to autism
spectrum disorder. ● expanded discussion of schizophrenia to include
saccade differences. ● Added discussion of oxidative stress in bipolar
disorder. ● update of learned helplessness and major depressive disorder
section to reflect Maier and seligman's (2016) rethinking of the
original experiments. ● Added discussion of genetics in height phobia. ●
update of discussion of culture in social anxiety. ● update of
biological correlates of oCD. ● update on causal factors and PtsD. ●
update of biological correlates of antisocial personality disorder. ●
refreshed Thinking Scientifically feature with discussion of cannabis
and psychosis. ● refreshed Diverse Voices feature with discussion of
culture, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and suicidality. ● revised
and updated Hub Science feature on leadership and psychopathy. ●
refreshed Real-World Problems feature with discussion of CoVID-19 and
oCD. ● ●

Chapter 15 Healing the Troubled Mind: Therapy updated discussion of life
coaching. Added discussion of transcranial direct electrical stimulation
for the treatment of auditory hallucination. ● update on research about
the efficacy of antidepressant medications. ● revised section on
treatment of PtsD. ● refreshed Diverse Voices feature with a discussion
of psychotherapy with Native Americans. ● refreshed Thinking
Scientifically feature with a discussion of neurodiversity versus
disorder/disability in autism spectrum disorder. this includes simon
baron-Cohen's "4 D's": disorder, disability, difference, and disease. ●
refreshed Real-World Problems feature with a discussion of online
therapy during CoVID-19. ● ●

Chapter 16 The Healthy Mind: Stress and Coping, Health Psychology, and
Positive Psychology Added discussion of stress and CoVID-19. Added
discussion of robotic pets as stress reducers for patients with
Alzheimer's disease. ● expanded discussion of vaping. ● expanded
discussion of loneliness interventions. ● updated culture and health
section with data regarding CoVID-19. ● expanded positive psychology
section to include PerMA model. ● revised happiness discussion with
latest world happiness data. ● expanded discussion of the "meaningful
life" and happiness. ● revised Thinking Scientifically feature on
parenting and happiness. ● refreshed Real-World Problems feature to
discuss resilience during a pandemic. ● ●

PreFACe xxxvii

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Acknowledgments We thank William James for bringing so many disparate
threads of scholarship together to form the backbone of what continues
to be the study of psychology.

Cengage Learning Team We are grateful to our Cengage Learning team.
Colin Grover shared our vision for this textbook from the outset and
went many extra miles to make it a reality. Christy Frame, Nick barrows,
Deanna ettinger, and Jessica Witzcak gave us their full support through
each step of the process. We also thank Michelle shiota of Arizona state
university and instructional designer Jan Johnson.

Manuscript Reviewers We could not produce this textbook without the
meticulous and thoughtful input of our peers. We continue to stand in
awe of the care that our colleagues put into their teaching and their
desire for their students to succeed. Many thanks to the following
reviewers of this book: Judith Addelston, Valencia College, East Anthony
Ahrens, American University John Allen, University of Arizona roxanna
Andersen, Palm Beach State College, Boca Raton stacy Anderson, Florida
Gulf Coast University ted barker, Northwest Florida State College Mark
basham, Regis University Kyle baumbauer, Texas A&M University Kathy
becker-blease, Oregon State University Kristen t. begosh, University of
Delaware richard bernstein, Broward College, South Campus Melissa A.
berry, University of Dayton Kathleen bey, Palm Beach State College, Lake
Worth rachel blaser, University of San Diego sara broaders, Northwestern
University Christina M. brown, Saint Louis University eric bruns,
Campbellsville University Kathryn Caldwell, Ithaca College Aimee A.
Callender, Auburn University David Campbell, Humboldt State University
John timothy Cannon, University of Scranton brian D. Carpenter,
Washington University, St. Louis Lawrence Cohen, University of Delaware
Kyle evan Conlon, Boise State University John Connor, Daytona State
College brian Cowley, Park University Verne Cox, University of Texas,
Arlington David seth Crystal, Georgetown University Natalie Dautovich,
University of Alabama sarah D'elia, George Mason University and Northern
Virginia Community College Matthew Draper, Utah Valley University
Patrick Drumm, Ohio University, Lancaster robert Dubois, Waukesha County
Technical College Kimberly Duff, Cerritos College Megan Dunbar,
California State University San Marcos and Palomar College Darlene
earley, Southern Union State Community College

xxxviii PreFACe Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved.
May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to
electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the
eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any
suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning
experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional
content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Dawn eaton, San Jacinto College-South Jennifer engler, York College of
Pennsylvania Kathy erickson, Pima Community College Carlos escoto,
Eastern Connecticut State University Kendall eskine, Loyola University
New Orleans Melanie evans, Eastern Connecticut State University bryan D.
Fantie, American University stephen L. Forssell, George Washington
University Debra Lynn Frame, University of Cincinnati Andrea Friedrich,
University of Kentucky Perry Fuchs, University of Texas, Arlington
Philip Gable, University of Alabama bridgett Galvin, Framingham State
College Deborah Garfin, Georgia State University Jeanette Gassaway, Ohio
University bryan Gibson, Central Michigan University Allen Gorman,
Angelo State University ruth Grahn, Connecticut College ruth M. Grant,
Sacred Heart University Alexis s. Green, Hanover College Anthony Greene,
University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee Christina Grimes, Duke University
scott Gustafson, University of Mississippi Carrie e. hall, Miami
University erin e. hardin, Texas Tech University Gregory harris, Polk
State College Jeffrey henriques, University of Wisconsin, Madison robert
J. hines, University of Arkansas, Little Rock Kelly huffman, University
of California, Riverside Linda Jackson, Michigan State University
Jennifer Johnson, Bloomsberg University todd Joseph, Hillsborough
Community College, Dale Mabry Irene P. Kan, Villanova University Kevin
Keating, Broward College, North Craig Kinsley, University of Richmond
Michelle (MiKi) Kitchen, University of South Carolina Cheri Kittrell,
State College of Florida, Manatee-Sarasota Megan L. Knowles, Franklin
and Marshall College Jordan Labouff, Baylor University Debra Laino,
Philadelphia University Carrie Lane, Florida State University Jamison D.
Law, Utah Valley University Natalie Lawrence, James Madison University
Jennifer Lee, Cabrillo College Angela M. Legg, Pace University,
Pleasantville Fabio Leite, Ohio State University, Lima robin Lightner,
University of Cincinnati Carrie A. Lloyd, Huntington University
Christine Lofgren, University of California, Irvine Nicolette Lopez,
University of Texas, Arlington David Malcolm, Fordham University Michael
Mangan, University of New Hampshire Abigail Marsh, Georgetown University
Daniel McConnell, University of Central Florida Anna Medina, Gonzaga
University sean P. Meegan, University of Utah Antoinette Miller, Clayton
State University PreFACe

xxxix

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

robin K. Morgan, Indiana University Southeast ronald Morrison, Daytona
State College Michelle Niculescu, Lebanon Valley College Charlotte
Nolan-reyes, Cabrillo College Kevin o'Neil, Florida Gulf Coast
University hajime otani, Central Michigan University Gwendolyn
Parsons-spurrier, Hillsborough Community College, Ybor City Campus Lois
Pasapane, Palm Beach State College, Lake Worth Marion Perlmutter,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor David J. rademacher, Carthage College
Gabriel radvansky, University of Notre Dame Cynthia reidi, Morrisville
State College Ann e. renken, University of Southern California heather
J. rice, Washington University, St. Louis Michael roberts, DePauw
University Marylou robins, San Jacinto College-South Dario rodriguez,
University of Dayton ronnie rothschild, Broward College, Central Campus
sharleen sakai, Michigan State University Catherine sanderson, Amherst
College Patrick saxe, State University of New York, New Paltz Luis
schettino, Lafayette College David schroeder, University of Arkansas
Dennis shaffer, Ohio State University, Mansfield Alex sharpe, Santa Fe
College Donald sharpe, University of Regina Caroline shelton-toney, Polk
State College Cindy sledge, San Jacinto College-South Mikle Don south,
Brigham Young University William suits, Seminole State College of
Florida Cyril svoboda, University of Maryland University College Lara
tedrow, Tidewater Community College brian Thomas, Baldwin-Wallace
College Lisa Thomassen, Indiana University, Bloomington Clarissa
Thompson, University of Oklahoma terry trepper, Purdue University
Southwest Alexa tullet, University of Alabama Lindsey West, Georgia
Regents University eliah White, University of Cincinnati, Blue Ash
College Katherine urquhart, Lake Sumter Community College Anre Venter,
University of Notre Dame Craig Vickio, Bowling Green State University
Mark Walter, Salisbury University shannon Welch, University of Idaho
Lona Whitmarsh, Fairleigh Dickinson University John Wright, Washington
State University erin Young, Texas A&M University We also thank suzanne
Corkin (1937--2016) for reading and commenting on sections describing
the amnesic patient h. M. (henry Molaison) in our first edition.
Finally, we could not have done this without the patience and support of
our families.

xl

PreFACe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Taste buds contained in the papillae of the tongue are far more
responsive to bitter tastes than to sweet tastes.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Science of Mind

1

THE DISCIPLINE OF PSYCHOLOGY Learning Objectives 1. Identify the five
indepth perspectives of psychology and explain how integrating these
perspectives leads to a more comprehensive and accurate view of behavior
and mental processes.

2.  Explain why issues of diversity and ethics are important to explore
    across all topics in psychology.

3.  Describe how early movements in psychology are significant for
    modern psychology.

4.  Explain the contributions of philosophy and the natural sciences to
    our understanding of modern psychology.

5.  Discuss the importance of the scientific method as a foundation for
    psychology.

6.  Explain why psychology's role as a hub science supports applications
    in many academic fields, contributes to the solutions of critical
    contemporary problems, and informs the development of public
    policies.

STUDYING THE SCIENCE OF PSYCHOLOGY CAN lead you to see yourself and
other people in completely new ways. Hundreds of years ago, people
believed that the world was flat and the Sun and stars circled the
Earth. Careful scientific research slowly dispelled these inaccurate
notions. Nonetheless, we hold tightly to many equally false commonsense
beliefs about the human mind and behavior. We all "know" that opposites
attract, but we also "know" that birds of a feather flock together---so
why do we need psychology to tell us what we already "know"? The problem
is that both statements cannot be true at the same time, so the real
state of affairs is neither obvious nor simple. Just as careful science
was required to understand our planet's place in the universe, the same
scientific techniques are providing us with a more accurate, complete
view of the human mind. Let's begin with a seemingly simple and familiar
example: our ability to taste. We know a lot about taste---what we like
or dislike, the different qualities of taste, and so on. Most of us can
taste sweetness in a solution made of 1 part sugar and 200 parts water.
As remarkable as this sensitivity appears to be, however, people can
detect 1 part bitter substance (like quinine or the chemicals in
broccoli) in 2 million parts water. This contrast in taste sensitivity
between sweet and bitter does not reflect the actual difference between
sweet and bitter substances---that is, bitter tastes are not 10,000
times stronger than sweet tastes---but rather how we experience them.
Why would we have such a vast difference in sensitivity between these
types of tastes? Our personal experience of taste does not help us much
in answering this question, but Most poisons or toxins taste bitter, and
if you want to stay alive, it is more important to avoid swallowing
poison than to enjoy something sweet. Being far more sensitive to tastes
that are

Masterfile

psychological science can. As it turns out, our greater sensitivity to
bitter tastes is highly adaptive:

3 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Can you tell whether you're experiencing lust or romantic love?
Introspection is the personal observation of our own thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors. Because we are not perfect observers of the operations of
our own minds, psychologists developed other methods that provide
scientific insight into the mind. In this functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) scan, areas of the brain that were more active when
participants were feeling lust are shown in blue and areas that were
more active when people are experiencing feelings of romantic love are
shown in pink. Through technology, researchers can better understand
complex behaviors like love and lust. From
https://news.uchicago.edu/story/researchers-find-brains-sweet-spot-love-neurological-patient

Source: University of Chicago Office of Communications

bitter is a trait that has served our species well because it helps us
avoid eating things that could kill us. Psychology helps us understand
why we do the things we do by providing a context for understanding the
mind and behavior. To gain that understanding, psychology addresses
questions from the multiple scientific perspectives discussed in this
chapter. One can think of this like the zoom feature in Google Earth. In
some parts of this textbook, we will zoom in on human behaviors, like
looking at the highly magnified image of the papillae on the tongue
(pictured on page 2), which allow us to taste, and trace the messages
about taste sent from the tongue to the brain. At other times, we'll
zoom out, to take in the larger picture and better understand why the
boy on the previous page is giving his bitter-tasting broccoli a
skeptical look. To begin, we can look at the little boy's reaction to
his broccoli from a developmental perspective, which tells us that
children are more sensitive to taste than adults. Using a biological
perspective, we can trace the neural mechanisms responsible for taste
sensitivity. Or, using the social perspective, we can think about social
influences like culture on food preferences. Cottage cheese, enjoyed by
many Americans, is viewed with disgust in some other parts of the world.
Meanwhile, deep-fried tarantulas, a delicacy in Cambodia, might not be a
popular item in the United States. Although single perspectives tell us
a great deal about a phenomenon like our sensitivity to bitter tastes,
no one perspective gives us a complete putting multiple perspectives
together. You can learn about your house by zooming in on it in Google
Earth, but when you see how your home fits into the larger context of
city,

iStock.com/NASA/kutay tanir

answer. The best view comes from

state, country, and planet, that viewpoint adds something special to
your understanding. We'll start by learning more about psychology's main
perspectives, along with a little background about their origins. Our
approach to these perspectives is consistent with contemporary
recommendations for teaching introductory psychology

4

Chapter 1

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

made by the American Psychological Association (e.g., Gurung et al.,
2016). Once we understand these perspectives, we'll be in a better
position to see how they come together to give us the big picture.

What Is Psychology? Psychology is the scientific study of the mind,
which includes thought, emotion, and behavior. a quick look at this
textbook's table of contents will show you the variety of approaches to
mind that you will encounter, such as the thinking mind (cognitive
psychology) and the troubled mind (abnormal psychology). The word
psychology is a combination of two Greek words: psyche (or psuche), or
"mind," and logos, meaning "the objective study of." Literally
translated, therefore, psychology means "the objective study of the
mind." Today, we define psychology as the scientific study of behavior,
mental processes, and brain functions. The phrase "behavior, mental
processes, and brain functions" has undergone several changes over the
history of psychology. Behavior refers to any action that we can
observe. for many years, our definition stopped at this point. The more
recent addition of mental processes and brain functions to our
definition was made possible by the development of improved research
methods. early efforts to study mental processes were generally
unsatisfactory because they relied on the use of introspection, or the
personal observation of your own thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.
Because it is difficult for others to confirm your introspections, this
subjective approach does not lend itself well to the scientific method.
if you say that you are in

mind The brain and its activities, including thought, emotion, and
behavior.

psychology The scientific study of behavior, mental processes, and brain
functions.

introspection A personal observation of your own thoughts, feelings, and
behavior.

PSYCHOLOGY AS A HUB SCIENCE Why Is Psychology a Hub Science? MoST
ReadeRS of ThiS BooK are not pursuing careers in psychology, so how will
this material help you in your chosen career? Psychology is all about
people, and nearly all occupations require an understanding of people
and their behavior. an architect cannot design a functional space
without considering how people respond to being crowded. an attorney
cannot cross-examine a witness without an understanding of memory,
motivation, emotion, and stress. a teacher cannot encourage students to
reach their potential without an understanding of child development and
learning. Business leaders and economists cannot predict the movements
of markets without understanding the minds making the relevant
decisions. The study of psychology, then, provides you with better
insight into and understanding of many occupations and fields of study.
You probably have seen applications that allow you to map your
friendship networks on social media, with shorter links indicating
greater connectivity and larger bubbles indicating more overlapping
friendships with another person. Kevin Boyack and his colleagues
generated a similar map of the sciences (see ● figure 1.1) but used
reference lists in journal articles instead of friendship networks
(Boyack et al., 2005). The SOCIAL SCIENCES resulting map shows the
extent to which each of the MATHEMATICS PSYCHOLOGY sciences are
influential and what other sciences they most influence. Boyack and
colleagues referred to the PHYSICS most influential sciences as hub
sciences. Their analysis shows that psychology is one of the seven major
EARTH SCIENCES MEDICINE hub sciences, with strong connections to the
medical CHEMISTRY sciences, the social sciences, and education. in the
upcoming chapters of this book, we will highlight these connections with
examples that are relevant to each particular chapter. ■ Political
Science

Law

International Relations

History

Sociology

Psychiatry

Economics

Geography

Gerontology

Computer Science

Communications

Education

Nursing

Ophthalmology

Sports Sciences

Biomedical Engineering Neurology Radiology Emergency Medicine Cardiology

Rheumatology Urology

Robotics

Electrical Engineering

Astronomy and Astrophysics Neuroscience Anthropology Geoscience
Meteorology Toxocology Paleontology Otorhinolaryngology

General Genetics Surgery Medicine Pharmacology Obstetrics/ Gynocology
Pediatrics Respiratory Endocrinology Hematology

Gastroenterology

Urology

Management Library and Information Sciences Statistics

Psychology

Public Health

Zoology

Fish

Immunology

Nutrition

Mechanical Engineering

Condensed Matter

Fuels

Geoscience

Physical Chemistry

Chemical Engineering

Analytical Chemistry

Physical Chemistry

Plant Sciences

Entomology

Virology

Microbiology

Dentistry

Parasitology

Veterinary Medicine

Material Sciences

Polymers

Dairy

Biochemistry

General/ Organic

Dermatology

Pathology

Construction

Nuclear

Environmental Soil Agriculture

Biochemistry

Oncology

Marine Biology

Ecology

Applied Mathematics

Plant

Food Sciences

Biotechnology

Pharmacology

FIGURE 1.1 Psychology as a Hub Science. This map of science was
generated by comparing citations from more than 1 million papers
published in more than 7,000 journals since 2000. Psychology appears
among the seven major areas of science, indicated in the map by a
different font. The other six major areas are social sciences,
mathematics, physics, chemistry, earth sciences, and medicine. Source:
Adapted from K. W. Boyack, et al. (2005). "Mapping the Backbone of
Science," Scientometrics, 64(3), 351--374. With kind permission from
Springer Science1Business Media.

WhaT iS PSYChoLoGY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5

love, how can anyone else know whether your observation is accurate? in
addition, your mind and behavior are governed by many processes of which
you are unaware. fortunately, innovations in the methods used to
investigate brain activity and behavior, such as brain imaging
technologies, have allowed psychologists to revisit the question of
mental processes and brain functions with greater objectivity and
success.

Why Do We Study Psychology? You have plenty of company while taking this
course. Between 1.2 and 1.8 million undergraduates in the United States
enroll in introductory psychology each year, not to mention the 30% of
high school graduates who have already completed a psychology course
(American Psychological Association \[APA\], 2019; Gurung et al., 2016).
increasing numbers of students outside the United States share your
journey. Today, the United States is home to only 21 to 24% of the
world's psychologists, down sharply from 80% in the 1980s (Takooshian et
al., 2016). What do all of these people hope to gain by studying
psychological science? We recognize that introductory psychology is
often a required course, but we hope that before too long, you will see
many benefits more important than the ability to check a box:

The empiricist philosophers had a profound influence on the foundations
of American political thought---that all of us are created equal. For
generations, Europe had been ruled by people who were born into
positions of power instead of earning the privilege of leading through
hard work and education. If knowledge is not innate or inborn, any of us
can learn enough to grow up to be president.

Among the many advantages of studying psychology is a deeper
understanding of ourselves as individuals and of the people around us.
one of the major themes of this textbook is the social nature of the
human species and the importance of social connectivity to our health
and well-being. We can all benefit from improved selfknowledge and
social skills. ● Psychology provides many opportunities to improve your
critical thinking skills, a necessity in an era of "fake news" and a
highly prized skill among employers. ● As you will see in our chapter
sections on real-world problems, psychology can make contributions to
the understanding of and solutions to many pressing contemporary issues,
from pandemics and social justice to poverty and climate change. ●
Psychology can answer many questions that we ask out of simple
curiosity. People behave in interesting ways, and we often find
ourselves asking, "Why?" What questions do you have about human
behavior? ●

Have you ever wondered why people in elevators stand facing the doors
and watching the numbers? Psychologists explain this behavior in terms
of personal space, or the imaginary bubbles we keep around ourselves
that strangers should not invade. When our personal space is violated by
necessity, as in a crowded elevator, we cope by pretending nobody else
is really there.

6

Chapter 1

Air Images/Shutterstock.com

Many students mistakenly believe that they don't "need" a course in
psychology, because they already have a good understanding of human
behavior. We are not saying that your understanding of others is poor,
but by studying psychological science, all of us can improve our
knowledge. See how many of the common myths listed in Table 1.1 you or
others you know believe.

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TabLE 1.1 Ten Common Myths about Human Behavior 1. We only use 10% of
our brains. 2. Some people are left-brained while others are
right-brained. 3. Playing Mozart to infants makes them more intelligent.
4. Hypnosis improves your memory. 5. Students learn better when
instruction matches their individual learning styles. 6. Lie detector
(polygraph) tests are accurate. 7. Low self-esteem is a major source of
personal and societal problems. 8. The teen years are typically
disruptive. 9. Memory for traumatic events is usually poor. 10. In
romantic relationships, opposites attract. Lilienfeld, S. O., Lynn, S.
J., Ruscio, J., & Beyerstein, B. L. (2009). 50 great myths of popular
psychology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.

Where Did Psychology Originate? Psychology is a relatively young
discipline, dating only to the 1870s. however, topics that interest
modern psychologists go back much farther in the history of human
thought. People living as long ago as 6000 to 5000 bce in assyria
described their dreams (Restak, 1988). among these accounts are
descriptions of being chased, which are still among the most common
dreams that people experience (nielsen et al., 2003). See ● figure 1.2
for common dream themes. The psychology family tree is a hybrid with two
major roots: philosophy and the natural sciences. Psychologists answer
questions traditionally posed by philosophers using scientific research
methods of the natural sciences, described in more detail in Chapter 2.

philosophy The discipline that systematically examines basic concepts,
including the source of knowledge. natural sciences Sciences that study
the physical and biological events that occur in nature.

Trying again and again Being frozen with fright

FIGURE 1.2

Eating delicious food Arriving too late, (e.g., for a train) Swimming

Sergey Mironov/Shutterstock.com

Themes in dreams

Being chased or pursued, not injured Being physically attacked

Being locked up Seeing snakes Finding money 0

10

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Percentage of participants reporting theme

90

100

Many People Report Dreams with the Same Themes. Although we don't
understand why we dream about certain things, many people report similar
themes in their dreams. Source: Adapted from T. A. Nielsen, et al.
(2003). "The Typical Dreams of Canadian University Students," Dreaming,
13, 211--235. doi: 10.1023/B:DREM.0000003144.40929.0b

WheRe did PSYChoLoGY oRiGinaTe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7

(b)

(c) 

Cynthia Johnson/Hulton Archive/Getty Images

Georgios Kollidas/Shutterstock.com

www.BibleLandPictures.com/Alamy Stock Photo

(a) 

One of the most significant questions shared by philosophy and
psychology asks whether the mind is inborn or is formed through
experience. (a) Philosophers beginning with Aristotle (384--322 bce)
believed that all knowledge is gained through sensory experience. (b)
Beginning in the 17th century, this idea flourished in the British
philosophical school of empiricism. Empiricists, like John Locke, viewed
the mind as a "blank slate" at birth, which then was filled with ideas
gained by observing the world. (c) Contemporary psychologists believe
that experience interacts with inborn characteristics to shape the mind.
Intelligence, for example, is influenced by both genetics and
experience. During the 1970s, Romanian orphans adopted at young ages
recovered from the effects of their seriously deprived social
circumstances, but those who endured years of deprivation had more
severe cognitive deficits (Ames, 1997).

New York Public Library/Science Source

What Are Psychology's Philosophical Roots?

Ancient people might have attempted to cure headaches, seizures, or
psychological disorders by drilling holes in the skull. Bone growth
around the hole indicates that some patients survived the procedure.
Surprisingly, some people today engage in DIY trepanation, a practice
that obviously concerns the medical community ("Doctors warn of the
dangers of trepanning," 2000).

8

Chapter 1

Philosophers and psychologists share an interest in questions regarding
the nature of the self, the effects of early experience, the existence
of free will, and the origin of knowledge. Both disciplines consider the
relative balance of biological factors (nature) and environmental
factors (nurture) in the resulting human behavior. Both attempt to
determine the relationships between self-interest and community welfare,
between body and mind, and between humans and other species with which
we share the planet. although we typically consider questions of the
unconscious mind and abnormal behavior to be the realm of the
psychologist, philosophers investigated these issues thousands of years
before the first psychologist was born.

What Are Psychology's Natural Sciences Roots? While philosophers tackled
these difficult questions, physicians were laying the foundation of our
knowledge of the brain and nervous system, discussed in detail in
Chapter 4. during this pursuit, physicians helped develop the scientific
methods that would become central to psychology and previewed the
application of scientific knowledge to the improvement of individual
well-being. Beginning in the 17th and 18th centuries, scientists armed
with new technologies, including the light microscope (see ● figure
1.3), made important discoveries that established the mind as physical
rather than magical. for example, they demonstrated that a single
sensory nerve carried one type of information instead of multiple types.
You might have already duplicated this research yourself while rubbing
your sleepy eyes---you see a flash of light. The nerves serving the
retina of the eye do not know how to process information about touch or
pressure. When stimulated, they are capable of only one type of
message---light. hermann von helmholtz (1821--1894) asked his
participants to push a button as soon as they felt a touch. When a thigh
was touched, participants reacted faster than when a toe was touched.
Because

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 1.3

A

C

B

D

World History/Topham/The Image Works

Mary Evans Picture Library/The Image Works

Microscopes Changed the World of Science. This light microscope was used
by Anton von Leeuwenhoek to discover red blood cells in 1676.
Microscopes opened a new world to scientists interested in living
things. A = Screw for adjusting the height of the object being examined
B = Metal plate serving as the body C = Skewer to impale the object and
rotate it D = Lens, which was spherical

the toe is farther from the brain than the thigh, signals from the toe
required more time to reach the brain. These types of discoveries
convinced scientists that the mind was not supernatural and could be
studied scientifically.

The Two Disciplines Merge to Create a New Science

bilwissedition Ltd. & Co. KG/Alamy Stock Photo

Philosophers began to incorporate physiological and psychological
concepts into their work, and natural scientists began to explore the
questions asked by philosophers. The gradual merger of these approaches
resulted in a series of experiments that looked increasingly like
contemporary psychology. Gustav fechner (1801--1889) was curious to know
how soft a sound a person could hear. he randomly presented sounds of
different intensities to which a participant would respond "yes" or
"no." When the "yes" responses passed 50%, or better than chance,
fechner concluded that the sound was within the range that the human ear
could detect (see Chapter 5).although fechner's research seems very
similar to von helmholtz's, note the importance of "mental processes" in
fechner's work, as opposed to the simple measurement of physiology in
von helmholtz's experiment. The stage was set for a modern science of
psychology.

The work of Hermann von Helmholtz (1821--1894) on reaction time helped
establish the mind as something that could be studied scientifically.

WheRe did PSYChoLoGY oRiGinaTe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9

summary 1.1 Highlights in the Philosophical and Scientific Roots of
Psychology

A

B

C

Person or group

things to remember

Ancient Greek philosophers

Observations can be accounted for by natural, not supernatural,
explanations.

British empiricists

Knowledge is the result of experience.

Ancient physicians

The brain is the source of the mind.

17th- and 18th-century natural scientists

Discoveries about sensation and movement showed that the mind was
physical.

Hermann von Helmholtz

Studies of reaction time reinforced the idea of the mind as physical.

D

Credits: Top row---www.BibleLandPictures.com/Alamy Stock Photo; Second
row---Georgios Kollidas/Shutterstock.com; Third row---New York Public
Library/Science Source; Fourth row---Mary Evans Picture Library/The
Image Works; inset: World History/Topham/The Image Works; Bottom
row---bilwissedition Ltd. & Co. KG/Alamy Stock Photo.

How Did the Science of Psychology Begin? as psychology developed from
the gradual merger of philosophical questions and scientific reasoning,
the young discipline struggled to determine which questions and methods
were best suited to its goals. Lively debates arose among psychologists
who helped to shape the field.

Wilhelm Wundt and Structuralism The credit for being the very first
psychologist goes to Wilhelm Wundt (1832--1920), a former research
assistant to von helmholtz, who conducted the first documented
psychological experiment in 1879. This landmark experiment was a simple
test of reaction time: how quickly after hearing a ball drop onto a
platform could a person respond by striking a telegraph key?

10

Chapter 1

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Wilhelm Wundt (1832--1920), seated in this photo, is considered the
first experimental psychologist.

structuralism An approach in which the INTERFOTO/Alamy Stock Photo

mind is broken into the smallest elements of mental experience.

Gestalt psychology An approach that saw experience as being different
from the sum of its elements. functionalism An approach that saw
behavior as purposeful and contributing to survival.

CONNECTING TO RESEARCH The First Official Psychology Experiment WE HAVE
GIVEN CREDIT to Wilhelm Wundt for conducting the first experiments in
psychology. What did those crucial first experiments look like? Wundt's
experiments reflected both his interests in consciousness and his
training as a medical doctor. He was aware of methods that were used by
researchers in physiology, such as the reaction-time measures pioneered
by F. C. Donders in the Netherlands, and he sought to apply these
methods to measure psychological processes such as attention and
decision making (Danziger & Ballantyne, 1997). The Questions: Is it
possible to "time" mental processes? Are simple reaction times different
from reaction times involving choices?

METHODS Wundt's methods involved two sets of apparatus: one that would
deliver a stimulus precisely to a participant, and a second that would
measure and record the participant's responses. His imposing-looking
brass instruments used to carry out these tasks were displayed to an
admiring public at the 1893 Chicago World's Fair. The first experiments
carried out by Wundt involved the presentation of stimuli,

such as the sound of a ball dropped onto a platform, and measurements of
reaction time, as indicated by the participant pressing a telegraph key.
In addition to these simple reaction-time experiments, Wundt asked
participants to make decisions: When you see this light, press the
button on the left, but if you see that light, press the button on the
right.

ETHICS As you continue reading your textbook, you will review a number
of experiments like this one. Many will highlight important ethical
considerations regarding the treatment of participants. These ethical
concerns will be reviewed in more detail in Chapter 2, but in the
meantime, Wundt's experiment appears to have posed little risk to his
participants. After you consider the criteria for conducting ethical
research outlined in Chapter 2, however, you might want to return to
this description and see if you agree with our assessment or not.

RESULTS Wundt viewed reaction time as "mental chronometry" (Hergenhahn &
Henley, 2013, p. 255). In other words, he believed that reaction time
provided a measure of

the amount of mental processing required to carry out a task. As his
tasks became more complex, reaction time increased accordingly.

CONCLUSIONS As mentioned earlier in this chapter, Wundt's mentor,
Hermann von Helmholtz, had performed a number of experiments similar to
those performed by Wundt. Von Helmholtz touched the participant on the
thigh and toe and discovered that the participant pushed a button faster
in response to the thigh touch than the toe touch. What makes von
Helmholtz's demonstration a physiological experiment and Wundt's a
psychology experiment? Part of the answer is the interpretation that
each scientist made of his results. For von Helmholtz, differences in
reaction time in these two instances represented the effects of the
speed of conduction of neural signaling. Because the toe is farther from
the brain than the thigh is, messages from the toe take more time to
reach the brain. Wundt's simple reaction-time experiments were not that
different, but his experiments on choice were more clearly
psychological. As decisions became more complex, reaction time
increased. ■

hoW did The SCienCe of PSYChoLoGY BeGin?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11

Bettmann/Contributor/Getty Images

Max Wertheimer (1880--1943) was one of the founders of Gestalt
psychology. Please note that there is no connection between the Gestalt
psychology of Wertheimer, Köhler, and Koffka, and the later similarly
named Gestalt approach to therapy.

Wundt saw mental experience as a hierarchy. The mind constructs an
overall perception (the food i'm eating tastes good) out of building
blocks made up of separate sensations, such as taste and vision, and
emotional responses. one of Wundt's students, edward Titchener (1867--
1923), expanded on Wundt's views to establish a theory of structuralism,
in which the mind could be broken down into the smallest elements of
mental experience. Titchener's approach to psychology paralleled the
general trends in the physical sciences of his day, such as efforts in
chemistry to break molecules into elements and attempts by physicists to
describe matter at the level of the atom.

Mary Evans Picture Library/The Image Works

Gestalt Psychology

William James and Functionalism While the structuralists and Gestalt
psychologists continued their debate, a new type of psychology emerged,
partly in response to the publication of Charles darwin's The Origin of
Species in 1859 and The Descent of Man in 1871. Functionalism viewed
behavior as purposeful because it led to survival. instead of
restricting themselves to exploring the structure of the mind,
functionalists were more interested in why behavior and mental processes
worked in a particular way. functionalism's chief proponent was William
James (1842--1910), whose textbook, Principles of Psychology (1890),
dominated psychology for 50 years. There are few topics in psychology
that James did not address in his book, and many of his ideas sound
modern. for example, he

Courtesy of the Wellesley College Archives

William James (1842--1910) proposed functionalism, an approach to the
mind that viewed behavior as purposeful.

The structuralists' effort to break behavior into its essential elements
was rejected by a group of early 20th-century German psychologists,
including Kurt Koffka, Max Wertheimer, and Wolfgang Köhler, who founded
Gestalt psychology. Gestalt, although difficult to translate into
english, basically means "form" or "whole." The Gestalt psychologists
believed that breaking a "whole" perception into its building blocks, as
advocated by the structuralists, would result in the loss of important
psychological information. ● figure 1.4 demonstrates the importance of
context to our interpretation of visual information. The structuralists
would have a difficult time explaining why the same visual building
blocks could lead to such different conclusions.

Mary Whiton Calkins (1863--1930) was a student of William James at
Harvard University, although she could not officially register because
of her gender. She studied memory and the self and served as president
of the American Psychological Association in 1905.

12

Chapter 1

FIGURE 1.4 Gestalt Psychologists Challenged Structuralism. Participants
usually see the middle figure as a B when instructed to look at the
first row, but see a 13 when instructed to read the second row, even
though the images are exactly the same. Structuralists, who believed
that experiences could be reduced to small building blocks, would have
difficulty explaining these results. In contrast, Gestalt psychologists,
who emphasized the role of context or the "whole" in perception, would
have no problem.

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

coined the term stream of consciousness to describe the flow of ideas
that people experience while awake. Throughout his discussions of mental
processes and behavior, James emphasized the role of evolution. if we
enjoy ice cream, it might be because eating sweet, high-fat foods
enhanced survival for our ancestors, for whom famine was more of a
problem than obesity. it is difficult to overestimate the impact of
James on psychology. Structuralism came and went, but all contemporary
psychologists are functionalists at heart. as described by two
psychology historians, "as a systematic point of view, functionalism was
an overwhelming success, but largely because of this success it is no
longer a distinct school of psychology. it was absorbed into the
mainstream psychology. no happier fate could await any psychological
point of view" (Chaplin & Krawiec, 1979, p. 53).

Clinical Roots: Freud and the Humanistic Psychologists

When a case of capital punishment is discussed, we

Prior to advances in psychological science, people with psychological
disorders were subjected to bizarre "treatments," such as this
18th-century spinning device intended to calm patients.

akg-images/Newscom

Sigmund Freud Sigmund freud (1856--1939) built a bridge from his medical
training as a physician to his belief in the impact of life experiences
on behavior. his psychodynamic theory and its applications to the
treatment of psychological disorders dominated much of psychological
thinking for the first half of the 20th century. freud's ideas about the
existence of the unconscious mind, the development of sexuality, dream
analysis, and psychological roots of abnormal behavior influenced not
just psychology, but also culture. he nearly single-handedly founded the
study of personality in psychology, a topic explored more fully in
Chapter 12. he developed the techniques of psychoanalysis for treating
mental disorders, which are discussed in Chapter 15. he popularized the
use of psychological principles for explaining everyday behavior, and
his theories are as likely to be covered in an english literature course
as in a psychology course. our enthusiasm for freud is tempered by a
number of valid concerns. freud's theories do not always lend themselves
to experimentation, an essential requirement for any scientific theory
as discussed further in Chapter 2. for example, how could you design an
experiment to test whether dreaming

Everett Collection Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

The history of efforts to aid those with psychological disorders has not
aloften hear about the prisoner's terrible childhood ways been
enlightened. With the exception of occasional bursts of insight from one
side of the argument and the need to from the ancient egyptians and
Greeks, the most common view of psychological disorders over the course
of history has been the supernatural protect society from further
misdeeds by this person approach. according to this view, psychological
disorders resulted from from the other side. Where would the Freudians
and the actions of evil spirits or other external, magical forces, and
associated humanistic psychologists line up in this debate? "treatments"
were often harsh. Between the 17th and the 19th centuries, supernatural
explanations for psychological disorders began to give way to two
scientific approaches: a medical model and a psychological model. The
medical model of psychological disorders emphasized physical causes of
abnormal behavior and medical treatments, such as medication. The
psychological model suggested that abnormal behavior can result from
traumatic life experiences, leading to fear, anxiety, and other
counterproductive emotional responses. Psychological treatments take
many forms, from offering support to applying cognitive and behavioral
methods to help people think and problem-solve in new ways. as Chapters
14 and 15 will explain, contemporary psychologists typically combine
medical and psychological approaches to understand disorders and develop
effective treatments. for example, we know that feeling depressed has
both physical components (changes in the activity of chemical messengers
in the brain) and experiential components (exposure to stressful
situations). Treatment for depression often combines medication with
efforts to change the way a person thinks about situations.

The work of Sigmund Freud (1856-- 1939) on consciousness, sexuality,
abnormal behavior, and psychotherapy played a dominant role in
psychology during the first half of the 20th century.

hoW did The SCienCe of PSYChoLoGY BeGin?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13

Courtesy of the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Howard University
Archives

In 1920, Francis Cecil Sumner (1895--1954) became the first African
American to receive a doctorate in psychology for his work on
psychoanalysis. Sumner's later work focused on religion and racism.
humanistic psychology An approach that saw people as inherently good and
motivated to learn and improve.

about a house really means that you're thinking about yourself (freud,
1913)? although psychoanalysis is still used as a therapy technique, it
is rarely conducted in the strict freudian manner. other techniques,
discussed in Chapter 15, exceed psychoanalysis in effectiveness and
popularity among contemporary therapists.

Humanistic Psychology By the 1960s, american psychology was dominated by
behaviorism (discussed in a later section of this chapter) on one side
and freud's theories on the other. Structuralism had fallen into
disfavor, and functionalism and Gestalt psychology were no longer
distinct schools of thought. Just as other aspects of american culture
at this time began to feature rebelliousness against current ways of
thinking, some psychologists began to push against the restrictions of
psychodynamic theory. Many of these disenchanted psychologists had been
trained in psychoanalysis but were not seeing the results they desired.
This dissatisfaction with prevailing views led these psychologists to
propose new ways of thinking about the human mind through an approach
known as humanistic psychology. humanistic psychology was referred to as
a "third force," separate from the prevailing behaviorist and
psychodynamic theories. one area of disagreement between the humanistic
psychologists and freud related to the question of basic human nature as
good or evil. Like James, freud was heavily influenced by Charles
darwin, whose work stimulated his decision to study medicine. freud
believed that human behavior was on a continuum with animal behavior,
and that society had a civilizing function on the otherwise selfish and
aggressive human. in contrast, the humanistic psychologists extended the
philosophy of Jean-Jacques Rousseau and other 18th-century Romantic
philosophers into a belief that people are innately good, are motivated
to improve themselves, and behave badly only when corrupted by society.
This more positive view of human nature led the humanistic psychologists
to ask novel questions. abraham Maslow (1908--1970) was curious about
what made a person "good." as Chapter

EXPERIENCING PSYCHOLOGY Testing Reaction Time YOU HAVE READ about a
number of reaction-time experiments in this chapter, including those
conducted by Hermann von Helmholtz and Wilhelm Wundt. It is possible to
conduct similar experiments without the brass equipment used by these
early researchers. This exercise, developed by Dr. Erik Chudler of the
University of Washington, is designed to measure your reaction time to a
visual stimulus. All you need is a partner and a simple footlong ruler
or yardstick. Hold the ruler vertically, with the highest numbers at the
top, and ask your partner to place a hand at the bottom of the ruler
without touching it. Tell your partner that you will drop the ruler
sometime in the next 5 seconds and to grab the ruler as quickly as
possible and hold it. Note the number at the top of the person's hand
after the ruler is caught,

14

Chapter 1

number on ruler at top of person's hand

reaction time

2 in. (about 5 cm)

0.10 s (100 ms)

4 in. (about 10 cm)

0.14 s (140 ms)

6 in. (about 15 cm)

0.17 s (170 ms)

8 in. (about 20 cm)

0.20 s (200 ms)

10 in. (about 25.5 cm)

0.23 s (230 ms)

12 in. (about 30.5 cm)

0.25 s (250 ms)

17 in. (about 43 cm)

0.30 s (300 ms)

24 in. (about 61 cm)

0.35 s (350 ms)

31 in. (about 79 cm)

0.40 s (400 ms)

39 in. (about 99 cm)

0.45 s (450 ms)

48 in. (about 123 cm)

0.50 s (500 ms)

69 in. (about 175 cm)

0.60 s (600 ms)

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bettmann/Contributor/Getty Images

16 will show, Maslow's emphasis on what is good about people, as opposed
to freud's focus on what goes wrong with people, reemerged in the form
of contemporary positive psychology. Humanistic psychologists not only
disagreed with freud about the nature of human beings, but also rebelled
against freudian approaches to treatment. As described in more detail in
chapter 15, the humanistic therapist carl Rogers (1902--1987) developed
a new approach called client-centered therapy. in this type of therapy,
the people receiving treatment are called clients rather than the more
medical term, patients, reflecting their equal standing with the
therapist and their active role in the therapy process. Humanistic
approaches to therapy have also influenced best practices in
communication, group process, parenting, and politics. the emphasis on
active listening and the use of "i hear what you're saying" reflections
have become nearly cliché in courses of leadership training and
interpersonal communication. Advice to parents to provide unconditional
love to their children is a direct application of humanistic beliefs,
discussed in more detail in chapter 11. finally, humanistic psychology
continues to flavor our political and social domains. when issues such
as capital punishment arise, the humanistic contention that there are no
bad people, just bad societies that fail people, typically appears as
part of the debate.

Abraham Maslow (1908--1970) contributed a theory of motivation and ideas
about exceptional people to the growing humanistic psychology movement.

The Behaviorists and the Cognitive Revolution

and use this chart to convert your results to reaction time. In other
words, if the number above the participant's hand is 8, record 0.20
seconds or 200 ms (a millisecond is one onethousandth of a second). Test
your participant five times and average the response times. Wundt
eventually discarded reaction time as a measure because he became so
frustrated with the variability that he observed among participants and
across tasks (Hergenhahn & Henley, 2013), but you can have some fun
exploring these same sources of variability. Are you faster than your
friends? Try testing people who are older than you. Are they faster or
slower? Do your participants improve with practice? What happens to your
reaction time if you dim the lights?

behaviorism An approach that features the study and careful measurement
of observable behaviors.

Roger Freberg

Beginning at the dawn of the 20th century, the concepts of "mental
processes" and "brain function" in our definition of psychology took a
back seat to observable behavior for the better part of the next 50
years. Psychologists following the approach of behaviorism concentrated
on observable, measurable behaviors instead. As part of their effort to
measure behavior carefully, many behaviorists restricted their research
to studies using animals. Armed with Darwin's evidence linking humans to
animals, the behaviorists comfortably drew parallels between their
observations of animals and their assumptions about human behavior. in
particular, behaviorists were fascinated by learning, which is examined
in depth in chapter 8.

Measuring the spot where a person catches a falling ruler gives you a
rough estimate of that individual's reaction time to a visual stimulus.

How DiD tHe Science of PSycHology Begin?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15

Michael Rougier/Contributor/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images

Humanistic therapists, like Carl Rogers (1902--1987), often rebelled
against Freudian approaches to therapy. For example, Rogers (in the
white shirt leading a group therapy session) referred to people as
clients rather than patients, the term that Freud used.

Bill Fritsch/Getty Images

The Freudians and humanistic psychologists had conflicting views on
human nature, with the Freudians believing that we are naturally selfish
and aggressive and the humanistic psychologists believing that we are
naturally good. These philosophical differences continue to color our
discussions of topics: Is a criminal a "bad" person who was never
properly socialized or a "good" person who was corrupted?

16

Chapter 1

ivan Petrovich Pavlov (1849--1936) had a particularly significant impact
on behaviorism and psychology. While studying digestion in dogs, he
realized that the dogs' salivation in response to the arrival of the
handler or to being harnessed for an experiment, rather than just to the
food itself, indicated that the dogs had associated, or linked, these
signals with the arrival of food. The dogs' ability to use this learned
association to anticipate important future events was a remarkable
advantage in terms of survival. This type of learning is now called
classical conditioning and will be covered in detail in Chapter 8.
Psychology textbooks would spend little time on Pavlov if his research
applied only to salivating dogs. although classical conditioning occurs
in rather primitive organisms, including fruit flies, snails, and slugs,
it also occurs quite frequently in humans. Many of our emotional
responses associated with environmental cues are the result of this type
of learning. if you feel especially anxious prior to taking an exam, you
can thank classical conditioning. if you are repulsed by the idea of
eating a food that you once consumed just before becoming ill, this is
again a likely result of classical conditioning. John B. Watson
(1878--1958) began experimenting with learning in rats and independently
came to many of the same conclusions as Pavlov. Watson echoed the
blank-slate approach of the British empiricist philosophers in his
emphasis on the role of experience in forming human behavior. Later in
his career, Watson applied his understanding of behavior to the budding
american advertising industry. By 1930, he was earning \$70,000 per year
as an advertising executive---an astronomical salary for the time, much
higher than the \$3,000 per year he earned as a professor. after
discovering that blindfolded participants couldn't tell the difference
between brands of cigarettes, Watson

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mark Stivers

Sovfoto/Contributor/Universal Images Group/Getty Images

Cover Images/Newscom

JHU Sheridan Libraries/Gado/Contributor/Archive Photos/Getty Images

AP Images/NOOR KHAN

concluded that to be successful, a product must be associated with an
appealing image. The advertising industry was never the same, and
today's advertisers continue to apply Watson's principles. Watson's
legacy in psychology was enormous. he restricted psychology to the study
of observable behavior. as we will see in Chapter 2 and throughout this
text, even psychologists who are interested in internal events, like the
visual recognition of an object, seek related observable behaviors, such
as brain images or reaction time. Like Pavlov, Watson approached
psychology with a focus on the relationships between environmental cues
and behavior. other behaviorists were more interested in the effects of
consequences on behavior, an idea that was derived from basic
functionalism. edward Thorndike (1874--1949) proposed the law of effect,
which suggested that behaviors followed by pleasant or helpful outcomes
would be more likely

While studying digestion, Ivan Petrovich Pavlov (1849--1936) realized
that his dogs could learn that certain signals meant food was on the
way.

Classical conditioning helps us understand the links that we make
between environmental cues and our emotions. If a soldier associated the
smell of diesel fuel with traumatic experiences, smelling diesel fuel at
a gas station back home could trigger distress.

John B. Watson (left, 1878--1958) was a strong believer in the
blank-slate approach of the earlier empiricist philosophers. After
working as a psychology professor, he applied his knowledge of human
behavior to advertising with great success. Watson believed that a
product would sell better if it were paired with an appealing image. His
ideas are still used by advertisers today. For instance, celebrity
endorsements, like Ed Sheeran's for Heinz ketchup, continue to be a
popular way to promote products.

hoW did The SCienCe of PSYChoLoGY BeGin?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17

600

Time required to escape (sec)

500

FIGURE 1.5 Thorndike's Law of Effect Emerged from Observations of Cats.
If you own a cat, you probably know that cats don't like to be enclosed
in boxes. Edward Thorndike (1874-- 1949) studied the escape strategies
of a cat to build his law of effect.

18

Chapter 1

300

200

100

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Trials

Nina Leen/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images

B. F. Skinner (1904--1990), shown here with the apparatus that bears his
name---the Skinner box---was interested in the effects of reward and
punishment on future behavior.

400

to occur in the future, whereas behaviors followed by unpleasant or
harmful outcomes would be less likely to occur. he based his law on
observations of cats' behavior in a puzzle box he had constructed (see ●
figure 1.5). To escape the box, a cat was required to complete a
sequence of behaviors. Through trial-and-error learning, the cat would
escape faster and faster on successive trials. in other words, the cat
repeated effective behaviors and abandoned ineffective ones. Like
Thorndike, B. f. Skinner (1904--1990) was interested in the effects of
consequences on how frequently behaviors were performed. Skinner shared
Watson's belief that psychology did not benefit from consideration of
consciousness or internal mental states (see ● figure 1.6). he believed
that inner, private states such as thinking and feeling existed, but he
viewed them as behaviors that followed the same rules as public
behaviors, like driving a car (Jensen & Burgess, 1997). he not only
reduced his study of behavior to the actions of rats and pigeons in
adapted cages that came to be known as Skinner boxes, but he also was
comfortable generalizing from the behavior of rats and pigeons to
complex human behaviors. despite its strong focus on a limited set of
animals and situations, Skinner's behaviorism has provided a wealth of
beneficial applications. Smokers attempting to quit, doctors and nurses
engaging in self-paced continuing education courses, and children
receiving treatment for autism spectrum disorder are all likely to be
benefiting from Skinner's efforts. By the 1950s, the behaviorists' lack
of interest in mental states and activity was challenged by scientists
from diverse fields, including linguistics and computer science, leading
to a cognitive revolution. Cognition covers the private and internal
mental processes that the behaviorists avoided studying---information
processing, thinking, reasoning, and problem solving. Ulric neisser
(1928--2012) gave the new field its name in his 1967 book, Cognitive
Psychology. Breakthroughs in computer technology allowed these new
cognitive psychologists to use mathematical and computer models to
illuminate the mental processes leading

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Input (Stimulus)

BLACK BOX

Output (Response)

Output (Response)

behaviorism Set the Stage for behavioral Neuroscience. Strict
behaviorists often referred to a "black box" model, in which stimuli
enter and responses exit, but you don't need to know much about what the
box is doing to the data. When psychologists began substituting what
they learned about the brain for the inner workings of the black box,
this led to the development of the biological psychology perspective,
also known as behavioral neuroscience.

to observable behaviors. alan newell (1927--1992) and herbert Simon
(1916--2001) wrote groundbreaking artificial intelligence programs using
human information processing as their model. By the 1980s, most
university psychology departments were offering courses in cognition. By
the 1990s, collaborations between cognitive and biological psychologists
led to a new field of cognitive neuroscience, which seeks to identify
brain structures and functions involved in processing information.
Chapter 10 will explore the contributions of cognitive psychologists in
more detail.

Computers were named after the job title of the women who did most
computation tasks before the machines were invented, and who continued
to operate them. Although these early computers were less powerful than
your cell phone (not to mention more expensive), their operation gave
psychologists new ideas about how the mind might process information.

Courtesy of Cornell University

NARA/Science Source

Input (Stimulus)

Eraxion/iStock/Getty Images

FIGURE 1.6

Ulric Neisser (1928--2012) contributed the term cognition to the
emerging field that studied information processing, thinking, reasoning,
and problem solving.

hoW did The SCienCe of PSYChoLoGY BeGin?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19

First psychology laboratory: Wilhelm Wundt at the University of Leipzig,
Germany. First Doctorate in Psychology: Joseph Jastrow, a student of
Hall's at Johns Hopkins.

Mary Calkins, a student of William James, becomes the first female
president of the American Psychological Association.

Alfred Binet and Theodore Simon develop the IQ test.

Ivan P. Pavlov publishes his first research on classical conditioning.

First Professor of Psychology: James McKeen Cattell, a student of
Wilhelm Wundt's, at the University of Pennsylvania and Columbia
University. Founding of the American Psychological Association. 1879

1883

1886

1888

1890

1892

1896

1904

1905

1906

1908

Edward Thorndike describes his Law of Effect.

William James publishes Principles of Psychology.

First American psychology laboratory established by G. Stanley Hall, a
student of Wundt's, at Johns Hopkins University.

1898

Functionalism and Psychoanalysis are introduced; First Psychology Clinic
is opened by Lightner Witmer.

Publication of Clifford Beers's A Mind That Found Itself leads to
improved treatment of people with psychological disorders.

FIGURE 1.7 Milestones in the History of Psychology.
INTERFOTO/Personalities/Alamy; LOC/Science Source; The APA logo is a
trademark of the American Psychological Association. Reproduced with
permission. No further reproduction or distribution is permitted without
written permission from the American Psychological Association; Mary
Evans Picture Library/The Image Works; Elias Goldensky/From the
Collections of the University of Pennsylvania Archives; U.S. National
Library of Medicine; Courtesy of the Wellesley College Archives;
INTERFOTO/Alamy Stock Photo, Courtesy Special Collections & Archives,
Truman State University; Library of Congress Prints and Photographs
Division \[LC-USZ62-117329\]; Reproduced with permission of Mental
Health America.

Summary 1.2 Pioneering Approaches to Psychology Foundation of psychology

Things to remember

Wilhelm Wundt (1832--1920)

Structuralism

Behavior can be broken down into its components.

Max Wertheimer (1880--1943)

Gestalt psychology

Breaking behavior into components loses meaning.

INTERFOTO/Alamy Stock Photo; Bettmann/Contributor/Getty Images

20

Chapter 1

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

B. F. Skinner's The Behavior of Organisms contributes to the dominance
of behaviorism.

John B. Watson publishes Psychology as the Behaviorist Views It.

1920

1921

1928

1929

George Miller's "The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two" stimulates
work in Cognitive Psychology.

The Boulder Conference establishes the scientistpractioner model of
clinical psychology.

First African-American Doctorate in Psychology: Francis Cecil Sumner, a
student of G. Stanley Hall's, at Clark University.

1913

Gordon Allport, a social psychologist, publishes The Nature of
Prejudice. Wilder Penfield publishes the results of his observations of
patients undergoing surgery for epilepsy.

1938

1942

1949

1954

1956

1959

1976

The first Gestalt journal is published in Germany.

Jean Piaget publishes Judgment and Reasoning in the Child.

Hans Berger invents the electroencephalogram (EEG), still used today to
study brain activity.

Carl Rogers introduces Humanistic approaches to therapy.

Noam Chomsky's criticism of Skinner's Verbal Behavior also contributes
to the cognitive revolution. Richard Dawkins's The Selfish Gene
popularizes Evolutionary Psychology.

JHU Sheridan Libraries/Gado/Contributor/Archive Photos/Getty Images;
Ferdinand Hamburger Archives, Sheridan Libraries, Johns Hopkins
University; Courtesy of the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Howard
University Archives; Farrell Grehan/Historical/ Corbis; VEM/Science
Source; Nina Leen/Getty Images; Michael Rougier/Getty Images; Jon Roemer
LLC; from "The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on
Our Capacity for Processing Information," by G. A. Miller, Psychological
Review, 63(2), 1956, 81--97. doi: 10.1037/h0043158; Dennis Van
Tine/Retna Ltd./Corbis; Nina Leen/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty
Images; Jon Roemer Photography; Patrick Grehan/Contributor/Corbis
Historical/Getty Images; Luis Gutierrez/NortePhoto.com/Alamy Stock
Photo; Michael Rougier/Contributor/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty
Images

Summary 1.2 (Continued) Foundation of psychology

Things to remember

William James (1842--1910)

Functionalism

Behavior is purposeful and contributes to survival.

Sigmund Freud (1856--1939)

Psychodynamic theory

Ideas about the unconscious mind, the role of experience in abnormal
behavior, and new approaches to therapy laid a foundation for later
study in personality and therapy.

How DiD tHe Science of PSycHology Begin?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21

summary 1.2 (Continued) Foundation of psychology

things to remember

Abraham Maslow (1908--1970)

Humanistic psychology

People are naturally good and are motivated to improve.

Ivan Petrovich Pavlov (1849--1936)

Behaviorism

Experience is the primary source of behavior.

Ulric Neisser (1928--2012)

Cognitive revolution

Private mental processing can be studied scientifically.

Credits: Top row---Mary Evans Picture Library/The Image Works; Second
row---akg-images/Newscom; Third row---Courtesy of Cornell University;
Fourth row---Sovfoto/Contributor/Universal Images Group/Getty Images;
Fifth row---Bettmann/Contributor/Getty Images.

What Are Psychological Perspectives?

biological psychology The psychological perspective that focuses on the
relationships between mind and behavior, as well as their underlying
biological processes, including genetics, biochemistry, anatomy, and
physiology; also known as behavioral neuroscience.

evolutionary psychology A psychological perspective that investigates
how physical structure and behavior have been shaped by their
contributions to survival and reproduction.

22

Chapter 1

William James, the freudians, and the behaviorists all tried to answer
psychological questions with a comprehensive "big theory" approach.
however, it is difficult to build a big theory without a large body of
experimental data, and psychology was still a young science. To fill
this gap, psychological scientists began to build a database by
specializing in more specific points of view, or perspectives. By
focusing on one part of the discipline, as opposed to trying to answer
everything at once, psychologists began to gain an in-depth
understanding of at least one aspect of mind at a time. By the second
half of the 20th century, most psychologists were examining
psychological phenomena from one of a handful of perspectives. The use
of different perspectives does not imply disagreement or conflict. in
most cases, the use of each perspective depended on specialized
expertise and methods, so different fields of psychology became
characterized by their distinct theories and methods. for example,
understanding how a child learns a new vocabulary word would be
investigated using different theories and methods by the biological,
developmental, cognitive, social, or behavioral psychologist. Reflecting
the traditional divisions of the field, it is common today for
psychologists to refer to themselves as "social psychologists,"
"developmental psychologists," and so on, indicating their area of
specialization and interest. Psychology departments of universities
often continue this organization, and students applying to graduate
school in psychology might specialize in one particular area, like
choosing an undergraduate major.

What Are the Five Perspectives of Psychology? The need to consider major
perspectives in psychology was reinforced in a report titled
"Strengthening the Common Core of the introductory Psychology Course,"
published in 2014

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Courtesy of Scott Grafton, UCSB Brain Imaging Lab. Photo © Roger Freberg

by the american Psychological association (gurung et al., 2014). We have
already seen how the various perspectives might address the question of
why some children don't like broccoli. to further illustrate the
distinctions among some of the main perspectives, outlined in ● Figure
1.8, we will consider how each might approach the question of human
memory, discussed in detail in chapter 9. Biological psychology, also
called behavioral neuroscience, focuses on the reciprocal relationships
between mind and behavior and their underlying biological processes,
including genetics, biochemistry, anatomy, and physiology. in other
words, biological psychologists are interested in the physical
mechanisms associated with behavior and mental processes. in addition to
the basic behavioral genetics presented in chapter 3 and the biological
psychology presented in chapter 4, this perspective is emphasized in
chapter 5 (sensation and perception), chapter 6 (consciousness), and
chapter 7 (motivation and emotion). as chapter 4 will show,
technological advances beginning in the 1970s, especially new methods
for observing brain activity, initiated an explosion of knowledge about
the connections between brain and behavior. Using these new
technologies, biological psychologists have approached the question of
storage and retrieval of memories in many ways, ranging from observing
changes in communication between nerve cells in slugs to investigating
the effects of stress hormones on the ability to form memories. a branch
of the biological perspective, evolutionary psychology, attempts to
answer the question of how our physical structure and behavior have been
shaped by their contributions to our species' survival. this perspective
should sound familiar---it is a modern extension of

INTROGATION INTEGRATION

Biological psychologists explore the relationships among mind, behavior,
and their underlying biological processes. They often use technology
such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Scott Grafton of
the University of California, Santa Barbara, is pointing out the
features of the brain of one of the authors of this book.

PILLAR 1

PILLAR 2

PILLAR 3

PILLAR 4

PILLAR 5

BIOLOGICAL Neuroscience Sensation Consciousness

COGNITIVE Cognition Memory Perception Intelligence

DEVELOPMENTAL Learning Life Span Development Language

SOCIAL AND PERSONALITY

MENTAL AND PHYSICAL HEALTH Abnormal Health Therapies

CROSS-CUTTING THEMES

Social Personality Emotion Multicultural Gender Motivation

1.  ETHICS
2.  APPLICATION
3.  VARIATIONS IN HUMAN FUNCTIONING
4.  CULTURAL AND SOCIAL DIVERSITY

RESEARCH METHODS FIGURE 1.8 Psychology Features Five Main Perspectives.
Five major psychological perspectives feature unique theories and
methods, yet share a foundation of scientific research methods and
cross-cutting themes. Source: Gurung, R., et al. (2016). "Teaching
introductory psychology: Content, context, and resources." American
Psychologist 71(2), 112--124.

What are Psychological PersPectives?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23

EPA/Newscom

Christian Jegou/Publiphoto/Science Source

Evolutionary psychologists are interested in how our modern behaviors
are shaped by our species' history.

Pascal Goetgheluck/Science Source

cognitive psychology A psychological perspective that investigates
information processing, thinking, reasoning, and problem solving.

James's functionalism, discussed previously in this chapter. earlier, we
also saw evolutionary psychology at work in the shaping of our
sensitivity to bitter tastes. The basic principle of evolutionary
psychology is that our current behavior exists in its present form
because it provided some advantage in survival and reproduction to our
ancestors. An evolutionary psychologist might be interested in our good
memory for faces, and particularly for faces of people who have cheated
us in the past (Barclay & Lalumiere, 2006). in the world of the
hunter--gatherer, being cheated out of a fair share of the hunt was
likely to lead to starvation for a family, and people who could not keep
track of the cheaters were unlikely to survive and reproduce. Cognitive
psychology focuses on the processing of information. Because our ability
to remember plays an integral part in the processing of information, a
cognitive psychologist is likely to have a great deal to say about the
storage and retrieval of memories. A cognitive psychologist might ask
why processing seems different when we are trying to remember names and
dates while taking a history test compared to remembering how to ride a
bicycle. What produces the frustrating experience of having something on
the "tip of your tongue," in which you remember the first letter or a
part of a word you're trying to retrieve, but not the whole thing? What
strategies can we use to make our memories more efficient? These and
similar issues are addressed in Chapters 9 and 10. Developmental
psychology explores the normal changes in behavior that occur across the
life span. Using the developmental perspective, a psychologist might
look at how memory functions in people of different ages. Without
further practice, 3-month-old babies can retain for about a month the
memory that kicking moves a mobile suspended above their crib
(Rovee-Collier, 1997). Teens and young adults are able to remember names
faster than are older adults (Bashore et al., 1997). These and other
age-related changes are explored in Chapter 11. Social and personality
psychology describes the effects of the social environment, including
social and cultural diversity, and individual differences on the
behavior of individuals (see ● figure 1.9). Social and personality
psychologists recognize that we construct our own realities and that the
social environment influences our thoughts, feelings, and behavior.
early psychologists were limited in their understanding of mind by their
exclusive focus on their own sociocultural contexts. More recently,
social psychologists have emphasized the need to explore the influences
of diverse sociocultural contexts and biology on our behavior. Returning
to our memory example, the social psychologist might ask how being in
the presence of others influences the storage and retrieval of data.
When we are sitting comfortably in our own homes, the answers to
Jeopardy! questions come relatively easily. in front of millions of
viewers, however, we might be lucky to remember our own names.

Cognitive psychologists investigate the ways that the human mind
processes information. This cognitive psychologist is studying the use
of mirrored images to help individuals overcome phantom pain due to the
loss of a limb. Seeing images of what appears to be a healthy limb in
place of the missing limb changes the way the mind thinks about the
missing limb, leading to a reduction in perceived pain.

24

Chapter 1

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Extraversion

Intraversion gbpc

installeddrive computers

poppin party partyingclub

web messagewebsite

townmessyhomies

program server

champagne rocking

type download

gonnarockin

tonight

shown

love

dearly

loved

chilin

file computer

error view properly

extraordinary love

cant girls crazy lookin

photoshop

adore yo

bottles

freely truely

admire

time_with lovin here_we

chill soooo

:)

sunday

playing

good

night

had_a

right_new\_!

happy

great

wait_to wit

come whatsguys boys best ready

i_can't

boy

love!

girl im:)thank out_with

sleepover

night forward

tonight hanging

girlybabysitting blast bonfire

partying

FIGURE 1.9

using

won't

pokernon

text

beautifulits miss amazing beach day gotta

wonderful thats

o.o

me

gettin lets

i_have_to

sooooooooo

sooomiss

gotta

brain oxygen science

soooooooo

missed love

cells natural

liquid

a a

correlation strength

by

b b

b relative frequency

evil

d: because idea

also

kind_of they

reading

of

shouldn't

0_0

read

dead finished that's

into

that'

book actually uselaptop death there's

reaction

privilege

a

process bodychemistry

acid chemical energy

soooooo

thunderstorms

internet

i'veapparently which they're

manga

soooomissingsoo

loving

dont

love

only

bestle

sooooo guys

oddunusual

i_should

characters \>.\<

big

ya

girls needed

dx

computer didn't

doin

u much_fun with_my gonna_be \<3 excited bout family

least

apparently weird

suppose thinks

keyboard

doesn't something isn't i_don't anime not probablywhy

ur dinner_with

lil baby weekend goin

telling

found theas dark pages from .\_sighwriting managed_to \>*.*\>

books odd

bestest

sort it's strangeisn't fact thinghappening fairly

system

though i'm_going xd other before able_to while

code

genuine entitled xoxo absolutly

loves party a_blast life fam sooo bday tonight last_night missin ladies
to_see_my

windows files softwarecomputer viruslaptop mac

computers

or

haven't

\_but

doctor_who

due

write

it's

slow

working yay

fixed computer comp internet

to_write wasn't

books

history

read

chapters chapter

page

readingbook

written pages notes article

finally

works laptop library online

prevalence in topic

Personality and Social Media. The emergence of social media has provided
social and personality psychologists with new methods for examining the
social mind and individual differences. What do your updates say about
your personality? When the updates of more than 70,000 people who
completed a Facebook personality test were examined, clear differences
in their choices of words were observed. Source: G. Park, et al. (2015).
"Automatic Personality Assessment through Social Media Language,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 108(6), 934--952.
doi:10.1037/pspp0000020

although much of psychology explores how the average person thinks,
feels, or acts, some people are not average. Behavior can vary
dramatically from one individual to another as a function of personality
factors and many aspects of diversity, including age, gender and gender
identity, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, disability status, and
socioeconomic status. Using our example of memory, we can see how
individual differences in "need for cognition" can predict memory for
verbal material (Cacioppo et al., 1996). People who have a high need for
cognition enjoy mental challenges, like solving difficult puzzles. as
Chapter 13 will explore, individuals who are high in need for cognition
also remember more of the messages to which they are exposed and respond
differently to persuasive messages.

developmental psychology A psychological perspective that examines the
normal changes in behavior that occur across the life span.

social psychology A psychological perspective that examines the effects
of the social environment on the behavior of individuals.

personality An individual's characteristic way of thinking, feeling, and
behaving.

Thierry Berrod, Mona Lisa Production/Science Source

cultural diversity Variations in the practices, values, and goals shared
by groups of people.

Developmental psychologists look at the behavior that is typical for
people of certain ages, from infancy to old age. The amount of time this
infant spends looking at moving stick figures helps us understand at
what point in life we perceive biological motion. WhaT aRe PSYChoLoGiCaL
PeRSPeCTiveS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25

iStock.com/Alina555

finally, the clinical psychology perspective seeks to explain, define,
and treat psychological disorders, as explained in detail in Chapters 14
and 15. More recently, the clinical perspective has expanded to include
positive psychology, or the promotion of general well-being and health,
described further in Chapter 16. Many types of psychological disorders
affect memory. freud believed that traumatizing experiences were more
difficult to remember, a process that he labeled repression (discussed
in Chapters 9 and 14). in other cases, war veterans and others who have
experienced trauma might be troubled by memories that are too good,
producing intrusive flashback memories of disturbing events. These five
main perspectives do not fully capture the range of specialization
within psychology. The american Psychological association (aPa)
recognizes 54 divisions for psychologists interested in topics such as
military psychology, community psychology, hypnosis, religion and
spirituality, and culture, ethnicity, and race. Some of the divisions
represent the main perspectives, such as division 7, developmental
Psychology, and division 8, the Society for Personality and Social
Psychology. others include psychologists from a number of main
perspectives who come together to explore shared questions. for example,
psychologists participating in division 35, the Society for the
Psychology of Women, might also identify with any of the five major
perspectives.

Clinical psychologists seek to understand and treat psychological
disorders.

clinical psychology A psychological perspective that seeks to explain,
define, and treat abnormal behaviors.

A New Connectivity: Integrating Psychology's Five Perspectives although
the 20th-century perspective approach to psychology generated detailed
understanding of aspects of behavior and mental processes, it has become
apparent that single perspectives are insufficient for fully describing
and explaining psychological phenomena. armed with in-depth research
results compiled from these various perspectives, many psychological
scientists in the 21st century have returned to the more comprehensive
view of the mind envisioned more than 100 years ago by James (Cacioppo,
2013). Their questions and methods are more likely to blur the lines of
the perspectives outlined earlier, often with remarkable results. for
example, a full understanding of romantic relationships is more likely
to emerge from combinations of perspectives than through the use of
single perspectives. "Zooming out" to combine an understanding of
cultural and social contexts, biological factors (such as the "bonding"
hormone oxytocin), personality (individual traits), social experience
(such as selffulfilling prophesies), cognitions (such as automatic
thought), and the effects of psychological disorders (as in borderline
personality disorder) give us a more comprehensive view of the
phenomenon (see ● figure 1.10).

Cognitions Personality

Cultural and Social Context

Biology

Development

Using Multiple Perspectives Can Help Us better Understand Complex
Phenomena Like attraction. What accounts for our romantic attraction to
that special someone? Single perspectives provide considerable insight,
but combining perspectives gives us a richer understanding of human
behavior.

26

Chapter 1

Valery Bareta/Alamy Stock Photo

FIGURE 1.10

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Diverse Voices in Psychology Culture and Diversity as "Cross-cutting
Themes" in Psychology African-American woman was licensed as a
psychologist (Gail Wyatt) in the state of California. Sue himself was
told that in 1971, he was the only Chinese-American with a regular
faculty appointment in an American Psychological Association--accredited
clinical psychology program in the entire nation. As Sue and others have
pointed out, underrepresentation has negative consequences both for
psychologists themselves and for the people they serve as teachers,
researchers, or therapists.

Recognition of the problem has led to remedial efforts, but there is
still a long way to go. Psychology, of course, is not alone in facing
this problem, but as students of the mind, we must include diverse
viewpoints to ensure accuracy. In Chapter 5, you will read about how
white Americans and Asians respond differently to objects (a tiger) and
backgrounds (a jungle) in a photograph. If we studied only one of these
groups, we would end up with faulty conclusions. ■

Kenneth and Mamie Clark conducted some of the most famous experiments in
psychology in 1939--1940. Children in segregated schools were shown two
dolls that were identical except for hair, eye, and skin color, and
asked questions such as whether one doll was nicer, or if the child
would prefer to play with one doll over the other. The majority of
children, regardless of their own race, preferred the white doll. The
Clarks not only made contributions to our understanding of the social
context of child development, but their research was applied as evidence
in hearings by the U.S. Supreme Court on the detrimental effects of
segregated schools. In 2005, an 18-year-old high school student, Kiri
Davis, repeated the Clark's doll study for her film A Girl Like Me: The
Gwen Araujo Story. She found that 15 out of 21 African-American girls
still preferred the white doll.

Jim West/Alamy Stock Photo

IN ADDITION TO THE FIVE PSYCHOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVES reviewed in this
chapter, a more general perspective provided by culture and diversity is
also essential to our understanding of behavior. The guidelines proposed
for the introductory psychology course by Gurung et al. (2014, 2016)
emphasize the need to use culture and diversity as a "cross-cutting
theme." In accordance with this view, each of the editions of this
textbook has been crafted following the guidance provided by Trimble et
al. (2004) about integrating issues of diversity into all relevant
discussions in an organic way. In addition to incorporating diversity
seamlessly throughout our topics, we also believe that it is useful to
provide opportunities to highlight diversity issues in greater depth,
which is the purpose of having this feature in each chapter. As
suggested by Betancourt and López (1993, p. 636), "psychology as a
discipline will benefit both from efforts to infuse culture in
mainstream research and theory and from efforts to study culture and
develop theory in cross-cultural and ethnic psychology." This first
chapter has reviewed psychology's historical timeline and explored some
of the career paths that psychologists can follow. From a diversity
perspective, we see that the history of psychology features a dramatic
underrepresentation of ethnic and racial minorities. Stanley Sue (2009)
noted that it wasn't until 1975 that the first

We don't have a crystal ball that will allow us to foresee psychology's
future. however, we strongly believe that this future will involve
combining and integrating new and existing perspectives. Many of these
new ways of looking at the mind will take advantage of the revolution in
techniques for studying the brain that began in the 1970s and continues.
already, today's cognitive neuroscientists investigate the brain as an
information-processing system and search for the biological basis of
topics such as attention, decision making, and memory. social
neuroscientists investigate the biological factors that vary with
people's feelings and experiences of social inclusion, rejection, or
loneliness. Behavioral neuroscientists pick up previous lines of
research on learning, memory, motivation, and sleep, and search for
connections between these processes and our biology. clinical and
counseling psychologists are likely to consider biological processes in
their theories about the causes of psychological disorders. By merging
the five perspectives of mind, we stand a better chance of tackling the
remarkable problem of understanding the human mind. What are
Psychological PersPectives?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

27

THINKING SCIENTIFICALLY Can the Use of a Single Perspective Be
Misleading?

The answer to that question is a resounding "yes." Consider the
following example. For many years, researchers were puzzled in their
efforts to understand the relationships between child maltreatment and
later antisocial behavior. Although maltreatment often seems to be
linked to later criminal behavior, the majority of maltreated children
do not become delinquents or adult criminals (Caspi et al., 2002). To
solve this dilemma, a clinical psychologist might focus on environmental
factors, such as the presence of a trusted adult or delinquent peer
group, or personal factors, like resilience. Working in parallel,
biological

psychologists know something about certain candidate genes and their
relationships with aggressive behavior in animals. In particular,
animals with a low-activity version of the MAOA gene seemed to be more
aggressive than animals with a higher-activity version. However, links
between variations in MAOA and human aggression are not clear.
Separately, neither group of psychologists is likely to do a very good
job of explaining why some children exposed to maltreatment engage in
antisocial behavior while others do not. The solution, however, becomes
apparent when we combine the clinical psychologists' observations of
environmental factors with the genetic information provided by the
biological psychologists. It appears that a gene-environment interaction
takes place, in which children with the low-activity version of the MAOA
gene responded to maltreatment by becoming antisocial, while children
with the higher-activ-

ity version do not (Fergusson et al., 2011; Caspi et al., 2002; Nilsson
et al., 2018). Restricting ourselves to one perspective might cloud our
understanding, but combining perspectives leads us to an accurate
conclusion.

DNA Strand: Science Picture Co/Superstock; Teenager: Suzanne
Tucker/Shutterstock.com

WE HAVE ARGUED that restricting our thinking about an aspect of mind to
the information provided by one perspective can result in an incomplete
picture, but can this single-perspective approach actually lead us in
the wrong direction?

Experiencing childhood maltreatment does not reliably predict
aggressiveness in youth, but combining genetics and exposure to
maltreatment provides a clearer picture.

iStock.com/BirdofPrey

What Does It Mean to Be a Psychologist?

Forensic psychologists attempt to understand the criminal mind and to
develop effective treatments for criminal behavior.

28

Chapter 1

in 2016--2017, nearly 117,000 students in the United States received a
bachelor's degree in psychology (APA, 2019). This amounts to
approximately 6% of the 1.9 million bachelor's degrees awarded that
year, making psychology the fourth-most-frequent bachelor's degree
program (following business, the health professions, and combined social
sciences and history). What are these psychology graduates likely to be
doing in the workforce? Psychology is unlike some other disciplines in
which people with a bachelor's degree can refer to themselves as a
practicing member of the relevant profession, such as a chemist or
biologist. Calling oneself a psychologist is restricted to holders of
graduate (usually doctorate) degrees. This does not mean that students
who completed a bachelor's degree in psychology cannot be employed in
relevant fields. Some undergraduate psychology graduates prefer
employment in fields that are directly related to psychology, such as
working in research facilities or rehabilitation centers for drug abuse
or brain damage. others are quite successful in a variety of
people-oriented jobs, such as those found in management, sales, customer
service, public affairs, education, human resources, probation, and
journalism. This diversity of career pathways reflects the hub
relationship of psychology with other fields, as described earlier in
this chapter. More than half of people holding graduate degrees in
psychology work in health care, counseling, financial services, or legal
services professions (Stamm, Lin, & Christidis, 2016). Graduates with a
master's degree in psychology, usually requiring 1 to 2 years of
additional

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REUTERS/Alamy Stock Photo

study past the bachelor's degree, can teach at the community college
(2-year) level and obtain licensing as therapists in most states, as
discussed in Chapter 15. School psychologists with a master's degree
typically work on elementary, middle school, or high school campuses.
These psychologists participate in academic and career counseling, as
well as the identification and remediation of problems that interfere
with student success. Many people working in psychology have earned
doctoral degrees, which usually take 2 to 5 years of study beyond the
master's level. as shown in ● figure 1.11, about 34% of new
doctoral-level psychologists do what your professor and the authors of
this textbook do: teach, conduct research at colleges and universities,
or both. about 45% of new doctoral-level psychologists work as
therapists. Smaller numbers of new doctoral-level psychologists find
employment in business and government settings, elementary and secondary
schools, and other related fields. Psychologists entering doctoral
programs traditionally identify with one of the major perspectives
discussed earlier, such as social, cognitive, or biological. Choosing a
graduate perspective is similar to choosing an undergraduate major.
although all psychology graduate students might take core courses in
research methods and statistics, they typically pursue coursework and
research in their particular area of specialization. however, training
of psychologists in the 21st century is beginning to reflect the
connections occurring in the field. increasingly, students are being
trained in combined specialties (e.g., cognitive neuroscience) as
psychology becomes an increasingly integrated field of study. The most
rigid distinction occurs between graduate students who plan to
specialize in clinical or counseling psychology and those who do not.
The clinical or counseling track includes extensive internships and
supervised training prior to government-regulated licensure that usually
add at least 1 year to students' graduate studies. do not assume that
your psychology professors are all therapists; it is most likely they
are not. it is important to distinguish

Sports psychologist Julie Elion gives Phil Mickelson some final tips
during his preparation for an important PGA championship.

Primary job by level of highest psychology degree Level of highest
psychology degree 1% 7%

19%

17%

5%

11% 11%

9%

3% 20%

45% 16%

16%

18%

Bachelor's

5% 3%

FIGURE 1.11

16% 3% 49%

11% 6%

Doctorate

9%

5%

Primary job Professional services Teaching Research Management/
supervision Sales Accounting/finance/ contracts Employee relations Other
work activities

8% 54%

4% 7% 12%

8%

Master's

Professional

Individuals earning psychology degrees work in a variety of settings.
Most psychologists with graduate degrees are employed in clinical and
higher-education settings, but opportunities for students of psychology
also exist in schools, businesses, government, and other places in which
an understanding of human behavior is helpful. Source: Data from Stamm
et al. (2016).

WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be a PSYChoLoGiST?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29

between therapists with doctoral degrees in psychology (Phds or Psyds)
and psychiatrists, who are medical doctors (Mds). The biggest difference
between the two professions is that psychiatrists can prescribe
medication, but psychologists usually cannot. in new Mexico, Louisiana,
illinois, iowa, and idaho however, specially trained psychologists can
legally prescribe medications, and this trend might spread to other
states. in Chapter 15, we will provide more detail about the types of
therapists who treat adjustment problems and psychological disorders.

Interpersonal Relationships How Can We Use Relationships to Illustrate
Psychological Perspectives?

OlegD/Shutterstock.com

WE GAVE QUITE A LOT OF THOUGHT to how we might help you, the students
reading our book, to see psychology more as an interconnected discipline
than as a collection of separate perspectives. The introductory
psychology course provides a unique opportunity to see all perspectives
at one time, in contrast to upper-division courses, which typically
focus on one specialty at a time (biological, developmental, social,
cognitive, clinical, and so on). at the beginning of each chapter, we
will take a question relevant to the chapter, such as "Why are we
sensitive to bitter tastes?" and explore it using multiple perspectives.
at the end of each chapter, we'll mirror this process by taking a single
problem and seeing how the material in the chapter can be applied. This
feature of the textbook will have more of a perspective flavor than the
beginnings of each chapter, but by the end of the textbook, you will
have seen how each of the major perspectives in psychological science
contributes to the whole picture. Because it is most helpful to know
something about the perspectives before you see how they can be applied,
we save this feature for the end of each chapter. ideally, seeing the
chapter material in action will make it more memorable for you. The
single problem we have chosen to consider this way is one that we know
to be on the minds of many of our students: their relationships with
others. We are a social species, and the quality of our relationships
has a huge impact on our physical and psychological well-being (Cacioppo
& hawkley, 2009). We will see how each of the major perspectives views
the question of relationship quality and how the perspectives work
together to give us the best possible understanding of this important
aspect of life. ■

30

Chapter 1

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology Takes on Real-World Problems Tackling the Problem of a
Pandemic we encourage you to expand on our model by applying what you've
learned to other issues that you find important. You'll be reading more
about good problem solving methods in Chapter 10. The problem we'll
model for you is a pandemic, and COVID-19 in particular. We will ask how
human behavior contributes to the causes and course of the pandemic as
well as how human behavior can lead to solutions. We might ask why some
people hoard toilet paper while others think masks are unnecessary.
Exploring these behaviors illustrates the power and applicability of
psychological science outside the classroom. In the upcoming chapters,
we want you to think about how the different perspectives might view
both the causes and solutions to our problem. What research results and
other information do you need to understand the problem better? Do
ethical concerns and issues of diversity influence the causes and
solutions of the problem? How would our lives be affected if the problem
continues to worsen or if solutions actually can be

found? If you were tasked with writing a policy to influence pandemic
responses at your school, how would you proceed? For example, what
policies should a college or university implement for wearing masks? For
maintaining social distancing? We'll be demonstrating how psychology can
assist the formation of policy components, including: ●

●

●

Rationale: Why isn't our current policy working well? Proposed Policy
Options: Why isn't our current policy working well? Policy
Recommendations: Which option should we try first? ■

Kevin McGovern/Shutterstock.com

AS YOU HAVE SEEN in this chapter, psychological science is the study of
behavior, mental processes, and brain functions. As such, psychology has
much to say about the causes and solutions of contemporary human
problems. To illustrate psychology's power to contribute to the
understanding and solution of these problems, each chapter will focus on
a "big problem" from the point of view of the chapter content. While
each chapter addresses only a part of the problem, by the time you reach
the end of the textbook, you will have been exposed to many ways that
psychology can contribute to solving some of the biggest challenges that
human beings face today, such as pollution, climate change, education,
poverty, terrorism, pandemics, food insecurity, crime, and social
injustice. Solving such big problems might seem overwhelming, but by
breaking each problem into little steps, real progress can be made. We'd
like to model this process for you by tackling a single problem, but

WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be a PSYChoLoGiST?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

31

summary 1.3 Five Psychological Perspectives

Extraversion

Intraversion installeddrivegbpc computers

poppin party partyingclub

tonight

chilin

file computer

error view properly

extraordinary love

cant girls lookin crazy

party

photoshop server

adoreyo

bottles

dearly

missin ladies to_see_my

code

genuine entitled xoxo absolutly

loves

fam good

night weekend goinbaby wait_to

had_a

lil

right_new\_!

playing

great

happy

big

gotta

wit

guys comeday whats boys best ready girl im:)thank out_with

beach family

thats

girls

tonight hanging

girlybabysitting blast bonfire

partying

love!

gettin lets

process

by

characters \>.\< d: because idea

evil

kind_of they

Cognitive psychology

Investigates mental processes, including thinking, problem solving, and
information processing

Social and personality psychology

Asks how our behavior is affected by the presence of others; Recognizes
that behavior varies around averages and that individual differences
often interact with environments

Developmental psychology

Investigates the normal changes in behavior that occur across the life
span

Clinical psychology

Explains, defines, and treats psychological disorders and promotes
general well-being

suppose thinks

oddunusual

of

computers

relative frequency

b b

it's

slow

working yay

liquid

b

haven't

dead

that's

that'

cells natural

a a

shouldn't

0_0

book actually uselaptop death there's

reaction

privilege

correlation strength

Investigates the connections among mind, behavior, and biological
processes, and asks how our evolutionary past continues to shape our
behavior

i_should

which finished they're doctor_who read into \_but to_write

i_have_to

brain oxygen science

bodychemistry acid chemical energy

soooooo

a

happening fact fairly apparently weird

Biological and evolutionary psychology

internet

manga

soooooooo

sooomiss

gotta

thunderstorms

love

only

sooooooooo

sooooo guys

missed love

also

i_can't

bestle

soooomissingsoo

loving

dont

sort it's strangeisn't thing telling

keyboard

things to remember

won't reading i'veapparently or

boy

me

least

o.o

using

pokernon

text

beautifulits miss amazing ya

wonderful

dx

computer didn't

doin

u much_fun with_my gonna_be \<3 excited bout

night forward

mac system

doesn't something isn't i_don't anime not probablywhy

books odd

tonight

found theas dark pages from .\_sighwriting managed_to \>*.*\>

though i'm_going other before able_to

xd while

admire

time_with lovin here_we

chill soooo a_blast life sooo sunday ur dinner_with bday :) last_night
bestest

needed sleepover

virus

program

type download

gonnarockin

love

loved

windows files softwarecomputer laptop

web messagewebsite

townmessyhomies

champagne rocking

shown

freely truely

Perspective

fixed computer comp internet

finally

works laptop library

wasn't

due

write

books

history

read

chapters chapter

page

readingbook

written pages notes article

online

prevalence in topic

Credits: Top row---Courtesy of Scott Grafton, UCSB Brain Imaging Lab.
Photo © Roger Freberg; Christian Jegou/Publiphoto/Science Source; Second
row---Pascal Goetgheluck/Science Source; Third row---Joel Gordon 2001;
Fourth row---Thierry Berrod, Mona Lisa Production/Science Source.

Key terms The Language of Psychological Science Be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

behaviorism, p.15 biological psychology, p.23 clinical psychology, p.26
cognitive psychology, p.24 cultural diversity, p.24 developmental
psychology, p.24

32

Chapter 1

evolutionary psychology, p.23 functionalism, p.12 gestalt psychology,
p.12 humanistic psychology, p.14 introspection, p.5 mind, p.5

natural sciences, p.7 philosophy, p.7 psychology, p.5 social and
personality psychology, p.24 structuralism, p.12

The SCienCe of Mind: The diSCiPLine of PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Scientific methods, including brain imaging, have allowed researchers to
pinpoint structural and functional differences between the brains of
fluent speakers and those of people who stutter.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2

The Measure of Mind THE SCIENTIFIC METHODS OF PSYCHOLOGY Learning
Objectives 1. Distinguish between scientific reasoning and common sense.
2. Assess the value of case studies, naturalistic observations, and
surveys to describe behavior.

3.  Analyze the key features, strengths, and limitations of
    correlational and experimental methods.

4.  Understand reliability and validity.

5.  Differentiate descriptive and inferential statistics.

6.  Critique the ethical guidelines for using human and animal
    participants in research.

AMONG THE MANY CELEBRITIES WHO STUTTER is action actor Samuel L.
Jackson. At a gala for the American Institute for Stuttering, Jackson
shared one of his strategies for avoiding stuttering--- uttering a
particular swear word under his breath. Stuttering involves disruptions
in normal speech production, such as repeating the starting letter of a
word (b-b-b-bird), holding a vowel sound for a long time (ah ah ah), or
having difficulty initiating speech. About 5% of the population
experience stuttering (Månsson, 2000), with males

Stuttering has been described since the days of the ancient Greeks and
occurs across all cultures and ethnicities. Many interesting myths exist
regarding its causes and remedies (Kuster, 2015). South African
traditions suggest that stuttering results from leaving a baby out in
the rain or tickling the infant too much. A Chinese folk remedy for
stuttering was to hit the person in the

iStock.com/EdStock

two to five times more likely to stutter than females (Craig & Tran,
2005).

face when the weather was cloudy. In Iceland, people believed that a
pregnant woman who drank from a cracked cup was likely to produce a
child who stuttered. Many of us might ask, "How could anybody believe
these things?" But how do we know these are merely myths and not facts?
Instead of dismissing these efforts to explain and predict, think about
what might have happened to lead people to these particular conclusions.
What is missing from these conclusions is a system for reaching logical,
objective results. Science provides us with this system. What does
science have to say about stuttering? Based on the careful evaluation of
stuttering using the methods outlined in this chapter, scientists have
concluded that there are multiple causes for stuttering (Kang et al.,
2010). Many cases seem to have a basis in genetics, which is discussed
in Chapter 3 (Han et al., 2019; Raza et al., 2015). Scientists have used
brain-imaging technologies to zoom in on brain structures and functions
that appear to differ between stutterers and fluent speakers, with
stutterers

35 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

showing more activation of the right hemisphere during speech (Gordon,
2002). As mentioned in the previous chapter, some of the most thorough
explanations combine multiple psychological perspectives (Ward, 2013). A
complete explanation of stuttering zooms back out to combine a
predisposition for the problem resulting from genetics and biology with
developmental, emotional, and social factors, like feeling embarrassed
or anxious about speaking in front of peers. Although there is no "cure"
for stuttering, carefully tested scientific explanations combining input
from various perspectives are leading to more effective treatments. In
this chapter, you will learn how science provides a system that allows
us to

steineranden/Shutterstock.com

construct increasingly realistic models of the world around us.

Science has provided explanations for many natural phenomena, like
lightning, that were probably quite frightening for our ancestors.

science A method for learning about

Throughout human history, we have been motivated to understand, predict,
and control the world around us. To meet these goals, we need methods
for gaining knowledge. We often take contemporary scientific knowledge
for granted, but our ancestors did not enjoy the benefits of science
while trying to explain and predict their world. early in history,
people attempted to understand natural phenomena by applying human
characteristics to nature (Cornford, 1957). skies could look "angry" or
a lake could be "calm." other explanations involved spirits inhabiting
humans and all other objects. earthquakes and illness were viewed as the
actions of spirits, and people attempted to influence these spirits
through magical rituals. Later on, people looked to authorities, such as
religious leaders and philosophers, for explanations of natural
phenomena. People often form strong beliefs about their world based on
faith, which literally means "trust." Faith is belief that does not
depend on proof or evidence. We might accept friends' excuses for being
late based on our faith in their honesty, without knowing for certain
whether they are telling the truth. in contrast to faith, science
definitely requires proof and evidence. The word science comes from the
Latin scientia, which means "knowledge." science doesn't refer to just
any type of knowledge, but rather to a special way of learning about
reality through systematic observation and experimentation. The methods
described in this chapter are designed to supply that evidence. Stefano
Bianchetti/Contributor/Corbis Historical/Getty Images

reality through systematic observation and experimentation. objectivity
The practice of basing conclusions on facts, without the influence of
personal emotion and bias.

Throughout history, people have often turned to authorities, such as
religious leaders, instead of to science. The astronomer Galileo Galilei
was interrogated as part of the Roman Inquisition for believing that the
Earth was not the center of the universe.

36

Chapter 2

What Is Science?

How Do We Develop a Scientific Mindset? not all observations are
scientific. how does science differ from everyday, common sense
observations, like the belief that "opposites attract"? as you will
learn in Chapter 13, "opposites" do not, in fact, find each other very
attractive. first, science relies on objectivity, rather than
subjectivity. Objectivity means that conclusions are based on facts,
without influence from personal emotions or biases. in contrast,
subjectivity means that conclusions reflect personal points of view. in
a study by allport and Postman (1945), research participants described
from memory what they had heard about some photos. one photo showed a
White man threatening another person. some participants switched the
race of the man from White to Black, possibly to fit a biased,
subjective worldview. scientists strive to be objective, but any
observation by a human is, by definition, subjective. recognizing when
we are being subjective can be difficult, so scientists cannot rely on
their introspections to maintain objectivity. The scientific methods
described in this chapter promote objectivity and help prevent biased,
subjective observations from distorting a scientist's work.

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

From Allport, G. W., & Postman, L. J. (1945), "The Basic Psychology of
Rumor," from Transactions of The New York Academy of Sciences, 8, 61--81

The second important difference between science and everyday
observations is the use of systematic as opposed to hit-or-miss
observation. By "hit or miss," we mean making conclusions based only on
whatever is happening around us. To make conclusions about the human
mind, we cannot restrict our observations to our immediate circle of
acquaintances, friends, and loved ones. our observations of the people
we see frequently are probably quite valid. it's just that the people we
know represent a small slice of the greater population. for example, we
might be surprised to learn that our favorite candidate lost an election
because "everyone we know" voted for that candidate. Based on
observations of people they know, college students often believe that
drinking alcohol, and even binge drinking (five drinks on one occasion
for men, four drinks for women), is a nearly universal behavior for
anyone over the age of 18 or so. We can see why a college student might
believe this after making hit-or-miss observations (see ● figure 2.1).
fifty-eight percent of college students aged 18 to 22 reported drinking
alcohol in the last 30 days, compared to 48% of age peers who are not
attending college. about 37% of college students report binge drinking
during this period, compared to 32.6% of 18- to 22-year-olds not
attending college and 26.9% among all adults (national institute on
alcohol & alcoholism, 2018). finally, science relies on observable,
repeatable evidence, whereas everyday observation often ignores or
rejects evidence, especially when it runs counter to strongly held
beliefs and expectations. our tendency to notice and remember instances
that support our beliefs more than instances that contradict them is
termed confirmation bias. Confirmation bias tends to protect people's
stereotypes, as they see only what they expect to see. for example, if
people are convinced that women are worse drivers than men, they will
notice only bad driving by women. Good driving by women and bad driving
by men will be ignored, strengthening the stereotypical belief. however,
as shown in ● figure 2.2, males of all ages are much more likely than
females to be killed in traffic accidents, in spite of their relatively
equal proportions of the driving population. scientific knowledge is
both stable and changing. it is a work in progress, not a finished
product. The fact that we may learn something new tomorrow should not
make you assume that today's knowledge is flawed. Most change occurs
slowly on the cutting edges of science, not quickly or at the main core
of its knowledge base. unlike with many other fields, we expect science
to improve over time. an important feature of scientific literacy is to
learn to be comfortable with the idea that scientific knowledge is
always open to improvement and will never be considered certain.

Science strives to be objective, making judgments that are free from
personal emotion or bias. In contrast, people's subjectivity emerged in
a classic experiment by Allport and Postman (1945). Some participants
remembered hearing that this picture illustrated a Black man threatening
another person rather than the objective fact---a White person is doing
the threatening.

confirmation bias The tendency to notice and remember instances that
support your beliefs more than instances that contradict them.

The Importance of Critical Thinking Critical thinking, or the ability to
think clearly, rationally, and independently, is one of the foundations
of scientific reasoning. The skilled critical thinker can follow logical
arguments, identify mistakes in reasoning, prioritize ideas according to
their importance, and apply logic to personal attitudes, beliefs, and
values. Critical thinking is not built in; rather, it is a skill that
people need to learn. You can begin by using five critical thinking
questions to evaluate new information you come across in your everyday
life, starting with what you read in this textbook (Bernstein, 2011):

critical thinking The ability to think clearly, rationally, and
independently.

What am i being asked to believe or accept? What evidence supports this
position? ● are there other ways that this evidence could be
interpreted? ● ●

WhaT is sCienCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

37

Nebraska

D.C.

FIGURE 2.1 Scientific Observations Are Systematic, Not Hit or Miss.
Science provides ways to make systematic observations. Judgments that we
make based on the people we know might not apply to larger groups of
people. Based only on personal experience, college students living in
Nebraska and California might disagree about the prevalence of binge
drinking.

California

Prevalence of Binge Drinking (%) 18.7--25.6 16.8--18.6 10.9--16.7 Data
unavailable

ExpErIEncIng Psychology POPULAR PRESS REPORTS OFTEN SUMMARIZE the
results of scholarly papers published in peer-reviewed journals. It is
very important to use your very best critical thinking in evaluating
these reports, which often distort the results and conclusions of the
papers they describe. U.S. News & World Report (2019) featured a
headline that read "Millennials' Odds for Depression Rise with Social
Media Use." Using the steps to good critical thinking outlined in this
chapter, let's see how this headline holds up.

1.  What Am I Being Asked to Believe or Accept? We are being asked to
    believe that there is a positive correlation between depression and
    social media use within the Millennial age cohort (those born
    between 1980 and 2000).

2.  What Evidence Supports This Position? The news report references an
    article in a peer-reviewed publication entitled "Social

38

Chapter 2

comparisons, social media addiction, and social interaction: An
examination of specific social media behaviors related to major
depressive disorder in a millennial population" (Robinson et al., 2019).
The study consisted of an online survey administered to 504
undergraduates attending Texas State, San Marcos. The participants
completed standardized instruments assessing their social media use and
depressive symptoms. Based on their responses, participants were divided
into depressed and non-depressed groups for further analysis. In this
chapter, we refer to this type of design as a quasiexperiment, because
the participants

13_Phunkod/Shutterstock.com

Using Critical Thinking to Evaluate Popular Press Reports

U.S. News & World Report claimed that "Millennials' Odds for Depression
Rise with Social Media Use." Evaluating claims like this requires our
best critical thinking skills.

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Fatality Ratio (% of 100)

Female Female Female Female Female Female Female Female Female Female
Female Female 43 32 24 25 27 30 29 29 30 33 36 43

Male 57

Male 68

Male 76

Male 75

Male 73

Male 70

Male 71

Male 71

Male 70

Male 67

Male 64

Male 57

Under 16

16--20

21--25

26--30

31--35

36--40 41--45 Age Group

46--50

51--55

56--60

61--65 Over 65

Alex Brylov/Shutterstock.com

FIGURE 2.2

are not randomly assigned into these groups. Participants meeting
criteria for major depressive disorder on the basis of their survey
responses (see Chapter 14) were more likely to engage in social
comparisons with others on social media and to show signs of addiction
to social media. Participants who were not depressed were more likely to
use social media for social interaction. At no point did the original
study argue that the quantity of social media use was correlated with
depressive symptoms, in contrast to the headline.

3.  Are There Other Ways That This Evidence Could Be Interpreted? While
    it is possible that social media use affects our mood, it is also
    possible that being depressed makes us use social media differently.
    Confounding factors might also contribute to these results. Perhaps
    feelings of social exclusion lead to both depression and different
    use of social media.

Confirmation Bias Supports Stereotypes. Confirmation bias leads people
to see what they expect to see, which is not necessarily the truth.
People who believe a false stereotype about women being bad drivers are
likely to notice instances of women driving badly while ignoring men
driving badly or women driving well. Actual data show that males are
much more likely to die in traffic accidents than females, in spite of
their relatively equal proportions in the population. Source: NHTSA's
National Center for Statistics and Analysis 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE.,
Washington, DC 20590 DOT HS 810 853 July 2008

4.  What Other Evidence Do We Need? First, we need a better sample. The
    study was conducted with a very limited sample of college students
    at a single university, who are likely to differ from "Millennials"
    in a number of ways. For example, Millennials born in 1980 are
    nearing mid-life and are probably quite different from young adult
    college students. Millennials who have not attended college or whose
    race and ethnicity differs from the sample might behave differently,
    too. We can't conclude that social media affects Millennials
    differently than it does other age groups unless we assess other age
    groups. Second, to answer a question about the causal effects of
    social media exposure on depression requires an experiment, which
    presents practical and ethical challenges. It might be possible to
    assess depressive symptoms before and after exposing participants to
    social media stimuli, but this would be somewhat artificial and not
    necessarily ethical.

5.  What Are the Most Reasonable Conclusions? The original study appears
    to be making some valid points, although the sample is quite
    limited. The news report, however, generally overstates and
    misinterprets the findings of the original study, such as implying
    causality where none can be established from the data. Although
    reading the original source described in news reports is always the
    safest bet, we rarely have time to do this. What we can do is
    recognize that news reports might not be accurate reflections of an
    original study.

Now It's Your Turn Using our model critical thinking questions, explore
a popular press headline about psychology of your choice, and evaluate
the item. Do you think you might have evaluated the claim differently
before reading this chapter? Why or why not? ■

WhaT is sCienCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

39

● ●

What other evidence would i need to evaluate these alternatives? What
are the most reasonable conclusions?

it is also helpful to recognize the signs that you are not thinking
critically (excerpt taken from Lau, 2019): i prefer being given the
correct answers rather than figuring them out myself. i don't like to
think a lot about my decisions, as i rely only on gut feelings. ● i
don't usually review the mistakes i have made. ● i don't like to be
criticized. ● ●

our abilities to think critically and accurately can also be undermined
by a number of very normal cognitive processes (Marsh et al., 2016). if
we understand our vulnerabilities, we might be better able to protect
ourselves from making these mistakes: We are biased to believe that most
information is true. it's easier in terms of time and effort to accept a
false statement like "omaha is the capital of nebraska" than to question
its truthfulness. ● information that is easier to retrieve feels more
like the truth. information that is repeated is also easier to recall,
making it more likely to be considered true. ● Compared to plain verbal
statements, statements accompanied by pictures have more "truthiness"
even though the picture does not provide additional evidence for the
statement. ● We use inferences to bridge gaps between ideas (dolphins
live in pods + dolphins use clicks and squeaks to communicate 5 pods
communicate with clicks and squeaks). While this remarkable ability
usually serves us well, it can also lead us in false directions. ● Prior
knowledge can sometimes interfere with new learning. if you begin your
course believing that we only use 10% of our brains or that vaccines
cause autism, your professor's very best efforts to convince you that
these statements are false may still fail. ● We often neglect important
information. When asked where the authorities should bury the survivors
of a plane crash at a border between two countries, many people fail to
consider that we don't bury survivors at all. ●

theory A set of facts and relationships between facts that can explain
and predict related phenomena.

Critical, accurate thinking not only is essential to good science, but
also provides the underpinning of a free society. our ability to think
clearly, rationally, and independently gives us the skills to evaluate
information and the confidence to question the actions of people in
authority instead of engaging in blind obedience. We hope you will
continue to practice good critical thinking skills long after you finish
reading this textbook.

The Scientific Enterprise Learning scientific facts is not the same as
understanding how science works. science, including psychological
science, is more than a collection of facts---it is a process (see ●
figure 2.3).

Courtesy of John Cacioppo

Scientific Theories science uses careful observations to understand how

40

Chapter 2

something works and develops theories based on those observations.
Theories are sets of facts and relationships between facts that can be
used to explain and predict phenomena (Cacioppo et al., 2004). in other
words, scientists construct the best possible models of reality based on
the facts known to date. unfortunately, the english language can be the
source of considerable confusion regarding the nature of scientific
theories. in addition to its use in science, the word theory can be used
in nonscientific ways to describe a guess, such as "i have a theory
about why my professor seems unusually cheerful this morning," or a
hypothetical situation, as in "That's the theory, but it may not work in
practice." Confusion over the multiple meanings of the word theory have
led people mistakenly to view truly scientific theories, like the theory

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD AS AN ONGOING PROCESS

Make Observations

Develop General Theories

Think of Interesting Questions

Refine, Alter, Expand, or Reject Hypotheses

Test Hypotheses and Gather Data

The Venus Project advocates a world where science is applied to the
social system. Find out how this will uplift humanity.

Formulate Hypotheses

Develop Testable Predictions

V

THE VENUS PROJECT

BEYOND POLITICS POVERTY AND WAR WWW. thevenusproject.com

FIGURE 2.3 Science Is a Process. Theory building begins with generating
hypotheses that are then systematically tested. Hypotheses that are not
rejected contribute to the theory and help generate new hypotheses.

of evolution, as nothing more than casual guesses or hunches, rather
than the thoroughly investigated and massively supported principles that
they are. The best scientific theories not only explain and organize
known facts, but also generate new predictions. The word prediction
comes from the Latin words for "saying before." a scientific prediction
is more than a guess or hunch. it is usually stated in a rigorous,
mathematical form that allows the scientist to say that under a certain
set of circumstances, a certain set of outcomes are likely to occur (if
a, then B). in some cases, a theory's predictions can be surprising. for
example, you might believe that it's impossible to be happy and sad at
the same time. however, one model of emotion, discussed in Chapter 7,
predicted that it is quite possible to feel happy and sad at the same
time (Cacioppo et al., 2012). This prediction was reinforced by research
showing that first-year college students reported feeling either happy
or sad, but not both, on a normal day of school, but experiencing both
emotions simultaneously on the day they moved out of campus housing to
go home for the summer. Before attempting to generate your own
scientific questions, it pays to become familiar with relevant theories
and previous discoveries. as sir isaac newton noted, scholars stand on
the shoulders of giants (Turnbull, 1959)---we build on the work of those
who came before us. new lines of research can also originate in
observation. scientists are observers and thinkers not just in the
laboratory, but also in everyday life. scientific progress often takes a
giant leap forward when a gifted observer recognizes a deeper
meaningfulness in an everyday occurrence. as we discovered in Chapter 1,
ivan Petrovich Pavlov realized that when his dogs learned to salivate to
signals predicting the arrival of food, something more significant than
drooling dogs was happening. The learning that he observed explains why
we can be conditioned to feel a certain way in certain situations, such
as getting nervous before a big test.

Generating Good Hypotheses once you understand the theoretical
foundations of your area of interest, you are ready to generate a
hypothesis. a hypothesis is a type of inference, or an educated guess,
based on prior evidence and logical possibilities. a good hypothesis
links concrete variables based on your theory and makes specific
predictions. for example, based on prior research, scientists interested
in obesity hypothesized that

hypothesis A proposed explanation for a situation, usually taking the
form "If A happens, then B will be the result." WhaT is sCienCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

41

consuming coffee would increase brown fat activity (Velickovic et al.,
2019). The concrete variables in this study are exposure to coffee and
measures of brown fat activity. When formulating the hypothesis that
coffee would have a significant effect on brown fat activity, the
researchers also must consider the additional possibility that coffee
would have no effect on brown fat activity. scientists can never "prove"
that a hypothesis is true because some future experiment, possibly using
new technology not currently available, might show the hypothesis to be
false. all scientists can do is find additional evidence that reinforces
that hypothesis. They can also show when a hypothesis is false. a false
hypothesis must always be modified or discarded. This aspect of the
scientific method explains why so many scientists are frustrated with
popular arguments against vaccinating children. extensive research has
demonstrated that a hypothesis linking vaccinations with autism spectrum
disorder is false, yet many people refuse to accept the need to modify
or discard the hypothesis, as good science demands. once you have a
hypothesis, you are ready to collect the data necessary to evaluate it.
The existing scientific literature in your area of interest provides
considerable guidance regarding your choice of methods, materials, types
of data to collect, and ways to interpret your data.

peer review The process of having other experts examine research prior
to its publication.

A contemporary theory of emotion correctly predicted the circumstances
for when we might experience mixed emotions of happiness and sadness.
Graduation from college is an important accomplishment, but we might
feel sad about leaving our friends.

42

Chapter 2

Joe Raedle/Staff/Hulton Archive/Getty Images

Syracuse Newspapers/Dick Blume/The Image Works

replication Repeating an experiment and producing the same results.

Communicating Science science is a vastly collaborative enterprise. not
only do we stand on the shoulders of giants because we benefit from the
work that has been done previously, but we depend on many others in the
scientific community to help us improve our work and avoid mistakes.
normally, this evaluation is done by submitting research to conferences
and for publication. during this process, research undergoes peer
review, in which it is scrutinized by other scientists who are experts
in the same area. only if other experts conclude that new research is
important, accurate, and explained thoroughly should it be added to the
existing body of scientific knowledge. To demonstrate the importance of
this peer review, contrast this process to what happens when a person
simply decides to transmit a tweet or launch a personal website. The
author is solely responsible for the content, and there are no checks on
the accuracy of that content. Published results should undergo
replication, which means that other scientists independently attempt to
reproduce the results of a study (Klein et al., 2014). if the data are
replicated, they will be accepted quickly. if other scientists are
unable to replicate the data, the results are rejected or remain in
question pending further study. although this process might slow the
acceptance of some innovative findings, the result---more accuracy---is
worth the effort.

The methods of psychological science can help us evaluate questions like
the effects, if any, that playing violent video games has on physical
aggression.

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ThInkIng scientifically Does Psychology Have a Replication Problem? 5 4
Teeth

3

Lips 2 1 0

No-camera

Camera

Scott Saling

When a group of nearly 300 psychologists led by Brian Nosek, known as
the Open Science Collaboration (OSC), set out to replicate 100 studies
from three wellrespected psychology journals, the results were not
encouraging (Nosek, 2015). Only 36% of the replications produced
significant results, meaning that the researchers were unable to
duplicate the original findings of the studies the majority of the time.
The average effect size, or the strength of a phenomenon, in the
replications was only about half of that reported in the original
studies. In other words, if a study found that 50% of the difference in
physical aggressiveness was due to hot weather, the replication might
show that only about 25% of the difference in aggressiveness was
accounted for by the weather. Does this mean that we have to throw out
these results? While failure to replicate should give scientists a
reason to reflect on their results, some psychologists are not
particularly alarmed by the findings of Nosek and his colleagues
(Gilbert et al., 2016). The methods used in the replication efforts were
sometimes different from the original study. For example, a sample of
Italians substituted for Americans in a study of attitudes toward
African Americans and a study of college students being called on by a
professor was replicated with people who had not attended college. These
differences in sampling, rather than the validity of the original study,
might have been the key reason for finding different outcomes.
Scientific debates usually move us in the right direction. Regardless of
how big a replication problem psychology might or might

6

Amusement Rating

ONE OF THE checks on science is the practice of replicating, or
attempting to reproduce, scientific data. A scientist producing the
original data might want to double-check his or her results, or other
scientists might want to see if they can produce the same results
(Simons, 2014). What happens if a study fails to replicate?

FIGURE 2.4 Changes in Method Can Impact Replication. A classic study by
Strack et al. (1988) concluded that participants would rate cartoons as
more amusing if they were holding a pen in their teeth (mimicking
smiling) than in their lips. The study failed to replicate (Wagenmakers
et al., 2016). The replicating studies, however, added a camera (see
photo on right) to the original method to ensure participants were
holding their pens correctly. When the camera was removed, returning to
the original method of Strack et al., 1988, the results did replicate
(Noah et al., 2018). Now psychologists face the task of explaining why
the presence of a camera, or the feeling of being observed, could change
the results. not have, psychologists are looking for new methods to make
their results even more reliable. For example, submitting a public
"registered report" of the methods and statistical analyses that a
researcher plans to run prior to conducting a study discourages any
afterthe-fact efforts to tweak data and results to find something
interesting when the main

purpose of the study fails. Sharing data, detailed methods, and results
in public places allows others to evaluate a researcher's findings.
Addressing unrealistic pressure on academics to "publish or perish" and
putting quality of research ahead of quantity should also contribute to
a more robust scientific environment.

WhaT is sCienCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

43

summary 2.1 Steps to Critical Thinking Questions for Detecting good
critical thinking

Questions for Detecting Poor critical thinking (all answers should be
no)

What am I being asked to believe or accept?

Do I prefer being given the correct answers rather than figuring them
out myself?

What evidence supports this position?

Do I rely on gut feelings instead of thinking a lot about my decisions?

Are there other ways that this evidence could be interpreted?

Am I forgetting to review my conclusions to check for mistakes?

What other evidence would I need to evaluate these alternatives?

Am I oversensitive to criticism about my conclusions?

What are the most reasonable conclusions?

how Do psychologists conduct research? Psychological scientists use a
variety of research methods, including descriptive, correlational, and
experimental methods, depending on the type of question being asked.
descriptive methods, including surveys, case studies, and naturalistic
observations, provide a good starting place for a new research question.
Correlational methods help psychologists see how two variables of
interest, like the number of hours spent playing video games and level
of physical aggression, relate to each other. Psychologists use
experiments to test their hypotheses and to determine the causes of
behavior. in the next sections, we will describe the common research
methods used in psychological science and then compare how they might be
used to approach a particular question---whether exposure to video game
violence increases aggression. each method--- descriptive,
correlational, and experimental---provides a different view of the
phenomenon in question, and each has a particular profile of strengths
and weaknesses. each requires different types of statistical analyses,
which are described in more depth later in the chapter. Many
psychological studies combine several of these methods. When similar
outcomes are observed using multiple methods, we have even more
confidence in our results.

Descriptive Methods descriptive method Research methods designed for
making careful, systematic observations.

case study An in-depth analysis of the behavior of one person or a small
number of people.

44

Chapter 2

Descriptive methods include case studies, naturalistic observations, and
surveys. as we have seen, personal observations and common-sense ideas
are especially vulnerable to bias, but descriptive methods allow a
researcher to make careful, systematic, real-world observations.
descriptive methods can illuminate associations between variables and
establish prevalence rates. armed with these scientific observations,
the researcher will be in a strong position to generate hypotheses.

The Case Study a case study provides an in-depth analysis of the
behavior of one person

or a small number of people. Many fields in addition to psychology,
including medicine, law, and business, use the case study method.
Psychologists often use case studies when large numbers of participants
are not available or when a particular participant possesses unique
characteristics, as in the case described in this section. interviews,
background records,

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s44/ZUMA Press/Newscom

observation, personality tests, cognitive tests, and brain imaging
provide information necessary to evaluate the case. Case studies not
only are a useful source of hypotheses, but also can be used to test
hypotheses. a hypothesis stating that no life exists outside our solar
system would be rejected if you did a case study on a planet outside our
solar system and discovered life there. one of the most productive case
studies in psychology chronicled more than 50 years of examinations of
henry Molaison (1926--2008), known in the scientific literature as "the
amnesiac patient h.M." in 1953, Molaison underwent brain surgery to
control his frequent, severe seizures. although the surgery may have
saved his life, he was left with profound memory deficits, which are
described in Chapter 9. Through painstaking testing and evaluation of
Molaison, psychologists learned a great deal about the brain structures
and processes that support the formation of memories (Corkin, 2002).
even after his death, Molaison continues to contribute to our knowledge.
researchers from the Massachusetts institute of Technology (MiT), the
Massachusetts General hospital, and the university of California, san
diego (uCsd) are analyzing Molaison's preserved brain today. how could
you use the case study method to learn about exposure to video game
violence and aggression? You could conduct a case study of Michael
Carneal, who was sentenced to life in prison after he began shooting
students at his high school in West Paducah, Kentucky in 1997, killing
three students and seriously wounding five others. he had never shot a
real gun before, but he was fond of playing first-person-shooter games
like Doom. To conduct your case study, you gather background facts about
Carneal's case, possibly by interviewing others associated with the
case, viewing legal and medical documents, and observing media accounts.
You interview Carneal and possibly administer established personality
and clinical tests like those discussed in Chapters 12 and 15. Licensed
clinicians who examined Carneal with these methods concluded that he met
the criteria for schizophrenia (see Chapter 14). We should be careful,
however, to avoid making broad generalizations about relationships
between mental illness and mass shootings based on any single case. The
majority of people with mental illness do not commit violent crimes
(Baumann & Teasdale, 2018), and not all violent offenders are mentally
ill. What are the advantages of using the case study method to learn
about the effects of playing violent video games on aggression? Mass
shooters are thankfully quite rare (when defined as four or more people
killed at one time by a gunman, excluding criminal or gang activity),
and the case study method is well suited to learning about unusual
situations. a case study can contribute to science by testing
hypotheses. if a hypothesis made a strong prediction that all mass
shooters play violent video games, finding and documenting a case of a
mass shooter who did not play violent video games would require
rejection of the hypothesis. Based on the detailed data that you obtain
from Carneal's case, you will be better prepared to generate and test
additional hypotheses. John Sommers II/Reuters

One of the most famous case studies in psychology is that of Henry
Molaison, who was known in the literature as "the amnesic patient H.M."
until his death in 2008. For more than 50 years, Molaison allowed
psychologists to evaluate his memory deficits resulting from brain
surgery. After his death, scientists like Jacopo Annese of the
University of California, San Diego, began a careful examination of
Molaison's brain that continues today.

Michael Carneal is serving a life sentence in prison for shooting and
killing fellow students at his high school in 1997, when he was 14.

hoW do PsYChoLoGisTs ConduCT researCh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

45

Avalon/Bruce Coleman Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

Naturalistic Observation if you are interested in learning about larger
groups

Jane Goodall used naturalistic observation to illuminate the world of
the chimpanzee.

naturalistic observation An in-depth study of a phenomenon in its
natural setting.

survey A descriptive method in which participants are asked the same
questions.

sample A subset of a population being studied.

population The entire group from which a sample is taken.

46

Chapter 2

of people than are possible with the case study method, you might pursue
naturalistic observation, or an in-depth study of a phenomenon in its
natural setting. Compared to the case study method, we are looking at a
larger group of people, which will strengthen our ability to apply our
results to the general population. We also have the advantage of
observing individuals in their natural, everyday circumstances, as
opposed to the more artificial setting of a laboratory. a classic
example of the method of naturalistic observation is the careful,
long-term study of chimpanzees conducted in their habitat by Jane
Goodall. in the summer of 1960, Goodall, then 26 years old, began her
painstaking observations of chimpanzees living in Gombe national Park in
Tanzania. among her discoveries was that chimpanzees were not
vegetarians, as previously assumed (Goodall, 1971, p. 34): i saw that
one of them was holding a pink-looking object from which he was from
time to time pulling pieces with his teeth. There was a female and a
youngster and they were both reaching out toward the male, their hands
actually touching his mouth. Presently the female picked up a piece of
the pink thing and put it to her mouth: it was at this moment that i
realized the chimps were eating meat.

as a result of Goodall's years spent following the chimpanzees,
scientists have a rich, accurate knowledge of the behavior of these
animals in the wild. impressed by Goodall's results, you plan to pursue
further knowledge about violent video games and aggression by attending
local area network (Lan) parties, where attendees bring their computers
to a gathering place to play multiplayer, networked video games. You
hope that by observing people playing violent video games and watching
their subsequent behavior for signs of aggression, you might reach some
conclusions about the relationships between video game violence and
aggression. as in Goodall's case, this approach has the advantage of
providing insight into natural, real-world behaviors with large numbers
of participants. some naturalistic observations are conducted when
people know that they are being observed, while in other cases, people
are unaware of being observed. Both situations raise challenges. if we
know we are being observed, we might act differently. Your Lan party
participants know that aggression is not viewed positively in our
culture, so they might act less aggressively when they know that they're
being watched. Watching people who do not know that they're being
watched raises ethical issues, which will be explored later in this
chapter. how would you feel if you discovered that you had been an
unwitting participant in a study? The use of naturalistic observation
illustrates the importance of choosing a method that is well suited to
the research goals. Like the case study method, naturalistic observation
can be helpful for developing hypotheses, but typically, other methods
must be used to test them. Most hypotheses in psychology look at the
relationships between two or more concepts, like the exposure to violent
video games and aggression in this example. Testing a hypothesis would
allow you to say whether a relationship between exposure to violent
video games and aggression exists, how strong the relationship is, what
direction it goes in, and so on. it might appear to you that the people
you observe are more aggressive following their Lan parties, but you
have no way to demonstrate your point. People engage in many different
behaviors during Lan parties. Perhaps eating pizza or staying up all
night at Lan parties enhances aggressive tendencies. With only your
naturalistic observations to go on, you can't say for sure.

The Survey Surveys allow us to ask large numbers of people questions
about attitudes

and behavior. surveys provide a great deal of useful information
quickly, at relatively little expense. Commercial online survey services
make conducting surveys easier than in the past. one of the primary
requirements for a good survey is the use of an appropriate sample, or
subset of a population being studied. The population consists of the
entire

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

kolvenbach/Alamy Stock Photo

group from which a sample is taken. Good results require large samples
that are typical, or representative, of the population that we wish to
describe. Major pollsters, like the Pew research Center and Gallup, take
great pains to recruit survey participants who mirror the
characteristics of the public across factors such as gender, age, race
or ethnicity, education, occupation, income, and geographical location.
surveys use self-reporting, so results can be influenced by people's
natural tendency to want to appear socially appropriate (Corbett, 1991).
as we will discover in Chapter 13, people have strong tendencies to
conform to the expectations of others. in some surveys, this factor is
not a problem. if you ask people whether they prefer lattes or mochas,
you will probably get a fairly honest answer. however, when people
believe that their true attitudes and behaviors will not be viewed
favorably by others, they are more likely to lie, even when their
answers are confidential and anonymous. Let's see how scientists have
used the survey method to explore video game violence. one survey asked
374 individuals about their motivations for playing violent video games
(Kneer et al., 2018). Participants responded to 20 motives for playing
video games on a 5-point scale, from strongly agree to strongly
disagree. although this survey, like all surveys, relied on self-report,
the questions were stated in the third person ("People play violent
video games because" rather than "i choose to play violent video games
because") to minimize conformity with perceived social ideals. as shown
in ● figure 2.5, participants ranked the "fun/challenge" aspects of
violent video games as being the most important reason for playing,
whereas their attraction to the violence itself was lower.

To pursue the question of the effects of violent video games on
aggression, you could do a naturalistic observation at a LAN party.

Diverse Voices in Psychology How Do We Recruit Diverse Research
Participants? the research methods used by behavioral scientists. Jon
Maner (2016) makes a strong case for conducting studies in the field as
a way of recruiting more diverse and representative samples. He
describes a study of diet and exercise effects on diabetes conducted in
27 geographically diverse clinical centers. Not only were the
researchers able to find a large sample (over 3,000 people
participated), but 45% of the sample identified themselves as members of
underrepresented minority groups. An additional advantage of these field
studies, according to Maner, is their stronger likelihood of being
replicable. In Rawpixel/istock/Getty Images

IF WE WANT TO GENERALIZE our conclusions to "people," it is very
important for us to sample from the population of "people" rather than
depending on handy convenience samples of undergraduate students
enrolled in psychology courses. Given limited resources (time and
money), how do psychological scientists reach a diverse sample of
participants? You might think that using online recruitment, such as
MTurk and Survey Monkey, could solve this problem, but that does not
appear to be the case (Maner, 2016). These participants are probably not
typical of the adult population in terms of their education and
understanding of technology, and they have been exposed to

another section of this chapter, we explored the controversy over the
replicability of psychological research. Psychological scientists
continue their search for methods that will provide more accurate
results. Ensuring that a research sample is diverse, mirroring the
population, is an important step in this direction. ■

hoW do PsYChoLoGisTs ConduCT researCh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

47

5 4.5 4

Mean score

3.5 3 2.5 2

Social Catharsis Fun/Challenge Virtual Aggression

1.5 1 0.5 0

FIGURE 2.5 Results from a Real Survey on Motives for Playing Violent
Video Games. A survey showed that participants who regularly play video
games, including violent ones, ranked the experience of virtual
aggression as a less important motivation for playing than
fun/challenge, catharsis, and social motives. Asking about "people who
play" rather than "you" might help improve the likelihood that
participants will make honest answers rather than socially acceptable
answers. Source: Kneer, J., et al. (2018). "You could have just asked:
The perception of motivations to play violent video games." Studies in
Media and Communication 6(2), 1--11.

correlation A measure of the direction and strength of the relationship
between two variables. variable A factor that has a range of values.

Correlations measure the direction and strength of the relationship
between two variables, or factors that have values that can differ, like
a person's height and weight. Correlations allow psychologists to
explore whether hours of sleep are related to student grade point
averages (Trockel et al., 2000) or whether the age of parents is related
to the rate of autism spectrum disorder among their children (Parner et
al., 2012). if you're curious about the results of these studies, the
first showed that sleep and GPa were not related, and the second showed
that the likelihood of producing a child diagnosed with autism spectrum
disorder increased with parental age. We begin our analysis of
correlations by measuring our variables. a measure answers the simple
question of "how much" of a variable we have observed. after we obtain
measures of each variable, we compare the values of one variable to
those of the other and conduct a statistical analysis of the results.
Three possible outcomes from the comparison between our two variables
can occur: positive, negative, or zero correlation. in a positive
correlation, high levels of one variable are associated with high levels
of the other. height and weight usually show this type of relationship.
in most cases, people who are taller weigh more than people who are
shorter. Two variables also can show a negative correlation, in which
high values of one variable are associated with low values of another.
for example, high levels of alcohol consumption among college students
are associated with low GPas. The third possible outcome is a zero
correlation, in which the two variables have no systematic relationship
with each other. When variables have a zero correlation, knowing the
value of one variable does not tell us anything about the value of the
other (see ● figure 2.6). for example, emergency room and law
enforcement personnel are often convinced that they are busier with
emergencies and crime on nights with a full moon. in contrast, numerous
scientific studies of lunar cycles show zero correlation with emergency
room admissions, traffic accidents, or other types of trauma (stomp et
al., 2010). Dusit/Shutterstock.com

measure A method for describing a variable's quantity.

Correlational Methods

People taking surveys might be more interested in pleasing others or
appearing "normal" than in answering honestly.

48

Chapter 2

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 2.6 Correlations Describe the Direction and Strength of
Relationships Between Two Variables. (a) In positive correlations, high
levels of one variable are associated with high levels of the other
variable. (b) In negative correlations, high values of one variable are
associated with low levels of the other variable. (c) In zero
correlations, the two variables do not have any relationship with each
other. (a) A positive correlation

(b) A negative correlation

High

Score on Y

(c) A zero correlation

Variable Y (grade point)

High Variable Y (grade point)

Variable Y (grade point)

High

Score on X Low Low

Variable X (hours of studying per week)

High

Low Low

High

Variable X (hours of TV watched per week)

Low Low

Variable X (number of apples consumed per week)

High

Correlational research results are frequently misunderstood (see ●
figure 2.7). Correlations permit us to discuss the relationships between
two variables but tell us nothing about whether one variable causes any
changes in the other. Let us say that we discover a positive correlation
between violent video games and aggression: Youth who play the most
hours of violent video games have the most reports of physical
aggression at school. These results do not allow us to say that playing
violent video games causes physical aggression at school. This
conclusion may seem Number of people who drowned by falling into a pool
correlates with

Films Nicolas Cage appeared in 140 drownings

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

6 Films

120 drownings

4 Films

100 drownings

2 Films

Nicholas Cage

Swimming pool drownings

Correlation: 66.6% (r=0.666004) 1999

0 Films

80 drownings 1999

2000

2001

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Nicholas Cage Swimming pool drownings

2008

2009

FIGURE 2.7 Correlations Do Not Tell Us About Causality. Tyler Vigen has
collected an amusing series of correlations on his Spurious Correlations
website to remind us that correlations cannot be used to make
conclusions about causality. Few people are likely to conclude that
watching Nicholas Cage films leads to higher risk of drowning in
swimming pools. However, even experts are tempted to use correlational
data to argue that violent video games cause aggressiveness, which is
just as inaccurate. hoW do PsYChoLoGisTs ConduCT researCh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

49

third variable A variable that is responsible for a correlation observed
between two other variables of interest.

reasonable and possibly true, so why must we abandon it? first, the two
variables in a correlation can influence each other simultaneously.
although it may be true that playing violent video games leads to
physical aggression at school, youth who are physically aggressive at
school may be more attracted to violent video games. second, a third
variable might be responsible for the correlation between our two
variables of interest. Consider the observation that school shootings
are often perpetrated by people who had been bullied relentlessly by
others. Perhaps the experience of having been bullied (the third
variable in this case) predisposes both a choice of violent recreation
and a tendency to engage in aggressive behavior at school. if we cannot
make conclusions about causality using correlations, why would we use
them? in a number of circumstances, correlations are more appropriate
than other research methods. for example, it would be unethical to ask
pregnant women to consume different amounts of alcohol to assess the
effects of prenatal alcohol on their infants. instead, we can ask
pregnant women to identify their alcohol intake in diaries, which can
then be correlated with various measures of infant functioning. although
this method will not allow us to conclude that drinking during pregnancy
causes damage to the fetus, we can correctly identify the strength and
direction (positive, negative, or zero) of any correlation between
drinks consumed and infants' outcome measures (see ● figure 2.8). using
this approach, researchers have shown that heavy maternal alcohol
consumption is correlated with abnormal amounts of thickening of the
outer layer of the brain (the cortex, which is discussed in Chapter 4;
Gautam et al., 2015). To identify studies that are correlational, watch
for the use of these and similar phrases: is related to, is linked to,
is associated with. These typically refer to correlational research, not
experimental results.

FIGURE 2.8

wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock.com

Correlations Can Help Us Learn About Situations in Which Experiments
Would Be Unethical. Even though we cannot make conclusions about causes
based on correlations, we can obtain useful information. It would be
unethical to assign pregnant women to drinking and nondrinking groups,
but the negative correlation that we find between drinks consumed by
pregnant women and measures of infant mental development can tell us
that drinking during pregnancy is not a good idea. The more alcohol the
women consumed, the lower their children scored on tests of infant
mental development.

Mental Development Index (MDI)

Source: Adapted from M. Testa, B. M. Quigley, & R. D. Eiden (2003). "The
Effects of Prenatal Alcohol Exposure on Infant Mental Development: A
Meta-analytical Review," Alcohol and Alcoholism, 38(4), 295--304.
doi:10.1093/alcalc/agg087 0.4 0.2 0 −0.2 −0.4 −0.6 −0.8

50

Chapter 2

0

1

2 3 Dosage (drinks per day)

4

5

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Experimental group

Testing situation

Random assignment of representational sample

Control situational variables

Control group

Testing situation

Hypothesis

Population of interest

Independent variable

Dependent variable

No independent variable

Dependent variable

FIGURE 2.9

Experimental Methods

How to Design an Experiment. A good experimental design features random
assignment of participants to groups, appropriate control groups,
control of situational variables, and carefully selected independent and
dependent variables.

The scientist's most powerful tool for drawing conclusions about
research questions is the formal experiment. unlike cases in which
descriptive methods are used, the researcher conducting an experiment
has a great deal of control over the situation. unlike correlational
methods, the use of the formal experiment allows us to talk about cause
(see ● figure 2.9). a researcher begins designing an experiment with a
hypothesis, which can be viewed as a highly educated guess based on
systematic observations, a review of previous research, or a scientific
theory. an experimental hypothesis takes this form: "if i do "When
you're reading or listening to the this, that will happen." To test the
hypothesis, the researcher manipulates or modifies news, watch for the
use of words like link, the value of one or more variables and observes
changes in the values of others. The association, or relationship used
to describe variable controlled and manipulated by an experimenter ("if
i do this") is known as two variables, such as a headline that states
the independent variable. We need some way to evaluate the effects of
this manipu- "Lack of sleep linked to depression" or lation. We use a
dependent variable, defined as a measure used to assess the effects
"Drinking red wine associated with lower of the manipulation of the
independent variable, to tell us "what will happen" as a result of our
manipulation of the independent variable. Like the independent vari-
rates of heart disease." These keywords usually mean that the data are
correlational able, our choice of dependent variable is based on our
original hypothesis. after determining our independent and dependent
variables, we still have quite but are often mistaken for causal. Now
you a bit of work to do. in most experiments, we want to know how simply
going through know how you should---and should not--- the procedures of
being in an experiment influences our dependent variable. Perhaps
interpret these reports. the hassle of going to a laboratory and filling
out paperwork changes our behavior. To evaluate these irrelevant effects
and establish a baseline of behavior under the experimental
conexperiment A research method that ditions, we assign some of our
participants to a control group. in many experiments, the control tests
hypotheses and allows researchers to group will experience all
experimental procedures except exposure to the independent variable.
make conclusions about causality. When a new treatment is being tested,
the control group might experience the standard treatment independent
variable An experimental for a condition. The experience of the control
group should be as similar as possible to that of the variable
controlled and manipulated by the experimental groups, who experience
different values of the independent variable. experimenter; the "if A
happens" part of a hypothesis. We want to ensure that our dependent
variables reflect the outcomes of our independent dependent variable A
measure that variables instead of individual differences among the
participants' personalities, abilities, modemonstrates the effects of an
independent tivations, and similar factors. To prevent these individual
differences from masking or distortvariable; the "result" part of a
hypothesis. ing the effects of our independent variable, we randomly
assign participants to experimental control group A group that
experiences all or control groups. Random assignment means that each
participant has an equal chance of experimental procedures, with the
exception being assigned to any group in an experiment. With random
assignment, differences that we of exposure to the independent variable.
see between the behavior of one group and that of another are unlikely
to be the result of the experimental group A group of individual
differences among the participants, which tend to cancel each other out.
participants who are exposed to the individual differences among
participants are an example of confounding variables, or variindependent
variable. ables that are irrelevant to the hypothesis being tested that
can alter or distort our conclusions. for random assignment The
procedure example, a researcher might want to test the effects of
aerobic exercise on blood pressure. if some in which each participant
has an equal chance of being placed in any group in an participants
competed in triathlons without the researcher's knowledge, their
athletic experience experiment. would confound the interpretation of the
results. random assignment to groups typically controls confounding
variable Variables for confounds because of these types of individual
differences, but other sources of confounds exist. that are irrelevant
to the hypothesis situational confounds, such as time of day or noise
levels in a laboratory, also could affect the inbeing tested but can
alter a researcher's terpretation of an experiment. scientists attempt
to run their experiments under the most constant conclusions.
circumstances possible to rule out situational confounding variables.
hoW do PsYChoLoGisTs ConduCT researCh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

51

Hypothesis: Playing violent video games produces higher aggression
Population of interest: College students

Experimental group

Testing situation

Random assignment of representational sample

Control situational variables

Control group

Testing situation

Independent variable: Violent video game

Dependent variable: Noise blast duration

No independent variable: Nonviolent video game

Dependent variable: Noise blast duration

FIGURE 2.10 Experimental Method in Action. Anderson and Dill (2000)
randomly assigned participants to groups playing violent and nonviolent
video games. After playing, each participant was asked to choose the
strength and duration of a blast of noise to be administered to another
person. Keeping conditions in the laboratory as constant as possible
would help to reduce the impact of situational variables.

in some cases, we are unable to randomly assign participants to groups
based on the independent variable, either for ethical or practical
reasons. for example, we are often interested in gender as an
independent variable, but we certainly do not assign participants to
gender groups. in these cases, we conduct a quasi-experiment. "Quasi"
means to resemble, so the quasi-experiment resembles the true
experiment, but without random assignment to groups. The
quasi-experiment does not do as good a job as the true experiment at
controlling for individual differences. for example, we might be
interested in how attending head start programs affects later school
achievement. To participate in head start, children must qualify on the
basis of their families' having income below a poverty threshold. These
children are likely to be different from children who do not attend head
start on a number of variables related to socioeconomic status which
might cloud the impact of attending the program. nonetheless, a
quasi-experiment may be the best we can do in some situations. Let's
return to our question about violent video games and aggression and see
how one real experiment addressed the issue (see ● figure 2.10). The
researchers tested a hypothesis stating that playing video games varying
in violent content (the independent variable) would influence subsequent
levels of aggression (the dependent variable; see anderson & dill,
2000).

Researchers attempt to reduce the impact of confounding variables on
their results. In a test of the effects of aerobic exercise on blood
pressure, situational confounding variables, such as (1) traffic outside
the building, (2) a noisy treadmill, and (3) a neighbor breathing
heavily, can be controlled by holding the environment as constant as
possible for all participants. Individual differences, such as (4) an
early morning after little sleep or (5) superior fitness, can be
controlled by randomly assigning participants to groups.

4 5 3 1

Tetra Images/Alamy Stock Photo

2

52

Chapter 2

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mary Kate Denny/PhotoEdit

To conduct an experiment, we must carefully operationalize, or define
our variables in practical terms. One way to operationalize physical
aggression is to measure how often a preschooler has a physical fight
with others.

operationalization Defining variables in ways that allow them to be
measured.

Ruslan Guzou/Shutterstock.com

The experimental group played a violent game (Wolfenstein 3D), while the
control group played a nonviolent game (Myst). Participants were
randomly assigned to groups. You can imagine how the results might be
distorted if the experimental group consisted of rugby players and the
control group consisted of members of the chess club. following their
game-playing, participants had an opportunity to choose the intensity
and duration for a blast of noise to punish a remotely located loser
(who didn't exist) in a competitive reaction time activity, and their
choices served as the dependent variable. We're assuming that laboratory
conditions were held constant to avoid situational confounds. for
example, we know that people feel more aggressive in hot temperatures
(Carlsmith & anderson, 1979). What would happen to our experiment if the
air conditioner in the laboratory broke while some participants played
violent video games, but was fixed right before the next participants
played nonviolent games? results of this carefully controlled experiment
confirmed the researchers' hypothesis: Playing the violent game led to
the stated intent to administer longer noise blasts to another person.
as powerful as it is, the experimental method, like the other methods
discussed previously, has some limitations. experiments can be somewhat
artificial. Participants know that they are in a research study, and
they may vary their behavior as a result. however, making a laboratory
experiment more realistic can raise ethical challenges. in a study
conducted in 1962, before current ethical guidelines for research had
been adopted, military personnel were led to believe that their lives
were in danger so that experimenters could realistically assess the
effects of panic on performance (Berkun et al., 1962). although the
responses of these participants were probably quite representative of
real life, few of us would want to be put in their position. This type
of research could not be conducted under today's ethical standards, as
explained later in this chapter. artificiality is also a problem with
the anderson and dill (2000) video game study. our realworld question
relates to the likelihood that playing violent video games may elicit
real physical violence in real situations. is a person's willingness to
inflict a loud sound on another person in a professor's laboratory truly
representative of the type of violence involved in mass shootings like
Carneal committed? it may or may not be; we need additional research to
find out. another issue with the experimental method arises from
differences in the choices of independent and dependent variables.
independent (controlled) and dependent (measured) variables have to be
defined and implemented in some concrete fashion. The process of
translating abstract independent and dependent variables into measurable
forms is called operationalization. The first step in operationalization
is to identify the concept to be measured clearly, such as the violence
in a video game. next, the quantitative measures of the concept must be
determined. What measures do you need to tell a violent video game from
a nonviolent one? You might develop a rating scale based on the number
of times violent images, such as depictions of physical injury or blood,
are presented in a particular game. finally, a method for obtaining this
measure must be developed. The entertainment software rating Board
(esrB) uses a panel of trained raters to evaluate a dVd of
representative game-play submitted by a manufacturer of a new game to
establish an appropriate age group rating (entertainment software rating
Board \[esrB\], 2019). There are many ways to operationalize variables
in practical terms. anderson and dill (2000) operationalized aggression
in terms of how lengthy and loud a sound blast a person was willing to
inflict on another person. one of the odder dependent variables used in
video game aggression research is the hot sauce paradigm, in which the
amounts of hot sauce that participants choose to be administered to
another participant are used to measure aggression (Lieberman et al.,
1999). other researchers might choose different ways to operationalize
aggression, such as frequency of physical fights among preschoolers. as
a result, even though there is a large body of work regarding the impact
of violent video games on aggression, the variables used are so
different that few direct comparisons can be made among the many
studies.

Meta-analyses The point of this discussion is not to convince you that
scientists don't know what they're talking about, but rather to impress
upon you the importance of reviewing research results using your best
critical thinking skills. in seeking to understand something as
complicated as the science of mind, it is unlikely that any single study
could provide complete information about

Nearly all studies of video games and aggression use participants
playing alone. If we add the social perspective by studying people
playing together, we find that aggressive behavior actually decreases
following play, regardless of whether the game was violent.

hoW do PsYChoLoGisTs ConduCT researCh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

53

meta-analysis A statistical analysis of many previous experiments on a
single topic.

publication bias The possibility that published studies are not
representative of all work done on a particular phenomenon.

a phenomenon. instead, progress in our understanding results from the
work of many scientists using diverse methods to answer the same
question. Conducting a meta-analysis, or a statistical analysis of many
previous experiments on the same topic, often provides a clearer picture
than do single experiments observed in isolation. Meta-analyses have
their own share of challenges, however. a meta-analysis is only as good
as the studies on which it is based. Published studies available to
researchers conducting a meta-analysis might be subject to publication
bias, or the possibility that they are not representative of all the
work done on a particular problem. a "file drawer" problem also exists,
in which journals are more likely to publish studies that demonstrate
significant effects of an independent variable, such as video game
violence, on a dependent variable, such as aggression, than studies that
show no significant effects. if publication bias is present, the results
of any meta-analysis might be misleading.

The Importance of Multiple Perspectives as we will see in so many
examples

in this textbook, even the best research designs might mislead us if
they fail to take multiple perspectives into account. Most of the
research discussed so far regarding video games and aggression has
involved single participants playing alone. What happens when we "zoom
out," using the social perspective to look at the effects of video games
on groups of people playing together? Playing video games cooperatively
is associated with less subsequent aggressive behavior, regardless of
whether the game played was violent or not (Jerabeck & ferguson, 2013).
The research discussed throughout the remainder of this textbook has
been subjected to considerable skeptical review by other experts in the
field. Most studies have survived the dual tests of peer review and
replication by others. Converging evidence from descriptive,
correlational, and experimental research provides us with confidence in
our conclusions. Psychology, like any science, has followed its share of
wrong turns and dead ends, but most knowledge presented here has been
carefully crafted to present the most accurate view possible of behavior
and mental processes.

How Do We Study the Effects of Time? Modifications of the methods
discussed previously might be necessary for answering specific
questions. Psychological scientists frequently ask questions about
normal behaviors related to age. as Chapter 11 will show, aggression in
preschoolers means something different from aggression in a 16-year-old.
Considering the impact of video game violence on aggression within the
context of age-related change adds a new and useful dimension to our
hypothesis, but it requires additional attention to the research methods
to be used. Psychologists have three specific techniques for assessing
the normal behaviors associated with age: cross-sectional, longitudinal,
and mixed longitudinal designs. To do a crosscross-sectional study An
experimental sectional study, we might gather groups of people of
varying ages and assess both their design for assessing age-related
changes exposure to violent video games and their levels of physical
aggression. We might be able to in which data are obtained
simultaneously from people of differing ages. plot a developmental
course for age-related differences in both video game exposure and
aggressive behavior. however, the cross-sectional method introduces what
we refer to as cohort longitudinal study An experimental design for
assessing age-related changes effects, or the generational effects of
having been born at a particular point in history. Being in which data
are obtained from the same 20 years old in 1960 was different from being
20 years old in 1990 or 2020 because of a variety individuals at
intervals over a long period of cultural influences. Today's
10-year-olds, who do not know of a time without the internet, of time.
might respond differently to violent video games than today's
60-year-olds, for reasons that have nothing to do with age. any such
cohort effects could Cross-sectional studies usually show that mask or
distort our cross-sectional results. intelligence scores decrease with
age. These a method that lessens this dilemma is the longitudinal study,
in which results are most likely a cohort effect. a group of individuals
is observed for a long period (see ● figure 2.11). Performance on IQ
tests has fluctuated over for example, the fels Longitudinal study began
in 1929 to observe the effects of the Great depression on children, and
it now has enrolled greatthe past 100 years for reasons that are not
fully grandchildren of the original participants. one longitudinal study
found understood (Flynn, 1984). no evidence that exposure to violent
video games led to antisocial behavior (smith et al., 2018). The
longitudinal approach has few logical drawbacks

54

Chapter 2

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60

Corepics VOF/Shutterstock.com

Mean T-scores

55

FIGURE 2.11

50 45 40 35 Verbal memory Verbal ability Perceptual speed

30

25

32

39

46

53 60 Age

67

74

81

88

Special Designs Let Us See Behaviors Associated with Age. Longitudinal
designs control for the cohort effects that are often seen in
cross-sectional designs. This longitudinal study shows that verbal
ability and verbal memory are fairly stable over the lifetime, but that
perceptual speed gradually worsens with age. Source: Adapted from K. W.
Schaie (1996). Intellectual development in adulthood: The Seattle
Longitudinal Study, p. 271, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

but is expensive and time consuming. Participants might drop out of the
study because they move or lack incentive. researchers then must worry
about whether those who remain in the study still comprise a
representative sample. The third approach, the mixed longitudinal
design, combines the cross-sectional and longitudinal methods.
Participants from a range of ages are observed for a limited time
(usually about 5 years). This approach is faster and less expensive than
the longitudinal method and avoids some of the cohort effects of the
pure cross-sectional method.

mixed longitudinal design A method for assessing age-related changes
that combines the cross-sectional and longitudinal approaches by
observing a crosssection of participants over a shorter period than is
used typically in longitudinal studies.

summary 2.2 Principles of Research Methods research method

strengths

Weaknesses

Case study

Can explore new and unusual phenomena; can provide the basis for
rejecting a hypothesis

Has limited generalization or ability to be replicated

Naturalistic observation

Provides insight into natural, real-world behaviors

Participants act differently when watched; the process has ethical
issues

Survey

Provides large amounts of data quickly and inexpensively

Requires a large representative sample; people wish to appear socially
appropriate and may lie

Descriptive methods

(Continued) hoW do PsYChoLoGisTs ConduCT researCh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

55

research method

strengths

Weaknesses

Correlations

Allow us to predict behavior; stimulate development of hypotheses;
address some difficult ethical situations

Cannot be used to discuss causality

Experiments

Allow control of situations, strong hypothesis testing, and judgment of
causality

Raise artificiality and ethical concerns; are time consuming

• Cross-sectional study

Is quick and relatively inexpensive

Is subject to cohort effects

• Longitudinal study

Reduces the impact of cohort effects

Is expensive and time consuming; people drop out

• Mixed longitudinal study

Is less expensive and time consuming than longitudinal, with some
control of cohort effects

Is still relatively expensive and time consuming; dropout problem
remains

0.4 0.2 0 −0.2 −0.4 −0.6

1

2 3 Dosage (drinks per day)

4

5

Assessing the effects of time: 60 55 50 45 40 35 Verbal memory Verbal
ability Perceptual speed

30

25

32

39

46

53 60 Age

67

74

81

88

Credits: Top row---s44/ZUMA Press/Newscom; Second row---Avalon/Bruce
Coleman Inc/Alamy Stock Photo; Third row---Dusit/Shutterstock.com;
Fourth row---wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock.com; Fifth row---Mary Kate
Denny/PhotoEdit; Bottom row---Corepics VOF/Shutterstock.com.

how Do We Draw conclusions from Data? asking the right questions and
collecting good information are only the beginning of good science. once
we have collected our results, or data, we need to figure out what those
data mean for our hypotheses and theories. The interpretation of data is
not an arbitrary act--- scientists follow specific rules when drawing
their conclusions. PhotoAlto/Alamy Stock Photo

0

Mean T-scores

−0.8

A valid measure actually measures what it is supposed to measure. In
this case, your bathroom scale is supposed to tell you how much you
weigh.

56

Chapter 2

The Importance of Valid and Reliable Measures data are only as good as
the measures used to obtain them. how would we know whether a measure is
good or bad? Two standards that any measure must meet are reliability
and validity. Reliability refers to the consistency of a measure. There
are several meanings of reliability in science, including test--retest,
interrater, inter-method, and internal consistency. for example,
test--retest reliability of the scholastic aptitude Test (saT) is quite
good, as you might have noticed if you took the test more than once. if
you were ill for the first test, or you invested in a preparation course
before taking it the second time, your score might change; otherwise,
your scores are likely to be about the same. Good measures also show
high interrater reliability, or consistency in the interpretation of a
measure across different observers. You can imagine

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 2.12 Reliable not valid

Valid not reliable

Neither reliable nor valid

Both reliable and valid

Good Measures Are Both Reliable and Valid. Think of hitting the bullseye
as having a measure that works perfectly (my scale tells me how much I
weigh). If our arrows consistently miss the bullseye but in the same
way, we have reliability but no validity (my scale repeatedly tells me I
am ten pounds less than I really weigh). If our arrows hit around the
bullseye, but not consistently, we have validity without reliability (my
scale weighs me five pounds too heavy one day and five pounds too light
the next---the average over time is likely to be close to my true
weight). If the arrows end up away from the bullseye in a random
pattern, we have neither reliability nor validity (who knows what the
scale will tell me today). Finally, when the arrows consistently hit the
bullseye, we have both validity and reliability (my scale weighs me
accurately). Source: https://socialresearchmethods.net/kb/relandval.php

how distressing it would be if, for example, one lab identified you as
having a fatal disease on the basis of a blood test and another did not.
inter-method reliability describes the positive correlation of several
approaches to measure a feature in an individual. returning to the saT
example, it is likely that your saT and high school grades are
positively correlated, which supports the reliability of these measures.
finally, internal consistency results from measures within a single test
that positively correlate with one another. Validity means that a
measure leads to correct conclusions or evaluates the concept that it is
designed to do. for example, your bathroom scale is supposed to measure
how much you weigh. The data obtained from your bathroom scale can lead
you to a valid conclusion (this is how much i weigh) or an invalid
conclusion (wow, i'm much lighter than the doctor's scale said i am).
how would we determine whether a measure leads to valid conclusions? one
approach is to see whether a measure correlates with other existing,
established measures of the same concept. Many universities use the saT
to help select the best candidates for admission. This test is supposed
to measure a student's aptitude for success in college, but some
universities have abandoned it in favor of other measures. We could ask
which of the following measures---the saT, saT subject Tests, or high
school GPa---shows the highest positive correlation with firstyear
college grades. The results of this comparison indicate that the saT
subject Tests show the highest positive correlation with first-year
college grades compared to both the saT and the high school GPa (Geiser
& studley, 2002). Thus, we can conclude that saT subject Tests are the
most valid of the three measures for predicting first-year college
grades. reliability and validity are not the same. You can obtain a
consistent result (reliability) that lacks meaning (validity; see ●
figure 2.12). for example, if you weigh 200 pounds and your bathroom
scale consistently reports that you weigh 150 pounds, whether you're
looking at the number or your roommate reads it for you, the scale has
reliability but not validity. if you get a wildly different number each
time you step on the scale, you have neither reliability nor validity.
The measure is not consistent (no reliability) and also fails to measure
the construct---weight in this case---that it is designed to measure (no
validity). only when the scale repeatedly reports your correct weight of
200 pounds do you have both reliability and validity.

reliability The consistency of a measure, including test--retest,
interrater, intermethod, and internal consistency. validity A quality of
a measure that leads to correct conclusions (i.e., the measure evaluates
the concept that it was designed to do).

Descriptive Statistics Just as we might explore a new research topic
using the descriptive research methods outlined earlier, we can use
descriptive statistics to explore the characteristics of the data
obtained from our research. Descriptive statistics help us organize
individual bits of data into meaningful patterns and summaries. however,
descriptive analyses tell us only about the sample we have

descriptive statistics Statistical methods that organize data into
meaningful patterns and summaries, such as finding the average value.

hoW do We draW ConCLusions froM daTa?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

57

studied. To determine whether the results from our sample apply to
larger populations requires additional statistical analysis, described
in a subsequent section of this chapter. To illustrate the use of
descriptive statistics, let's look at some real data. The national
survey of sexual attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal-3) uses a large sample
of the British population between the ages of 16 and 74 years (Mitchell
et al., 2019). understanding these results would be overwhelming without
some way of summarizing the individual data points in meaningful ways.
We might approach this mass of data first by asking how numbers of
lifetime sex partners are distributed. We could arrange the numbers from
low to high and note how many participants reported each number. The
result of our work would be a frequency distribution. We often
illustrate frequency distributions with a bar chart, or histogram, like
the one shown in ● figure 2.13.

Central Tendency frequency distributions are a useful starting place,
but we might

mean The numerical average of a set of scores.

median The halfway mark in a set of data, with half of the scores above
it and half below.

mode The most frequently occurring score in a set of data.

also be interested in identifying the "average" score on our measures,
or the central tendency of our data set. Central tendency helps us
understand what the "most typical" score in a data set might be. if you
met only one person from the Natsal-3 sample, what is their most likely
number of lifetime sex partners? There are three types of measures for
central tendency, each having its own set of advantages: the mean,
median, and mode. The mean is the numerical average of a set of scores,
computed by adding all the scores together and dividing by the number of
scores. Your professors are likely to tell you about the mean score of
your class on an exam, to help you figure out how you're doing relative
to your classmates. The Natsal-3 reported means of 14 lifetime sex
partners for men and 7 for women (Mitchell et al., 2019). Please note
that in many self-report studies, males appear to overestimate their
number of sex partners for a variety of interesting reasons. The median
represents a halfway mark in the data set, with half of the scores above
it and half below. in many data sets, the median scores are quite close
to the mean scores. Why, then, would you ever need to consider a median?
in some cases, you might find some extreme scores that could affect the
mean. in most studies of the number of lifetime sex partners people
report, the median is substantially below the mean. This suggests the
presence of outliers, or people who have many more lifetime sex partners
than others (look back again at figure 2.13). The mode refers to the
score that occurs most frequently, and it is easy to determine by
looking at a histogram. in our Natsal-3 data, the mode for both males
and females is one lifetime sex partner. in particular, the mode can be
an advantage over a mean or median when

20

FIGURE 2.13

Source: Mitchell, K. R., et al. (2019). "Why Do Men Report More
Opposite-Sex Sexual Partners Than Women? Analysis of the Gender
Discrepancy in a British National Probability Survey." The Journal of
Sex Research 56(1), 1--8.

58

Chapter 2

15 Percent

Frequency Distributions. Descriptive statistics, such as this frequency
distribution of male and female numbers of lifetime opposite sex
partners, allow us to see meaningful patterns and summaries in large
sets of data.

Male Female

10

5

0 0

10

20 30 Number of reported lifetime partners

40

50

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Percentage of new cases of anorexia nervosa

Custom Medical Stock Photo/Alamy Stock Photo

25

20

Mean onset

14 years

15

FIGURE 2.14 What New Information Can We Learn from a Mode? The average
age of onset for the anorexia nervosa is 17 years, but this measure
masks the important fact that age of onset shows two modes---one at 14
years and a second at 18 years. For public health officials wishing to
target vulnerable groups for preventive education, the modes provide
better information than the mean.

18 years

10

12

13

14

15

16 Age

17

18

19

20

Source: Adapted from K. A. Halmi, R. C. Casper, E. D. Eckert, S. C.
Goldberg, and J. M. Davis (1979). "Unique Features Associated with Age
of Onset of Anorexia Nervosa," Psychiatry Research, 1(2), 209--215. doi:
10.1016/01651781(79)90063-5

there is more than one mode in a set of data. for example, the mean age
of onset for anorexia nervosa, which is discussed in Chapter 7, is 17
years of age, but the distribution is bimodal, which means that it has
two substantial modes. one peak occurs around the age of 14, when many
teens struggle with their changing shapes due to puberty, and another
occurs around the age of 18, when many teens leave home and make food
choices without the watchful eyes of their parents (halmi et al., 1979).
an intervention program designed to coincide with the most likely ages
of onset would probably be more effective than one timed to coincide
with the mean age of onset (see ● figure 2.14).

Variance in addition to being curious about central tendency, we might
want to know how clustered our scores are (variance). The traditional
way to look at the variance of scores is to use a measure known as the
standard deviation, which tells us how tightly clustered around the mean
a group of scores is. a smaller standard deviation suggests that most
scores might be found near the mean, whereas a larger standard deviation
means that the scores are spread out from the mean (see ● figure 2.15).
The Normal Curve Many measures of interest to psychologists, such as
scores on

standard deviation A measure of how tightly clustered around the mean a
group of scores is.

intelligence tests, which are discussed in Chapter 10, appear to form a
normal distribution, illustrated in ● figure 2.16. The ideal normal
curve in this illustration has several important Small variance

FIGURE 2.15 Large variance

Variance. Measures of variance tell us how tightly clustered our scores
are around the mean. Small amounts of variance indicate that scores are
tightly clustered and larger variance tells us that the scores are more
spread out. hoW do We draW ConCLusions froM daTa?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

59

FIGURE 2.16

(a) 

The Normal Curve. Many measures of interest to psychologists take the
approximate form of a normal distribution. These graphs compare a
standard normal curve, shown in (a), to the distribution of scores on a
standardized test of intelligence, the Wechsler Adult Intelligence
Scale, shown in (b).

34% 0.5% −4

2.0% −3

34%

13.5% −2

2.0%

13.5% −1

0

+1

+2

+3

0.5% +4

68% 95% 99% Standard deviation

(b) 

34% 0.5%

2.0% 55

34%

13.5% 70

2.0%

13.5% 85

100

115

130

0.5%

145

Wechsler IQ scores

features. one, it is symmetrical. equal numbers of scores should occur
above and below the mean. second, its shape indicates that most scores
occur near the mean, which is where our measure of variance plays a
role. in the standard normal curve, shown in figure 2.16(a), 68% of the
population falls within one standard deviation of the mean, 95% falls
within two standard deviations, and 99% of the population falls within
three standard deviations. instruments for assessing intelligence,
discussed in Chapter 10, frequently convert raw scores earned by many
participants to fit a normal distribution with a mean of 100 and a
standard deviation of 15. as a result, we would expect 68% of test
takers to receive an iQ score between 85 and 115. another 95% would most
likely score between 70 and 130, leaving only 2.5% to score above 130
and another 2.5% to score below 70.

Descriptive Statistics with Two Variables in our discussion so far, we
have been

describing single variables, such as number of lifetime sex partners and
iQ test scores. in psychological research, we often want to describe the
relationships among multiple variables. We can illustrate the
relationship between two variables in a scatterplot like the one shown
in ● figure 2.17. each dot represents the intersection between scores on
two variables of interest. for example, we can compare the distributions
of math saT scores as a function of grade point average (GPa). from our
scatterplot, it looks like math saT scores and GPas are systematically
related to each other. as one increases, the other does as well, which
you should recognize from the earlier discussion as a positive
correlation. although this scatterplot gives a sense that GPas and math
saT scores have a systematic relationship, we can compute the strength
of that relationship using a correlation coefficient. Correlation
coefficients can range from 21.00 to 11.00. a correlation of 21.00 and a
correlation of 11.00 are equally strong but differ in the direction of
the effect. negative coefficients indicate a negative correlation and
positive coefficients indicate a positive correlation. a zero
correlation indicates that the two variables have no systematic
relationship. The closer a correlation coefficient is to 21.00 or to
11.00, the stronger is the relationship between the two variables. When
the score is 21.00 or 11.00, the correlation is perfect---all data
points follow the pattern.

60

Chapter 2

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ConneCting to ReseaRch

Syfy Channel/Courtesy Everett Collection

ESP STANDS FOR EXTRASENSORY PERCEPTION, with extra in this case meaning
"outside" the boundaries of the normal information that we obtain from
our various senses, such as vision, hearing, and touch. The study of ESP
is part of the larger field of parapsychology, or the study of psychic
phenomena lying outside the typical boundaries of the field of
psychology described in Chapter 1. Among the abilities grouped into the
category of ESP are telepathy (the ability to communicate with other
minds without using the usual methods of speaking or writing),
clairvoyance (the ability to perceive objects that do not affect the
known senses), precognition (knowledge of future events), and
premonition (emotional anticipation of future events). In 2005, Gallup
pollsters found that 41% of Americans said that they believed in ESP,
with 25% not sure and 32% not believing (Gallup Poll News Service,
2005). Of the scientists who are members of the National Academy of
Sciences, 96% said that they did not believe in ESP (McConnell & Clark,
1991). A study of ESP (Bem, 2011) generated considerable discussion in
the scientific community about everything from the statistics that we
use to the effects of investigator bias. Evaluating this study provides
a good opportunity to practice your critical thinking skills and to
apply what you have learned about validity and reliability.

The Question: Nine experiments involving more than 1,000 participants
tested different types of precognition and premonition. We will focus
our attention on the first experiment, which tested the following
hypothesis: Participants should be able to anticipate the position
(right side or left side of a computer screen) of an erotic photograph
(see ● Figure 2.18). Is the following study of this hypothesis an
example of good science?

METHODS A total of 100 undergraduates (50 men and 50 women)
participated. Stimuli (both erotic and nonerotic photographs) were
selected from a standard set known as the International Affective
Picture System. During each trial, participants saw two curtains on a
computer screen and were asked to predict which curtain hid a picture.
The sequencing of the erotic and nonerotic pictures and the left-- right
positions was determined by a random number generator after the
participant made a selection. This timing was designed to test the
precognition of future events (the participants selected a side of the
screen before the random number generator selected a location for the
picture). Here is where Bem's methods get a bit murky. The first 40
participants saw 12 erotic pictures, 12 negative pictures (unpleasant
images), and 12 neutral pictures. Then, for reasons not well explained
in the paper, the method was changed for the remaining 60 participants,
who were shown 18 erotic and 18 nonerotic photos, 8 of which were
described as romantic but not erotic (couple at a wedding, etc.). It is
quite unusual for researchers to change their methods in the middle of
an experiment, and more troubling when there doesn't seem to be a good
reason to do so.

ETHICS The popularity of television shows like Ghost Hunters might be
related to the large number of Americans who report a belief in ESP
(41%). In contrast, 96% of the members of the National Academy of
Sciences say they do not believe in ESP.

The only potential ethical challenge in this study is the presentation
of erotic photos. Potential participants should be warned of this aspect
before they agree to continue with the study.

Anson0618/Shutterstock.com

Do You Believe in ESP?

FIGURE 2.17 Evidence of ESP? Participants in Bem's (2011) study were
supposed to predict behind which of two curtains a picture would appear.

RESULTS If we have two choices, we have a 50% chance of guessing
correctly on each trial. Bem reported that the future position of the
erotic images was chosen correctly on 53.1% of the trials, and the
future position of the nonerotic images was chosen correctly on 49.8% of
the trials. Bem reported that his results were statistically significant
using the p , .05 standard discussed in this chapter.

CONCLUSIONS Bem concluded that the choices made by his participants were
better than chance, supporting his hypothesis that precognition could be
demonstrated. What do others think of Bem's results? James Alcock,
writing for the Skeptical Inquirer, concluded that "just about
everything that could be done wrong in an experiment occurred here"
(Alcock, 2011, p. 31). Among Alcock's concerns were Bem's changing of
his method midway through the experiment and his questionable use of
statistical analyses. As discussed earlier, replication provides an
important check on possible researcher bias, and failure to replicate
can indicate serious flaws in an experiment. So far, the three known
replications of Bem's experiments have failed to produce significant
results. Despite the flaws, however, Bem's experiments have contributed
to science by stimulating a lively discussion of scientific and
statistical methods. ■

How Do we Draw ConClusions from Data?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

61

FIGURE 2.18

800

A Scatterplot. A scatterplot allows us to visualize the relationship
between two variables, such as the math SAT score and the high school
GPA for one small sample of college students. This relationship should
look familiar to you---it is an example of a positive correlation. Math
SAT score

Source: Adapted from F. Young (2011). "The Pearson Correlation
Coefficient," retrieved from
http://forrest.psych.unc.edu/research/vista-frames/help/
lecturenotes/lecture11/pearson.html.

700

600

500

400

300

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

GPA

Inferential Statistics

normal distribution A symmetrical probability function.

inferential statistics Statistical methods that allow experimenters to
extend conclusions from samples to larger populations.

generalize To extend conclusions to larger populations outside your
research sample. null hypothesis A hypothesis stating the default
position that there is no real difference between two measures.

statistical significance A standard for deciding whether an observed
result is likely in the event the null hypothesis is true.

62

Chapter 2

although we can learn a great deal from descriptive statistics, most
research described in this textbook features the use of inferential
statistics, so called because they permit us to draw inferences or
conclusions from data. descriptive statistics allow us to talk about our
sample data but do not allow us to extend our results to larger groups.
To reach conclusions about how our observations of a sample might fit
the bigger picture of groups of people who didn't participate in our
research, we use inferential statistics. although inferential statistics
can be powerful, we must be cautious about making generalizations from
our results to larger populations. To generalize means to extend your
conclusions to people outside your research sample. Psychology over the
years has been justifiably criticized as being the "psychology of the
college sophomore." This criticism arises because researchers are
usually college professors, and the students in their courses are a
convenient source of willing study participants, especially when extra
credit is available. Today's psychological scientists recognize that
college students do not comprise a representative sample of people, and
they go to great lengths to recruit samples of participants that are
more diverse in age, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic background, and
other demographic variables. having a diverse sample supports more
generalization than using a sample of college students. To illustrate
the use of inferential statistics, let's consider the 2009 saT
mathematics test. Men scored an average of 534 out of 800 and women
scored an average of 499 out of 800 on this test. does this mean that
men perform better than women on this test? or do men and women perform
similarly, and this group is just an unusual sample of test takers? The
default position, stating that there is no real difference between two
measures (math scores produced by men and women in this example), is
known as the null hypothesis. recall that we cannot "prove" a hypothesis
to be correct. We can either reinforce a hypothesis or demonstrate that
it is false. rejecting the null hypothesis suggests that alternative
hypotheses (there might be a relationship between gender and math
scores) should be explored and tested. how do we know when a hypothesis
should be rejected? Like most sciences, psychology has defined
statistical significance as a probability or "p value" of .05 (5%) or
less that a score at least as extreme as the observed result could occur
if the null hypothesis is true. More recently, a large number of
influential scientists have argued that the term "statistical
significance" should be reserved for a p value of only .005 (.5%) or
less for any new discoveries (Benjamin et al., 2018). results meeting
the old criterion of 5% but not the new criterion of .5% would be
described as "suggestive." We can assess the likelihood of observing a
result by repeating a study, like throwing dice multiple times. We could
give the mathematics portion

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

550 540

Mean math SAT score

530 Male 520 510 500 490

Female

480 470 1967 1969 1971 1973

1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001
2003 2005 Year of test

FIGURE 2.19 Are Male and Female Scores on the Math SAT Different?
Inferential statistics allow us to decide whether the observed
differences between the performance of males and that of females on the
math SAT represents a real gender difference. Source: Adapted from The
College Board (2009).

of the saT to many randomly selected samples of male and female
college-bound students. if men and women score about the same or women
score higher than men in .5% or more of these samples, we would reject
our "Men score higher than women" hypothesis as false. in reality,
scientists rarely repeat their studies many times. instead, statistical
methods help us to evaluate statistical significance based on a single
sample. This type of careful analysis of the saT data has confirmed that
the differences on the mathematics portion of the test between male and
female test takers are statistically significant (halpern et al., 2007;
see ● figure 2.19). does this result mean that we should consider this
difference when deciding on a major or career? Probably not. Keep in
mind that the goal of the saT is to predict college grades. When the
math saT scores of men and women receiving the same letter grade in a
mathematics course at the same university were compared, the women
scored 33 points less than the men (Wainer & steinberg, 1992). This is
about the same difference that we observed between the mean scores of
men and women on the saT math test. it appears that the saT might be
underestimating women's ability to achieve in college mathematics
courses. although psychology and most other sciences have relied heavily
on testing the significance of the null hypothesis, this approach has
its share of weaknesses (Cumming, 2013). Testing and rejecting a null
hypothesis encourages us to view variables, like exposure to violent
video games, as producing discrete either/or outcomes (aggression or no
aggression) when that is unlikely to be the case in reality. instead, we
might think of people's aggression as existing along a continuum from
high to low or none. significance testing lets us know if an effect
exists, but we are also interested in how important our effect might be.
a result can be statistically significant and still demonstrate a tiny
effect size. for example, facebook manipulated the sentiment (positive
or negative) of the newsfeeds of nearly 700,000 users (the independent
variable) and then observed the impact of this manipulation on people's
use of positive and negative words in their own status updates (Kramer
et al., 2014). although some of the reported differences in the
sentiment of updates were highly significant (p \< .001), the largest
effect size hoW do We draW ConCLusions froM daTa?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

63

Psychology as a hub science The Invention of Factor Analysis in Chapter
1, we mentioned that the field of psychology developed as scientists
began combining questions asked previously by philosophers with methods
developed by natural scientists. however, over the course of its short
history, psychology has also contributed new methods that have been
applied across many other disciplines. factor analysis is a statistical
technique that has a long list of contemporary applications, from
machine learning and data mining to marketing and finance to the
physical and biological sciences. factor analysis allows researchers to
discover clusters within large data sets, such as smaller numbers of
personality traits among long lists of words that describe personality
(see Chapter 12). a marketing professional can use factor analysis to
understand sources of customer satisfaction, and an environmental
scientist can use factor analysis to identify sources of water
pollutants. The invention of factor analysis is usually attributed to
British psychologist Charles spearman (1863--1945), a student of Wilhelm
Wundt, our very first psychologist whom we met in Chapter 1. spearman
developed factor analysis to study intelligence (Lovie & Lovie, 1993;
see Chapter 10). he believed that scores on intelligence tests were
composed of two factors---one general factor that did not change across
the tests (g) and another that was specific to each particular test (see
Chapter 10). not only has spearman's method served a wide number of
fields very well, but it stimulated a mathematical approach to
understanding the mind that continues to influence modern psychology.

reported was .02, which is considered to be tiny. in other words,
manipulating the sentiment of people's news feeds had a significant, but
trivial effect on their use of positive and negative words. in contrast,
the differences between the performance of people with and without
dementia on standard cognitive screening tests have very large effect
sizes (more than 100 times larger than in the facebook study; Larner,
2014). We would certainly hope that having dementia or not would have a
big impact on how you score on diagnostic tests for dementia (Kramer et
al., 2014; Larner, 2014).

how can We conduct Ethical research? We mentioned earlier that deceiving
participants into thinking they were truly in danger raised ethical
questions. on what basis do researchers decide what they can and cannot
do to their research participants? although most studies published in
psychological journals involve the use of human participants, psychology
also has a rich heritage of animal research. separate guidelines have
been developed for each type of subject. researchers working in
universities and other agencies receiving federal funding seek the
approval of institutional review boards (irBs) for human participant
research and institutional animal care and use committees (iaCuCs) for
animal research before conducting their studies. The irBs and iaCuCs are
guided by federal regulations and research ethics endorsed by
professional societies such as the american Psychological association
(aPa), the association for Psychological science (aPs), and the society
for

64

Chapter 2

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Human Participants

Picture Partners/Alamy Stock Photo

neuroscience (sfn). iRBs and iaCuCs must include at least one member of
the community outside the university or agency, avoiding the possibility
that inappropriate research might be conducted in secret. these
procedures do not apply to institutions that do not have federal
funding, such as private genetics research corporations or consumer
product corporations (cosmetics, etc.), although efforts are being made
to bring these organizations into compliance with federal standards. as
you review the ethical guidelines for both human and animal research
participants, keep in mind that the guidelines look simpler when you
read about their provisions than when you try to implement them in the
context of real research. this is why the final approval decision lies
with a committee, as opposed to an individual.

Many populations that are interesting to psychologists are unable to
sign informed consent forms legally and require additional ethical
protection. In the case of research with infants, parents are required
to sign informed consent forms on their child's behalf.

at the core of ethical standards for human research is the idea that
participation is voluntary. no participant should be coerced into
participating. although psychologists are well aware that people who
volunteer to participate in research are probably quite different in
important ways from those who don't volunteer, we have chosen to give
research ethics a higher priority than our ability to generalize
research results. to ensure that a participant is a willing volunteer,
researchers must make provisions for reasonable incentives. incentives,
such as pay or extra credit for participation, must not be so extreme
that they become the primary motivation for prospective volunteers. to
informed consent Permission obtained from a research participant after
the risks decide whether to volunteer for research, a person must have
some knowledge of what the and benefits of an experimental procedure
research will entail. Researchers must provide prospective participants
with an informed have been thoroughly explained. consent form, which
provides details about the purpose of the study and what types of
procedures will occur. You might be curious about the Facebook study
mentioned earlier. the study has raised many ethical concerns, because
Facebook neither solicited informed consent nor mentioned the
possibility of participating in research in its terms of service (Flick,
2015). in psychological research, we have the added burden of
occasionally dealing with participants who are limited in their
abilities to provide informed consent because of the conditions that
make them interesting to study. developmental psychologists have an
obvious interest in children, but a person cannot sign a legal informed
consent form until age 18. Can you obtain informed consent from a
patient with schizophrenia who suffers from hallucinations and
irrational, delusional beliefs, or from a person in the later stages of
alzheimer's disease whose memory and reasoning have deteriorated because
of the condition? in these cases, legal permission must be obtained from
a qualified guardian. the university iRBs play an essential role in
evaluating these ethical dilemmas case by case. Research also should be
conducted in a manner that does no irreversible harm The Tuskegee
syphilis experiment, conducted by to participants. in some cases, to
avoid participants' desire to appear normal and their the U.S. Public
Health Service from 1932 to 1972, tendency to try to outguess the
research, researchers might say that they are inves- involved 400
African-American men who had tigating one factor when they are
interested in another. Most cases of deception are contracted syphilis.
The study's failure to treat quite mild, such as when participants are
told that a study is about memory when it is or inform these
participants about their health actually a study of some social
behavior. when researchers must deceive their partici- led to new
regulations to prevent such unethical pants, the informed consent form
must indicate that deception will occur, although research from being
repeated. the exact form of that deception does not need to be
specified. extra care must be Source: Department of Health, Education,
and taken to debrief participants about the deception and answer all
their questions fol- Welfare. Public Health Service. Health Services and
lowing the experiment. Mental Health Administration. Center for Disease
Research using human participants should be rigorously private and
confi- Control. Venereal Disease Branch (1970--1973)/ dential. Privacy
refers to the participants' control over the sharing of their personal
National Archives How Can we ConduCt etHiCal ReseaRCH?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

65

Wellesley College/MCT/Newscom

While examining the papers of Dr. John Cutler, who led the Tuskegee
syphilis study, Wellesley College historian Susan Reverby discovered
that during the 1940s, U.S. and Guatemalan health officials had
deliberately exposed prisoners, soldiers, and mental patients to
syphilis and gonorrhea to test the effectiveness of penicillin.

information with others, and methods for ensuring privacy are usually
stated in the informed consent paperwork. for example, some studies
involve the use of medical records, which participants agree to share
with the researchers for the purpose of the experiment. Confidentiality
refers to the participants' right to have their data revealed to others
only with their permission. Confidentiality is usually maintained by
such practices as substituting codes for names and storing data in
locked cabinets. Collecting data anonymously, so that even the
researchers do not know the identity of participants, is the surest way
to protect privacy and confidentiality. science learns from its past
ethical lapses. one of the most egregious examples of unethical research
was the Tuskegee syphilis experiment, which lasted from 1932 until 1972.
researchers from the u.s. Public health service recruited about 400
impoverished african-american men who had contracted syphilis to study
the progression of the disease. none of the men were told they had
syphilis, and none were treated, even after penicillin became the
standard treatment for the disease in 1947. Many current federal
regulations related to research ethics were developed in response to
this experiment.

Ethical guidelines for animal research require setting a clear purpose
for the experiment, providing excellent care for the animals, and
minimizing pain and suffering.

66

Chapter 2

Agencja Fotograficzna Caro/Alamy Stock Photo

Animal Subjects The topic of using animals in research is guaranteed to
stimulate lively, and possibly heated, discussion. some people are
adamantly opposed to any animal research, whereas others accept the
concept of using animals, so long as certain conditions are met. The
united Kingdom has some of the most rigorous protections for animals in
research, based on the "3 r's:" reduce (the number of animals used),
replace (do not use animals if you can answer your research question a
different way), and refine (adjust your methods to be as humane as
possible; russell & Burch, 1959). about 7% to 8% of published research
in psychology journals involves the use of animals as subjects (american
Psychological association \[aPa\], 2012). a total of 90% of the animals
used are rodents and birds, with 5% or fewer animal studies involving
monkeys and other primates. according to the aPa, the use of dogs and
cats in psychological research is rare. research using animals must
demonstrate a clear purpose, such as benefiting the health of humans or
other animals. in addition to serving a clear purpose, animal research
requires excellent housing, food, and veterinary care. The most
controversial ethical standards relate to minimizing the pain and
suffering experienced by animal research subjects. federal regulations
provide guidelines for the use of pain, surgery, stress, and deprivation
with animal subjects, as well as the termination of an animal's life.
The standards approximate the community standards that we would expect
from local humane societies tasked with euthanizing animals that are not
adopted.

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

interpersonal Relationships The Methodological Perspective CaN wE
DIffERENTIaTE "LIkE" fROM "LOvE"? AT THE END OF CHAPTER 1, we noted that
each chapter would feature a discussion of how the chapter's material
could be used to talk about relationships. for this chapter on research
methods, we ask whether psychological research methods can be used to
differentiate between liking and loving another person. using the
methods described in this chapter, you can probably think of many ways
to approach this question. You could observe friends and compare their
behavior to that of romantic partners. You could conduct a survey,
asking people to rate certain characteristics of people they love versus
those of people they like. Perhaps you could correlate physiological
arousal measures, like pupil diameter or heart rate, with ratings of how
much a participant likes or loves another person. Conducting an actual
experiment might be a bit tricky, though, in terms of both methods and
ethics. how could people be randomly assigned to love and like groups?
an example of research on the neuroscience of relationships was
contributed by Bartels and Zeki (2000). These researchers chose to use
correlational methods in the form of brain imaging, which we discuss
further in Chapter 4. Brain imaging studies are typically correlational
because we assume that brain activity in particular areas has a
relationship with some ongoing behavior. it is important to recall that
we cannot make conclusions about causality based on correlational data.
Bartels and Zeki's participants were instructed to supply photographs of
people they like and people they love. The photographs were then
presented to the participants while their brain activity was observed
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMri; see Chapter 4).
several differences in brain activity occurred when the participants
viewed a lover as opposed to a friend. not too surprisingly, areas of
the brain associated with reward became more active when viewing lovers
than when viewing friends. areas of the brain associated with social
judgment, negative emotions, and assessing the intentions and emotions
of other people were less active when viewing lovers than when viewing
friends. Love, according to these results, appears to be a combination
of reward and less social judgment (see ● figure 2.20). The results of
this scientific research might help us understand some of our everyday
experiences with relationships. We feel rewarded in the presence of a
loved one, and we have to admit that we may miss a flaw or two in
someone we love. friends and family members, whose social judgment has
not been silenced, do not miss these flaws and often try in vain to
alert us to them. ■

When you view a person you love rather than like: These areas increase
their activity.

These areas decrease their activity.

FIGURE 2.20 Imaging Love. When people view a photo of a person they say
they "love," brain imaging shows increased activation in reward areas of
the brain and decreased activation in areas involved with social
judgment.

hoW Can We ConduCT eThiCaL researCh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

67

Psychology takes on Real-World Problems Research Methods for Studying a
Pandemic

68

Chapter 2

wide attitude survey like the one developed by Pew Research (Igielnik,
2020). The survey found that in June 2020, about 65% of American adults
had worn masks in stores or other businesses all or most of the time in
the past month. Pew Research investigated a number of variables in an
attempt to clarify the motivation for wearing masks, such as race and
ethnicity (Asians wore masks more often than other races and
ethnicities), living in areas with high impact of the disease (mask
wearing was more common in high impact areas), political affiliation
(Democrats were more likely than Republicans to wear masks), education
(college graduates were more likely to wear masks), and age (older
adults were more likely to wear masks). To produce a good survey on your
campus, you would need to consider these and other relevant variables
carefully. What variables might be especially relevant to a college
community that might not have been included by Pew Research in their
more general survey? Your results might provide insights into how your
current mask policy is and is not working and why. If you gain some
systematic understanding of the whys and why nots for mask wearing on
your campus, you will then be in a position to modify Syda
Productions/Shutterstock.com

IN CHAPTER 1, we suggested using the COVID-19 pandemic to illustrate the
power of psychological science for understanding and solving real-world
problems. Specifically, we can consider the policies your campus might
put in place to ensure everyone's safety during the pandemic. As we
mentioned in Chapter 1, our goals in policy development are to (1)
figure out what we're doing that isn't working, (2) identify what else
we could be doing, and (3) decide which option we should try first. Good
research, described in the current chapter, forms an essential
foundation for addressing these goals. For the purposes of this
exercise, we will assume that your campus is letting at least some
classes meet face-to-face. You might have an existing policy that calls
for everyone on campus to wear a mask. You have noticed that people are
generally compliant with this policy in the classroom, but not
necessarily in other campus venues, such as in out-of-doors spaces and
at parties, club functions, and sporting events. To understand why
members of the campus community are complying some, but not all the
time, requires systematic research. We might start with naturalistic
observation. Is it actually true that people are less likely to wear
masks outside the classroom? Carrying out these observations must be
done ethically, as people might have a reasonable expectation of privacy
even in public locations. If your observations confirm a problem exists,
we can begin to ask why. It might be possible to conduct a campus-

your approach. If you keep your overall mask policy in place, you could
possibly change your persuasive messaging, which we cover in Chapter 13.
Or you might consider modifications of your mask policy, such as being
more lenient out-of-doors or in situations that allow for appropriate
social distancing. Regardless of the policy you devise, more research
will be needed to see if your policy is actually working. This, of
course, raises significant ethical concerns. You can't randomly assign
your classmates to mask and no mask groups and ask who is more likely to
get sick! In these cases, scientists use so-called experiments of
nature. For example, comparisons of COVID-19 growth rates before and
after mask mandates showed a slowing of daily COVID-19 growth following
the mask mandates (Lyu & Wehby, 2020). You could run a similar study to
see if your policy approach was effective. If not, then it's time to try
another approach. ■

The Measure of Mind: The sCienTifiC MeThods of PsYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Summary 2.3 Principles of Ethical Research Human Participants

animal Subjects

No coercion

Necessity

Informed consent

Excellent food, housing, and veterinary care

No harm

Minimal pain and suffering

Confidentiality and privacy

Credits: Left---Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Public
Health Service. Health Services and Mental Health Administration. Center
for Disease Control. Venereal Disease Branch (1970--1973)/National
Archives; Right---Agencja Fotograficzna Caro/Alamy Stock Photo.

Key TermS The Language of Psychological Science Be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

case study, p. 44 confirmation bias, p. 37 confounding variable, p. 51
control group, p. 51 correlation, p. 48 critical thinking, p. 37
cross-sectional study, p. 54 dependent variable, p. 51 descriptive
method, p. 44 descriptive statistics, p. 57 experiment, p. 51
experimental group, p. 51 generalize, p. 62 hypothesis, p. 41
independent variable, p. 51

inferential statistics, p. 62 informed consent, p. 65 longitudinal
study, p. 54 mean, p. 58 measure, p. 48 median, p. 58 meta-analysis,
p. 54 mixed longitudinal design, p. 55 mode, p. 58 naturalistic
observation, p. 46 normal distribution, p. 62 null hypothesis, p. 62
objectivity, p. 36 operationalization, p. 53 peer review, p. 42

population, p. 46 publication bias, p. 54 random assignment, p. 51
reliability, p. 57 replication, p. 42 sample, p. 46 science, p. 36
standard deviation, p. 59 statistical significance, p. 62 survey, p. 46
theory, p. 40 third variable, p. 50 validity, p. 57 variable, p. 48

How Can we ConduCt etHiCal ReseaRCH?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

69

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Environmental factors such as stress, diet, smoking, and exercise can
influence whether a gene is turned on or off.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Evolving Mind

3

NATURE AND NURTURE INTERTWINED Learning Objectives 1. Analyze the role
of genes as the building blocks of human nature. 2. Appraise the
importance of heritability estimates, twin studies, adoption studies,
and epigenetic analyses in the field of behavioral genetics.

3.  Compare the roles played by mutation, natural selection, migration,
    and genetic drift as mechanisms of evolution.

4.  Discuss how the human brain might represent an adaptation for coping
    with complex social behavior.

5.  Identify the cultural mechanisms by which nature and nurture can
    interact to influence human behavior.

6.  Explain the mechanisms by which intrasexual and intersexual
    selection might influence the evolution of human behavior.

WE ALL KNOW THAT IDENTICAL TWINS, LIKE THE little girls appearing in the
photo, are, well, identical. Or are they? For a long time, scientists
were puzzled not by the similarities between identical twins, but by
their differences. If two people share the same deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA), as identical twins do, why does one get cancer while the other
stays healthy? Why does one become obese while the other remains fit?
When science began to unravel some mysteries about genes and how they
work, answers to these questions emerged. You have the same DNA in each
cell of your body, yet some cells develop into heart cells, others into
brain cells, and so on. How does the same set of DNA know how to make
these different types of cells? Genes, or segments of DNA that produce
specific proteins, can be turned on and off. The genes that are not
turned off are free to produce the proteins needed to build a particular
kind of cell, whether that is a skin cell or a liver cell. Only about
10% to 20% of the genes in a particular type of cell, such as a skin
cell or brain cell, are active. Genes do not just turn on and off as
they build a body during development. Your ongoing or drink, your stress
levels, and other environmental factors can influence how your DNA
works. Our understanding of these ongoing interactions between genes and
the environment is the main reason psychologists no longer argue about
the separate contributions of nature and nurture. In this chapter, we
will explore these interactions in more detail.

iStock.com/LSOphoto

interactions with the environment can also turn genes on or off. What
you eat, whether you smoke

71 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Let's zoom in to see what's happening when the environment interacts
with DNA. In mice, a gene called Agouti produces yellow fur and obesity
when it is turned on, but brown fur and normal weight when it is turned
off (Dolinoy et al., 2007). Certain environmental factors can turn the
gene on or off. When pregnant mother mice ate food containing bisphenol
A (BPA), a chemical found in food and beverage Courtesy Randy L. Jirtle,
Ph.D.

containers, baby bottles, dental sealants, and food cans, their pups had
yellow fur and were obese. The BPA turned on the Agouti gene. How does
studying the fur color of mice help us understand the differences
between identical human twins? The young twins on the previous page have
a great deal in common, but as they get older, they are more likely to
eat different foods and have different experiences. These environmental
influences can

change the way their genes are turned on or off, just as the BPA
affected the Agouti

nature The contributions of heredity to our physical structure and
behaviors. nurture The contributions of environmental factors and
experience to our physical structure and behaviors. genotype An
individual's profile of alleles. phenotype An observable characteristic.
gene A small segment of DNA located in a particular place on a
chromosome that produces a protein.

gene in the mice. These changes accumulate over time, so identical twins
become less similar as they age. In this chapter, we will explore how
nature and nurture interact to build the mind across the life span, and
how the interactions between nature and nurture have been shaping the
human mind over millennia.

Why Do We Say That Nature and Nurture Are Intertwined? Along with an
understanding of the structures and processes of the brain, covered in
Chapter 4, knowing how our biological history shapes our behavior is an
important part of understanding the mind. Contemporary psychologists
view the contributions of nature (our heredity or innate
predispositions) and nurture (the results of our experience with the

These identical twins probably do not look as similar as they did as
small children. The twin on the left is a nonsmoker, while her sister on
the right smoked for 29 years.

72

Chapter 3

American Society of Plastic Surgeons/Shutterstock.com

When pregnant mice are fed a diet containing BPA, found in plastics and
other consumer products, their offspring are more likely to have yellow
fur and to be obese.

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

akg-images/Newscom

environment) as being closely intertwined, as opposed to somehow
competing for control over structure and behavior. scholars have not
always thought about nature and nurture the way we do today. instead of
viewing the actions of nature and nurture as inseparable, earlier
scholars talked in terms of nature versus nurture and debated the
relative contributions of nature or nurture to a particular type of
behavior. Credit for describing the contrast between heredity and
environment as "nature versus nurture" usually goes to francis galton
(1869), who was Charles darwin's cousin. galton believed that
intelligence was largely the result of inheritance, a topic tackled in
Chapter 10. over the next 150 years or so, many thinkers engaged in a
highly spirited debate on this question. As Chapter 10 will demonstrate,
contemporary psychologists view intelligence as another example of an
outcome shaped by both genetic inheritance and environment. We can say
with some certainty that the either/or approach to human behavior has
produced some of the most contentious discussions in the history of
psychology. our motive for arguing in favor of the intertwined approach
to nature and nurture is intended not to sidestep difficult questions,
but rather to support good science. By zooming out to integrate a number
of perspectives, both biological and experiential, we can achieve a more
accurate understanding of these questions.

Francis Galton was the first to use the phrase "nature versus nurture."

Before we explore the interactions between nature and nurture that
contribute to psychological phenomena, let's look at the genetic
mechanisms that help shape the mind. every nucleus in the approximately
37 trillion cells of your body, with the exception of your red blood
cells and sperm or eggs, contains two complete copies of the human
genome, a set of instructions for building a human. Your personal set of
instructions is known as a genotype, which interacts with the
environment to produce observable characteristics, known as a phenotype.
one half of your genotype was provided by your mother's egg, and the
other half was provided by your father's sperm. each parent contributes
a set of 23 chromosomes, which in turn are composed of many molecules of
dnA. A smaller segment of dnA located in a particular place on a
chromosome is known as a gene. each gene contains instructions for

Featureflash Photo Agency/Shutterstock.com

What Are the Building Blocks of Behavior?

ISM/Phototake

Some genes have a large number of alleles. Of the more than 500 alleles
for the BRCA1 (Breast Cancer 1) gene, a small number are associated with
a higher risk for breast and other cancers. Actress Angelina Jolie, who
possesses the high-risk alleles, chose to undergo a preventive
mastectomy to reduce her chances of developing breast cancer.

Twenty-three pairs of chromosomes make up the human genome.

WhAT ARe The BUilding BloCks of BehAvioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

73

Father's allele

FIGURE 3.1

Mother's allele

A

B

O

A

AA (Type A blood)

AB (Type AB blood)

AO (Type A blood)

B

AB (Type AB blood)

BB (Type B blood)

BO (Type B blood)

O

AO (Type A blood)

BO (Type B blood)

OO (Type O blood)

Genotypes and Phenotypes of Blood Type. The three possible blood type
alleles---A, B, and O--- can be combined to produce Type A, Type B, Type
O, or Type AB blood.

gene expression The process in which genetic instructions are converted
into a feature of a living cell. allele One of several versions of a
gene, as in having an A, B, or O blood type allele.

homozygous Having two of the same alleles for a gene. heterozygous
Having two different alleles for a gene.

recessive A feature of an allele that produces a phenotype only in the
homozygous condition. dominant A feature of an allele that deter-

Strauss/Curtis/Corbis/Getty Images

mines a phenotype in either the homozygous or the heterozygous
condition.

making a particular type of protein. Gene expression occurs when these
genetic instructions are read to produce a particular protein. each cell
contains the instructions for an entire human organism, but only a
subset of instructions is expressed at any given time and location. gene
expression in a nerve cell is different from gene expression in a muscle
cell or a skin cell. different versions of a gene, or alleles, can give
rise to different phenotypical traits. Many alleles can occur in the
population for a given gene, but an individual receives only two---one
from each parent. for example, alleles for blood type include A, B, and
o, but typically, nobody has all three. As shown in ● figure 3.1,
combinations of your two alleles make your blood Type A (AA or Ao), Type
B (BB or Bo), Type AB (AB), or Type o (oo). if both parents contribute
the same type of allele, such as a version of the MC1R gene related to
having freckles, the child would be considered homozygous for that gene
(homos means "same" in greek). if the parents contribute different
alleles, such as one for freckles from one parent and one related to not
having freckles from the other, the child is heterozygous for that gene
(hetero means "different" in greek). Recessive alleles determine a
phenotype only when an individual is homozygous for a particular gene,
whereas dominant alleles determine a phenotype in either the homozygous
or the heterozygous condition. Because alleles for no freckles are
recessive and alleles for freckles are dominant, the typical way that an
individual has no freckles is if that person receives two copies of the
no-freckle allele, one from each parent. Any individual receiving either
two freckle alleles or one freckle allele and one no-freckle allele will
have freckles (see ● figure 3.2).

FIGURE 3.2 Effects of Dominant and Recessive Genes. Having freckles (F)
is dominant, whereas having no freckles (f) is recessive. The only way
that a child can have no freckles is to inherit two of the recessive "no
freckle" alleles, one from each parent. In this example, both parents
are heterozygous (Ff) with freckles.

Father's allele Freckles (F)

Mother's allele Freckles (F)

No freckles (f)

FF (homozygous freckles) Ff (heterozygous freckles)

No freckles (f) Ff (heterozygous freckles) ff (homozygous no freckles)

Source: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/sp.dyn.tfrt.in

74

Chapter 3

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ExpEriEncing Psychology The Genetics of Cats

Hair Length: Short hair in cats is dominant, so cats with LL or Ll
genotypes will have short hair. Your long-haired kitty has a homozygous
ll genotype. ● White Hair: Cats with one or two W alleles (WW or Ww)
will be completely white, which is very rare (and often linked with
deafness and eyes of two different colors, such as one blue and one
green eye), while cats with two recessive (ww) alleles will have some
other color. This feature will combine with the spotted trait we discuss
next. This feature also reminds us that dominant alleles are ●

not necessarily the most common in the population. ● Spotting: Cats with
the dominant S (SS or Ss) will have some white fur, which can range from
white toes to a mostly white body. Some observers believe that SS cats
have white fur over more than 50% of their bodies while Ss cats have
white fur on less than 50% of their bodies. Cats with an ss genotype
have no white fur at all. ● Dense Color: A cat with a DD or Dd genotype
will have vivid black, orange, or brown fur, whereas a dd cat will have
cream, light brown, or gray fur. ● Orange Fur: This is a sex-linked
trait (like hemophilia or red-green dichromacy in humans, discussed in
Chapter 5), because the gene is located on the X chromosome. Orange
females have an OO genotype and orange males have a single O. Black or
gray results from an oo genotype in females and an o in males. Females
with an Oo genotype will be calico (with some white fur) or
tortoiseshell (no white fur). Males cannot be calico or tortoiseshell
unless they have an XXY genotype, which can happen also in humans
(Klinefelter syndrome) but is relatively rare. Still other genes affect
the striping of some cats, the "points" of color in Siamese cats, and
hairlessness. Can you now identify the

genotype of your cat? What pieces of information might be missing? ■

Courtesy of Laura Freberg

Most human traits simply do not fit the simple Mendelian principles of
genetics taught in grade school. Did you know that two blue-eyed parents
can in fact produce a child who does not have blue eyes? Traits like
widow's peak, attached earlobes, tongue rolling, hand-clasping, and
other commonly presented examples are either only somewhat genetic or
are the result of multiple interacting genes. So where can we look for
good examples of the basic principles outlined in this chapter? If you
have a cat, that's a good place to start (Christensen, 2000). If you
don't have a cat or want to compare different cats, take a look at the
photos on petfinder.com. We can compare the following genetic traits in
cats:

Coco is a long-haired (ll), non-white (ww and ss), low density (dd)
tortoiseshell (Oo) kitty. Other genes determine the patterns of her
striping and curliness of fur. How does your cat compare?

Whether you have freckles or not is a simple example of how dominant and
recessive genes interact, but one allele does not always dominate
another. in a study of gene-- environment interactions involving the
serotonin transporter gene (SERT or 5-httlPr) and a child's response to
bullying, the authors note that with two types of alleles (s for short
or l for long), individuals could have one of three genotypes: ss, sl,
or ll (sugden et al., 2010). neither the s nor the l allele dominates
the other. as you can see in ● figure 3.3, the sl group had levels of
emotional disturbance in response to frequent bullying that fell between
the extremes of the ss and the ll groups (sugden et al., 2010). if
either the s or the l alleles were dominant, the sl group would behave
like that dominant group instead.

What are the Building Blocks of Behavior?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

75

FIGURE 3.3 Some Alleles Do Not Show Dominance. Neither the S nor the L
allele of the serotonin transporter gene dominates the other. Among
children who have been bullied frequently, those with the SL genotype
(shown in green) experience a level of emotional problems midway between
the levels of those with the SS and LL genotypes. If either the S or the
L allele was dominant, we would expect the SL group to behave the same
way as the homozygous dominant group.

Mean emotional problems score

22 20 18 16 14 12 SS (short/short)

10

Source: Adapted from K. Sugden, et al. (2010). "Serotonin Transporter
Gene Moderates the Development of Emotional Problems Among Children
Following Bullying Victimization," Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49(8), 830--840.
doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2010.01.024

SL (short/long) LL (long/long)

8 Serotonin transporter gene genotype

Genetic Variation if you have siblings, you are aware that having the
same biological parents does not guarantee similar appearance,
personality, and behavior. The development of an egg or sperm cell is
like shuffling a deck of cards. in both cases, a large number of
possible outcomes may occur. When a parent's cell divides to make an egg
or a sperm cell, each resulting cell contains 23 chromosomes, one
chromosome from each of the parent's original 23 chromosome pairs. As a
result, a single human can produce eggs or sperm with 223 (8,388,608)
combinations of chromosomes. Add this variability to the different
possibilities provided by the other parent, and it may seem surprising
that we resemble our relatives as much as we do.

relatedness The probability that two people share the same allele from a
common ancestor.

Relatedness represents probability. In some cases, similarities will be
more or less than the predicted amount. Second cousins should share
approximately 1/32 of their alleles (about 3%), but this particular pair
might be mistaken for brothers.

Relatedness despite this potential variability, we remain similar to our
genetic relatives. This important point will be revisited later in the
chapter, when the evolution of social behavior is discussed. Relatedness
is defined as the probability that two people share copies of the same
allele from a common ancestor. if we go back in history far enough, we
all share common ancestors. Relatedness, however, is usually computed
within a limited number of generations. The chance that you share an
allele with one of your parents is one-half, as is the chance that you
share an allele with a sibling. First cousins have a one-eighth
likelihood of sharing an allele (see ● Figure 3.4). These types of
calculations led geneticist J. B. S. haldane to allegedly proclaim, "i
would lay down my life for two brothers or eight cousins!" (Bynum &
Porter, 2005, p. 261). haldane was computing the likelihood that his
genes would be passed down to future generations. As discussed later in
the chapter, evolutionary psychologists suggest that sacrificing
yourself for others is more likely when the others are genetically
related relatives.

76

Chapter 3

Courtesy of Laura Freberg

Courtesy of Laura Freberg

Sex Chromosomes of the 23 pairs of human chromosomes from each parent,
22 pairs are perfectly matched. in other words, a gene appearing on one
of a pair of chromosomes (perhaps a gene for blood type) has a
corresponding gene on its partner. in contrast, the X and Y chromosomes
do not carry the same genes. The much-larger X chromosome contains about
2,000 active genes, while the Y has fewer than 100. in most

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 3.4

r = 0.50

r = 0.50

r=

0.2

5

r= 25 0.

Biophoto Associates/Science Source

Siblings

Relatedness. Relatedness refers to the probability that two people share
a particular allele from a common ancestor. The chance that you share an
allele with one of your parents or a brother or sister is 0.50, or
one-half. The chance that you share an allele with a niece or nephew is
0.25, or one-quarter.

Niece and nephew

cases, females carry two copies of the X chromosome, whereas males carry
one X and one Y chromosome. The allele responsible for hemophilia, a
disease characterized by the failure of blood to clot, is found only on
the X chromosome. This allele is recessive, leading to different
outcomes based on the sex of the child receiving the alleles. if a
female receives a healthy allele on the X chromosome from one parent and
a disease-causing allele on the X chromosome from her other parent, she
will be a carrier for the condition but not experience it. in contrast,
a male receiving a disease-causing allele on the X chromosome from his
mother will have the condition. Because there is no equivalent allele on
the Y chromosome to offset the diseasecausing recessive allele, the
disease-causing allele will be expressed. As a result, conditions such
as hemophilia are more frequent among males and are called sex-linked
characteristics (see ● figure 3.5). As illustrated in ● figure 3.6, the
family of Queen victoria of great Britain (1819--1901) spread hemophilia
to a number of european royal houses. even when genes are duplicated on
the X and Y chromosomes, they can differ depending on their location.
forensic experts determine the sex of the source of a genetic sample by
observing the amelogenin gene, which contributes to the development of
tooth enamel (Akane, 1998). The size of the amelogenin gene on the X
chromosome is different than on the Y chromosome.

Which Fields of genetics Are relevant to psychology? our species shares
quite a few genes with chimpanzees, mice, fruit flies, yeast, and even a
weed known as thale cress (see ● figure 3.7). At the same time, humans
have genes that definitely set them apart from other animals (and
plants). for example, research points to differences between humans and
chimpanzees in a single gene, FoxP2, which appears to have had a
significant effect on distinctly human behaviors, including spoken
language (konopka et al., 2009). simply having different genes is only
part of the story. Rates of expression of large numbers of shared genes
are quite different in human brains compared to other primate brains
(Cáceres et al., 2003). Table 3.1 compares several subfields of genetics
that are relevant to our understanding of behavior and mental processes.
Behavioral geneticists attempt to discover the strength of genetic
influences on a particular behavior. Molecular geneticists look for
candidate genes, or genes that have a greater impact on a trait of
interest than other genes. functional geneticists study the entire
genome, looking for whole patterns of genetic differences linked to a
given trait. finally, geneticists studying gene--environment
interactions look for situations in which candidate genes appear to have
different effects.

X chromosome

Biophoto Associates/Science Source

50 0.

r=

r=

0.  50

Parents

Y chromosome

XHX Mother

XY Father

XHX

XX

XHY

XY

FIGURE 3.5 Hemophilia Is a Sex-Linked Trait. If a daughter inherits her
mother's X chromosome containing the allele for hemophilia (XH), she
will be a carrier but will not have the disease. If a son inherits this
XH chromosome, he will have the disease. Unlike his sister, he does not
have a healthy X chromosome to offset the disease allele.

WhiCh fields of geneTiCs ARe RelevAnT To PsYChologY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

77

Victoria

Edward VII

Alfred

Alice

Queen Victoria's mother was not a carrier for hemophilia, and her father
did not have the disease. Scientists believe that a mutation occurring
in her father's sperm resulted in Victoria's being a carrier.

One of Alice's two sons had hemophilia, and two of her five daughters
were carriers. One daughter, Alix, carried hemophilia into the Russian
royal family.

Helena

Louise

Grand Duke Louis IV of Hesse Victoria Elisabeth Irene (m. Henry of
Prussia) Grand Duke Ernest Louis Frederick Alix (m. Emperor Nicholas II
of Russia)

Arthur

Leopold

Helena of Waldeck

Beatrice

Alice

Henry of Battenberg Alexander Mountbatten Victoria Eugenie (m. King
Alfonso XIII of Spain) Leopold Maurice

Prince Leopold had the royal disease and his daughter Alice was a
carrier. Two of Beatrice's three sons had the disease. One, Leopold,
died during surgery, because hemophilia causes uncontrolled bleeding.
Beatrice's daughter, Victoria Eugenie, married into the Spanish royal
family and carried the disease with her.

Photos, left to right: Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy Stock Photo; Mary Evans
Picture Library/CHARLOTTE ZEEPVAT; Mary Evans/The Image Works; Mary
Evans Picture Library/ CHARLOTTE ZEEPVAT; Background photo:
martan/Shutterstock.com.

Queen Victoria (m. Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha)

FIGURE 3.6 Hemophilia and European Royalty. Queen Victoria of Great
Britain (1819--1901) had nine children. One son (Prince Leopold, Duke of
Albany) had hemophilia, and two daughters (Princess Alice and Princess
Beatrice) were carriers for the condition. As a result of their
marriages to other European royalty, the three children spread the
hemophilia gene to the royal families of Germany, Russia, and Spain.
Therefore, hemophilia was once popularly called "the royal disease."

Behavioral Genetics and Heritability

behavioral genetics The scientific field that attempts to identify and
understand links between genetics and behavior.

heritability The statistical likelihood that variations observed in a
population are because of genetics.

78

Chapter 3

Behavioral genetics investigates the strength of genetic influences on a
particular behavior. Heritability is the statistical likelihood that
variations in a trait observed across individuals in a population are
due to genetics. it is usually computed by comparing monozygotic
(identical) and dizygotic (fraternal) twin pairs. As you can see in ●
figure 3.8 heritability is only one piece contributing to a trait, along
with shared experience (both twins have Thanksgiving dinner with family
every year) and non-shared experience (one twin plays soccer and the
other plays basketball). if genes play no part in producing phenotypical
differences among individuals, heritability is zero. for example, genes
are responsible for human hearts, but there is no individual variation
in the population in terms of the presence of a heart---each of us has
one. Consequently, the heritability of having a heart is zero. if genes
are totally responsible for all phenotypical differences among
individuals, heritability is 1.0. for example, all variation in the
population in terms of having or not having a fatal neurological
condition known as Huntington's disease

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Humans

100%

Chimpanzees

94--98%

Mice

92%

Fruit flies

44%

FIGURE 3.7 Yeast

Thale cress

18%

0

20 40 60 80 100 Percent of shared genes

WILDLIFE GmbH/Alamy Stock Photo

26%

Genes Shared with Other Species. Humans share quite a few genes with
other species, such as the 18% of genes that we share with a weed known
as thale cress. However, geneticists are most interested in the genes
that differ from those of other species, such as the FoxP2 gene, which
appears to influence spoken language. Mutations of this gene cause
severe speech and language disorders.

is entirely because of genetics. if you inherit a huntington's gene from
one parent, you will develop the condition. heritability of most human
traits is typically in the range of 0.30 to 0.60. ● figure 3.9 shows the
heritability of a number of important psychological conditions.
heritability is a concept that is frequently misunderstood. it always
refers to populations, never to individuals. saying that a trait such as
shyness is 40% heritable does not say that 40% of one individual's
shyness is produced by genes and the other 60% by his or her
environment. instead, this suggests that the variations in shyness that
we see across the population (some people are more shy than others) are
the result of both genetic and environmental factors. heritability
cannot be assessed without taking the environment into account, which is
another source of potential confusion. if the environment is held
constant (i.e., everybody is treated the same way), the heritability of
a trait will appear to be high. for example, if you plant seeds in trays
with identical nutrients, water, and sunlight, the height of the
resulting plants will reflect their genetic differences. in variable
environments, heritability is lower.

TABLE 3.1 Subfields of Genetics branch of genetics

topic

example

Behavioral genetics

Amount of heritability

Variations in loneliness across the population appear to be strongly
influenced by genetics.

Molecular genetics

Candidate genes

Certain genes seem to impact loneliness more than others.

Functional genomics

Links between the global genome and particular traits

Genes might be expressed differently in lonely and nonlonely
individuals.

Gene--environment Interactions

Candidate genes have different effects in different situations

Candidate genes seem to have more impact on loneliness in some
environments compared to others.

After L. Goossens et al. (2009), Loneliness and solitude in adolescence:
A confirmatory factor analysis of alternative models. Personality and
Individual Differences, 47(8), 890--894.

WhiCh fields of geneTiCs ARe RelevAnT To PsYChologY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

79

Females

Males

28% 58%

53%

47%

0% Genes

Shared environment

Unshared environment

F8 studio/Shutterstock.com

14%

FIGURE 3.8 Contributions to an Observed Trait. Behavioral geneticists,
often using studies of identical and fraternal twins, attempt to
quantify the contributions of genes, shared environments, and unshared
environments. These contributions are not constant. Instead, they can
vary over the lifespan and among genders. In this case, a large
meta-analysis of twin studies reported that a shared environment
influenced female but not male gambling behavior. For both males and
females, genes play a significant role in predicting gambling behavior.
Source: Adapted from Y.-H. Xuan, et al. (2017). "Genetic and
Environmental Influences on Gambling: A Meta-Analysis of Twin Studies,"
Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 2121. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02121

Diverse Voices in Psychology GENETIC RESEARCH OFTEN PUSHES THE
BOUNDARIES of research ethics, discussed in Chapter 2. Conclusions from
genetic research can apply to entire groups of people, far beyond the
individuals who agreed to participate. Even when individual participants
are protected, the possibility that data could stigmatize an entire
group should be considered and avoided. For example, most
anthropologists argue that the political concept of "race" is not
clearly defined at the genetic level. Individuals of European and Asian
backgrounds, but not individuals from sub-Saharan backgrounds, usually
trace 1% to 4% of their DNA back to non--Homo sapiens ancestors, such as
Neanderthals or Denisovans. This type of finding could be misinterpreted
by the public as representing an important racial divide, an idea that
has been soundly rejected by geneticists (Yudell et al., 2016). Many
indigenous groups have been reluctant to participate in genetics
research.

80

Chapter 3

Although the model was developed for use The possibility of promoting
social prejudices with Maori participants, it provides guidance due to
stigmatization is a common source of for researchers setting up
biorepositories concern, along with cultural values that are with many
types of communities. ■ inconsistent with genetics methods. Many studies
require storage of biological samples in biorepositories. This practice
might be inconsistent with cultural values. For example, the Maori
people of New Zealand view tissue samples, DNA, and any associated data
as taonga ("precious") and tapu ("sacred"). To engage the Maori in
genetics research, researchers developed a culturally sensitive plan
that tailored informed consent, control over the procedures and data,
and Using culturally sensitive procedures for handling biosamples
community engagement collected for genetics research built trust between
researchers to existing Maori values and Maori communities in New
Zealand. (Beaton et al., 2016).

davidf/E+/Getty Images

Avoiding Social Prejudice in Genetic Research

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

iStock.com/digitalskillet

if you plant seeds in trays receiving different amounts of nutrients,
water, and sunlight, the height of the resulting plants will appear to
be less influenced by genetics. if you studied the heritability of human
intelligence in participants living in extremely wealthy or extremely
poor circumstances, genetic influences would be exaggerated, just as
they are when you hold the nutrients, water, and sunlight constant for
your plants. Researchers assessing the heritability of human traits
attempt to do so within a typical range of environments. Because of the
influence of environment on heritability, some researchers question the
use of adoption studies for assessing the relative influences of
genetics and environment on development. These studies compare adopted
children to their biological and adoptive parents in an effort to assess
the relative impact of heritability. like plants with constant amounts
of nutrients, water, and sunlight, adoptive families share many common
features as a result of the screening process required before adopting.
Consequently, adoptive parents rarely represent as much diversity as the
group of biological parents whose children they adopt. if all adoptive
families provide a consistent environment, this factor would inflate the
apparent heritability of characteristics examined in their adopted
children. Comparisons of twins are often used in behavioral genetics to
evaluate relative contributions of genetics and environment. The
differences between identical twins, who share identical dnA, and
fraternal twins, whose dnA shows the same approximately 50% of overlap
found in any two siblings, are particularly useful because both types of
twins share similar environments. The Minnesota study of Twins Reared
Apart (Bouchard et al., 1990) not only compares identical to fraternal
twins, but includes pairs of identical twins and fraternal twins adopted
at birth and raised in separate homes (see ● figure 3.10). Twin studies
are also useful in establishing concordance rates, which are statistical
probabilities that a trait observed in one person will be seen in
another. Concordance rates are especially useful to psychologists
interested in psychological disorders because they provide estimates of
the heritability of a condition. for example, concordance rates for
autism spectrum disorder (see Chapter 14) are high in identical twins
(95.2%) relative to fraternal twins (4.3%; nordenbæk et al., 2014).
Because both types of twins share a uterine environment and

The environments provided by adoptive parents are more similar to one
another than to the environments provided by biological parents. This
environmental similarity can exaggerate genetic influences---a result
that must be taken into account when investigating heritability using
adopted children.

concordance rates The statistical probability that a trait in one person
will be shared by another; usually discussed in relation to identical
and fraternal twins.

Schizophrenia

FIGURE 3.9

Nicotine dependence Major depressive disorder

Heritability of Some Human Conditions. Heritability rates, typically
based on twin studies, tell us how much of the variability seen in a
population can be due to genetics. Most human traits feature
heritability between 0.30 and 0.60.

Bipolar disorder Autism spectrum disorder Anorexia nervosa Alcohol
dependence ADHD Alzheimer's disease 0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Heritability

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Source: Adapted from P. F. Sullivan, M. J. Daly, & M. O'Donovan (2012).
"Genetic Architecture of Psychiatric Disorders. The Emerging Picture and
Its Implications," Nature Reviews Genetics, 13, 537--551.
doi:10.1038/nrg3240

WhiCh fields of geneTiCs ARe RelevAnT To PsYChologY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

81

are exposed to similar parenting, this discrepancy makes a strong
argument for the importance of genetic influences on autism spectrum
disorder.

The Search for Candidate Genes

© Richard A. Sturm, IMB, University of Queensland

Although we can say that all humans share 100% of their genes, we do not
share 100% of our alleles, giving each of us a unique version of the
genome. in other words, we all share genes that produce eye color of
some sort, but our different combinations of alleles result in a variety
of shades. There are at least 3 million dnA variations in the human
genome---enough for us to differ from one another in nearly every gene
(Plomin & Spinath, 2004). A primary goal in psychology is the
understanding and effective treatment of psychological disorders, many
of which are described in Chapter 14. genotypes related to psychological
disorders can provide a starting point for this understanding, although
as shown in ● Figure 3.11, scientists must fill in the gaps between
genes and observed symptoms. Comparing variations of dnA in individuals
who do or do not have a particular trait of interest can help scientists
pinpoint the causes of problems and suggest preventive strategies. A
common misunderstanding is the belief that we can identify "a gene for"
a particular behavior. For example, a headline in Time magazine
trumpeted, "The genes for Pot Addiction have Been identified"
(Szalavitz, 2016). it is important to remember that genes encode for
proteins, not behaviors. genes build proteins that construct brains, and
brains might or might not become addicted to cannabis. Rather than
viewing a gene as causing a complex behavior, it is more accurate to
view genes as contributing, along with many other factors, to the
development and functioning of the nervous system, which in turn
generates observable behavior.

Our species shares genes for eye color, but combinations of alleles
produce many possible shades.

candidate gene A gene that has a greater impact on a trait of interest
than other genes.

FIGURE 3.10 Twins Raised Together or Apart Show Comparable Levels of
Similarity Across Several Traits. Comparisons of identical twins raised
together or in separate adoptive families show that some traits are more
similar in twin pairs (fingerprint ridge count) than others
(nonreligious social attitudes). However, regardless of the degree of
similarity for a trait, living apart or together seems to have had
relatively little impact on the degree of similarity within twin pairs.
In other words, twins raised apart are just about as similar on each
trait as twins raised together. Source: Adapted from T. Bouchard, Jr. et
al. (1990). "Sources of Human Psychological Differences: The Minnesota
Study of Twins Reared Apart," Science, 250, 223--228. doi:
10.1126/science.2218526

82

Chapter 3

Fingerprint ridge count Multidimensional personality questionnaire
Occupational interest scale

Religious attitudes Identical twins raised Apart

Nonreligious social attitudes

Together 0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Correlations

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Prior to the development of databases made possible by the human genome
Project and the international hapMap Project, investigating more than a
few genes at a time was not feasible. instead, candidate gene research
studies were conducted, in which one gene or a small number of genes
were compared between groups of people with and without a condition of
interest. This search for candidate genes for a particular phenotype,
such as schizophrenia, did not always result in accurate or complete
findings (farrell et al., 2015). Rather than testing single genes,
contemporary functional geneticists often use genomewide association
studies (GWAS) or whole-genome sequencing (Wgs). emerging technologies
now allow researchers to scan complete sets of dnA from many
participants, looking for variations associated with a particular
phenotype, condition, or disease. A gWAs study identified a higher risk
for severe Covid-19 with respiratory failure among people with Type A
blood, while those with Type o blood experienced lower risk (ellinghaus
et al., 2020). As our methods for conducting genetic research improve,
our answers become more complete and accurate (Prata et al., 2019).

Epigenetics

Genotype: Alleles associated with schizophrenia

Neurological biomarkers: Differences in brain activity during working
memory tasks

Behavioral biomarkers: Poor working memory

FIGURE 3.11 From Genes to Behavior. In addition to our desire to view
nature and nurture accurately, incorporating genetics in psychology
helps us understand the development of psychological disorders, from
genes to observed and clinical symptoms. Understanding this pathway
should improve our ability to develop effective treatments. Source:
Author

Phenotype: Disorganized thinking Cognitive impairment Attention
difficulties

genomewide association study (GWAS) A scan of complete sets of DNA from
many participants, which is performed to look for variations associated
with a particular phenotype, condition, or disease.

"Epigenetic differences arise during the lifetime of monozygotic twins,"
by Mario Fraga et al., in Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 2005 Jul 102 (30) 10407-8, Fig. 3. Copyright (2005) National
Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.

having identical genotypes, as is the case with identical twins, does
not guarantee identical epigenetics The study of gene-- phenotypes, or
observed characteristics. As we explained in the example of the Agouti
gene's environment interactions in the production effects on the fur
color and weight of baby mice, different phenotypes can result from the
of phenotypes. same genotype due to interactions between the organism
and its environment. When factors other than the genotype produce
changes in a phenotype, we say that an epigenetic change has occurred.
Epi is greek for "over" or "above," so epigenetics refers to the
reversible development of traits by factors "above" the genes themselves
that determine how genes perform. The field of epigenetics explores
these gene--environment interactions. epigenetic change influences gene
expression, the process by which dnA builds proteins that contribute to
features of living cells. genes can be turned on or off by internal
signals (hormones or neurochemicals) or by signals from external sources
(diet or toxins). There is an obvious need for epigenetics in
development, as the differences between a skin cell and a muscle cell
result from turning on the right set of genes and turning off others.
Thus, the magnitude of epigenetic change depends on an organism's age.
The fetus experiences the highest rate of epigenetic change, followed by
the child and finally, the adult. While epigenetic changes are
reversible, many last entire lifetimes. for example, individuals who
experienced traumatic life events prenatally or during childhood were
found to have long-term epigenetic changes in brain strucFraga et
al. (2005) studied 160 identical twin pairs between the ture,
influencing lifetime vulnerability to mental health problems ages of 3
and 74. The two chromosomes on the right belong to (Ambeskovic et al.,
2019). a pair of 3-year-old twins, and those on the left belong to a
pair Among the factors known to produce epigenetic change of 50-year-old
twins. Areas of red indicate differences between are nutrition,
disease-causing organisms, drugs, stress, and enthe two chromosomes in
each pair related to differences in vironmental toxins. in particular,
malnutrition and stress expegene expression. As twins age, their gene
expression becomes rienced by pregnant women have the potential to
influence the more different, as indicated by the greater amount of red
in the epigenetics of the fetus, leading to lifelong effects on physical
chromosomes from the older twins. Twins who had spent the most and
psychological well-being. in the discussion of psychological time apart
showed the greatest epigenetic differences. WhiCh fields of geneTiCs ARe
RelevAnT To PsYChologY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

83

ThINkINg scientifically The "Warrior Gene" and Criminals ALTHOUGH WE
HAVE CAUTIONED YOU against "a gene for" reasoning for complex human
behaviors, the examination of candidate genes continues to be a viable
approach to understanding the "nature" part of the nature--nurture
interaction. In some cases, identification of candidate genes can have
profound influences on public policy. One such candidate gene is the
MAOA (monoamine oxidase A) gene, located on the X chromosome, which has
been implicated in antisocial behavior. The protein produced by the MAOA
gene is an enzyme that affects several important neurochemicals,
including dopamine and serotonin, which are discussed further in Chapter
4. Variations in MAOA are classified as low or high activity. The
low-activity allele has been linked to impulsive antisocial behavior,
leading to its popular reputation as "the warrior gene." How valid is
this point of view? To evaluate this concept, we will return to the
critical thinking questions we outlined in Chapter 2.

by an unusual zero-activity version of MAOA and a multi-generational
history of extreme aggression encouraged further investigations of the
"warrior gene" (Brunner et al., 1993).

What Am I Being Asked to Believe or Accept?

Antisocial behavior is very complex (see Chapters 13 and 14). Using
multiple perspectives to evaluate antisocial

The "warrior gene" concept asks us to believe that variations in a
single gene can predict antisocial behavior.

Are There Other Ways That This Evidence Could Be Interpreted? The
original study is based on a rare and unusual situation. Studies of more
typical MAOA alleles demonstrate very small effect sizes. As we
discussed in Chapter 2, this means that only a small part of the
variation in antisocial behavior across the population can be linked to
people's MAOA alleles. Genes interact with environments, too. The MAOA
alleles were more predictive of violent behavior in children with known
histories of child maltreatment (Caspi et al., 2002; Fergusson et al.,
2011). What Other Evidence Would I Need to Evaluate These Alternatives?

behavior should provide a clearer picture of the issue. What Are the
Most Reasonable Conclusions? Although MAOA alleles might play a part in
antisocial behavior, single genes rarely determine simple human traits
like eye color, let alone complex behaviors. This has not, however,
stopped the legal system from considering MAOA status in criminal cases.
Not only has MAOA status been admitted as evidence in courts in the
European Union and in the United States, but this information has been
used to support the idea that defendants had reduced responsibility for
aggressive actions because they "couldn't help" being violent. However,
it is also possible that courts of law might administer more stringent
punishments, such as longer prison terms, under the belief that the
person is relatively untreatable (González-Tapia & Obsuth, 2015).
Geneticists and psychologists have a responsibility to communicate the
correct interpretation of findings to policymakers to avoid improper
applications of research results.

What Evidence Supports This Position?

This advertisement for direct-to-consumer genetics tests suggests that a
single gene, MAOA, is responsible for your being a "warrior" and how you
respond to stress. It is very likely that this claim oversimplifies and
exaggerates what we know about the MAOA gene.

84

Chapter 3

Source: FamilyTreeDNA

An early case study (see Chapter 2) of a Dutch family characterized

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

disorders in Chapter 14, you will see that many disorders trace their
roots to a combination of genetic vulnerability and disruptions
experienced by the pregnant woman, such as illness or malnourishment.
geneticists have identified four processes that produce lasting but
reversible changes in gene expression: ribonucleic acid (RnA)
interference, RnA editing, histone modification, and dnA methylation
(see ● figure 3.12). for the purposes of this overview, we will focus on
histone modification and dnA methylation. Histones are protein
structures around which your dnA is wound. if the dnA in a single cell
were not wound up in this fashion, it would be over 6 feet long
(Annunziato, 2008). When either the core or the tail of a histone
interacts with regulatory proteins, the expression of nearby segments of
dnA can become more or less likely. DNA methylation occurs when a methyl
group (one carbon atom bonded to three hydrogen atoms) is added to the
dnA molecule. This usually has the result of turning genes off. You can
think about dnA methylation as being similar to stapling some pages in a
book together. Because of the staples, you can't read the pages.
Although many epigenetic studies examine physical features like fur
color, more complex features of interest to psychologists are also
subject to epigenetic influences. for example, rats that were licked
frequently during infancy by their mothers (the rat equivalent of
getting a hug from mom) were calmer when faced with A human being has
about 100 trillion meters of stress later in life than rats licked
infrequently (Champagneet al., 2003). By DNA. To put this in
perspective, this means that licking their pups, these mothers
influenced the expression of genes that our DNA could go to the Sun and
back more than determined responses to a stress hormone. The nurture
provided by the mother had a lifelong impact on the offspring's ability
to cope with stress. 300 times.

Histone modification

FIGURE 3.12

ME ME

Methylated DNA

ME

Mechanisms of Epigenetic Change. Two important processes for producing
epigenetic change are histone modification and DNA methylation. Histone
modification occurs when certain chemicals interact with the tail or
core of a histone. DNA methylation occurs when a methyl group (one
carbon atom bonded to three hydrogen atoms) attaches to the DNA
molecule. These modifications affect the likelihood that particular
genes will be expressed or silenced. WhiCh fields of geneTiCs ARe
RelevAnT To PsYChologY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

85

Psychology as a hub science

Medicine

Understanding the Epigenetic Influences of Nutrition

Nutrition

gephoto/Shutterstock.com

WE TYPICALLY THINK OF NUTRITIONISTS as providing good advice about what
to eat, especially for pregnant women, children buying school lunches,
and people facing health challenges. But we also understand that the
food we eat is one of the key environmental factors that produce
epigenetic change. A new field known as nutrigenomics has emerged to
explore the epigenetic influences of diet. in the not-too-distant
future, you might be given an individualized diet plan by a nutritionist
based on your personal methylation pattern. Although this might
initially help us with certain cancers and other disease states, we know
that some psychological disorders are also influenced by epigenetics.
following a healthier diet is linked with lower risk for depression
(Molendijk et al., 2018; Berk & Jacka, 2019), and epigenetic factors
might play a role in these findings. it is possible that in addition to
more conventional treatments, individuals with psychological disorders
might benefit from diets tailored to their epigenetic histories. Many
common foods have known epigenetic effects. intake of garlic, broccoli,
and dietary fiber can turn on anticancer and other protective genes. We
saw earlier in this chapter how mother mice exposed to BPA gave birth to
offspring that had yellow fur and were obese due to reduced methylation
of the Agouti gene. however, if the mother exposed to BPA was also given
a diet rich in the nutrients choline, betaine, and vitamin B12, all of
which contribute to increased methylation, the offspring had normal
weight and brown fur. We might not be able to control the environmental
toxins to which we are exposed, but a greater understanding of
epigenetics might help balance our exposure with appropriate nutrition.
■

Children exposed to child abuse have been found to have similar
long-lasting changes in the expression of genes related to stress
hormones (neigh et al., 2009), as well as a number of genes associated
with later medical problems and psychological disorders (Yang et al.,
2013). happily, these changes appear to be reversible in children who
experience consistent and responsive caregiving by foster parents
(fisher et al., 2011). epigenetics has the potential to illuminate the
causes of many psychological disorders, as discussed in Chapter 14.
hundreds of separate genes appear to be linked to disorders like
schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorder, and bipolar disorder, yet no
single gene produces more than a tiny effect on a person's risk of
developing these disorders. in contrast, patterns of dnA methylation and
unusual histone modifications are strongly associated with risk for
these conditions. for example, epigenetic differences help to
distinguish between identical twin pairs in which one twin has
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder while the other remains healthy
(Abdolmaleky et al., 2015).

86

Chapter 3

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ConneCting to ReseaRch Can Transgenerational Epigenetic Change Occur? WE
HAVE SEEN IN THIS CHAPTER that individual experience can influence gene
expression, but scientists also are considering the possibility that
epigenetic changes can be passed along to subsequent generations. How
might this happen? Brian Dias and Kerry Ressler (2013) investigated
transgenerational epigenetics using fear conditioning in mice. As
explained in Chapter 8, animals (including humans) can learn to
associate a signal with an important event through the process of
classical conditioning. If a mouse learned to fear an odor associated
with shock prior to becoming a parent, could this experience affect the
offsprings' reaction to the odor? The Question: Can a learned fear
response to an odor be passed from one generation to the next?

After the odor was infused into the mouse's cage, the mouse experienced
electric shock through the grid floor. After sufficient training, the
mice showed fear in the presence of the odor, even when they didn't get
shocked. The researchers conditioned fear to another odor in one control
group and included another control group that had no fear conditioning
at all. All of the mice were mated following conditioning, and their
offspring were tested for their reaction to acetophenone.

ETHICS As you learned in Chapter 2, all animal research in psychology is
regulated by a set of strict ethical guidelines. The use of electric
shock in this experiment must conform to federal regulations regarding
pain.

RESULTS METHODS

Offspring of the father mice receiving the acetophenone--shock pairings
showed fear to the acetophenone, even though they had never experienced
it. Even more surprisingly, the grandchildren of the original
conditioned

Dias and Ressler began by training mice to fear the smell of a chemical
called acetophenone, which to us smells like almonds and cherries (see ●
Figure 3.13). foot shock

mice also showed fear of acetophenone, as did mice conceived using in
vitro fertilization with sperm from the original trained mice.

CONCLUSIONS What could possibly produce this response to an odor that a
parent learned to fear? The original trained mice responded to their
fear training by increasing the production of a protein related to
detecting acetophenone. The researchers suggested that DNA methylation
had changed on the genes responsible for producing the receptor protein.
Because the next two generations showed similar changes, the researchers
argued that the epigenetic changes were passed along through the sperm
by mechanisms that are not fully understood. Sperm contain RNA,
proteins, and metabolites in addition to DNA, and some or all of these
molecules might influence offspring (Perez & Lehner, 2019). While some
scientists support the conclusions put forward by Dias and Ressler,
others are more skeptical. Successful replications and further research
on mechanisms of transgenerational epigenetics might clarify the
processes responsible for these observations. ■

F0

- 

FIGURE 3.13

ODOR

F1

- 
- ODOR

F2

kontur-vid/Shutterstock.com

ODOR

Can Epigenetic Changes Affect Future Generations? According to Dias and
Ressler (2013), a changed response to a distinctive odor can be passed
to a mouse's children and grandchildren. A male mouse (F0) is exposed to
an odor similar to cherries and almonds that is paired with foot shock.
The male offspring of this mouse (F1) is tested with a combination of
odor and a blast of noise (a standard way of measuring startle). The
grandchild of the original mouse (F2) is tested the same way. Compared
to mice whose fathers and grandfathers did not receive a pairing of odor
and foot shock, these F1 and F 2 mice demonstrated an enhanced startle
effect to the odor plus noise, suggesting that a greater sensitivity to
the odor might have been passed along due to epigenetic change.

Which Fields oF Genetics Are relevAnt to PsycholoGy?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

87

summary 3.1 Major Concepts in Genetics concept

Definition

example

Genotype

An individual's genetic makeup.

A person might have an allele for freckles and an allele for no
freckles.

Phenotype

An individual's observable trait.

A person has green eyes.

Gene

A sequence of DNA in a specific location on a chromosome that contains
the instructions for making a protein.

The serotonin transporter gene is located on chromosome 17.

Gene expression

Information from a gene is used to produce a protein.

Maternal diet in mice can affect the expression of the Agouti gene.

Allele

One of two or more possible variations of a gene.

A small number of BRCA1 alleles are associated with cancer risk.

Homozygous

Having two of the same alleles.

A person has the SS or the LL form of the serotonin transporter gene.

Heterozygous

Having two different alleles.

A person has the SL form of the serotonin transporter gene.

Dominant

An allele that is expressed regardless of whether it is homozygous or
heterozygous.

The allele for freckles is dominant.

An allele that is expressed only when it is homozygous.

The allele for no freckles is recessive.

Mean emotional problems score

22 20 18 16 14 12 SS (short/short)

10

SL (short/long) LL (long/long)

8 Serotonin transporter gene genotype

Father's allele Mother's allele Freckles (F)

Freckles (F)

No freckles (f)

FF (homozygous freckles) Ff (heterozygous freckles)

No freckles (f) Ff (heterozygous freckles) ff (homozygous no freckles)

Recessive

Credits: Top row---ISM/Phototake; Second row---©Richard A. Sturm, IMB,
University of Queensland; Third row---"Epigenetic differences arise
during the lifetime of monozygotic twins," by Mario Fraga et al., in
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2005 Jul 102 (30)
10407-8, Fig. 3. Copyright (2005) National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.;
Fourth row---Courtesy Randy L. Jirtle, Ph.D.; Fifth row---Featureflash
Photo Agency/Shutterstock.com; Bottom row---Strauss/Curtis/ Corbis/Getty
Images.

88

Chapter 3

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

how Does Evolution occur? DEA/C. BEVILACQUA/Contributor/De
Agostini/Getty Images

The human genome is the product of millions of years of evolution,
defined by biologists as descent with modification from a common
ancestor. The study of evolution allows us to trace the family tree of
living things. in his book The Origin of Species, Charles darwin
proposed that species evolve or change from one form to the next in an
orderly manner (darwin, 1859). darwin was well aware of the procedures
used by farmers to develop animals and plants with desirable traits by
mating particular individuals. A farmer's goal to raise the strongest
oxen for pulling a plow might be accomplished by breeding the strongest
available oxen to each other. in these cases, the farmer is using
artificial selection to determine which individuals have the opportunity
to produce offspring. darwin suggested that instead of a farmer making
these decisions, the pressures of survival and reproduction in the wild
would make the choice, a process that he called natural selection.
organisms that survive long enough to reproduce would pass their traits
to the next generation. organisms that did not reproduce would not have
the opportunity to pass their traits to future generations. As
geneticists often remind us, we have no infertile ancestors. in the more
than 150 years since The Origin of Species was first published, our
understanding of genetics and the fossil record has expanded
exponentially, lending substantial further support for darwin's views.
surprisingly, darwin was able to derive his theory without the benefit
of a basic understanding of genetics. he was unable to account for the
variations he observed in a particular trait. That understanding was
provided by gregor Mendel (1822--1884), who discovered ways to predict
the inheritance of particular traits, like the color of flowers, in his
research on pea plants (Mendel, 1866). Mendel, in turn, was working
without our modern understanding of genes. Combining current
understanding of genetics with the natural selection processes proposed
by darwin provides scientists with powerful hypotheses about the
progression of species over time.

Charles Darwin's theory of evolution described how species change in an
orderly manner.

Mechanisms of Evolution

natural selection The process by which survival and reproduction
pressures act to change the frequency of alleles in subsequent
generations. mutation An error that occurs when DNA is replicated.
migration Movement to a new location. genetic drift Change in a
population's genes from one generation to the next because of chance or
accident.

TIMOTHY CLARY/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom

in addition to the process of natural selection described by darwin,
evolution can result from mutation, migration, and genetic drift. A
mutation is an error that occurs when dnA is replicated. The average
human baby is born with about 130 new mutations, but most have no effect
(Zimmer, 2009). Mutant alleles providing some advantage spread through
the population, but most mutant alleles that result in a disadvantage
disappear from future generations. Migration occurs when organisms move
from one geographical location to the next. Moving to a new location can
affect the survival of individuals and the frequency of certain alleles
in the population. Phenotypical traits that are advantageous in one
environment might be less so in another. Genetic drift produces change
from one generation to the next through chance or accident. Type B blood
is virtually absent in contemporary populations of native Americans,
most likely due to chance (halverson & Bolnick, 2008). The group of
ancestors who first made their way to the Western hemisphere and
survived to reproduce did not include anyone with the Type B allele. if
the ancestors' blood type alleles had been more representative of the
entire human population, more of their descendants would have Type B
blood. We can explore the effects of evolutionary processes---mutation,
migration, genetic drift, and natural selection---on the history of one
allele: the recessive allele for blond hair. Although as many as eight
genes might participate in hair color, a tiny difference in KITLG is
significantly linked to blond hair

evolution Descent with modification from a common ancestor.

Darwin understood that breeders could influence the traits of offspring
by mating particular individuals. He believed that natural selection
operated according to the same principles. The pressures of survival and
reproduction in the wild would take the role of the breeder---
determining which traits are passed to the next generation.

hoW does evolUTion oCCUR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

89

/AKG Images

Gregor Mendel (1822--1884) made important discoveries about inheritance
at about the same time that Darwin was working on his theory of
evolution, but neither scientist knew about genes and chromosomes.
Modern geneticists combine this knowledge to form powerful hypotheses
about the nature of living things.

in humans (guenther et al., 2014). The original appearance of the allele
for blond hair was probably the result of a random mutation occurring in
northern europe some 10,000 years ago (frost, 2006). Migration, or
rather the lack of it, might account for the relatively restricted area
in northern europe populated by blondes until fairly recently. genetic
drift undoubtedly reduced the global frequency of the blond allele
between 1300 and 1700, as waves of bubonic plague decimated the european
population. if by chance every person carrying the blond allele had died
from the plague before reproducing, the allele would have disappeared
from the human genome (see ● figure 3.14). has natural selection
influenced the blond gene? some scientists believe it has. When people
have a choice of mates of equal value, they will select the one that
stands out from the crowd (Bem, 2001; frost, 2006). Therefore,
individuals with relatively rare blond hair might have enjoyed more
reproductive success than those with more common, darker hair colors
(field et al., 2016). in germany, with its high percentage of blondes,
the trait of blondness is viewed differently than in countries where
blondes are relatively rare. german men report that they view blondes as
good homemakers, but they find women with dark hair more sexually
attractive. Any consideration of evolution must include the question of
what natural selection selects. natural selection favors the organism
with the highest degree of fitness, defined as the ability of one
genotype to reproduce relative to other genotypes. The concept of
fitness includes survival to adulthood, ability to find a mate, and
reproduction. fitness is not some static characteristic, such as being
strongest or fastest. instead, fitness describes the interaction between
characteristics and the environment in which they exist. A genotype that
succeeds during the ice Age may be at a significant disadvantage during
periods of warmer temperatures. Animals in cold climates have short legs
and stocky bodies, which help retain heat, whereas animals in warm
climates have long legs and slim bodies, which release heat. Again, we
see the need to consider nature within the context of nurture.

fitness The ability of one genotype to reproduce more successfully
relative to other genotypes.

FIGURE 3.14 Spread of the Blond Allele. After the first appearance of
the blond hair allele about 10,000 years ago as a result of a chance
mutation, its frequency might have been affected by migration, genetic
drift, and natural selection.

90

Chapter 3

Over 80%

Under 1% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20%10% Percentage of light hair in Europe

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Marilyn Monroe and Jane Russell starred in the 1953 film Gentlemen
Prefer Blondes. In some parts of the world, the sentiment in this title
appears to be true.

adaptation A change because of natural

Peter Burian/Spirit/Corbis

selection.

Jeff Vanuga/Spirit/Corbis

Corbis

Adaptation refers to either the process or the result of change because
of natural selection. in other words, a species can respond to an
environmental change by adapting, and features of the new phenotype may
be called adaptations. Adaptations can take many forms. They can be
behaviors, such as jumping higher to better avoid a predator, or
anatomical features, such as eyes that can see color. Adaptations do not
necessarily produce perfection. Any adaptation that is good enough to
contribute to the fitness of an organism will carry forward into future
generations. A classic example of rapid adaptation is the case of the
english peppered moth (Biston betularia). Before the industrial
Revolution, most peppered moths found in Britain were light gray, which
allowed them to hide against the similar colors of tree bark. darker
moths occasionally appeared beginning around 1848, but because they were
less capable of hiding from predators, they made up only about 1% of the
population. With increasing industrialization, tree bark became
frequently coated in soot. The once-camouflaged light gray moths became
an easy target for predators against the darker background of the sooty
trees. The darker moths rapidly became the norm, reaching frequencies of
about 98%. As pollution came under better control, tree bark returned to
its original light gray, and the lighter moths again became the norm.
The peppered moth population successfully adapted to changing
environmental circumstances, with color playing the role of an
adaptation. The moths did not "decide" to change color. natural
selection, in the form of greater rates of reproductive success on the
part of moths with a particular color, changed the frequencies of color
alleles within the population. Adaptations often appear to be
compromises between costs and benefits. Adult human males have about 10
times as much testosterone as adult human females. Testosterone conveys
a reproductive advantage because men with higher testosterone report
having more sex partners and earlier age at intercourse (lassek &
gaulin, 2009). on the negative side, however, high testosterone levels
lead to lower immune system functioning, making the high testosterone
males more vulnerable to disease (Muehlenbein & Bribiescas, 2005).
Adaptation is only one source of evolutionary change. Random events,
such as the collision of meteors with the earth and resulting climate
changes, are believed to have destroyed some types of life and provided
broad opportunities for others. We are also limited in our ability to
use adaptation to predict the future. The study of evolution is similar
to the study of history. Although we gain insight into wars by studying
the causes of World War ii, we cannot use our knowledge to predict
future wars with precision. We can be fairly certain that

20TH CENTURY FOX/Album/Newscom

Adaptation

Fitness varies across environments. Characteristics like long ears and
long legs work in hot, desert climates, but short ears and legs conserve
heat in colder climates. hoW does evolUTion oCCUR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

91

Michael Willmer Forbes Tweedie/Science Source

antibiotic-resistant bacteria, climate change, pollution, and
reproductive technologies are probably changing the face of the human
population as this text goes to press, but where all these changes will
lead us remains unknown.

Perennou Nuridsany/Science Source

18 hours ago

3 hours 45 minutes ago

2 hours 40 minutes ago

2.5 minutes ago

3 seconds ago

23 00 1

23 00 1

23 00 1

23 00 1

22 21 55 20 50 19 17

0

2

35

6

18

20

7

17

4

10

40

14

15

5

45

16 15

5

22 21 55 20 50 19

3

30

25

13 12 11

10

8 9

Single-cell organism

0

2

35

6

18

20

7

17

4

10

40

14

15

5

45

16 15

5

22 21 55 20 50 19

3

30

25

13 12 11

10

8 9

Jellyfish (first nervous systems)

0

2

35

6

18

20

7

17

4

10

40

14

15

5

45

16 15

5

22 21 55 20 50 19

3

30

25

13 12 11

10

8 9

35

15

6

18

20

7

17

3

5

4

10

40

14

5

23 00 1 2 22 3 0 21 55 5 4 20 50 10 5 19

2

45

16 15

Lamprey (first brains)

0

30

25

13 12 11

10

8 9

First hominins

45 40

16 15

35

14

30

15

6

20

7

25

13 12 11

10

8 9

Homo sapiens

Photos, left to right: Sebastian Kaulitzki/Shutterstock.com; pan
demin/Shutterstock.com; blickwinkel/Alamy Stock Photo; imageBROKER/Alamy
Stock Photo; The Natural History Museum/Alamy Stock Photo.

our interest as psychologists is in the mind, and the mind and the
behavior that it produces originate in the structures and processes of
the brain and nervous system. nervous systems are fairly recent
innovations that separate animals from plants (see ● figure 3.15). We
can place the origin of the earth at 4.5 billion years ago and the first
single-celled life forms 1 billion years later, but the first neural
nets appeared only 700 million years ago. in these primitive animals,
the nerves in the abdomen were as likely to be important to behavior as
the ones in the head. True brains residing in heads did not appear until
animals formed skeletons, around 500 million years ago. The first
decidedly human brain made its appearance only 7 million years ago, a
small blip in the timeline of evolution (Calvin, 2004). The current
model of the human brain has only been available for the last
100,000--200,000 years. Anthropologists use the term hominin to describe
species that walked on two feet, had large brains, and are assumed to be
related to modern humans. over the 7 million years of hominin evolution,
brains grew rapidly, suggesting that improved intelligence was quickly
translated into substantial advantages in survival. early tool-using
hominins, the australopithecines, had brains that were a bit larger than
contemporary newborns and about the same size as those of modern
chimpanzees, or about 400 cm3. Homo erectus, a hominin living about 1.5
million years

The dark and light coloring of the peppered moth population in Great
Britain changed in response to pollution from soot that collected on
trees and changed again when pollution controls reduced the soot.

18

Evolution of the Human Brain

FIGURE 3.15 Timeline of Brain Evolution. If the 4.5-billion-year history
of the Earth were expressed as a 24-hour day:

92

●

The first single-celled organisms would have emerged 18 hours ago.

●

The first nervous systems would have emerged about 3 hours and 45
minutes ago.

●

The first true brain would have emerged about 2 hours and 40 minutes
ago.

●

The first hominin brain would have emerged less than 2.5 minutes ago.

●

The current version of the human brain would have emerged less than 3
seconds ago.

Chapter 3

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Contemporary Human Brain

John Barrett/ZUMA Press/New York/New York/U.S./Newscom

Males with high testosterone report more chances to reproduce, but
testosterone also might lower the response of the immune system.
Extremely high levels of testosterone, because of the use of
performance-enhancing drugs, might be contributing to the early deaths
of some professional wrestlers, like Curt Hennig (1958--2003).

Over the course of hominin evolution, the size of the brain increased
dramatically. It is possible that the ability of bigger brains to manage
social relationships could have driven this rapid change.

Archive Image/Alamy Stock Photo

You surf the internet, complete your calculus homework, and read this
textbook with a brain that is essentially the same size as that of your
early Homo sapiens ancestors. Although we can understand the advantages
to survival of big, intelligent brains, we do not know why advances such
as agriculture, literacy, and urbanization have not been accompanied by
additional increases in brain size. it is possible that we have reached
equilibrium between our needs for intelligence and the costs of a big
brain. Brains are expensive to run in terms of nutrients. Although the
brain comprises only about 2% of the body's weight, it requires about
20% of the body's resources (Raichle & gusnard, 2002). in addition,
brain size may be limited by the dimensions of the birth canal. further
change may not occur unless we experience a drop in the costs of big
brains, a change in nutrients, or additional pressures for greater
intelligence. Although brain size has changed little during Homo
sapiens's time on the earth, the evolution of the human brain has not
ended, and average intelligence has not remained the same. Modern
genetic techniques allow researchers to date changes in a particular
gene. genes involved with brain development appear to have changed as
recently as 6,000 years ago (evans et al., 2004; evans et al., 2005). As
discussed in Chapter 10, iQ test scores first increased about 100 points
worldwide during the 20th century (flynn, 1999) and then began to drop
again in those born after 1975 (Bratsberg & Rogeberg, 2018). if brain
size has not changed for 100,000 years, let alone during the last 100
years or so, how can we account for the observed changes in intellectual
performance? it is likely that environmental factors, including health,
nutrition, education, and environmental toxins might explain the ups and
downs.

E. R. Degginger/Science Source

ago, had a brain of about 700 cm3, and the brains of modern humans, or
Homo sapiens, are about 1,400 cm3. hominins were not the only creatures
who evolved large brains and considerable intelligence. The other
primates, elephants, and whales are not lacking in these areas. Although
the challenges of finding food, avoiding predators, and navigating
through territories require considerable intelligence, these ecological
challenges are no match for the complexity of social life faced by the
hominins. The major factor distinguishing human intelligence from
intelligence of other species is the richness and complexity of the
social behavior supported by the human brain. Managing the abilities to
distinguish friend and foe, imitate the behavior of others, use language
to communicate, recognize and anticipate the emotions, thoughts, and
behavior of others, maintain relationships, and cooperate required the
evolution of a special brain (Cacioppo et al., 2002; hrdy, 2005; Roth &
dicke, 2005). Comparisons of the challenges faced by different species
support a stronger role for social complexity than for ecological
complexity in building bigger brains (dunbar & schultz, 2007). Cacioppo
& decety, 2011a).

It is somewhat surprising that humans figured out how to go to the Moon
and back with brains that were the same size as those of Homo sapiens
living 100,000 years ago.

hoW does evolUTion oCCUR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

93

summary 3.2 Principles of Evolution concept

Definition

example

Natural selection

A trait's frequency in a population is determined by the survival and
reproductive success of the organisms with the trait.

Faster rabbits are more likely to survive and reproduce than slow
rabbits, leading to more fast rabbits in subsequent generations.

Mutation

Genetic changes that occur spontaneously or because of external factors
like radiation.

A mutation about 10,000 years ago led to the appearance of blond hair.

Migration

Populations move from one area to another.

Moving from a cold to a warm climate might change the natural selection
of traits in a species.

Genetic drift

Chance events influence the frequency of alleles.

Huntington's disease is more common than usual among the Afrikaner
population of South Africa because a carrier of the disease was among
the small number of Dutch immigrants who survived to reproduce.

Fitness

The ability of one genotype to reproduce relative to other genotypes in
a particular environment.

The recessive sickle-cell trait has low fitness in general because it
can produce disease, but because the trait protects the individual from
malaria, it has higher fitness in populations living where malaria is
common.

Adaptation

Evolutionary changes whereby a population becomes better suited to its
environment.

The moth population changed from primarily light to dark colors when the
trees they inhabited became darker because of pollution.

Over 80%

Under 1% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20%10% Percentage of light hair in Europe

Credits: Top row---TIMOTHY CLARY/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom; Second
row---20TH CENTURY FOX/Album/Newscom; Fifth row---Corbis, Jeff
Vanuga/Spirit/Corbis, Peter Burian/Spirit/Corbis; Bottom row---Michael
Willmer Forbes Tweedie/ Science Source, Perennou Nuridsany/Science
Source.

94

Chapter 3

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We mentioned in an earlier section that behavior can be adaptive. if an
animal that is good at hiding in the bushes is more successful than
others of its species in escaping predators, it is likely that the
ability to hide will spread through subsequent generations of the
population. Behavior like hiding, however, is unlike the other
adaptations discussed so far, such as the color of a moth or blond hair.
Color is a physical characteristic, and it is a fairly simple matter to
identify the genes associated with these phenotypes. Behavior as a
phenotype is considerably more complex. it is not an anatomical
structure like a wing or an eye. Can we assume that behavior is shaped
by the same evolutionary forces that affect physical traits? darwin
thought so. in The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, he
writes:

Mitsuaki Iwago/Minden Pictures/Getty Images

how Does Evolution Influence Behavior?

The difference in mind between man and the higher animals, great as it
is, certainly is one of degree and not of kind. We have seen that the
senses and intuitions, the various emotions and faculties, such as love,
memory, attention, curiosity, imitation, reason, etc., of which man
boasts, may be found in an incipient, or even sometimes in a
welldeveloped condition in lower animals. (darwin, 1871, p. 126)

Physical features, like the coloring of an animal that allows it to
hide, are well-understood types of adaptations. Evolutionary
psychologists attempt to explain how behaviors can be adaptive too.

The Evolutionary Psychology Perspective

Origins of Social Behavior

MAURICIO HANDLER/National Geographic Image Collection

Among the psychological specialties discussed in Chapter 1, evolutionary
psychology, a subspecialty within biological psychology, is the most
relevant to our current discussion of the evolution of behavior. This
approach to the mind assumes that our current behavior exists in its
present form because it provided some advantage in survival and
reproduction to our ancestors (Cosmides & Tooby, 1997). The evolutionary
psychology approach not only owes an obvious debt to darwin, but also is
a direct descendant of the functionalism supported by William James. As
the term functionalism implies, behavior is seen as promoting survival,
as opposed to being random and pointless. The goal of evolutionary
psychology is to explain how the patterns of behavior that we share with
other humans have been shaped by evolution.

Reconstructing the evolution of the nervous system is difficult, and
tracing the origins of individual behavior is even more challenging, but
identifying the roots of social behavior might be the most difficult
task of all. occasionally, physical evidence has allowed scientists to
determine whether dinosaur parents stayed around to look after their
young, but such accounts leave much detail unexplored and unexplained.
individuals belonging to social species congregate in a number of ways,
from pairs to families to whole societies. Belonging to a social group
provides the benefits of mutual protection and assistance. Predatory
fish are most likely to hunt in the perimeter of a school of

Predator fish typically hunt on the perimeter of a fish ball, where it
is easier to isolate and capture prey. Humans who are on the social
perimeter also may be at risk from predation, but usually from their own
kind.

hoW does evolUTion inflUenCe BehAvioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

95

TABLE 3.2 Outcomes of Social Interactions and the second organism: the
first organism:

Wins

Loses

Wins

Cooperation

Selfishness

Loses

Altruism

Spite

Kim Hill/Arizona State University

fish because it's easier to isolate prey there than in the middle of the
school (ioannou et al., 2012). Being on the social perimeter is risky
for our species as well. This simple fact of survival might be one of
the reasons that we react so emotionally when we believe that we are
being socially excluded. Being social carries costs as well as benefits.
social animals face injury in competition for food and mates and are
exposed to contagious illnesses (Alexander, 1974), but the benefits of
being social have clearly outweighed the costs for many species. in
typical environments, individual animals experience a variety of
possible interactions when they come into contact with others of their
kind. in each case shown in Table 3.2, individuals either benefit or do
not benefit from the interaction, ultimately affecting their survival
and reproductive success. Both parties benefit equally if they
cooperate. for example, two hunters can work together to bring down an
animal that neither could successfully hunt alone. sharing the resulting
meat with the families of both hunters would contribute to their
survival and reproductive success. Much social behavior probably
originated in these types of situations, in which the benefits of
cooperation for an individual's survival and reproduction outweighed the
disadvantages of cooperating, such as having less food or sharing with
someone who later does not reciprocate.

96

Chapter 3

era Gh

Altruism, or the sacrifice of yourself for others, is more common among
related individuals, but it also occurs when we are in close social
contact with others. Honeybees sting to defend their hive, but in doing
so, they end their own lives.

sim

Ra

res

/Sh

utt

ers

toc

k.c

om

Although no cultures today exist exactly like the hunters--gatherers of
the past, the Ache of Paraguay are often used as a model of how that
life might have been. Here, the Ache cooperate with one another to fish.
Social behaviors like cooperation might have allowed humans, who are not
particularly strong individuals, to survive.

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3/NaturePL/Superstock

stefanolunardi/Shutterstock.com

Cooperation, however, is not the only way that two individuals can
interact. in selfish interactions, one person could steal food from
another, allowing the thief 's family to survive while the victim's
family starves to death. in spiteful interactions, both participants
lose. in some divorce proceedings, the partners are so determined to
keep each other from maintaining resources that everything goes to the
attorneys. finally, in altruism, one individual's self-sacrifice is
designed to benefit another individual. Altruism is widespread in the
animal kingdom. Most of us have experienced a honeybee sting, which is
suicidal behavior on the part of the bee in an effort to protect its
hive (Wilson, 1975). Altruism can extend to entire social organizations,
regardless of the degree of relatedness (Chicago social Brain network,
2011). Among emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri), survival of the
chicks in the hostile Antarctic cold depends not only on an individual
parent, but on the larger huddle formed by other parents. As discussed
in greater detail in Chapter 13, altruism is one of the most challenging
social behaviors to explain in evolutionary terms. darwin himself was
puzzled by the apparent sacrifice of some individuals that led to the
survival of the group. if altruism results in the destruction of the
individual with altruistic genes, why doesn't this behavior disappear
from the population? To explain this phenomenon, we return to the
concept of relatedness presented earlier in the chapter. sacrificing
your life to save a close blood relative might increase the likelihood
that your alleles would be passed along to subsequent generations.
self-sacrifice in this case does not need to be a conscious decision.
Any behavior that results in a greater frequency of the relevant genes
in subsequent generations will become more common. You might be thinking
that you often behave altruistically toward people who are not related
to you. You might have comforted a friend who experienced a death in the
family instead of studying for an upcoming midterm. This type of
behavior, known as reciprocal altruism, occurs when we help another
individual who is likely to return the favor at some future date
(Trivers & Burt, 1999).

Cooperation allows humans to carry out complex behaviors that would be
impossible for a single individual to perform successfully.

altruism Behavior on behalf of another that fails to benefit or harms
the individual performing it.

reciprocal altruism Help that you provide for another person when you
expect the person to return the favor in the future.

Survival of emperor penguin chicks in the hostile cold of the Antarctic
depends not just on the individual parent, but also on the larger huddle
formed by the other parents. hoW does evolUTion inflUenCe BehAvioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

97

Sexual Selection Sexual selection was darwin's term for the development
of traits that help an individual compete for mates (darwin, 1871). To
what extent is human behavior influenced by sexual selection?

sexual selection The development of

Andrey Burmakin/Shutterstock.com

traits that help an individual compete for mates.

Genghis Khan may have been the most prolific human male in history. His
distinctive Y chromosome has been identified in 16 million living men,
or 0.5% of the world's current total (Zerjal et al., 2003).

Parental Investment sexual selection is influenced by the different
investments in parenting made by males and females (emlen & oring,
1977). in many species, including our own, the female bears most costs
of reproduction, from the carrying of the developing organism until
birth to the nurturance of the young until adulthood. As a result, human
females face sharper limitations than human males on the number of
children that they can produce in a lifetime. if the goal is to pass
your genes to subsequent generations and you are going to produce only
one or two children, each child had better be as healthy and well
nurtured as possible. The average number of children per woman worldwide
dropped dramatically from 4.98 in 1960 to 2.45 in 2014 (The World Bank,
2017; see ● figure 3.16). Because males have a lower investment of time
and resources in reproduction compared to females, it might seem that
the best reproductive strategy for males would be promiscuity, but this
is not always the case. in species such as our own, with lengthy and
complex development leading to adulthood, a male who abandons his
offspring puts their survival at risk (gibson, 2008). even if a man
fathers many children, his genes are less likely to make it into the
next generation if most or all perish from lack of care or protection.
The mother can maximize her children's chances of survival by choosing a
father who will not only pass along healthy genes, but also participate
in the raising of children. Women have the ability to make accurate
predictions of a man's interest in children simply by looking at a
photograph of his face (Roney et al., 2006). Men with facial features
correlated with high testosterone (strong brow ridge, square chin) are
viewed as less likely to participate in childrearing than are men with
facial features correlated with lower testosterone. These results
suggest that women would be able to determine a man's potential as a
father before reproductive investment occurs.

6.0 5.5

Children per woman

5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

FIGURE 3.16 The Human Birth Rate Is Dropping Rapidly. The average number
of children per woman worldwide dropped dramatically between 1960 and
2017. Source: Adapted from the World Bank
(https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/sp.dyn.tfrt.in).

98

Chapter 3

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Detail from F. Moore et al. Figure 1, "Composite male faces constructed
to differ in levels of T and C," from the article "Evidence for the
stresslinked immunocompetence handicap hypothesis in human male faces,"
Proc. R. Soc. B, March 7, 2011, by permission of the Royal Society.

Traits Possibly Influenced by Sexual Selection earlier in this chapter,
we discussed how blond hair might have provided a reproductive advantage
because its relative novelty made it an attractive feature. What other
types of human traits appear to fit darwin's ideas about sexual
selection? sexual selection might occur in two ways. in intrasexual
selection (intra means "within"), members of one sex compete with one
another for access to the other sex. in some species, such as deer,
males engage in fights that determine which males are allowed to mate
and which are not. features like large antlers, which assist in winning
a fight, could become sexually selected. in intersexual selection (inter
means "between"), characteristics of one sex that attract the other
might become sexually selected. The male peacock's luxurious tail
appears to have developed for the sole purpose of attracting mates.
evolutionary psychologists have argued that a number of human traits
might have been subjected to sexual selection, including humor and
vocabulary. According to this argument, human males use humor (Cherkas
et al., 2000) and their vocabularies (Rosenberg & Tunney, 2008) to
impress females with their intelligence because of intersexual
selection. in romantic situations, males use more uncommon words than
they do in other situations. We can also tell you about one behavior
that does not successfully attract females---taking unnecessary risks
like driving recklessly (Wilke et al., 2006). however, risky activities
might have indirect positive outcomes for males. dominant, successful
males are likely to attract more females, and dominance among males is
often decided on the basis of intrasexual competition in risky
endeavors.

Culture You might be surprised to find a section on culture in a chapter
on genetics. however, genetics and evolution have shaped the human
brain, which universally forms cultures. Cultures, which arise from
socially transmitted knowledge, provide practices, values, and goals
that can be shared by groups of people. languages, morality, arts, laws,
and customs make up a diverse and vibrant part of human social
interactions. experiences shaped by culture, like other types of
experiences, interact with survival and reproductive pressures. how
might cultural differences have affected our ancestors' survival? We can
gain insight into our species' cultural history by observing
contemporary preagricultural societies, such as the Waorani and Yanomamö
of the Amazon Basin. These groups are remarkably combative. fights
between villages account for 30% of the deaths among Yanomamö males
(Chagnon, 1988) and 54% of deaths among Waorani males (Beckerman et al.,
2009). Cultural traditions in the two groups have led to different
patterns of interactions between aggression and reproductive success.
Aggressive Yanomamö men produce more children than less aggressive
Yanomamö, but less aggressive Waorani men have more surviving offspring
than aggressive Waorani (Beckerman et al., 2009). A simple cultural
distinction---the Yanomamö practice of standing down for a period of
time between raids, which is not a practice shared by the
Waorani---appears to account for the differences observed in the impact
of aggression on reproductive success. our social minds were shaped by
the cultures of hunter--gatherer groups until the development of
agriculture approximately 10,000 years ago. With improved control of the
food supply, less geographical mobility, and larger communities, humans
entered a new era of social interaction. Although we believe that many
features found in modern human behavior, such as reciprocal altruism,
originated in the hunter--gatherer society, further social adjustments
were required as groups became larger and more complex. Agriculture,
with its emphasis on land ownership, might have been the origin of
patriarchal systems, in which men maintain control of resources, and
inheritances follow the male line. Unlike hunter--gatherer societies,
which are relatively egalitarian so far as the rights of males and
females go, agricultural societies tilted the control of food and
important resources

Women show the ability to predict a man's score on the Infant Interest
Questionnaire, which might indicate how involved a father he would be,
by detecting the influence of testosterone on his facial features. These
facial stimuli are constructed by combining photographs of many people.
The face at the top has been manipulated to illustrate the impact of
higher testosterone, while the one at the bottom reflects the impact of
lower testosterone.

hoW does evolUTion inflUenCe BehAvioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

99

Wave Royalty Free/Design Pics Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

Francois ANCELLET/Contributor/Gamma-Rapho/Getty Images

The Waorani (left) and Yanomamö (right) of the Amazon Basin share high
rates of aggression and yet experience different reproductive outcomes.
Reproductive success is higher among the most aggressive Yanomamö and
the least aggressive Waorani. This outcome is probably the result of the
Yanomamö practice, not shared by the Waorani, of standing down between
raids. This gives aggressive Yanomamö men chances to rest, heal, and
reproduce that are not available to aggressive Waorani men.

Humans have developed a strong need to belong and often adopt traditions
that enhance a sense of group membership.

100

Chapter 3

Samo Trebizan/Shutterstock.com

Chuck Liddy/Raleigh News & Observer/Contributor/ Tribune News
Service/Getty Images

in favor of men. early industrialization merely built upon agricultural
systems and, if possible, accentuated the power differential between
males and females. Contemporary trends are again moving in a more
egalitarian direction, with females in developed countries enjoying
considerable financial independence and reproductive choice. These
changes will no doubt have further effects on our social environment. As
societies became larger, humans took advantage of their large brains to
devise new cultural systems to maintain group cohesion. emerging
societies shared many of the same types of internal conflict, so we
typically find similar moral, religious, and legal systems across
diverse cultures that attempt to control marriage, "character" issues
such as honesty, and the transfer of precious resources. With all the
flaws of our groups, whether we're looking at families, communities, or
nations, we retain a strong need to belong. As we will see on many
occasions in this textbook, humans do not thrive in isolation. our
dependence on kinship, friendship, and group membership, honed over the
course of 100,000 years or more of social living, continues to influence
our behavior today.

The development of agriculture 10,000 years ago changed the shape of
human cultures.

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

interpersonal Relationships The Evolutionary Perspective CAN WE USE
GENETICS TO SELECT A MATE? A CLUSTER OF GENES known as the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) appears to be subject to intersexual
selection (Wedekind & füri, 1997). As described in this chapter, this
type of sexual selection operates on traits in one sex that influence
the choices by the other. A child with a heterozygous set of MhC genes
is better prepared to battle infections than is a child who receives two
sets of MhC genes that are similar to one another. As a result, our
children are more likely to survive if we select a mate that has a
different set of MhC genes than we do. There is some evidence that too
much MhC similarity affects not just our children, but also our
relationships. garver-Apgar et al. (2006) reported that among romantic
couples, increases in the number of MhC alleles shared by a couple
reduced the woman's sexual responsivity to her partner and increased her
number of extrapair sexual partners and her attraction to men other than
her partner. in a world before genetic testing, it appears that we were
able to select partners with compatible MhC profiles on the basis of
odor. different configurations of the MhC genes produce distinctive body
odors. When participants were asked to rate the pleasantness of the
odors of T-shirts that had been worn by other people, they preferred
smells associated with MhC genotypes that were different from their own
(Wedekind & füri, 1997). instead of relying on smell, some people are
taking advantage of relatively affordable genetic testing to assess
their relationships. instant Chemistry provides clients and their
partners with information about genes related to immune function,
serotonin transport, oxytocin receptors, and dopamine function. it is
too soon to tell whether such endeavors will improve relationships. We
hope that you will use the critical thinking skills discussed in Chapter
2 to evaluate instant Chemistry's claim that they "can help give you
insights into how your relationship ticks and where strengths and
weaknesses may lie" (instant Chemistry, 2019). ■

HLA1

HLA4

HLA3

HLA1

HLA2

HLA1

Boris Ryaposov/Shutterstock.com

HLA1

Participants in a study preferred the smell of T-shirts worn by people
who have MHC genotypes different from their own. Historically, these
smell preferences might have helped people select partners with whom
they are most likely to have healthy children.

hoW does evolUTion inflUenCe BehAvioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

101

Psychology takes on Real-World Problems Can Genetics Explain Differing
Responses to COVID-19 Social Distancing? WHAT CAN WE LEARN about human
behavior during a pandemic by incorporating concepts and research
related to genetics and evolution? News reports are filled with stories
of people flaunting expert recommendations for social distancing while
others carefully avoid large social gatherings. While psychological
science can provide a substantial list of factors that probably
contribute to this behavior, our focus in this chapter is on genetics
and evolution. As you've seen in this chapter, our human mind has been
shaped over time to be highly social. Interruptions to social
connectivity, such as solitary confinement, are among the most stressful
experiences a human can experience. When we do not experience the social
connectivity we desire, the result is loneliness (Cacioppo & Cacioppo,
2018). The quarantines and social distancing associated with COVID-19
certainly have the potential to make individuals feel more lonely. You
might not think of your capacity for loneliness as being a trait that is
influenced by your genotype, but there is

FIGURE 3.17

Source: Boomsma, D. I., Willemsen, G., Dolan, C. V., Hawkley, L. C., &
Cacioppo, J. T. (2005). Genetic and Environmental Contributions to
Loneliness in Adults: The Netherlands Twin Register Study. Behavior
Genetics, 35(6), 745-752. doi: 10.1007/s10519-005-6040-8

Chapter 3

Correlation Between Loneliness Scores

0.6

Perceived Loneliness Is Heritable. Scores on a measure of perceived
loneliness were more similar in identical (monozygotic) twins than in
fraternal (dizygotic) twins. It is likely that genetic influences
contribute to a person's "set point" for feeling socially connected or
not.

102

number of other subconscious behaviors that might work to support
survival in the short term but also interfere with connectivity. For
example, loneliness can lead to selfishness and self-preservation. While
these behaviors might promote survival in people who are socially
isolated, they rarely endear us to others (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018).
If a trait is somewhat genetic, does this mean we have no control over
it? Absolutely not. A trait can be 100% heritable, like the condition
phenylketonuria, and still be completely treatable. Phenylketonuria
interferes with the digestion of a particular amino acid and used to be
a major cause of intellectual disability. Today, following an
appropriate diet prevents adverse effects of the condition. So even if a
person has a tendency toward feeling lonely, many steps can be taken to
remedy the situation. This should encourage us in our efforts to design
policies for reducing loneliness during a pandemic. Even if a condition
features considerable heritability, we can still improve the situation.
■

substantial evidence that it is. Numerous studies have identified
loneliness as being approximately 48% heritable (Boomsma et al., 2005;
Cacioppo et al., 2014). Recall that heritability refers to the amount of
variability explained by genes in populations, not individuals. When
attempting to establish an evolutionary influence on a trait, we often
look to other species to see if they respond similarly to humans. If you
own a dog, you're probably already anticipating the answer--- many
species, from fruit flies to pigs, respond adversely to social
isolation, but social species like our own have the worst responses
(Cacioppo et al., 2014). Most of us would agree that feelings of
loneliness are distinctly unpleasant. Why would evolution favor those
who had the capacity for this aversive experience? An Evolutionary
Theory of Loneliness (ETL; Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018) suggests that
feelings of loneliness could be adaptive by serving as a warning signal
that stimulates efforts to repair social connectivity. Unfortunately,
loneliness can also elicit a

0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0

Males

Females Monozygotic

Dizygotic male/female pairs

Dizygotic

The evolving Mind: nATURe And nURTURe inTeRTWined

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

summary 3.3 Evolutionary Influences on Behavior concept

Definition

example

Cooperation

Working together to benefit all parties involved.

Hunters work together to kill an animal that an individual could not
kill alone.

Altruism

Sacrificing your personal interests to benefit another.

A young mother threw herself over her infant during a parking lot
shootout. She died, but the infant survived.

Reciprocal altruism

Sacrificing when you expect the recipient might do the same for you at
some future time.

You share food with a hungry person, thinking that someone might share
with you later.

Sexual selection

The evolutionary pressure on traits that help individuals find mates.

A woman may choose a man whose facial appearance is correlated with
being a good father.

Credits: Top row---stefanolunardi/Shutterstock.com; Second
row---Gherasim Rares/Shutterstock.com; Third
row---3/NaturePL/Superstock; Bottom row---Detail from F. Moore et
al. Figure 1, "Composite male faces constructed to differ in levels of T
and C, from the article "Evidence for the stress-linked immunocompetence
handicap hypothesis in human male faces," Proc. R. Soc. B, March 7,
2011, by permission of the Royal Society.

Key terms The Language of psychological Science Be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

adaptation, p. 91 allele, p. 74 altruism, p. 97 behavioral genetics,
p. 78 candidate gene, p. 83 concordance rates, p. 81 dominant, p. 74
epigenetics, p. 83 evolution, p. 89 fitness, p. 90

gene, p. 73 gene expression, p. 74 genetic drift, p. 89 genomewide
association study (gWAs), p. 83 genotype, p. 73 heritability, p. 78
heterozygous, p. 74 homozygous, p. 74 migration, p. 89

mutation, p. 89 natural selection, p. 89 nature, p. 72 nurture, p. 72
phenotype, p. 73 recessive, p. 74 reciprocal altruism, p. 97
relatedness, p. 76 sexual selection, p. 98

hoW does evolUTion inflUenCe BehAvioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

103

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Perceived social isolation or connectedness can produce changes in the
cells of our immune system.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Biological Mind

4

THE PHYSICAL BASIS OF BEHAVIOR Learning Objectives 1. Identify the brain
structures and processes relevant to our understanding of mind and
behavior. 2. Differentiate the major branches of the nervous system,
explaining the core functions of each branch.

3.  Associate key structures in, and regions of, the brain and
    peripheral nervous system with important aspects of physical and
    psychological functioning.

4.  Explain the process by which hormones influence psychological
    experience and behavior.

5.  Describe the process by which neurons communicate with one another,
    allowing the nervous system to integrate complex information.

6.  Differentiate the roles played by major neurotransmitters in
    supporting physical functioning and psychological experience.

THROUGHOUT HISTORY, HUMAN SURVIVAL HAS been threatened by the various
bacteria and viruses that try to make us their home. The bacteria-driven
Black Death decimated Europe between 1346 and 1400, killing an estimated
30 to 60% of the population (Austin Alchon, 2003). Smallpox, measles,
and influenza carried by Europeans to the Western Hemisphere killed as
many as 90% of native populations (Public Broadcasting Service \[PBS\],
2005). The Spanish flu of 1918, which is related to contemporary bird
flu strains, killed between 50 million and 100 million people worldwide
in about a year (Patterson & Pyle, 1991). The full extent of deaths
caused by COVID-19 remains to be seen as the pandemic runs its course.
Although you might think surviving a pandemic is more a question of
biology and medicine, behavior and mental processes have a considerable
amount of influence on our abilities to fight bacteria and viruses
(Cacioppo & Berntson, 2011). Again, zooming out to the human social
environment and then zooming back in to a smaller scale gives us a
complete and interesting picture. Humans, who lack impressive teeth or
claws, formed groups to enhance the odds of their survival. Anyone who
was socially excluded from these groups experienced a more hostile
environment. perhaps in fending off a predator, but worse, could lead to
outright conflict with others, including combat. Under such hostile
circumstances, socially excluded people faced a greater risk from
bacterial infections than from viruses. Bacteria enter the body through
cuts and scratches, whereas viruses are transmitted through body fluids
(e.g., sneezing), so you are most likely to be exposed to them when you
are in close contact with other people.

SHipskyy/iStock/Getty Images

Social exclusion not only separated a person from the help of others in
life-threatening situations,

105 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

With that background in mind, look at the group of people in the image
on the previous page. Do you think the woman on the right is feeling
included or excluded? Surprisingly, whether we typically feel socially
isolated or socially connected can have serious implications for our
health (Cole et al., 2015; Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018a, 2018b). If this
woman feels isolated and often left to fend for herself, she will, like
her excluded ancestors, face a greater threat from bacteria than from
viruses. Her brain will respond to her subjective feelings of isolation
by generating hormonal signals that will tell her immune system (shown
in the larger image at the beginning of the chapter) to gear up to
protect her against bacteria. Human brains such as this one, carefully
held by one of your authors, weigh about 3 pounds and contain
approximately 86 billion neurons. That's about the same number as the
stars in our galaxy, the Milky Way.

In contrast, if she usually feels socially connected to others, her
brain will initiate a cascade of hormonal signals that tell her immune
cells to prepare to protect her against viruses instead of bacteria.
This is just one example of how the mind's perceptions of the social
environment---whether it is friendly or not, for instance---can affect
biological processes that are important to health and survival. This
finding is especially relevant to the COVID-19 pandemic. The perception
of isolation during a lockdown could reduce a person's ability to combat
viruses just when that ability is needed the most. As we will see

Courtesy of Dr. Skirmantas Janusonis/University of California, Santa
Barbara. Photo © Roger Freberg

in our later section on real-world problems, psychological science can
make important contributions to public policies by providing this type
of important background research. In Chapter 3, we learned how the
challenges of surviving and reproducing in particular physical and
social environments could shape a species' biology and behavior. In
turn, the resulting biological structures and processes of the mind
exert profound influences on our physical and social environments. In
this chapter, we will provide a foundation for understanding the
biological bases of behavior and mental processes by exploring the
structures of the nervous system and the ways that they function.

Why do we think this information, which is often challenging for
students to master, is so important to include in a textbook on
introductory psychology? Isn't this something better left to biology
courses? While our biology courses do an excellent job of outlining the
structures and processes of the nervous system, psychological science is
in a unique position to build bridges from that understanding to a
deeper appreciation of the biological correlates of both healthy and
unhealthy behaviors and their treatments. This will not be the only
place where you will engage with these concepts. We will build a
foundation in this chapter that is used to support our understanding of
the many aspects of mind explored in the upcoming chapters.

What Is Biological Psychology? Many of us find the concept that our
minds are somehow a result of the activity of nerve cells a bit
unsettling. how could our feelings, thoughts, and memories be caused by
a bunch of cells? Shouldn't there be more to who we are than something
so physical? Such ideas led thinkers like Renaissance philosopher René
descartes to propose a philosophy of dualism, which suggests that our
mind is somehow different and separate from our physical being. if you
are more comfortable with thinking about the mind this way, go ahead, as
long as you recognize that the field of biological psychology, and the
neurosciences in general, embrace the competing philosophy of monism.
according to the monistic approach, the mind is what the brain does.

106

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Diverse Voices in Psychology What Is Cultural Neuroscience? CONSISTENT
WITH OUR ARGUMENT that multiple perspectives considered together produce
a richer and more accurate analysis of the mind, we would like to
introduce you to a combination of two seemingly distant fields---culture
and neuroscience---to form cultural neuroscience. Cultural neuroscience
has been defined as "an interdisciplinary field that examines how
cultural and biological mechanisms mutually shape human behavior across
phylogenetic, developmental, and situational timescales" (Chiao, 2015,
p. 283). In other words, cultural neuroscientists explore how genetics,
brain structures, and cultures interact to shape behavior (see Figure
4.1). Cultural neuroscience asks two main questions. First, how do
cultural

phenomena such as beliefs and values influence genetics and brain
structures? We saw an example of this question in our discussion of the
Waorani and Yanomamö tribes in Chapter 3. The Yanomamö cultural value of
standing down between raids, not shared by the Waorani, led to changed
reproductive success on the part of the most aggressive Yanomamö
warriors. A common way to categorize cultures is to designate them as
collectivistic or individualistic (see Chapter 13). People from
collectivistic cultures, such as many in East Asia, focus on context and
relationships. In contrast, people from individualistic Western cultures
focus on objects and favor highly arousing, positive

emotional states. Han and Ma (2015, p. 671) suggest that "culturally
patterned brain activity" allows the individual to voluntarily take
actions that fit with their cultural context. Recent immigrants from a
different type of culture probably work harder to conform to the demands
of their new culture. The second question asks how genetics and brain
structure shape cultural phenomena. At a minimum, we might argue that
forming cultures is something the human brain always seems to do. In
addition, the brain produces the behaviors that shape cultures, such as
the invention of social media technologies that change communication
patterns radically. ■

FIguRE 4.1

fMRI signal change (%)

0.5

0.0

--0.5

Chinese --0.1

American

Self Mother Other

Culture and the Brain. Scientists working in the new discipline of
cultural neuroscience argue that brain activity can be different when
people of different cultures complete the same task. Here participants
undergoing brain imaging were asked to think about their own traits
(self), their mother's traits (mother), and a famous person's traits
(other). Both American and Chinese participants showed more activation
in relevant areas of the brain in response to thinking about themselves
versus thinking about the other famous person, but their responses to
their mothers differed. The Chinese did not show different patterns of
activity when thinking about themselves and their mothers, but the
Americans did. Data from Y. Zhu, L. Zhang, J. Fan, & S. Han (2007),
"Neural Basis of Cultural Influence on Self-Representation," NeuroImage,
34(3), 1310--1316. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.08.047

Biological psychology, also known as behavioral neuroscience, is the
scientific study of the reciprocal connections between the structure and
activity of the nervous system and behavior and mental processes.
Biological changes often influence behavior and cognition. For example,
when your stomach is empty, a gut hormone called ghrelin is released.
When ghrelin reaches the brain, you respond by feeling hungry. after you
eat, ghrelin release is suppressed and you feel satisfied, so biology
(amount of ghrelin released) initiates behavior and cognitions (feeling
hungry and beginning to eat, or feeling full and stopping eating).
however, your behavior and cognitions can also have substantial effects
on your biology. When participants were told that WhaT iS BiologiCal
PSYChologY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

107

Gibbs Graphics

Gibbs Graphics

Not only can our biology affect our behavior, but our behavior and
cognitions can have significant effects on our biology as well. Alia
Crum and her colleagues gave participants the same 380-calorie
milkshakes, but made some participants think they were drinking an
indulgent milkshake and others a sensible milkshake. Their subsequent
levels of the hormone ghrelin varied with feelings of satisfaction in
spite of their having consumed the same number of calories. Source: A.
Crum et al. (2011), "Mind Over Milkshakes: Mindsets, Not Just Nutrients,
Determine Ghrelin Response." Health Psychology, 30 (4), 424--429. doi:
10.1037/a0023467

a 380-calorie milkshake that they consumed was a "sensible" 140-calorie
shake, their ghrelin levels barely changed, whereas consuming the same
380-calorie milkshake was followed by a steep decrease in ghrelin when
they were told it was a 620-calorie "indulgent" shake (Crum et al.,
2011). in other words, the way people thought about the shake
(cognitions) had remarkable effects on their biology (amount of ghrelin
released). We can't guarantee that praising your healthy salad for its
"indulgent" qualities will make it easier to stick to your diet, but the
milkshake experiment reinforces the power of thought to influence
biology.

Early Attempts to Understand Biological Psychology advances in the
methods and technology we use to observe the structure and function of
the nervous system have driven the history of biological psychology. The
development of contemporary methods, such as the recording and imaging
of brain activity, opened new areas of inquiry to biological
psychologists. Before these methods were available, however, most of our
knowledge of the nervous system resulted from clinical observations of
injured or mentally ill individuals or from autopsy, the examination of
bodies after death. When used with other contemporary methods, clinical
observation and autopsy are quite accurate, but early thinkers lacking
contemporary methods often struggled in their attempts to understand the
physical basis of mind. They understood many things correctly while
making some notable errors. aristotle (384--322 bce) mistakenly believed
that the heart, not the brain, was the source of mental activity. an
interesting historical mistake was phrenology. Toward the end of the
18th century, phrenologists proposed that the pattern of bumps on an
individual's skull correlated with that person's personality traits and
abilities (Simpson, 2005). The brain supposedly worked like a muscle,
getting larger through use, which led frequently used areas of the brain
to grow so much that the skull above these areas would bulge.
Phrenologists "read" a person's character by locating the bumps on a
person's head and identifying the personality traits below each bump
according to a map. none of these ideas were close to being accurate.
although the phrenologists were wrong about the significance of bumps on
the skull and the effects of activity on the structure of the brain,
they did reach one correct conclusion: Their notion that some behavioral
functions are localized to certain areas of the brain is one we share
today.

108

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Phrenologists believed that "reading" the bumps on a person's head,
using a bust like this as a reference, could tell them about a person's
character.

Courtesy of Laura Freberg

More modern perspectives of the nervous system emerged from the work of
scientists such as nobel Prize--winning anatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal
(1852--1934) and neurologist John hughlings Jackson (1835--1911). Ramón
y Cajal's work helped us understand the microscopic level of the nervous
system. Surprisingly, it took scientists a long time to accept the idea
that the nervous system was made up of separate cells just like other
tissues in the body. even in the late 19th century, scientists such as
Camillo golgi still argued that the nervous system was a single
continuous network. ironically, Ramón y Cajal used a microscopic stain
invented by golgi to prove him wrong. Using golgi's stain, Ramón y Cajal
demonstrated conclusively that the nervous system was made up of
separate cells, an idea that became known as the neuron doctrine.
Consequently, both men shared the 1906 nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine. Jackson's conclusions illuminated the relationships among the
larger structures of the brain. Based on observations of his patients
with seizure disorders, Jackson proposed that the nervous system is
organized as a hierarchy, with progressively more complicated behaviors
being managed by more recently evolved and complex structures (Jackson,
1884). We can see Jackson's hierarchy at work when we observe people
drinking alcohol. alcohol specifically decreases the activity of parts
of the brain involved with decision making. When a person has had too
much to drink, the more complex social controls normally provided by
higher level areas of the brain are diminished. Without the influence of
these controls, people start doing things that they would not do while
sober. This change in behavior reflects the now-unrestrained influence
of the more primitive parts of the brain involved with behaviors such as
aggression and sexuality. Under the influence of alcohol, you might, for
example, pick a fight with someone when you normally think fighting is
wrong. The aggression and sexuality were there all along, but the
activity of the higher levels of the nervous system usually restricted
their expression to more appropriate circumstances (Siever, 2008). over
the last 100 years, our understanding of the correlations between brain
and behavior leaped forward with continuing improvements in research
methods, including many of those found in ● Table 4.1. in particular,
methods that allow scientists to observe the activity of the living
brain, including positron emission tomography (PeT) and functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRi), began to answer questions that were
impossible to study previously. While these imaging technologies are
still far away from "mind reading," researchers have been able to use
imaging data to identify the gender of perceived faces and even faces
that are just imagined (VanRullen & Reddy, 2019). Moving into the 21st
century, the ranks of neuroscientists continue to grow, from 500 members
of the Society for neuroscience in 1969 to nearly 40,000 members today
(Society for neuroscience, 2019). Many university departments of
psychology have added phrases such as "and neuroscience," "and
behavioral neuroscience," or "and brain sciences" to their names. in
1986, only seven universities in the United States offered undergraduate
degrees specifically in neuroscience (Ramos et al., 2011). That number
tripled by 1996 and more than tripled again by 2006. it is very likely
that your college or university psychology department offers a number of
courses in neuroscience, and your campus might have a separate major or
minor as well. as more scientists are trained in the neurosciences, we
can look forward to continued innovations in both technology and our
knowledge about the biological basis of mind.

Stephen Coburn/Shutterstock.com

Contemporary Approaches in Biological Psychology

This functional magnetic resonance image (fMRI) was taken while one of
your authors engaged in a finger-tap exercise, touching each digit of
her right hand one by one with her thumb for 20 seconds followed by
holding very still for 20 seconds. The red and yellow areas indicate
parts of her brain that were selectively more active during the
finger-tapping task than when she tried to stay very still.

WhaT iS BiologiCal PSYChologY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

109

table 4.1 Research Methods in Biological Psychology Research method

Description

What questions can we answer?

Histology

Microscopic examination of the nervous system.

How does the structure of nervous system cells correlate with behavior?

Skin conductance response (formerly galvanic skin response)

Measurement of electricity passed between two surface electrodes placed
on the skin of the hand or finger.

What is a person's state of arousal?

Electroencephalogram (EEG)

Measurement of the brain's electrical activity using electrodes placed
on the scalp.

What is a person's state of arousal?

Event-related potential (ERP)

Measurement formed by averaging EEG responses to a stimulus, such as a
light or tone.

Did the person perceive the stimulus?

Single cell recording

Measurement of a single neuron's activity obtained through a surgically
implanted electrode.

What types of stimulation make this neuron respond?

Magnetoencephalography

Recording of the tiny amounts of magnetic output of the brain.

What parts of the brain react to this stimulus?

Positron emission tomography (PET)

Measurement that uses the accumulation of radioactively tagged glucose
or oxygen to identify activity levels in parts of the brain.

What parts of the brain are active during a particular task?

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)

Identification of active parts of the brain using magnetism to track the
flow of oxygen.

What parts of the brain are active during a particular task?

Electrical stimulation

Application of small amounts of electricity through a surgically
implanted electrode.

What behaviors occur if we stimulate this part of the brain?

Optogenetics

Genetically inserted light-sensitive proteins allow cells in the brain
to be turned on with light.

Which types of cells are active during particular behaviors?

Transcranial magnetic stimulation

Application of magnetic fields to the brain through an instrument held
near the scalp.

What behavioral changes occur when magnetism is applied to the brain?

Lesions

Naturally occurring or deliberate damage to the brain.

What behavioral changes are correlated with brain damage?

How Is the Nervous System Organized?

central nervous system (CNS) The brain and spinal cord.

110

Chapter 4

To examine the relationships between nervous system and behavior, we
will first zoom out to examine the larger view of the structures making
up the nervous system, and then we'll zoom in later in the chapter to
look at the microscopic world of the nerve cells, or neurons. Talking
about the connections between structures of the nervous system and
behavior requires a quick word of caution. as mentioned in Chapter 3,
saying that we have a "gene for" a behavior is overly simplistic. Saying
we have a "center for" a behavior in the brain is equally misleading.
although we can identify structures that participate in certain
behaviors, the biology of mind involves intricate and overlapping
patterns of activity involving networks made up of richly connected
structures. The nervous system can be divided into two major components:
the central and the peripheral nervous systems (see ● Figure 4.2). The
central nervous system (CNS) consists

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

Central nervous system (CNS)

Peripheral nervous system (PNS)

Brain Spinal cord

Somatic nervous system

Autonomic nervous system

Parasympathetic nervous system

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Sympathetic nervous system

Figure 4.2 The Organization of the Nervous System. The nervous system
has two major divisions: the CNS, containing the brain and the spinal
cord, and the PNS, containing all nerves that exit the brain and the
spinal cord. The CNS is protected by bone, but the PNS is not.

of the brain and the spinal cord, which extends from the brain down the
back of the body. although we often see the brain and the spinal cord
referred to as separate structures, they form one continuous unit of
tissue. you might think of the brain as having a tail known as the
spinal cord. nerves branch outward from the cnS to all areas of the
body---the lungs, heart, and other organs; the eyes and ears; and the
arms, legs, fingers, and toes. as soon as a nerve branches outward from
the cnS, it is considered part of the peripheral nervous system (PNS).
another way to know you have left the cnS for the PnS is to look for the
protection of bone. nerves of the cnS are encased in bone, but those of
the PnS are not.

What Are the Structures and Functions of the Central Nervous System? the
appearance of the human brain is not particularly impressive. it is
covered in wrinkles, measures about 5½ inches (14 centimeters) wide, 6½
inches (17 centimeters) long, and 32 3 inches (9 centimeters) high, and
weighs about 3 pounds (1.5 kilograms). the brain contains about 86
billion nerve cells, which make trillions of connections. the spinal
cord contains about 1 billion nerve cells, reaches a length of about 18
inches (45 centimeters), and

spinal cord A long cylinder of neural tissue extending from the medulla
of the brain down to the middle of the back; part of the CNS.

peripheral nervous system (PNS) The nerves exiting the CNS that carry
sensory and motor information to and from the rest of the body.

What are the StructureS and FunctionS oF the central nervouS SyStem?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

111

Medical Body Scans/Science Source

Meningitis is the inflammation of the membranes ("meninges") covering
the brain and the spinal cord. This condition can result from infection
with bacteria, viruses, or fungi, with the bacterial infections being
the most dangerous. Fortunately, most cases of bacterial meningitis can
be prevented by vaccination. This image shows the distortion of the
membranes caused by infection.

weighs about 1.2 ounces (35 grams). its diameter ranges from about 0.4
inches (1 centimeter) to 0.6 inches (1.5 centimeters). The adult spinal
cord is shorter than your spine. Your bony spinal column continues to
grow into adulthood, but the spinal cord itself stops growing in length
at about four years of age. The brain and the spinal cord are among the
best protected parts of your body, which is not surprising given their
importance for your survival. Surrounding the brain and the spinal cord
are the heavy bones of the skull and spinal vertebrae. Under these
bones, membranes known as meninges provide further protection.
infections of these membranes result in potentially life-threatening
cases of meningitis, for which you were possibly vaccinated before
beginning your college studies. The brain and the spinal cord are
further protected by a clear, plasma-like fluid known as cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF). CSF seeps out of the lining of hollow spaces in the brain
known as the ventricles (see ● Figure 4.3). near the base of the skull,
openings enable CSF to flow from the ventricles into a space within the
meninges, allowing the fluid to flow around the outer surfaces of the
brain and spinal cord. CSF is constantly produced, so blockages in its
circulation cause the fluid to build up. The result is hydrocephalus,
which means "water on the head." The cushioning provided by the CSF
limits the damage produced by a blow to the head. as a result, single
minor concussions are unlikely to produce long-term problems, but
multiple concussions are possibly more serious (Mannix et al., 2016).
The CSF also "floats" the brain within the skull, preventing false
signals that might result from the weight of some neurons pressing down
on others. To diagnose some medical conditions, it is helpful to obtain
a sample of CSF. This is done through a spinal tap, in which a physician
removes some of the CSF circulating through the meninges surrounding the
spinal cord.

Lateral ventricles

FIguRE 4 .3 The Ventricles of the Brain. The ventricles of the brain are
filled with circulating cerebrospinal fluid

Third ventricle

(CSF), which floats and cushions the brain.

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Fourth ventricle

112

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Source: The Lancet, Volume 370, Issue 9583, Page 262, 21 July 2007

French neurologists were shocked when they saw brain images taken of a
middle-aged man who sought treatment for some minor weakness in one leg.
His lateral ventricles (LV) take up most of the volume in his skull, and
the brain appears as a thin layer on the outside. The patient reported
that he had been treated for hydrocephalus from infancy until the age of
14. The patient was a married father of two who worked as a civil
servant with a low but still normal IQ of 75.

The Spinal Cord, Brainstem, and Cerebellum The spinal cord extends from
the lowest part of the brain down into the middle of your back (see ●
Figure 4.4). if you feel the back of your skull where it curves to meet
your spine, your fingers will be just below the junction of the spinal
cord and the lowest structure of the brain. although the spinal cord is
only 2% of the weight of the CnS, its functions are vital, as evidenced
by the challenges faced by people with spinal damage. The spinal cord
serves as a major conduit for information flowing to and from the brain
along large bundles of nerve fibers, carrying sensory information from
the body and delivering commands to muscles. a total of 31 pairs of
spinal nerves exit the spinal cord between segments of the bony
vertebrae in your spine to serve the body.

Gray matter (cell bodies) White matter (nerve fiber pathways) Spinal
nerve

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

FIguRE 4.4

Vertebra

The Spinal Cord and the Spinal Nerves. Thirty-one pairs of spinal nerves
exit between the bones of the vertebrae to bring sensory information
back to the CNS and carry motor commands to muscles.

WhaT aRe The STRUCTUReS and FUnCTionS oF The CenTRal neRVoUS SYSTeM?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

113

2 Sensory fibers sense increased stretch. Sensory fiber

To brain

Thigh muscle

1 Hammer tap stretches thigh muscle.

Checking Spinal Reflexes. When your physician taps on your knee, your
thigh muscle stretches. Information about the stretch is carried to the
spinal cord by a sensory nerve. The spinal cord sends a command to the
muscle to contract to counteract the stretch, and your foot kicks out.
The spinal cord manages this reflex alone. No higher level of processing
in the nervous system is necessary for this reflex to occur.

brainstem The part of the brain containing the midbrain, pons, and
medulla.

114

Chapter 4

4 Motor neurons cause thigh muscles to contract.

Spinal cord 3 Sensory fibers stimulate motor neurons in the spinal cord.

5 Foot kicks.

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Motor fiber

FIguRE 4.5

Many important reflexes are initiated by the spinal cord without any
assistance from the brain. one type of spinal reflex makes you pull your
body away from a source of pain. it doesn't take long for your hand to
fly up when you've touched something hot on the stove. When tapping your
knee with a hammer during a routine physical, your doctor is checking
another type of spinal reflex, the knee-jerk reflex (see ● Figure 4.5).
This reflex is interesting to your doctor because certain medical
conditions, such as diabetes, affect the strength of the reflex. Still
other spinal reflexes help us stand and walk. Spinal reflexes give us an
opportunity to look at the functions of three types of nerve cells, or
neurons. Sensory neurons carry information from the external environment
or from the body back to the CnS. in the knee-jerk reflex, sensory
neurons tell the spinal cord that a muscle has been stretched by the tap
of the hammer. Motor neurons carry commands from the CnS back to the
muscles and glands of the body. in response to information about the
stretched muscle, the spinal cord sends a message through motor neurons
back to your leg, telling the muscle to contract to counteract the
stretch. You know what happens next--- your foot kicks as the muscles
contract. neurons that have neither sensory nor motor functions are
called interneurons. Inter in this case means "between," because many
interneurons form bridges between sensory and motor neurons. The
knee-jerk reflex forms a simple arc between a sensory neuron and a motor
neuron and does not require interneurons. however, interneurons play
important roles in other reflexes and throughout the nervous system.
Moving up from the spinal cord brings us to the brainstem. in the fourth
gestational week, the embryo's developing brain forms three bulges. The
most forward of these bulges, the forebrain, develops into the two large
cerebral hemispheres, which we discuss in a later section. The remaining
two bulges, the hindbrain and midbrain, form the brainstem. if you
examine ● Figure 4.6, you can see that the brainstem looks like the stem
of a flower, supporting the larger blossom of the cerebral hemispheres.
directly branching from the brainstem are the cranial nerves, which
perform the same functions for the head and neck areas that the spinal

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cerebral cortex

Thalamus

Midbrain

Cerebellum

Pons

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Reticular formation

FIguRE 4.6 Structures of the Brainstem. The brainstem contains
structures responsible for reflexive behaviors, heart rate, breathing,
arousal, sleep, preliminary sensory analysis, balance, and movement.

Medulla

Zuma Press, Inc./Alamy Stock Photo

nerves manage for the remainder of the body. We will discuss the cranial
nerves in more depth medulla The brainstem structure that in a later
section on the PnS. lies just above the spinal cord. The hindbrain
consists of the medulla, pons, and cerebellum. The medulla is located
just pons A part of the brainstem located beabove the spinal cord. like
the spinal cord, the medulla contains large bundles of nerve fibers
tween the medulla and the midbrain. traveling to and from higher levels
of the brain. The medulla manages many functions essencerebellum A
structure attached to the tial to life, such as heart rate, breathing,
and blood pressure. brainstem that participates in skilled moveJust
above the medulla is the pons, which contains structures involved with
the management and, in humans, complex cognitive processing. ment of
sleep, arousal, and facial expressions. Pons means "bridge" in latin.
The pons not only serves as a bridge between the higher and lower
portions of the brain, but it also connects the midbrain The part of the
brainstem that lies between the pons and the cerebral cerebellum to the
rest of the brain. essential for maintaining balance and motor
coordinahemispheres. Opiate painkillers such as tion, the cerebellum is
one of the first structures in the brain to be affected by alcohol. as a
morphine and OxyContin produce some of result, alcohol consumption
impairs balance (walking a straight line) and motor coordination their
analgesic effects by interacting with (touching your finger to the tip
of your nose with your eyes closed). Most sobriety tests are the opioid
receptors in the periaqueductal gray. same tests a neurologist would use
to assess the function of the cerebellum. Surprisingly, the cerebellum
contains more nerve cells than the rest of the brain combined. not only
does the cerebellum contain huge numbers of neurons, but it is also
richly connected with the rest of the CnS. Because of the cerebellum's
position on the brainstem, which is relatively ancient in terms of
evolution compared to the cerebral hemispheres, neuroscientists
initially underestimated its importance to human behavior. They believed
that the cerebellum's activities were restricted to managing the timing
and strength of movements. While we still do not know exactly what the
cerebellum does, today's neuroscientists believe that it has a broader
role in making mental and motor skills more automatic. damage to the
human cerebellum produces subtle deficits in language, cognition, and
perception. in autism spectrum disorder, a condition that affects
language, sensory, and social behaviors, abnormalities in the cerebellum
are common (Courchesne, 1997; Fatemi et al., 2012). The midbrain sits
above the pons and contains a number of structures involved in sensory
reflexes, movement, and pain. For example, the periaqMost sobriety tests
assess the function of the ueductal gray of the midbrain plays an
important role in the body's managecerebellum, which helps us maintain
balance and muscle ment of pain because it contains receptors for
endorphins, our natural opioids, coordination. The individual in this
photo passed. WhaT aRe The STRUCTUReS and FUnCTionS oF The CenTRal
neRVoUS SYSTeM?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

115

reticular formation A collection of structures located along the midline
of the brainstem that participate in mood, arousal, and sleep.

thalamus A subcortical structure involved with the processing of sensory
information, states of arousal, and learning and memory.

basal ganglia A collection of subcortical structures that participate in
reward and the control of movement.

Thalamus

discussed later in this chapter and in Chapter 6. When endorphins are
present in the periaqueductal gray, they reduce the perception of pain
by decreasing the strength of pain messages traveling to higher levels
of the brain. activity in the periaqueductal gray is also associated
with maternal (Bartels & Zeki, 2004) and unconditional love (Cacioppo et
al., 2012). nearby are other cell clusters that serve as the major
sources of two important chemical messengers in the brain, serotonin and
norepinephrine. These structures participate in states of arousal, mood,
appetite, and aggression. Running the length of the brainstem's core
from the upper medulla into the midbrain is the reticular formation,
which participates in the management of levels of arousal, discussed
further in Chapter 6. The cells in the reticular formation have two
settings---fast and slow. When the cells are firing quickly, we usually
show other signs of being awake. When the cells are firing slowly (or
are damaged due to a stroke or other injury), an individual will enter
either deep sleep or unconsciousness.

Subcortical Structures embedded within the vast tracts of nerve fibers
or white matter that make up the bulk of the cerebral hemispheres are a
number of subcortical structures that participate in self-awareness,
learning, emotion, movement, communication, the inhibition of impulses,
and the regulation of body states. We call them subcortical because they
lie sub, which means "below," the cerebral cortex, which comprises the
wrinkled outermost covering of the cerebral hemispheres. early
anatomists collected some of these subcortical structures into a limbic
system (limbic means "border," and these structures form a gentle curve
below the cerebral cortex), but this term is losing popularity with
contemporary anatomists (Rolls, 2015). Basal ganglia You might also have
heard the limbic system called "your emotional brain." as you will see
in the next sections, some of these structures do participate in our
emotional life, but they perform many other functions as well. We
usually discuss subcortical structures in the singular, as in thalamus
or hippocampus, but they actually are paired sets of structures, one on
either side of the brain.

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The Thalamus almost at the center of the brain lies the thalamus. The
thalamus is often called the gateway to the cortex, because input from
most of our sensory systems (vision, hearing, touch, and taste) travels
first to the thalamus, which then forwards the information to the
cerebral cortex. The cortex, in turn, forms large numbers of connections
with the thalamus. in addition to its role in sensation, the thalamus is
involved with memory and states of consciousness. Some lesions in the
thalamus are associated with profound memory loss (Cipolotti et al.,
2008 ). as you will learn in Chapter 6, during our deepest stages of
sleep, the thalamus coordinates the activity of cortical neurons,
"tuning out" the outside world, making it difficult to awaken.
disturbances in the circuits linking the thalamus and the cortex
accompany some seizures. Amygdala

FIguRE 4.7 The Thalamus and the Basal ganglia. Near the center of the
brain, the thalamus receives input from most of our sensory systems and
relays the information to the cerebral cortex. Curving around the
thalamus are the basal ganglia, which form an important part of our
voluntary movement systems.

116

Chapter 4

The Basal Ganglia The basal ganglia consist of several large structures

that help us select movements that bring us closer to our goals (aron et
al., 2005). These structures curve around to cup the thalamus (see ●
Figure 4.6 and ● Figure 4.7) and form complex circuits with motor
structures located in the brainstem, the thalamus, and the cerebral
cortex. degeneration of the basal ganglia occurs in Parkinson's disease,
a condition that makes the initiation of voluntary movement extremely
difficult. The basal ganglia also contribute to several psychological
disorders described in Chapter 14, including obsessive-compulsive
disorder (oCd), autism spectrum disorder (aSd), and attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (adhd). These disorders are characterized by
inadequate control of voluntary movement. in the case of oCd, patients
may endlessly repeat a behavior, such as hand washing, while in adhd,
voluntary movements can be unusually frequent, rapid, and impulsive.
individuals with aSd often experience repetitive thoughts and movements.

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Hypothalamus The hypothalamus is involved with motivation

Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)

and homeostasis (see Chapter 7), or the regulation of body functions
such as temperature, thirst, hunger, biological rhythms, and sexual
activities (see ● Figure 4.8). The hypothalamus is often described as
contributing to the "4F" behaviors: feeding, fleeing, fighting, and,
well, sex (fornication). The hypothalamus carries out its motivational
and homeostatic tasks by directing the autonomic nervous system and the
endocrine system and its hormones, which we discuss in detail later in
this chapter.

The Cingulate Cortex The cingulate cortex forms a fold of tissue on the
inner surface of each cerebral hemisphere. The forward two thirds of
this structure, known as the anterior cingulate cortex (aCC),
participate, along with the hypothalamus, in the control of the
autonomic nervous system, which we discuss later in this chapter. The
aCC also plays significant roles in decision making, emotion,
anticipation of reward, and empathy. The rear third, or posterior
cingulate cortex (PCC), participates in memory and visual processing.

Hippocampus

Amygdala

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The Hippocampus The hippocampus, named for its shape after the greek
word for seahorse, is essential to the formation of long-term memories,
which we discuss in more detail in Chapter 9. Memories are not stored
permanently in the hippocampus, but it is likely that the hippocampus is
involved in the storage and retrieval of memories located elsewhere in
the brain. damage to the hippocampus results in profound impairments in
the ability to form new memories, but intelligence, personality, and
most memories of events that occurred before hippocampal damage remain
intact. The hippocampus also plays a role in our management of stress
(see Chapter 16). it contains receptors for some stress hormones,
allowing it to "put on the brakes" if levels get too high. This function
of the hippocampus can be less effective in cases of major depressive
disorder (see Chapter 14).

Posterior cingulate cortex (PCC)

Hypothalamus

FIguRE 4.8 Other Important Subcortical Structures. Subcortical
structures located under the cerebral cortex participate in attention,
decision making, learning, memory, and emotion.

From A. J. Pegna, et al., "Discriminating Emotional Faces Without
Primary Visual Cortices Involves the Right Amygdala," in Nat Neurosci,
Jan. 2005, 8(1): 24--25. © 2005 Nature Publishing Group

The Amygdala The amygdala gets its name from the greek word for "almond"
because of its shape. one amygdala is deeply embedded in the temporal
lobe, the wing of cortex that curves around the side of the brain, in
each hemisphere. The amygdala receives sensory information (vision,
hearing, and smell) from the thalamus and produces emotional and
motivational output that is sent to the cerebral cortex. historically,
the amygdala has been associated with the perception of threat and fear,
but contemporary research indicates that its role is much broader
(adolphs, 2008, 2018). activation of the amygdala is associated with
salient or relevant stimuli regardless of whether they are positive or
negative. The amygdala plays important roles in social behavior,
emotion, and learning about reward.

This image is taken from a man who is blind because of damage caused by
a stroke to his visual areas, indicated by the red and green arrows. The
orange area indicates activation of his amygdala when he is shown a
photo of an angry face. This man couldn't tell you whether he is looking
at a tree, a building, or a face, let alone a happy or angry one, but
his amygdala knows and reacts appropriately.

hypothalamus A subcortical structure that participates in the regulation
of thirst, temperature, hunger, sexual behavior, and aggression.
hippocampus A subcortical structure that participates in memory and
stress.

cingulate cortex A subcortical structure above the corpus callosum. Its
anterior (forward) segment participates in decision making and emotion,
and its posterior (rear) segment participates in memory and visual
processing.

amygdala A subcortical structure located in the temporal lobe believed
to participate in emotional processing. WhaT aRe The STRUCTUReS and
FUnCTionS oF The CenTRal neRVoUS SYSTeM?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

117

FIguRE 4.9

SM's preferred distance

Control participants' average preferred distance

0.34 m

0.64 m

Results of Damage to the Amygdala. In addition to her difficulties in
responding to fear stimuli, Patient S.M. shows other behavioral deficits
related to her damaged amygdalae. Personal space, although variable
across cultures, is consistent within cultures. Healthy control
participants in the United States stand about 0.64 meter (about 2 feet)
or arm's length away from people they don't know. In contrast, Patient
S.M. prefers to stand nearly twice as close to others, or 0.34 meter
(about 1 foot). Standing closer to strangers than is normal for your
culture is likely to send inappropriate social messages of either threat
or intimacy. Source: D. P. Kennedy, J. Gläscher, J. M. Tyszka, & R.
Adolphs (2009). "Personal Space Regulation by the Human Amygdala,"
Nature Neuroscience, 12, 1226--1227. doi: 10.1038/nn.2381

Several behavioral deficits have been identified in a patient, known as
Patient S.M., who experienced a rare medical condition that damaged her
amygdalae in both hemispheres (adolphs et al., 1998; see ● Figure 4.9).
although the patient can identify facial expressions of happiness,
sadness, and disgust in photographs, she has a specific difficulty
identifying expressions of fear. When researchers exposed Patient S.M.
to snakes, spiders, and scary movies, she showed no signs of fear
(Feinstein et al., 2011). observations of Patient S.M. have contributed
to our understanding of autism spectrum disorder, which also features
abnormalities of the amygdala (Blair et al., 2002; Marsh & Blair, 2008;
adolphs, 2018).

nucleus accumbens A subcortical structure that participates in reward
and addiction. corpus callosum A wide band of nerve

The Nucleus Accumbens The nucleus accumbens is an important part of the
brain's reward and pleasure circuitry. Whether you are eating, having
sex, using addictive drugs, gambling, or simply enjoying a beautiful
sunset, this circuitry comes into play (Comings & Blum, 2000). one
important part of this circuitry originates in cell bodies located in
the midbrain that form connections with many subcortical structures and
with the nucleus accumbens in particular. The activity of the nucleus
accumbens is related to a person's sense of social inclusion. When
people who have strong connections to friends and family view a happy
social scene, their nucleus accumbens becomes active. in contrast, when
people with weaker social connections view the same happy scenes, their
nucleus accumbens shows less activity than those of the socially
connected people (Cacioppo et al., 2009).

fibers connecting the right and left cerebral hemispheres.

The Cerebral Cortex

cerebral cortex The thin layer of neurons covering the outer surface of
the cerebral hemispheres.

above the brainstem, we find the two large cerebral hemispheres, which
are connected by a large bundle of nerve fibers known as the corpus
callosum. The thin layer of cells covering the outer surface of the
cerebral hemispheres is the cerebral cortex (see ● Figure 4.10). The
cortex, which means "bark" in latin, covers the cerebral hemispheres
like the bark of a tree. Most of the remaining bulk of the hemispheres
is made up of white matter, or nerve fiber pathways, that connects the
cortex with other parts of the nervous system. The average 20-year-old
human brain has around 100,000 miles (162,500 kilometers) of white
matter (Marner et al., 2003). The subcortical structures discussed
earlier are distributed within this white matter. if stretched out flat,
the human cerebral cortex would cover an area of about 2.5 square feet
(about 0.23 square meters). To fit within the confines of the skull, the
cortex is convoluted or wrinkled. The degree of cortical convolution
positively correlates with the general intellectual capacities of a
species. For instance, human brains are more convoluted than sheep
brains, which in turn are more convoluted than rat brains (see ● Figure
4.11). each hemisphere of the cerebral cortex can be divided into four
lobes, named after the bones of the skull that cover them (see ● Figure
4.12). Toward the front of the brain, we find the frontal lobe, and
directly behind the frontal lobe lies the parietal lobe. at the back of
the brain is the occipital lobe. Curving around the side of each
hemisphere, we find the temporal lobe. Because we have two hemispheres,
it follows that we have pairs of each type of lobe, usually denoted
right or left (e.g., right frontal lobe and left frontal lobe).

frontal lobe The most forward of the four lobes of the cerebral cortex;
location of the primary motor cortex and areas responsible for some of
the most complex cognitive processes. parietal lobe The lobe of the
cerebral cortex that lies at the top of the brain between the frontal
and the occipital lobes; location of the primary somatosensory cortex.

occipital lobe The lobe of the cerebral cortex located at the back of
the brain; location of the primary visual cortex.

temporal lobe The lobe of the cerebral cortex that curves around the
side of each hemisphere; location of the primary auditory cortex.

118

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THINKING SCIENTIFICALLY Why Does Moving Your Eyes Reduce Negative
Emotions? movements have to do with recovering from traumatic
experiences? One group of researchers suggests that the eye movements
have the ability to reduce activation of the amygdala (de Voogd et al.,
2018). As you are learning in this chapter, the amygdala receives visual
input and plays an important role in emotional processing.

EYE MOVEMENT DESENSITIzATION AND Reprocessing (EMDR) is a psychotherapy
technique with a somewhat controversial history. In the 1980s, Francine
Shapiro began experimenting with EMDR after noticing that her eyes moved
rapidly while she recalled something disturbing, while consciously
controlling her eye movements reduced her distress. The therapy she
developed consists of asking the client to recall disturbing images
followed by sideto-side eye movements (or in other cases another
activity such as hand-tapping).

What Am I Being Asked to Believe or Accept? We are being asked to
believe that moving our eyes consciously will reduce anxiety and fear
related to traumatic memories by suppressing activity in the amygdala.

Outcome studies have been surprisingly positive, although research in
this area suffers from low quality, such as small numbers of
participants and possible researcher bias (Bisson et al., 2013).
Nonetheless, EMDR is considered an "evidence-based" treatment (see
Chapter 15) by many professional and government organizations. You might
be wondering why something like this would ever work. What do eye

Voisin/Phanie/Superstock

What Evidence Supports This Position? De Voogd and her colleagues (2018)
used functional MRI (fMRI) to observe brain activity during the EMDR
process. They compared brain activity during EMDR to activity during a
working memory task (remembering if a digit had been presented
previously; see Chapter 9). They reported that both the working memory
task and the eye movements reduced amygdala activity. So although the
eye movements are probably an effective way to reduce emotion, other
tasks that engage conscious cognitive control are probably equally
effective. The researchers suggest that given the limited resources of
the brain, functions might compete. Activating cognitive control
suppresses the amygdala

and activating the amygdala suppresses cognitive control.

Are There Other Ways That This Evidence Could Be Interpreted? Advocates
of EMDR therapy propose different reasons for the efficacy of the eye
movements, including unlearning and relearning with "appropriate
emotions" (EMDR Institute, 2019). Unfortunately, results reported by de
Voogd and her colleagues (2018) directly challenge the idea of EMDR's
ability to produce unlearning.

What Other Evidence Would I Need to Evaluate These Alternatives?
Criticisms raised by meta-analyses mentioned previously, such as small
sample sizes and researcher bias, must be addressed in future studies.

What Are the Most Reasonable Conclusions? Other research confirms the
fact that tasks that engage our working memory reduce the emotionality
of other memories. It is unlikely, then, that there is anything special
about moving your eyes other than this task's ability to engage
conscious cognitive control. The technique does seem to have merit, so
if a person benefits from it, then there is no reason to discontinue. ■

Localization of Functions in the Cerebral Cortex as we mentioned earlier
in

this chapter, the phrenologists were wrong in assuming that behavioral
characteristics were reflected in bumps of the skull, but they were
correct in suggesting that some functions were localized in particular
parts of the brain. The functions performed by different areas of the
cerebral cortex Early scientists discovered that nerves carry only one
within the lobes fall into three categories: sensory, motor, and
association. type of information. When you take a blow to the The
sensory cortex processes incoming information from the sensory sys- back
of the head, where your primary visual cortex is tems, such as vision or
hearing, which we describe in Chapter 5. The prifound, your occipital
lobe does not know how to say, mary visual cortex is in the occipital
lobe, and the primary auditory cortex is in the temporal lobe. The
primary somatosensory cortex (soma refers to "ouch." Instead, it
responds to the blow as if you saw "body") is in the parietal lobe and
processes information about touch, pain, a flash of light (not
necessarily the tweeting birds or body position, and skin temperature.
The primary motor cortex is in the stars indicated in cartoons). WhaT
aRe The STRUCTUReS and FUnCTionS oF The CenTRal neRVoUS SYSTeM?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

119

Outer surface of cortex Complete single cells

Cortex

Cell bodies

Myelin

Corpus callosum White matter Gray matter

Inner surface of cortex

FIguRE 4.10 The Cerebral Cortex. The cerebral cortex (cortex means
"bark") is a thin layer of cells on the outer surface of the brain. The
close-up shows different views of the cortex, including the distribution
of complete single cells, cell bodies, and myelin, the insulating
material that covers most nerve fibers.

rearmost portion of the frontal lobe and provides the highest level of
voluntary control over movement. areas of the cortex that do not have
specific sensory or motor functions are known as association cortex.
Association means "connection" in this case, and association cortex
helps us form bridges between sensation and action, language, and
abstract thought. association areas are distributed throughout the
cortex. Cerebral cortex

FIguRE 4.11 Degree of the Convolution of the Cortex Predicts Intellect.
As species' behavior becomes more complex, we see a corresponding
increase in the degree of convolution (wrinkling) of the cerebral
cortex. This wrinkling of the brain permits more brain tissue to fit
within the skull. As a result, cortical size has increased more quickly
over the course of evolution than skull size---an important adaptation
given that large skulls are difficult to get through the birth canal.

120

Chapter 4

Rat

Sheep

Human

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Primary motor cortex

Primary somatosensory cortex Frontal lobe Parietal lobe

Prefrontal cortex

Wernicke's area

Broca's area

Occipital lobe Primary visual cortex

Primary auditory cortex

FIguRE 4.12 © Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Orbitofrontal cortex

Temporal lobe

Lobes of the Cerebral Cortex. The cerebral cortex is traditionally
divided into four lobes: frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal.

Simon Fraser/Science Source

The Frontal Lobe in addition to being the home of the primary motor
cortex, the frontal lobe has a number of important, sophisticated
cognitive functions. adjacent to the primary motor cortex is Broca's
area, named after Paul Broca, who helped identify its functions in the
1860s. Broca's area participates in the production of speech.
Consequently, damage to Broca's area caused by a stroke or a tumor
produces considerable difficulty in speaking, although comprehension of
speech remains good (see Chapter 10). The most forward portion of each
frontal lobe, known as the prefrontal cortex (pre means "before"), is
involved with the planning of behavior, attention, and judgment.
abnormalities of frontal lobe activity may account for characteristics
of some psychological disorders, including schizophrenia and adhd, which
we will discuss in detail in Chapter 14. The role of the frontal lobes
in the planning of behavior is illustrated by a bizarre condition known
as alien hand syndrome, which occurs when connections between the
prefrontal cortex and the lower areas of the brain involved in
moveDiffusion tensor imaging highlights the rich arrays ment are damaged
(Kikkert et al., 2006). This condition has no effect on sensory formed
by the white matter in the brain. feedback from the limb, such as touch
and position. however, patients with this condition do not seem to have
control over their affected limbs and often remain unaware of the limbs'
activities until they are pointed out by another person. For instance, a
hand might undo a button or remove clothing without the patient's
awareness of the activity. Patients do not recognize the rogue limb as
their own and may use the other hand to wrestle with it in an attempt to
control it forcibly or punish it for its activities. The importance of
the frontal lobes is also illustrated by the results of a terrible
accident that befell a young railroad worker named Phineas gage in 1848.
While gage was preparing to blast through some granite, a freak accident
sent an iron tamping rod through his head before it landed about 30 feet
(about 9 meters) away. The rod entered his head under his left
cheekbone, passed behind his left eye, and exited out the middle of his
forehead. Remarkably, gage survived, but he was not the same person as
before his accident. although outwardly normal in his intelligence,
speech, and movement, gage became prone to angry outbursts and
unreliability, which made it difficult for him to find and keep
employment. as his doctor prefrontal cortex The most forward noted, "his
contractors, who regarded him as the most efficient and capable foreman
in their part of the frontal lobe of the cerebral cortex. employ
previous to his injury, considered the change in his mind so marked that
they could not give him his place again" (Fleischman, 2002, p. 20). WhaT
aRe The STRUCTUReS and FUnCTionS oF The CenTRal neRVoUS SYSTeM?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

121

SPL/Science Source

ImageShop/Cardinal/Corbis

gage suffered his accident when modern imaging technologies were nowhere
to be seen on the scientific horizon. Today, we know more about why gage
behaved the way he did because of his accident. Scientists initially
recreated the pathway that gage's tamping rod must have traveled
(damasio et al., 1994). More recent analyses show that the rod did more
damage to the fiber pathways (11% were damaged) than to the cells (4%
were damaged) of gage's cerebral cortex (Van horn et al., 2012). The rod
missed areas involved in speech, voluntary movement, and the senses of
touch, body position, and pain. Thus, gage had no difficulty speaking or
performing complex movements, such as driving a stagecoach, following
his accident. Modern patients with damage in this area exhibit many of
the same social deficits that gage demonstrated (damasio & anderson,
1993). They are often impulsive, emotionally unstable, unpredictable,
and unable to make reasonable decisions. Knowing the outcome of the gage
case, you might be astonished to learn that physicians in the 1940s and
1950s deliberately damaged the frontal lobes of nearly 50,000 american
patients in a procedure known as a frontal lobotomy. The intent of the
procedure was to reduce fear and anxiety in patients with serious
psychological disorders, which it accomplished in many cases but at
great expense to the patient. as you might suspect from reading about
gage, many patients who underwent the procedure were unable to work or
live normal lives because of their impulsive, antisocial behavior. The
orbitofrontal cortex, a part of the prefrontal cortex located just
behind the bony orbits protecting the eyes, plays an important role in
our emotional lives (see ● Figure 4.13). orbitofrontal cortex A part of
the prePeople with damage to the orbitofrontal cortex demonstrate
dramatic deficits in their social frontal cortex located right behind
the eyes behavior and experience of emotion, despite retaining their
intelligence, language skills, and that participates in impulse control.
abilities to pay attention, learn, and remember (Bechara et al., 2000).
Patient e.V.R. experienced orbitofrontal damage during surgery for a
tumor (eslinger & damasio, 1985). Before his surgery, e.V.R. was
considered a role model and a respected member of his community.
Following his surgery, e.V.R. lost his job, went bankBio-feedback
training helps people gain conscious rupt, and divorced his wife to
marry a prostitute, whom he divorced 2 years later. although he had no
difficulties talking about moral dilemcontrol over some autonomic
processes that mas, he experienced enormous problems when trying to make
everyday normally run in the background. People who suffer decisions,
such as buying toothpaste or choosing a restaurant. from migraine
headaches can be trained to reduce Researchers have made other
connections between abnormalities blood flow to the brain. in the
orbitofrontal cortex and antisocial behavior. in a sample of 21
individuals diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder, a condition
characterized by disregard for others that we discuss in Chapter 14, the
volume of the prefrontal cortex, which includes the orbitofrontal
cortex, was about 11% less than in control participants who did not have
the condition (Raine et al., 2000). individuals with antisocial
personality disorder or orbitofrontal damage not only fail to anticipate
the emotional consequences of situations but also are unable to delay
gratification (Raine, 2019). They typically choose immediate rewards
over long-term benefits, such as stealing something despite knowing the
long-term benefits of staying out of jail.

Phineas Gage suffered a terrible injury to his frontal lobes. Modern
imaging techniques allowed scientists to recreate the pathway of Gage's
tamping iron through his brain. Remarkably, Gage survived, although his
friends described him as a "changed man." Source: H. Damasio et
al. (1994). "The Return of Phineas Gage: Clues About the Brain from the
Skull of a Famous Patient." Science, 264, 1102--1105. doi: 10.1126/
science.81781688

122

Chapter 4

The Occipital Lobe The occipital lobe, located at the back of the brain,
is home to the primary visual cortex. The primary visual cortex begins
the process of interpreting input from the eyes by responding to basic
information about an image, such as its borders, shading, color, and
movement. This amount of processing by itself does not allow you to read
this page or recognize your professor in the library. Two important
pathways link the occipital lobe with the rest of the brain. a pathway
connecting the occipital lobe with the temporal lobe allows you to
recognize objects you see. a second pathway connects the occipital lobe
with the parietal lobe and allows you to process the movement of
objects. We discuss these processes further in the next sections. The
Temporal Lobe The temporal lobe has several areas that

are specialized for particular functions. The temporal lobe is home

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Parietal Lobe The parietal lobe is home to the primary somatosensory
cortex, which helps us localize touch, pain, skin temperature, and body
position. The parietal lobe helps us better understand where our body
(or even our self) is in time and space. damage to the parietal lobe can
produce neglect syndrome. Patients with this condition have difficulty
paying attention to the space opposite the side of their brain damage
(see ● Figure 4.14). The parietal lobe processes input about taste and,
like the temporal lobe, it engages in some complex processing of vision.
Whereas the temporal lobe participates in visual recognition, the
parietal lobe helps us coordinate vision and movement. People with
parietal lobe damage would experience great difficulty while trying to
insert a credit card into a card reader. We discuss these functions of
the parietal lobe in depth in Chapter 5.

Orbitofrontal cortex

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

to the primary auditory cortex, which allows us to process incoming
sounds. as mentioned earlier, the temporal lobe processes some higher
visual system tasks, including the recognition of objects and the faces
of familiar people. Patients with damage to the temporal lobe are often
unable to recognize their loved ones by sight. They must wait until the
person speaks. We discuss this processing of vision and hearing by the
temporal lobe in more detail in Chapter 5. We saw earlier how damage to
Broca's area in the frontal lobe produced difficulty in speaking. damage
to another language area located in the temporal lobe, Wernicke's area,
produces different results (see Figure 4.12). as we discuss in Chapter
10, patients with damage to their Wernicke's area speak fluently but
make no sense. They cannot comprehend speech, but they seem blissfully
unaware of their deficits.

FIguRE 4.13 The Orbitofrontal Cortex. People with damage to their
orbitofrontal cortex have difficulty controlling impulses and
anticipating the negative outcomes of poor decisions. This part of the
brain is one of the last areas to mature.

PSYCHOLOGY AS A HUB SCIENCE Law, Responsibility, and the Brain

ZUMA Press, Inc./Alamy Stock Photo

PSYCHOLOGY, AND BIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY IN PARTICULAR, have a great deal
to say to the criminal justice system. in particular, neuroscience is
entering the courtroom to evaluate "dangerousness," or the likelihood
that a person will commit additional crimes (aharoni et al., 2013; Kiehl
et al., 2018). This trend is consistent with an overall paradigm shift
in forensics from punishing perpetrators to protecting society from
future crimes. assessing dangerousness is not new. Courts have used the
opinions of forensic psychiatrists and psychologists for years, often
bolstered with standardized instruments that test psychopathy (see
Chapter 14). What is somewhat new is the use of brain imaging to link
differences in structure and function with future criminal behavior. For
example, aharoni et al. (2013) argued that offenders with low activity
in the anterior cingulate cortex (aCC) had twice The U.S. criminal
justice system continues to the risk of re-offending as offenders with
higher struggle with issues of maturity, mental illness, and activity in
this structure. analyses of brain strucresponsibility for one's actions.
In 2005, 13-yearture outperformed traditional models featuring old
Roberto Holguin murdered 87-year-old Army psychopathic traits, drug and
alcohol use, and veteran Gerald O'Malley by hitting him in the head
tasks requiring behavioral inhibition in predictwith a skateboard. In
2014, while still incarcerated, ing future offenses (Kiehl et al.,
2018). Holguin sent California Governor Jerry Brown an While the goal to
use neuroscience to imemail that said, "I will shoot you with a real
gun." prove forensics is worthy, ethical concerns must Brown
subsequently overturned a parole board be fully explored. Research data
tell us what decision for early release for Holguin, but by law, "most
people" do, but not whether a particuHolguin could not be held longer
than his 25th lar individual will fall within the "most people" birthday
in 2017. group. given the stakes of a person's freedom and the safety of
society, neuroscientific evaluations of dangerousness merit the best
scientific assessments possible. ■ WhaT aRe The STRUCTUReS and FUnCTionS
oF The CenTRal neRVoUS SYSTeM?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

123

FIguRE 4.14

(a) 
(b) 

Damage to the Parietal Lobe Causes Neglect. Patients with certain types
of brain damage in the parietal lobe experience "hemispatial neglect,"
or the inability to pay attention to stimuli located in space on the
opposite side relative to their damage. They seem unaware that there is
anything wrong with their perceptions. The patient whose drawings are
featured in this figure experienced damage to the right hemisphere,
resulting in neglect for anything to the left in space. Neglect does not
affect vision alone but can also affect the sense of body location. One
patient was unable to recognize his own leg and suspected the hospital
staff of putting a cadaver leg into his bed.

Mirror Neurons in the early 1990s, giacomo Rizzolatti and a team of
italian scientists

Fibers to cortex

were busy studying the brain correlates of movement when they noticed
something odd (di Pellegrino et al., 1992). They had observed that
certain neurons in a part of a monkey's brain became especially active
when the monkey performed certain actions, like reaching for a piece of
banana or a peanut. What surprised them was that the same neurons fired
when the monkey observed the experimenter Corpus callosum pick up a
piece of food to place it within his mouth and eat. Suspecting something
important was behind these observations, the researchers began to study
these "mirror neurons" more carefully. The scientists believed that
mirror neurons provided a mechanism for understanding the actions and
the intentions of others (Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004; Rizzolatti &
Sinigaglia, 2016). do human beings, as well as monkeys, possess mirror
neurons? Research on humans typically involves brain imaging, such as
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRi), so we see the activity of
larger areas of the brain (mirror "systems") rather than single neurons,
as recorded through surgically implanted electrodes in monkeys. it does
appear, though, that human beings possess mirror systems that help us
understand not just the actions and emotions of others, but their
intentions as well (grafton, 1996; ortigue et al., 2010). Skull

Right Brain and Left Brain a special type of

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

localization of function in the cerebral cortex is known as
lateralization, or the localization of a function in either the right or
the left cerebral hemisphere. a basic type of lateralization occurs in
the somatosensory and voluntary motor systems in the brain. Movement and
sensation on the right side of the body are processed by the left
hemisphere, and movement and sensation on the left side of the body
Location of incision by the right hemisphere. if you observe a person
who is paralyzed on the right side of the body, you can be fairly
certain that this paralysis is a result of motor cortex damage in the
left hemisphere. in a similar manner, the visual cortex of the left
hemisphere processes all data from the right half of the visual field,
while the right hemisphere processes all data from the left half of the
visual field. in other words, when you look straight ahead, holding your
eyes and head still, everything to the right or left of center is
processed by the opposite hemisphere (see Chapter 5 for more detail).
early knowledge of lateralization of the human brain resulted from the
careful analysis of a surgical procedure known as a split-brain
operation (see ● Figure 4.15). To treat rare

FIguRE 4.15 The Split-Brain Operation. To save patients from
life-threatening seizures, physicians cut the corpus callosum, a large
band of nerve fibers connecting the right and left hemispheres.

124

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONNECTING TO RESEARCH Mirror Systems and Predicting Tennis Serves

The Question: How do expert tennis players predict their opponents'
serve quickly enough to respond well?

METHODS Twenty-five male tennis players were observed using fMRI as they
viewed films of players serving the ball in one of two conditions: (1)
the player serving the ball knew where he wanted to place the serve
(initially intended) or (2) the player was told by an experimenter where
he should place the serve after he had already tossed the ball
(noninitially intended). The players viewing the films were asked to
indicate where they thought the ball would go.

ETHICS

complex process involving the mirror neuron system. This system is more
likely to be activated when we observe a person whose actions are
relevant to our goals, such as our opponent in a tennis match, than if a
person's actions are irrelevant, such as an usher in the grandstand.
Correctly reading your opponent's intentions, but not the usher's, is
critical to your success. ■

Because fMRI is a safe procedure, this study raises few ethical
concerns. Nonetheless, the participants must freely volunteer and
provide informed consent. Their confidentiality should be strictly
protected.

RESULTS The more expert the tennis player being scanned, the more
successful he was at predicting where the serve would land, but only
when the server in the film knew where the ball was supposed to go
before he tossed the ball in the air. When the server didn't know until
the last minute where the ball was supposed to go, all viewers performed
no better than chance. Accurate predictions of the location of the serve
were correlated with activation of mirror neuron systems and subcortical
structures involved with motor memory.

CONCLUSIONS The scientists demonstrated that "reading" the intentions of
others is a remarkably

iStock.com/nycshooter

ATHLETIC SUCCESS OFTEN DEPENDS upon the athlete's ability to predict an
opponent's intentions quickly enough to react appropriately. In tennis,
the reading of an opponent's serve is especially important, as the time
required to plan and implement a response is longer than the flight time
of the ball (Cacioppo et al., 2014).

cases of life-threatening seizures, surgeons in the 1960s cut the
patients' corpus callosum and other pathways connecting the right and
left cerebral hemispheres (Bogen et al., 1988). The procedure not only
succeeded in reducing or eliminating seizures, but it also produced no
changes in personality, intelligence, or speech. only when patients were
studied in the laboratory were the consequences of their surgery
evident. a typical experiment demonstrating the differences in
processing by the right and left hemispheres (gazzaniga, 1967) is
illustrated in ● Figure 4.16. Subsequent research indicated that
language, for most people, is lateralized to the left hemisphere,
although a minority of individuals process language either in the right
hemisphere or in both hemispheres (Rasmussen & Milner, 1977). The
lateralization of language is correlated, although not completely, with
a person's handedness. as shown in a later section, nearly all
right-handed people lateralize language to the left hemisphere, as do
about 70% of people who are left-handed. The remaining individuals
process language either in the right hemisphere or in both hemispheres.
language is not the only cognitive process to show evidence of
lateralization. other suspected lateralized processes include
mathematical computation and logical reasoning (left hemisphere) and
some music functions, spatial information, intuition, and the visual
arts (right hemisphere). emotional behavior also appears to be
lateralized. neurological patients with right hemisphere damage show
greater impairments than patients with left hemisphere damage in the
comprehension and expression of emotion (gainotti, 2019). WhaT aRe The
STRUCTUReS and FUnCTionS oF The CenTRal neRVoUS SYSTeM?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

125

What word did you see?

Point with your left hand to the word you saw.

"Art"

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Look at the dot and read the word.

FIguRE 4.16 The Hemispheres Have Different Capacities for Language
Functions. If participants who have experienced a split-brain surgery
fixate on a dot in the middle of the screen, information to the left of
the dot is processed by the right hemisphere, and information to the
right of the dot is processed by the left hemisphere. When asked
verbally what word was seen, participants answered "art," which was seen
by the verbal left hemisphere. When asked to point with the left hand,
which is controlled by the right hemisphere, to the word that was seen,
the participants pointed to "he," which is the word seen by the right
hemisphere.

Humans are not the only animals to have a preferred hand. However, the
fact that over 90% of humans are right-handed sets the species apart.
While other primates, such as this chimpanzee using a stone to open
nuts, are also more likely to be right- than left-handed, only about
65--70% of chimpanzees are right-handed (Hopkins, 2006).

Martin Harvey/Alamy Stock Photo

Right--Left Brain Myths a word of caution is in order here. as noted by
Roger Sperry, who won the 1981 nobel Prize for his investigations of
lateralization in the human brain, "The left--right dichotomy in
cognitive mode is an idea with which it is very easy to run wild"
(Sperry, 1982, p. 1225). Most of us have not undergone a split-brain
procedure. our intact corpus callosum and other connections between the
two cerebral hemispheres allow information to pass rapidly from one
hemisphere to the other. Suggestions that you can improve your artistic
or athletic talent or reduce inattention by "learning to access your
right brain" have gained considerable attention in the popular press,
but they do not hold up to scrutiny in the laboratory. one of the most
popular myths about lateralization is the idea that individual
differences in artistic talent or logical thinking correlate with a
person's dominant hemisphere. hemisphere dominance, as measured by the
relative size of the hemispheres and the localization of language and
handedness, does not predict occupational choice or artistic talent
(Springer & deutsch, 1998).

126

Chapter 4

The Function of Lateralization What are the advantages of
lateralization? Most species of animals show a preference for one hand
or the other, such as when a cat reaches for its prey (Cole, 1955;
holder, 1999). lateralization might provide organisms with the ability
to multitask (Rogers, 2000). Chicks raised in the dark fail to
lateralize normally and are at a disadvantage compared to normal chicks
when feeding and watching for predators simultaneously. Success in this
type of multitasking has obvious survival advantages. human
lateralization of brain structures might have made language possible
(Berlim et al., 2003). This development could have a big price tag,
however, because lateralization might account for our species'
vulnerabilities for schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder, as
discussed in Chapter 14. People with schizophrenia show abnormal
hemisphere lateralization and are more likely to be left-handed or to
have ambiguous handedness (Berlim et al., 2003). autism spectrum
disorder is also associated with extensive differences in lateralization
(Paquet et al., 2017).

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ExPErIENCING PSYCHOLOGY Handedness AS SHOWN IN ● TABLE 4.2,
LATERALIzATION OF LANGUAGE is correlated with handedness (Milner, 1974).
Handedness represents a continuum, with some people being nearly
ambidextrous and others having strong preferences for using one hand or
the other. Although most of us would have no trouble answering a
question asking whether we are right- or left-handed, researchers like
Milner must apply systems for determining a person's handedness. One of
the frequently used instruments follows. Simply read each of the
questions in ● Table 4.3. Decide which hand you use for each activity,
and then circle the answer that describes you the best. If you are
unsure

TABLE 4.2 Relationships Between Handedness and Language Localization
Handedness

Language left

Language right

Mixed dominance

Right-handed (90%)

96%

4%

0%

Left-handed (10%)

70%

15%

15%

of any answer, try to act out the action. To find your score, count the
number of circled "right" answers and subtract the number of circled
"left" answers. Ignore "either" answers. Ambidextrous people will score
around 0, very right-handed people will

score near +12, and very left-handed people will score near --12
Although this test can't tell you which hemisphere you use for language,
your odds of using your left hemisphere for language if you're very
right-handed are quite high. ■

TABLE 4.3 The Lateral Preference Inventory 1. With which hand do you
draw?

Left

Right

Either

2.  Which hand would you use to throw a ball to hit a target?

Left

Right

Either

3.  In which hand would you use an eraser on paper?

Left

Right

Either

4.  Which hand removes the top card when you are dealing from a deck?

Left

Right

Either

5.  With which hand do you normally write?

Left

Right

Either

6.  In which hand do you use your racquet for tennis, squash, etc.?

Left

Right

Either

7.  With which hand do you use your toothbrush?

Left

Right

Either

8.  Which hand holds a knife when you are cutting things?

Left

Right

Either

9.  Which hand holds the hammer when you are driving a nail?

Left

Right

Either

10. In which hand would you hold a match to strike it?

Left

Right

Either

11. Which hand holds the thread when you are threading a needle?

Left

Right

Either

12. In which hand would you use a fly swatter?

Left

Right

Either

Source: Adapted from S. Coren (1993). "The Lateral Preference Inventory
for Measurement of Handedness, Footedness, Eyedness, and Earedness:
Norms for Young Adults," Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 31(1),
1--3. doi: 10.3758/BF03334122

WhaT aRe The STRUCTUReS and FUnCTionS oF The CenTRal neRVoUS SYSTeM?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

127

Michael Zagaris/Contributor/Getty Images Sports/ Getty Images

Mike Powell/Sports Illustrated Classic/Getty Images

Although efforts to connect brain lateralization, which is highly
correlated with handedness, with occupational choice or artistic talent
have not been successful, being in the left-handed minority might
provide advantages in sports and in combat. Righthanded pitchers, such
as Tim Lincecum, are often challenged by left-handed hitters such as
Adrian Gonzalez. Some of the most famous hitters of all time were
lefties, including Barry Bonds, Ty Cobb, Lou Gherig, Stan Musial, Babe
Ruth, and Ted Williams.

suMMary 4.1 Structures of the Central Nervous System Gray matter (cell
bodies) White matter (nerve fiber pathways) Spinal nerve

structure

What to remember

Spinal Cord

●

Continuous with brainstem

●

Large white matter pathways

●

Reflexes

●

Large white matter pathways, arousal, reflexes, and body functions
(heart rate, etc.)

●

Midbrain

●

Pons

●

Cerebellum

●

Medulla

●

Reticular formation

●

Embedded in the white matter of the cerebral hemispheres

●

Thalamus

●

Basal ganglia

●

Hypothalamus

●

Hippocampus

●

Cingulate cortex

●

Amygdala

●

Nucleus Accumbens

●

Thin layer of gray matter enveloping the hemispheres

●

Divided into four lobes

●

Areas with sensory, motor, or association functions

●

Some localized and lateralized functions

Vertebra

Brainstem and Cerebellum

Cerebral cortex

Thalamus

Midbrain

Cerebellum

Pons Reticular formation

Medulla

Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)

Subcortical Structures

Posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) Hippocampus

Amygdala Hypothalamus

Cerebral Cortex

Primary motor cortex

Primary somatosensory cortex Frontal lobe Parietal lobe

Prefrontal cortex

Wernicke's area

Broca's area

Occipital lobe Primary visual cortex

Orbitofrontal cortex Primary auditory cortex

Temporal lobe

Credits: Top row---© Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Second row---© Argosy
Publishing, Inc.; Bottom row---© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

128

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Peripheral Nervous System (PNS) and the Endocrine System

somatic nervous system The part of the peripheral nervous system that
brings

sensory information to the central nervous The brain and spinal cord are
spectacular processing units, but without input or ability to system and
transmits commands to the implement commands, they would be no different
from your computer's central processing muscles. unit (CPU) without its
mouse, keyboard, monitor, printer, and internet connection. The lights
autonomic nervous system The divimay be on, but not much is going to
happen. sion of the peripheral nervous system that in this section, we
will explore the structures of the PnS that provide these essential
input directs the activity of glands, organs, and and output functions
in the body. The PnS can be separated into two divisions: the somatic
smooth muscles. nervous system and the autonomic nervous system. The
somatic nervous system includes the sympathetic nervous system The
peripheral portions of the sensory and voluntary movement systems. The
autonomic nervous division of the autonomic nervous system that
coordinates arousal. system is responsible for the actions of many
glands and organs. additional output is provided by the endocrine
system, through which the CnS can communicate with the body by releasing
chemical III. Oculomotor V. Trigeminal IV. Trochlear messengers into the
bloodstream. These systems coorTouch VI. Abducens Pain II. Optic dinate
their efforts to produce consistent patterns of Eye movements Jaw
muscles Vision movement, hormone release, and arousal.

The Somatic Nervous System

I. Olfactory Smell

The somatic nervous system is the part of the PnS that transmits
commands for voluntary movement from the CnS to the muscles and brings
sensory input back to the CnS for further processing. These functions
are carried out by the 31 pairs of spinal nerves serving the torso and
limbs and the 12 pairs of cranial nerves serving the head, neck, and
some internal organs (see ● Figure 4.17).

VII. Facial Face muscles Taste

VIII. Hypoglossal Tongue movements

The Autonomic Nervous System

VIII. Auditory Hearing Balance
IX. Spinal accesory Neck muscles

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The function of the autonomic nervous system is the control of tissues
other than the skeletal muscle (langley, 1921)---in other words, our
glands and organs. The term autonomic has the same root as the word
autonomy, or independence. You might think of this system as the cruise
control of the body because it ensures that your heart keeps beating and
your lungs continue to inhale and exhale without your conscious
direction. The autonomic nervous system contains three subdivisions: the
sympathetic, the parasympathetic, and the enteric. The sympathetic and
parasympathetic divisions are active under different circumstances. The
sympathetic nervous system prepares the body for situations requiring
the expenditure of energy, while the

X. Vagus Internal organs (parasympathetic) IX. Glossopharyngeal Taste
Muscles of throat and larynx

FIguRE 4.17 The Cranial Nerves. Twelve pairs of cranial nerves carry
sensory and motor information from the brain to the head, the neck, and
some internal organs.

The PeRiPheRal neRVoUS SYSTeM (PnS) and The endoCRine SYSTeM

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

129

Kurt Jones

Stress activates the sympathetic nervous system, preparing the body for
fight or flight or, in this case, fast paddling. We're told, however,
that this is a porpoise, not a shark.

parasympathetic nervous system The division of the autonomic nervous
system associated with rest, repair, and energy storage.

enteric nervous system A division of the autonomic nervous system
consisting of nerve cells embedded in the lining of the gastrointestinal
system.

130

Chapter 4

parasympathetic nervous system directs the storage of energy. You have
probably experienced intense sympathetic arousal, perhaps because of a
close call on the highway. in the aroused state produced by the
sympathetic nervous system, our hearts race, we breathe rapidly, our
faces become pale, and our palms sweat. all these activities are
designed to provide the muscles with the resources they need for a
fight-or-flight reaction. The sympathetic nervous system is important to
our understanding of stress, described further in Chapter 16. in
contrast, the parasympathetic nervous system controls the glands and
organs at times of relative calm. instead of using up energy like the
sympathetic nervous system does, the parasympathetic nervous system
allows you to store nutrients, repair your body, and return the
activities of internal organs to baseline levels. The responses of the
internal organs to environmental stimuli reflect a sophisticated
combination of inputs from both the sympathetic and the parasympathetic
nervous systems (Berntson et al., 1991). These systems usually have
antagonistic effects on the organs they serve and are designed to
alternate their activities (see ● Figure 4.18). We cannot be
simultaneously relaxed and aroused. The sympathetic nervous system
dilates the pupils of the eye, whereas the parasympathetic nervous
system constricts the pupils. The heart responds to sympathetic commands
by beating faster but responds to parasympathetic commands by slowing
down. The two divisions do manage, however, to cooperate during sexual
activity. The enteric nervous system, shown in ● Figure 4.19, consists
of nerve cells embedded in the lining of the gastrointestinal system.
This system is often called a "second brain" because it contains as many
nerve cells as are found in the spinal cord. The enteric nervous system
communicates with the endocrine system, described later in this chapter,
to ensure the release of chemicals essential to digestion. enteric cells
also communicate directly with the vagus nerve, one of the cranial
nerves, forming a gut-brain axis (Breit et al., 2018). This
communication channel also transmits information about the gut's
microbiome, or bacteria population, to the brain. Some functions of the
enteric nervous system result in conscious perceptions, such as
gastrointestinal pain, hunger, and satiety (fullness), while others
operate below the threshold of conscious awareness. The latter give rise
to our references to having a "gut feeling." disturbances of the enteric
environment might contribute to the development of autism spectrum
disorder (Slattery et al., 2016). The enteric nervous system is the
source of 95% of the body's serotonin, a neurochemical discussed later
in this chapter. individuals with autism spectrum disorder (see Chapter
14) show higher than normal levels of serotonin in their blood
(Janusonis, 2008) and often experience gastric distress (holingue et
al., 2018).

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Dilates pupil Inhibits salivation

Contracts pupil

Oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III)

Stimulates salivation

Facial nerve (cranial nerve VII)

Heart

Cranial

Glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX)

Slows heartbeat

Accelerates heartbeat Relaxes airway

Constricts airway

Cervical

Cranial

Vagus nerve (cranial nerve X)

Cervical

Lungs Liver

Lumbar

Stimulates digestion

Inhibits digestion Constricts blood vessels

Gall bladder

Stomach Stimulates digestion Spleen Stimulates digestion

Pancreas

Inhibits digestion

Thoracic

Large intestines Stimulates digestion Small intestines Lumbar Rectum
Adrenal gland

Inhibits urination

Kidney

Sacral Coccygeal Stimulates orgasm

Promotes urination

S2 3 4

Sacral Coccygeal

Bladder Stimulates penile erection and labial engorgment

Sympathetic Nervous System

Parasympathetic Nervous System

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Thoracic

T1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 L1 2

FIguRE 4.18 The Autonomic Nervous System. The sympathetic nervous system
(left) usually has the opposite effect on an organ compared with the
parasympathetic nervous system (right). For example, sympathetic input
tells the heart to beat faster, while parasympathetic input tells the
heart to slow down. However, both systems cooperate during sex.

Esophagus

A cutaway of the small intestine Enteric nervous system

Stomach Large intestines Small intestines

Nerve signals travel to the brain Muscle Contractions that move food
along are controlled by the enteric nervous system.

FIguRE 4.19 The Enteric Nervous System. The enteric nervous system is
often called a second brain. It has about the same number of neurons as
the spinal cord, or about as many found in the entire brain of an adult
cat.

The PeRiPheRal neRVoUS SYSTeM (PnS) and The endoCRine SYSTeM

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

131

endocrine system A system responsible for the release of hormones into
the bloodstream.

The Endocrine System The nervous system communicates by passing messages
along nerves. in contrast, the endocrine system is made up of glands
that release chemical messengers known as hormones into the blood (see ●
Figure 4.20). These chemicals are often identical to those used by one
nerve cell to communicate with another, but their actions affect more
distant cells in a coordinated fashion. Ultimately, the endocrine system
responds to input from the nervous system and from the hypothalamus in
particular. The endocrine system is especially involved with arousal,
metabolism, growth, and sex. among the important glands of the endocrine
system are the pineal gland, the pituitary gland, the thyroid gland, the
adrenal glands, the islets of langerhans, and the ovaries in females and
testes in males. The pineal gland, and its release of the chemical
messenger melatonin, is important in the maintenance of our sleep--wake
cycles, which we discuss in Chapter 6. although not an officially
approved and tested medication, melatonin is used by some travelers to
offset the unpleasant effects of jet lag. Melatonin is normally released
in the early evening, and it breaks down in the presence of light. Thus,
exposure to artificial light at night can have negative implications for
our health. however, research attempting to link night shift work to
higher risk of cancer remains inconclusive (Jones et al., 2019).
Tsuni/USA/Alamy Stock Photo

Human growth hormone, released normally by the pituitary gland, has
become a popular substance among actors and athletes. Sylvester Stallone
(b. 1946), star of Rocky and Rambo, is one of the few Hollywood stars to
discuss his use of the hormone publicly.

Pineal gland

Pituitary gland

Thyroid gland Adrenal gland

Ovary Testes

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Islets of Langerhans

FIguRE 4.20 glands of the Endocrine System. The endocrine system
communicates with other body tissues by releasing hormones from glands
into the bloodstream.

132

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Gino Santa Maria/Shutterstock.com

The pituitary gland, located just above the roof of your mouth, is often
called the body's master gland, because many of the hormones it releases
activate other glands. The pituitary in turn is regulated by the
hypothalamus, which lies directly above it. one type of pituitary
hormones, including oxytocin, vasopressin, and human growth hormone, is
released directly from the pituitary. oxytocin and vasopressin
participate in several important physical functions, such as
breastfeeding and maintenance of fluid levels, respectively. however,
these hormones are also implicated in cooperation and trust, memory for
social information, recognition of emotions, and resilience during
stress (Meyer-lindenberg et al., 2011). growth hormone stimulates growth
and regeneration, making it a popular performanceenhancing substance
used illegally by some elite athletes. a second type of pituitary
hormone influences the release of hormones by other glands. For example,
pituitary hormones control the production and release of sex hormones by
the ovaries and the testes, initiating puberty and maintaining
fertility. in response to pituitary hormones, the thyroid
gland---located just below your larynx, or voice box, in your
throat---raises or lowers your rate of metabolism, or the chemical
processes your body needs to sustain life. low levels of thyroid can
mimic the symptoms of depression, described further in Chapter 14. at
times of stress, pituitary hormones activate the adrenal glands, which
are located just above the kidneys in the lower back. in response, the
adrenal glands release other hormones, including cortisol, that travel
throughout the body and the brain to provide a general wake-up message.
The islets of langerhans, located in the pancreas, produce hormones
essential to digestion, including insulin.

Oxytocin released by the pituitary gland is correlated with human
bonding between parent and child and between romantic partners.

suMMary 4.2 Peripheral Nervous and Endocrine Systems II. Optic Vision

III. Oculomotor
IV. Trochlear
V.  Abducens Eye movements

V. Trigeminal Touch Pain Jaw muscles

structure

What to remember

Somatic nervous system

●

Sensation and movement

●

12 pairs of cranial nerves

●

31 pairs of spinal nerves

●

Sympathetic nervous system: arousal and fight or flight

●

Parasympathetic nervous system: rest and repair

●

Enteric nervous system: control of the gastrointestinal system

●

Metabolism, arousal, growth, sex

●

Glands

●

Hormones

I. Olfactory Smell

VII. Facial Face muscles Taste

VIII. Hypoglossal Tongue movements

IX. Auditory Hearing Balance

X.  Spinal accesory Neck muscles

X. Vagus Internal organs (parasympathetic) IX. Glossopharyngeal Taste
Muscles of throat and larynx

Autonomic nervous system Dilates pupil

Contracts pupil

Oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III)

Stimulates salivation

Facial nerve (cranial nerve VII)

Inhibits salivation

Heart

Cranial

Glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX)

Slows heartbeat

Accelerates heartbeat Relaxes airway

Constricts airway

Cervical

Cranial

Vagus nerve (cranial nerve X)

Cervical

Lungs Liver

Thoracic

Lumbar

T1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 L1 2

Stimulates digestion

Inhibits digestion Constricts blood vessels

Gall bladder

Stomach Stimulates digestion Spleen Stimulates digestion

Pancreas

Thoracic

Large intestines

Inhibits digestion

Stimulates digestion Small intestines Lumbar Rectum Adrenal gland

Inhibits urination

Kidney

Sacral Coccygeal Stimulates orgasm

Promotes urination

S2 3 4

Sacral Coccygeal

Bladder Stimulates penile erection and labial engorgment

Sympathetic Nervous System

Parasympathetic Nervous System

Pineal gland

Pituitary gland

Endocrine system

Thyroid gland Adrenal gland Islets of Langerhans

Ovary Testes

Credits: Top row---© Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Second row---© Argosy
Publishing, Inc.; Third row---© Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Bottom row---©
Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The PeRiPheRal neRVoUS SYSTeM (PnS) and The endoCRine SYSTeM

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

133

How Do Neurons Communicate? MPI Biochemistry/Volker Steger/Science
Source

We now zoom in to explore the microscopic building blocks of the nervous
system, which are the nerve cells, or neurons. human brains have about
86 billion neurons. To put this number into perspective, consider the
following: if each neuron represented a second, ticking off the neurons
in your body alone would take more than 3,000 years. With each neuron
forming an average of several thousand connections with other neurons,
the connections in the human brain number in the hundreds of trillions.
in addition to these large numbers of neurons, the nervous system
contains many supporting cells, known as glia. once you are familiar
with the structure of neurons and glia, we will explore the ways neurons
communicate with one another. neural communication is a two-step
process. The first step takes place within a single neuron and involves
the generation of an electrical signal. The second step takes place
between two neurons and involves the release of a chemical messenger
from one neuron that affects the activity of the second.

Although it sounds like a script from a science fiction film,
researchers are capable of growing neurons, such as these from the
retina of the eye, on silicon chips. The chip electrically stimulates
the growing neurons. Future uses of this type of technology might
include brain-like computer networks and better prostheses for people
who have lost a limb.

Neurons and Glia

neurons share many characteristics with other cells found in the body.
like other cells, a neuron has a large central mass or cell body, and
within the cell body, it has a nucleus (see ● Figure 4.21). Most
housekeeping tasks of the cell, such as the translation of genetic codes
into the manufacture of proteins, take place in the cell body. like
other cells, neurons feature an outer membrane, which surrounds the
neuron and forms a barrier between the fluid outside the cell (the
extracellular fluid) and the fluid inside the cell (the intracellular
fluid). The neural membrane is composed of fatty materials that do not
dissolve in water, so even though it is only two molecules thick, it is
able to hold apart the water-based fluids on either side. neuron A cell
of the nervous system that Pores within the membrane act as channels
that allow chemicals to move into or out of the cell. is specialized to
send and receive neural Unlike other types of body cells, neurons have
two types of branches that extend from messages. the cell body to allow
the neuron to perform its information-processing and communication glia
Nervous system cells that perform functions. The branches known as axons
are responsible for carrying information to other a variety of support
functions, including neurons, while the branches known as dendrites
receive input from other neurons. although formation of the blood--brain
barrier and neurons may have many dendrites, each neuron typically has
only one axon. myelin. Many axons communicate with immediately adjacent
cells and are, therefore, only small cell body The large, central mass
of a fractions of a millimeter in length, but other axons are much
longer. When you stub your big neuron, containing the nucleus. toe on a
rock, the neurons that process this information have cell bodies in your
lower back and axon The branch of a neuron that is usually responsible
for transmitting informaaxons that extend all the way down to your sore
toe, a distance of around 3 feet (about 0.9 metion to other neurons.
ters), depending on your height. at its farthest point from the cell
body, an axon bulges to form dendrite A branch from the neural cell a
terminal. if you look inside an axon terminal with an electron
microscope, you can see round, body that usually receives input from
other hollow spheres known as synaptic vesicles, which contain molecules
of chemical messengers. neurons. We have been using the term white
matter to describe pathways formed by nerve fibers or axons. You have
probably heard the term gray matter as well. now that you understand the
structure of neurons, these terms will The blood--brain barrier might
offer too much make more sense. When we prepare neural tissue for study
using microprotection to the brain in some cases. Many scopes, the
chemicals used to preserve the tissue are absorbed by cell bodies.
chemotherapy agents used to treat cancer in other This gives cell bodies
a pink--gray coloring. in contrast, these chemicals are parts of the
body cannot penetrate the blood--brain repelled by the insulating
material covering most axons because the insulabarrier, which
complicates the treatment of tumors tion has a fatty composition that
doesn't mix well with the watery preservatives (we discuss the nature of
this insulation shortly). as a result, axons in the brain. look white,
like the fat in a steak. When we examine images of the brain, areas that
look gray have a high density of cell bodies, whereas areas that look
white consist of large bundles of axons.

134

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Axon terminals

(a) Parts of the neuron Cell body

Nucleus Axon

Dendrites Positive ion \_ Extracellular fluid

Axon terminal

- 

Neurotransmitters +

\_

Dendrite

Pore

\_

- \_

(b) Close-up view of the axon membrane

Receptors

** Negative ion

Synaptic vesicle (c) Close-up view of the axon terminal

Synaptic gap

FIguRE 4.21

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Intracellular fluid

The Neuron. Neurons share many features with other living cells but are
specialized for the processing of information. (a) Parts of the neuron.
Like other types of animal cells, the neuron features a nucleus in its
cell body and a fatty membrane that separates intracellular and
extracellular fluids. Unlike most other cells, the neuron has
specialized branches, the axon and the dendrites, that pass information
to and receive information from other cells. (b) A closeup view of the
axon membrane. A thin, oily membrane separates the intracellular fluid
inside the neuron from the extracellular fluid outside the neuron. Pores
spanning the membrane act as channels that allow ions to move into and
out of the neuron. (c) A closeup view of the axon terminal. Within the
axon terminal are synaptic vesicles, which contain chemical messengers
called neurotransmitters that transmit signals between neurons. Later in
the chapter, we'll see how these neurotransmitters communicate with
receptors on the dendrites of other neurons.

if neurons are the stars of the nervous system team, glia are the
trainers, coaches, and scorekeepers. They make it possible for neurons
to do their job effectively. Some glia (from the greek word for "glue")
provide a structural matrix for neurons, ensuring that the neurons stay
in place (see ● Figure 4.22). other glia are mobile, allowing them to
move to a location where neurons have been damaged to clean up debris.
glia form tight connections with the blood vessels serving the nervous
system. This forms a blood--brain barrier that prevents many toxins
circulating in the blood from exiting into brain tissue where neurons
could be harmed. Psychoactive drugs, by definition, are substances
capable of penetrating the blood--brain barrier with ease. We discuss
psychoactive drugs and the ways in which they act on the nervous system
in Chapter 6. in vertebrates such as humans, glia wrap around some axons
like sausages on strings at a delicatessen, forming an important layer
of insulation called myelin. Myelin makes neural signaling fast and
energy efficient. We will discuss how myelin accomplishes this in a
later section on neural signaling. By speeding up the transmission of
neural signals and contributing to quicker recovery between signals,
myelin increases the amount of information a neuron

myelin The insulating material covering some axons.

hoW do neURonS CoMMUniCaTe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

135

Blood vessel Neuron

Glia

FIguRE 4.22

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The Blood--Brain Barrier. Glia form tight connections with the blood
vessels in the nervous system, preventing many toxins from entering the
brain. Glia also help hold neurons in place and form the myelin on some
axons.

can transmit per second by a factor of 3,000 times (giedd et al., 2015).
not all axons in the human nervous system are myelinated. When you hurt
yourself, the fast, sharp "ouch" message is carried to the brain by
myelinated axons, but the dull, achy message that lasts a lot longer is
carried by unmyelinated axons. one type of glia forms the myelin in the
brain and the spinal cord, and a second type forms the myelin in the
remainder of the nervous system (see ● Figure 4.23). These two types

Myelin Glia

(a) Glia in the central nervous system

glia Form Myelin. One type of glia forms myelin in the CNS, and a second
type forms myelin in the PNS. These types of glia respond differently to
nerve damage, making nerve damage outside the brain and spinal cord
easier to repair.

136

Chapter 4

Axon

Myelin Glia

Axon Myelin (b) Glia in the peripheral nervous system

Axon

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

FIguRE 4.23

Axon

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Drew Angerer/Getty Images News/Getty Images

CORTESIA/Notimex/Newscom

of glia behave quite differently from each other when they are damaged.
glia in the brain and the spinal cord form scar tissue, inhibiting
repair to the damaged nerves. Because of this feature, we consider
damage in the CnS to be permanent. Considerable research is under way to
figure out how to repair such damage, including work using stem cells to
grow bridges across the damaged areas. in contrast, damaged glia in the
PnS do not form scar tissue and instead help the damaged axons regrow.
as a result, nerve damage in these areas can heal. if this were not so,
operations to reattach limbs would be doomed to failure. Today, not only
are digits and even limbs that were lost in accidents routinely
reattached to their rightful owners, but a number of patients whose own
hands or faces were damaged beyond repair have undergone successful
transplants from cadavers (dubernard et al., 2001; Clarke & Butler,
2009).

Neural Signaling now that we have a working knowledge of the structure
of neurons, we are ready to talk about how they function. a neuron is a
sophisticated communication and information-processing system that
receives input, evaluates it, and decides whether to transmit
information to neurons downstream. its actions are similar to your own
when you receive great news from a friend and then decide whether to
tell somebody else. Understanding this process is important for anyone
using psychoactive substances, whether recreational or therapeutic, as
psychoactive drugs typically produce their effects (and side effects) by
interacting with neural signaling. as we mentioned earlier, neural
communication is a two-step process. in the first step, which takes
place in the signaling neuron's axon, the neuron generates an electrical
signal known as an action potential. This signal travels the length of
the axon from its junction with the cell body to its terminal. in the
second step, which takes place between two neurons, the arrival of an
action potential at the axon terminal of the first neuron signals the
release of chemical messengers, which float across the extracellular
fluid separating the two neurons. These chemicals influence the
likelihood that the second neuron will respond with its own action
potential, sending the message along.

Electrical Signaling The production of action potentials can be
demonstrated using

While on duty as a volunteer fireman in 2001, Patrick Hardison
experienced catastrophic burn damage to his face. His original
appearance before the accident is shown on the left. In 2015, a team of
over 100 medical professionals transplanted a donor face onto Hardison.
His current appearance is shown on the right. This type of operation
would be useless unless the nerves in the face were able to establish
new connections. Hardison expressed joy in an interview about his
ability to feel his children's touch on his face again.

action potential The electrical signal arising in a neuron's axon.

Source: Tau, G. Z., & Peterson, B. S. (2010). "Normal development of
brain circuits". Neuropsychopharmacology Reviews, 35, 147--168. doi:
10.1038/npp.2009.115

axons dissected from a squid and placed in a tub of seawater, which has
a chemical composition

Myelination of the human nervous system takes more than 20 years to
complete. hoW do neURonS CoMMUniCaTe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

137

FIguRE 4.24

Squid axon

Recording From the Axons of Squid Some squid axons are large enough to
be seen with the naked eye and remain active in a bath of seawater for
hours. These features make studying neural activity in a squid axon
relatively simple.

1 mm

resting potential The measure of the electrical charge across a neural
membrane when the neuron is not processing information.

138

Chapter 4

similar to the fluid surrounding our body cells (hodgkin & huxley,
1952). of all the possible sources of axons on the earth, why choose
squid? Certain axons from a squid can be as much as 1 millimeter in
diameter, large enough to see with the naked eye. The squid axon is also
large enough that you can insert a recording electrode into its interior
without disrupting its function. The readings from inside the axon can
then be compared with readings from a recording electrode placed in the
seawater. When a neuron is not processing information, we say that it is
at rest. When a cell is at rest, the difference between the readings
from the interior of the axon and the external fluid is known as the
resting potential. our recording will show that the interior of the
neuron is negatively charged relative to its exterior due to the
different chemical composition of the intracellular and extracellular
fluids. This is similar to the minus sign (the cell's interior) and the
plus sign (the cell's exterior) on a battery. let's assume that our
resting neuron now begins to receive chemical messages from another
neuron, a process we discuss in more detail shortly. neurons can respond
to incoming chemical signals by becoming either depolarized or
hyperpolarized. The word polarized means "far apart," such as when
political factions disagree. Being depolarized means we have moved
closer together, and being hyperpolarized means we have moved even
farther apart than before. in the case of neurons, depolarization means
that the difference between the electrical charges of the extracellular
and the intracellular recordings is decreasing. hyperpolarization means
that the difference is increasing. When a neuron is depolarized by
sufficient input, it reaches a threshold for producing an action
potential. a threshold is the point at which an effect, the action
potential in this case, is initiated. once this threshold is reached,
the generation of an action potential is inevitable. approaching the
threshold for initiating an action potential is similar to pulling the
trigger of a gun. as you squeeze the trigger, nothing happens until you
reach a critical point. once that critical point is reached, the gun
fires, and there is nothing you can do to stop it. Reaching threshold
initiates a sequence of events that reliably produces an action
potential (see ● Figure 4.25). These events involve the opening and the
closing of pores or channels in the neural membrane, which in turn allow
certain chemicals to move into and out of the cell. These chemicals are
in the form of ions or electrically charged particles dissolved in
water. When threshold is reached, channels open, allowing one type of
ion, sodium, to rush into the neuron. Because sodium ions carry a
positive electrical charge, we can see their movement reflected in a
steep rise in our recording of the difference between the internal and
the external electrodes. at the peak of the action potential, our
recording has reversed itself from the resting state. now the interior
of the cell is more positively charged than the outside. near the peak
of the action potential, channels open that allow another type of ion,
positively charged potassium, to move across the membrane. Potassium
begins to leave the cell. as the interior loses these positively charged
potassium ions, our recording heads in the negative direction again.
Following the production of the action potential, the neuron requires a
time-out or refractory period, during which it returns to its resting
state. during this refractory period, the cell is unable or unlikely to
respond to further input by producing another action potential. The size
and shape of action potentials are always the same, whether we're
recording them in a squid or in a human. You won't see recordings of
short, fat action potentials or tall,

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Resting

Action potential

Refractory period

Resting

3

40

mV

2

1 Sodium channels open; sodium rushes in. 2

Potassium channels open; potassium starts to leave cell.

3

Sodium channels close.

4

Potassium channels close.

0

1

Depolarization Threshold Resting potential

4

--65 --70

Hyperpolarization 0

2 Time (in msec)

1

3

Depolarizing input

FIguRE 4.25

skinny ones. either an action potential occurs, or the cell remains at
rest---there is no middle ground. Because of this consistency, we say
that action potentials are all or none. action potentials do not affect
the entire axon all at once. The process we just described takes place
first in a small segment of the axon where the axon connects to the cell
body. The next step is propagation, or the duplication of the electrical
signal down the length of the axon to the axon terminal, where it
initiates the release of chemical messengers. We mentioned earlier that
myelinated neurons enjoyed some advantages in efficiency and speed, and
we are now ready to discuss why that is the case. Propagation takes
place differently in myelinated and unmyelinated axons. in an
unmyelinated axon, action potentials occur step by step, from one small
section of the axon to the next adjacent section, down

JOE SCHERSCHEL/National Geographic Image Collection

The Action Potential. Once threshold is reached, an action potential is
triggered. The movement of sodium and potassium ions across the axon
membrane is reflected in the rise and fall of our recording,
respectively. A refractory period follows each action potential, and
triggering another action potential during this time is more difficult.

Sushi made from puffer fish, known as fugu, is a delicacy, but when
prepared poorly, it can result in sickness or death. Chefs who prepare
fugu undergo extensive training and licensing in Japan. The puffer fish
toxin blocks the movement of sodium into cells, making electrical
signaling impossible. As a result, diners who eat poorly prepared fugu
can become paralyzed and suffocate to death. hoW do neURonS CoMMUniCaTe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

139

Nodes of Ranvier

synapse A point of communication between two neurons.

neurotransmitter A chemical messenger that communicates across a
synapse.

The Science Picture Company/Alamy Stock Photo

A node of Ranvier, located between two adjacent segments of myelin, is
rich in sodium channels, which makes the formation of action potentials
at the node possible.

the entire length of the axon. in contrast, action potentials in
myelinated axons are formed only at the sections of the axon membrane
between adjacent segments of myelin, known as nodes of Ranvier. in other
words, propagation in myelinated axons can "skip" the sections covered
by myelin. You might think about propagation in unmyelinated versus
myelinated axons as being similar to shuffling your feet versus taking
long strides. Which covers the most ground faster and more efficiently?
Propagation in unmyelinated axons works well, as evidenced by the wealth
of invertebrate life on the earth, from the snails in your garden to the
giant squid of the oceans. These animals survive with no myelin, but
their neural communication is not fast or energy efficient compared to
ours. Forming action potentials at each section down the length of the
axon is time consuming, like taking the local bus that stops at every
block. in addition, cleaning up after all these action potentials uses a
lot of energy (Swaminathan et al., 1982). The more action potentials it
takes to move a signal down the length of the axon, the more energy is
expended returning the cell to its resting state. Propagation in
myelinated axons is fast and efficient (see ● Figure 4.26). after an
initial action potential is generated near the cell body, the current
flows beneath a segment of myelin until it reaches a node of Ranvier,
where another action potential occurs. like the express bus, the action
potentials skip the myelinated sections of the axon, reaching their
destination, the

- 

Action potential Myelinated axon ++

Node of Ranvier

- 

** ++ ++ **

*++*

- 

\_

** ** \_

Myelin

- - 
- 

Current flows under myelin

Unmyelinated axon

FIguRE 4.26 Propagation of the Action Potential. Action potentials move
down the length of the myelinated axon more quickly than they move down
an unmyelinated axon.

140

Chapter 4

- \_ *+* + + \_ \_ \_ \_ \_

- - - \_

- ++ + ++++ ++ \_ \_ \_ \_

- \_ \_

- - \_

- 

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  \_ ** \_

- - 

- 

Action potential

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Cell body

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

axon terminal, about 20 times faster than if the axon were unmyelinated.
By covering the same distance with fewer action potentials, the
myelinated axon uses less energy returning to the resting potential than
an unmyelinated axon would need. once the action potential reaches the
axon terminal, the neural communication system switches from an
electrical signaling system to a chemical signaling one.

Chemical Signaling The point of communication between two neurons

Eye of Science/Science Source

is known as a synapse. at the synapse, neurons do not touch one another
physically. instead, they are separated by tiny gaps filled with
extracellular fluid. Because electrical signals are unable to jump this
gap, neurons send chemical messengers instead. These chemical messengers
are called neurotransmitters (see ● Table 4.4). ● Figure 4.27
illustrates the sequence of events triggered by the arrival of an action
potential at an axon terminal. The neurotransmitters in the axon
terminal are contained in synaptic vesicles. The arrival of an action
potential releases the vesicles from their protein anchors, much like
boats leaving a dock, and the vesicles migrate rapidly to the cell
membrane. Because the vesicles are made of the same thin, oily material
as the membrane, they easily fuse with the membrane and spill Two axons
(in purple) are forming their contents into the synaptic gap, similar to
popping soap bubbles in a bathtub. Following synapses or junctions where
release, the vesicles are pinched off the membrane and refilled.
communication will occur with a The neurotransmitters released across
the synaptic gap come into contact with special neuron's cell body (in
yellow). channels on the receiving neuron, known as receptors. Receptors
work with the neurotransmitters like locks and keys. only a
neurotransmitter with the right shape (the key) can attach receptor A
special channel in the memitself or bind to a particular receptor (the
lock). neurotransmitters do not stay bound to rebrane of a neuron that
interacts with neuceptors long. once they pop out of the receptor
binding site, neurotransmitter molecules drift rotransmitters released
by other neurons. away from the gap, are broken down by enzymes, or
return to the axon terminal from which reuptake A process in which
molecules they were released in a process called reuptake. in reuptake,
special channels in the axon terof neurotransmitter in the synaptic gap
are minal membrane known as transporters allow the neurotransmitters to
move back into the returned to the axon terminal from which they were
released. releasing neuron where they are repackaged for later use. Many
important drugs, including the antidepressant drug fluoxetine (Prozac),
cocaine, and amphetamines, interfere with or inhibit this reuptake
process. TABLE The interaction between neurotransmitters and their
receptors Important Neurotransmitters can have one of two effects on the
receiving neuron: excitation or inhibition. When a neurotransmitter has
an excitatory effect, it slightly behaviors influenced by the
depolarizes the receiving neuron, increasing the likelihood that the
neurotransmitter neurotransmitter neuron will reach threshold and
initiate an action potential. Recall that depolarization reduces the
difference between the electrical environAcetylcholine (ACh) • Movement
ments inside and outside the neuron. When a neurotransmitter has •
Memory an inhibitory effect, it slightly hyperpolarizes the receiving
neuron, • Autonomic nervous system function moving the cell farther from
threshold and reducing the likelihood Epinephrine (adrenalin) • Arousal
that it will initiate an action potential. Recall that hyperpolarization
increases the difference between the electrical environments inside •
Arousal Norepinephrine and outside the neuron. (noradrenalin) •
Vigilance excitatory messages seem logical. one neuron is telling
another • Movement to "pass the message along." inhibitory messages,
however, seem someDopamine what strange at first glance. Why would our
nervous systems need a • Planning message that says, "don't pass the
message along"? Tetanus, for which • Reward you probably have been
vaccinated, provides a dramatic example of • Mood Serotonin what can
happen when inhibition doesn't work properly. The toxin • Appetite
produced by the bacteria responsible for tetanus selectively damages
inhibitory neurons in the parts of the nervous system that control •
Sleep muscle contraction. normally, excitatory inputs that contract
muscles • Dominance/Aggression coordinate their activity with inhibitory
inputs that tell muscles to • Excitation of brain activity Glutamate
relax, allowing the steady hands we need to put in a contact lens, for
example. Without the input of the inhibitory neurons, the system is left
• Inhibition of brain activity GABA with excitation only, and the result
is the extreme muscle contraction Endorphins • Pain management that
gives tetanus its other name---lockjaw (see ● Figure 4.28).

4.4

hoW do neURonS CoMMUniCaTe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

141

Synaptic vesicles 1 Action potential reaches axon terminal.

6 Vesicles are refilled with neurotransmitter.

Axon terminal

4 Vesicles open, releasing neurotransmitters into synaptic gap

Neurotransmitter molecules

5 Vesicle material is recycled.

2 Synaptic vesicles are released from their protein anchors. 3 Synaptic
vesicles fuse with axon membrane at release sites.

Synaptic gap

Cell receiving information Receptors

(a) Neurotransmitter release

Neurotransmitter molecule Receptors (b) Reuptake

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Channels used for reuptake

FIguRE 4.27 Chemical Signaling. Because most neurons are separated from
one another by extracellular fluid, the action potential cannot jump
from one neuron to the next. To cross the gap between neurons, chemical
signals are used instead. (a) Neurotransmitter release. The arrival of
an action potential at the axon terminal triggers a sequence of events
that results in the release of neurotransmitter molecules, which float
across the synaptic gap to interact with receptors on the receiving
neuron. (b) Reuptake. After interacting with receptors, neurotransmitter
molecules are often recaptured by the neuron that released them to be
recycled and used again later.

Inhibitory neuron Inhibition

FIguRE 4.28

Tetanus toxin

Excitation signals from the central nervous system

Tetanus Blocks Motor Inhibition. The severe muscle contraction that
gives tetanus its nickname of lockjaw results from the toxin's blocking
the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters in the motor systems of the
brain and spinal cord. (a) Normally, inhibitory input balances
contraction to maintain smooth movements. (b) Without the counterbalance
of inhibition, too much muscle contraction occurs.

Muscle

(b) 
(c) 

142

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Synapses usually occur in many locations on the dendrites or cell body
of the receiving neuron, and the depolarizing or hyperpolarizing current
that results from neurotransmitter activity at these synapses drifts to
the junction of the cell body and axon. if there is sufficient
depolarization to reach threshold at this junction, the neuron generates
an action potential. if not, it remains at rest. The neuron's "decision"
to generate an action potential or not is called summation; the neuron
is adding up all incoming messages and making a decision based on that
information. The neuron's task is not unlike the situation we face when
we ask friends and family for advice. We will receive some excitatory
advice (go for it!), along with some inhibitory advice (don't even think
about it!). our job, like the neuron's, is to sum our input and make a
decision. Unlike us, however, the neuron cannot disregard the advice it
receives.

The SSRI label for some antidepressant medications, including Prozac,
stands for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. People who are
depressed often have lower-than-normal serotonin activity at the
synapse. If you inhibit reuptake of serotonin, more molecules remain in
the synaptic gap longer where they can continue to interact with
receptors. Serotonin activity increases, relieving depression, because
we get more "bang for the buck" each time serotonin is released.

Types of Neurotransmitters

Jack Fields/Science Source

Researchers have identified more than 50 chemicals that serve as
neurotransmitters. Table 4.4 lists some of the neurotransmitters that
are particularly interesting to psychologists, and we will highlight a
few of these in this section. in Chapter 6, we explore examples of
psychoactive drugs, both therapeutic and recreational, that interact
with the normal biochemistry of the nervous system. acetylcholine (aCh)
is a neurotransmitter found in many systems important to behavior. aCh
is found at the neuromuscular junction, the synapse at which the nervous
system commands muscles. interference with the action of aCh at the
muscles can result in paralysis and death, making drugs that act on aCh
popular for use as pesticides and as bioweapons. aCh also serves as a
key neurotransmitter in the autonomic nervous system, discussed
previously, which carries commands from the brain to the glands and
organs. aCh is also intimately involved in the brain circuits related to
learning and memory. These brain circuits are among the first to
deteriorate in A Yagua hunter in Peru loads a alzheimer's disease. not
surprisingly, memory deficits are among the dart tipped with curare into
the earliest symptoms of alzheimer's disease to appear. among the many
drugs that act on aCh mouthpiece of his blowgun. Curare systems is the
nicotine found in tobacco. is derived from native plants and
norepinephrine activity in the brain leads to arousal and vigilance.
Consistent with this causes paralysis by blocking receptors role in
arousal, norepinephrine is also released by the sympathetic nervous
system. as we for acetylcholine (ACh) at synapses observed previously,
the sympathetic nervous system prepares us to react to emergencies
between the nervous system and the by providing necessary resources,
such as the extra oxygen that is needed to run or throw a muscle fibers.
punch. abnormalities in norepinephrine activity have been implicated in
several psychological conditions that feature disturbances in arousal
and vigilance, including bipolar disorder and posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSd), discussed in Chapter 14. dopamine is involved with
systems that govern movement, planning, and reward. Parkinson's disease,
which makes normal movement difficult, results when dopamine-releasing
neurons in the brain's movement circuits begin to die. in addition,
dopamine participates in the brain's reward and pleasure circuits by
becoming active whenever we engage in behaviors that promote survival
and successful reproduction, such as eating a great meal or having sex.
Most drugs that produce addiction, including Botox, which is used to
treat muscle spasms or cocaine and methamphetamine, stimulate increased
activity in dopamine reduce wrinkles, is made from an inactive form of
circuits. in Chapter 14, we will see how disruptions to dopamine
circuits the toxin responsible for botulism, which is produced have been
implicated in schizophrenia and adhd. Serotonin is involved with systems
regulating sleep, appetite, mood, by bacteria that spoil food. Botox
interacts with ACh and aggression. Consequently, these behaviors are
tightly linked. as we by preventing its release from the axon terminal.
will see in Chapter 14, people who experience depressed mood also show
Without the activity of ACh telling a muscle to abnormalities in
appetite and sleep. contract, the muscle remains paralyzed.

hoW do neURonS CoMMUniCaTe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

143

endorphins, short for endogenous morphine or morphine produced by the
body, modify our natural response to pain. in evolutionary terms, it
makes sense to have a system that reduces your chances of being disabled
by pain during an emergency. all too frequently, however, we
underestimate the extent of our injuries until we wake up the next
morning feeling sore. "Runner's high," in which people who regularly
engage in endurance sports experience a sense of well-being and reduced
sensation

Source: University Of Michigan Health System

This image highlights areas of the human brain that are rich in
receptors for endorphins, our natural opioids. The red areas have the
most endorphin receptors, followed by the yellow areas. Opioid drugs,
such as heroin or morphine, affect our behavior by interacting with
these receptors.

Interpersonal Relationships The Biological Perspective Sexual Desire

Insula Romantic Love

Insula

FIguRE 4.29 Brain Areas Associated with Sexual Desire and Romantic Love.
Areas shown in blue are uniquely active during sexual desire, while
areas shown in red are uniquely active during romantic love. One of the
areas where activity reliably varies between the states of sexual desire
and romantic love is the insula. Activity in the posterior insula
(toward the back of the brain) is associated with sexual desire, while
activity in the anterior insula (toward the front of the brain) is
associated with romantic love.

144

Chapter 4

FOR MANY PEOPLE, Romantic love and Love lust seem close together. Using
the biological perspective, however, these two states look related yet
distinct. on a neurochemical level, sexual desire or lust is driven
primarily by levels of testosterone for males and levels of estrogens
for females (Cappelletti & Wallen, 2016), while the bonding we associate
with romantic love is largely associated with oxytocin (diamond, 2004).
This suggests that, at least on a hormonal level, it is possible to
differentiate the two states. Further understanding of the relationship
between lust and Insula love comes from brain imaging research. of
particular interest is the insula, an area of cortex lining the lateral
sulcus, which separates the temporal lobes from the frontal and parietal
lobes. Pulling the temporal lobe away from the rest of the brain reveals
the insula within the sulcus. as shown in Figure 4.28, researchers found
that activation of the posterior (back) part of the insula is more
closely associated with lust (Cacioppo et al., 2012). in contrast, these
same researchers found that activation of the anterior or forward part
of the insula is more associated with romantic feelings. They conclude
that passionate/romantic "love grows out of and is a more abstract
representation of the pleasant sensorimotor experiences that
characterize desire" (Cacioppo et al., 2012, p. 1048). additional
support for the role of the anterior insula in love comes from a unique
case study (Cacioppo et al., 2013). a male patient who had experienced
damage to his anterior insula was asked to indicate whether a series of
attractive individuals could be the object of his lust or his love.
Compared to healthy control participants, the patient showed a selective
deficit in his decisions about love yet performed normally on decisions
about lust. The patient was similar to the controls in the number of
people he categorized as objects of love or lust, and his response time
to objects of lust appeared normal. however, his response time for
categorizing objects of love was slower than that of the healthy
controls. Should we conclude that the anterior insula is a "love center"
of the brain? it would be better to conclude, as Cacioppo et al. (2013)
do, that the anterior insula participates in a larger network that helps
us figure out internal states, which includes feelings of romantic love.
■

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology Takes on Real-World Problems Social Distancing, Loneliness,
and the Nervous System FEELINGS OF SOCIAL ISOLATION are common among
people practicing social distancing during a pandemic. These feelings
initiate quite a few physical responses, including the changes in immune
functioning described at the beginning of the chapter. These phenomena
provide additional examples of how the way we think can influence our
biology. Among the other responses to social isolation relevant to this
chapter are changes in sympathetic nervous system activity and the
activity of several brain areas and networks. Being socially isolated
for our ancestors also meant being more vulnerable to threats of many
kinds. In this chapter, we have noted that the sympathetic nervous
system participates in making our bodies ready for fight or flight in
response to threat. As we'll

see in Chapter 16, some of the long-term, negative consequences of
stress result from too much activation in this system. Loneliness,
however, produces a somewhat different response in the sympathetic
nervous system (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018a). Instead of a fight or
flight reaction, loneliness is associated with a type of watchful
anticipation of threat. While not as dramatic, this activity nonetheless
might be associated with high blood pressure and other physical
problems. What happens in the lonely brain? In this chapter, we
described the reward pathways of the brain, which support feelings of
pleasure for everything from eating a delicious meal to having sex to
gambling and drug addiction. As shown in Figure 4.29, when lonely and
non-lonely individuals are

exposed to pleasant pictures of people and objects, activity in their
reward pathways differed (Cacioppo et al., 2014). Lonely people showed
greater activity when viewing objects than people, whereas non-lonely
people showed greater activity when viewing people than objects. As we
stated in Chapter 1, the goal of this section of each chapter is to
think about real-world problems in ways that inform policy. An
understanding of this important reciprocal relationship between nervous
system activity and the perception of loneliness can help us emphasize
to policy makers the importance of solving problems related to social
isolation, not just for people's emotional well-being but for their
health. ■

Pleasant nonsocial

0.2

Everett Historical/Shutterstock.com

Pleasant social

0.1

0.1 Osadchaya Olga/Shutterstock.com

Mean % signal change AUC

0.2

0.0

-- 0.1 Lower loneliness

High loneliness

FIguRE 4.30 Loneliness Changes Brain Responses to Pleasant Photos. When
lonely and non-lonely individuals are exposed to pleasant pictures of
people (e.g., man playing with dog) and objects (e.g., rocket launch),
activity in their reward pathways differed. (AUC means "area under
curve" and provides a measure of change in the brain's activity as shown
in functional MRI).

hoW do neURonS CoMMUniCaTe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

145

of pain, results from the release of endorphins initiated by high levels
of activity. opioid drugs such as morphine, heroin, and oxycodone
(oxyContin) produce their pain-relieving effects by mimicking the action
of endorphins at the synapse. in other words, the opioid drugs are so
similar in chemical structure to our natural endorphins that the
receptors cannot tell them apart and treat the opioids as if they were
natural endorphins.

suMMary 4.3 Neural Communication Structure

What to remember

Neuron

●

●

Axon: Used to send information

●

Dendrite: Used to receive information

●

Hold neurons in place

Neuron

●

Clean up debris

Glia

●

Form myelin

●

Blood--brain barrier

●

Propagated down the axon to the terminal

●

Resting potential: No incoming signals

●

Action potential: Occurs when cell reaches threshold

●

Refractory period: Follows action potential

Synapse

●

Point of communication between two neurons

Neurotransmitters

●

Released when an action potential arrives at a terminal

●

Interact with receptors in the receiving neuron's membrane

●

Deactivated if they remain in the synaptic gap

●

ACh

●

Norepinephrine

●

Dopamine

●

Serotonin

●

Endorphins

Glia

Resting

Blood vessel

Refractory period

Action potential

Resting

3

40

mV

2

Cell body: contains the nucleus and carries out most housekeeping
functions

1 Sodium channels open; sodium rushes in. 2

Potassium channels open; potassium starts to leave cell.

3

Sodium channels close.

4

Potassium channels close.

Action potentials

0

1

Depolarization Threshold Resting potential

4

--65 --70

Hyperpolarization 0

1

2 Time (in msec)

3

Depolarizing input

Credits: Top row---MPI Biochemistry/Volker Steger/Science Source.;
Second row---© Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Third row---© Argosy Publishing,
Inc. Fourth row---Eye of Science/Science Source.; Bottom row---Jack
Fields/Science Source.

146

Chapter 4

The BiologiCal Mind: The PhYSiCal BaSiS oF BehaVioR

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Key terMs The Language of Psychological Science Be sure you can define
these terms and use them correctly.

action potential, p. 137 amygdala, p. 117 autonomic nervous system,
p. 129 axon, p. 134 basal ganglia, p. 116 brainstem, p. 114 cell body,
p. 134 central nervous system (CnS), p. 110 cerebellum, p. 115 cerebral
cortex, p. 118 cingulate cortex, p. 117 corpus callosum, p. 118
dendrite, p. 134 endocrine system, p. 132 enteric nervous system, p. 130

frontal lobe, p. 118 glia, p. 134 hippocampus, p. 117 hypothalamus,
p. 117 medulla, p. 115 midbrain, p. 115 myelin, p. 135 neuron, p. 134
neurotransmitter, p. 141 nucleus accumbens, p. 118 occipital lobe,
p. 119 orbitofrontal cortex, p. 122 parasympathetic nervous system,
p. 130 parietal lobe, p. 118

peripheral nervous system (PnS), p. 111 pons, p. 115 prefrontal cortex,
p. 121 receptor, p. 141 resting potential, p. 138 reticular formation,
p. 116 reuptake, p. 141 somatic nervous system, p. 129 spinal cord,
p. 111 sympathetic nervous system, p. 129 synapse, p. 141 temporal lobe,
p. 119 thalamus, p. 116

hoW do neURonS CoMMUniCaTe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

147

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The rods and cones in the retina begin the process of interpreting the
light energy that enters the eye.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Perceiving Mind

5

SENSATION AND PERCEPTION Learning Objectives 1. Explain the basic
concepts of sensation and perception, including transduction of stimuli
into neural signals, distinctions between bottom-up and top-down
perceptual processing, thresholds, and measurement.

2.  Identify the process by which the physical structures of the eye
    transduce light waves into neural signals, producing the sense of
    vision.

3.  Summarize the processes responsible for color vision, object
    recognition, and depth perception.

4.  Describe the process by which physical structures of the ear
    transduce sound waves into neural signals, producing perception of
    pitch, loudness, and spatial location in hearing.

5.  Explain the mechanisms by which the somatosensory and chemical sense
    systems produce perception of body position, touch, skin
    temperature, pain, smell, and taste.

6.  Analyze the causes of various individual differences in perception,
    including development and culture, in terms of biology, experience,
    and their interaction.

WE LIKE TO THINK WE UNDERSTAND REALITY. After all, we can see, hear,
touch, smell, and taste it. We don't live in some science fiction
universe where things are not how they appear. Or do we? The human eye
can see many different colors, but what does it mean to "see" a color?
Is color something that is a fixed quality of an object? Is the sky
really blue? Is an apple really red? Or does the human mind construct
these colors from the light reflected from these objects into the eye?
Consider the image of the blue/black or white/gold dress that became an
Internet sensation in February 2015. A friend of a Scottish bride posted
the dress worn by the bride's mother on her Tumblr blog, leading to a
discussion that engaged everyone from Justin Bieber to esteemed
neuroscientists. Why do people see this photo so differently?
Neuroscientists disagree about why the dress produced such different
responses. The Journal of Vision phenomenon. A survey of 1,400 people
found that 57% described the dress as blue/black (which is correct), 30%
as white/gold, 11% as blue/brown, and 2% as something else (Lafer-Sousa
et al., 2015). Older individuals and women were more likely to choose
white/gold. These researchers believe that

Laura Freberg

prepared an entire issue ("A Dress Rehearsal for Vision Science")
devoted to explaining the dress

people choose dress colors based on their expectations regarding the
lighting. If you think the dress is seen in daylight, you make different
conclusions than if you think the dress is seen under artificial light.
Other scientists believe there is something special about the color blue
due to our considerable experience with natural lighting (Winkler et
al., 2015). Because indirect lighting and shadows are usually

"The Dress" became an Internet phenomenon as people debated its true
colors. Do you see it as black and blue? White and gold? Something else?

149 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

blue, participants are more likely to confuse blue objects with blue
lighting. If you assume the light falling on the dress is somewhat blue,
you will probably see it as white. Would having a color vision
deficiency change the way a person sees the dress? See for yourself. We
can reconstruct how the image would look to a person with a rare type of
blue-yellow color vision deficiency. Surprisingly, this has little
effect, although the blue looks somewhat gray. Is the reality seen by a
person with a color vision deficiency different from your reality? We're
going to argue that it is not reality that changes but rather the way
Laura Freberg

the brain views that reality. As you'll see in this chapter, we
construct models of reality from the information obtained through our
senses. We like to think that we are aware of the world around us, and
it is unsettling to realize that the world "Tritanopes" have a rare type
of blue-yellow color vision deficiency. We can simulate how the
mysterious dress would look to a tritanope. The differences are
surprisingly subtle, which explains why we use the term "color vision
deficiency" rather than "colorblindness." This example also reminds us
that a single reality (the dress) can be sensed and perceived very
differently by individual minds.

sensation The process of detecting environmental stimuli or stimuli
arising from the body. perception The process of interpreting sensory
information.

might be different from the representations of reality formed by the
human mind. You will learn how the models built by the human mind have
promoted our survival over many generations. Our models of reality are
distinct from those built by the minds of other animals, whose survival
depends on obtaining different types of information from their
environments.

How Does Sensation Lead to Perception? Our bodies are bombarded with
information during wakefulness and sleep. This information takes many
forms, from the electromagnetic energy of the sun to vibrations in the
air to molecules dissolved in saliva on our tongues. The process of
sensation brings information to the brain that arises in the reality
outside our bodies, like a beautiful sunset, or originates from within,
like an upset stomach. Sensory systems have been shaped by natural
selection, described in Chapter 3, to provide information that enhances
survival within a particular niche. We sense a uniquely human reality,
and one that is not shared by other animals. Your dog howls seconds
before you hear the siren from an approaching ambulance because the
dog's hearing is better than yours for high-pitched sounds. horses bolt
at the slightest provocation, but they may be reacting to the vibration
of an approaching car or an animal that they sense through their front
hooves, a source of information that is not available to the rider. Some
animals sense light energy outside the human visible spectrum. insects
can see ultraviolet light, and some snakes use infrared energy to detect
their prey. differences in sensation do occur from person to person,
such as the need to wear corrective glasses or not, but they are
relatively subtle. however, once we move from the process of sensation
to that of perception, or the interpretation of sensory input,
individual differences become more evident. For example, friends voting
for different presidential candidates will come to different conclusions
about who won a debate. everyone watching the exchange sensed similar
information, but each person's perceptions are unique.

Sensory Information Travels to the Brain Sensation begins with the
interaction between a physical stimulus and our biological sensory
systems. A stimulus is anything that elicits a reaction from our sensory
systems. For example, we react to light energy that falls within our
visual range, as we will see later in this chapter, but we cannot see
light energy that falls outside that range, such as the microwaves that
cook our dinner or the ultraviolet waves that harm our skin (see ●
Figure 5.1).

150

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 5.1

Leah Warkentin/AGE Fotostock

All Species Experience an Adaptive Reality. Humans see only a small part
of the electromagnetic energy emitted from the Sun. Some animals see
even less. Dogs apparently do fine seeing blues, yellows, and grays,
whereas humans have evolved to see a more colorful world. The dog's view
of the world is simulated in the photo on the right.

Wavelength in meters

10--14

10--13

Cosmic rays

10--12

10--11

Gamma rays

10--10

10--9

X-rays

10--8

10--7

Ultraviolet

10--6

10--5

Visible

10--15

10--4

Infrared

10--3

10--2

10--1

101

102

103

Microwaves Radar TV FM AM Short Radio waves waves

VISIBLE RANGE

Human's view 400

450

500

550

600

650

700

750

Wavelength in nanometers

Dog's view

The Brain Constructs Perceptions From Sensory Information

Ted Kinsman/Science Source

Before you can use information from your senses, it must be translated
into a form the nervous system can understand. this process of
translation from stimulus to neural signal is known as transduction. You
might think of sensory transduction as being similar to the processing
of information by your computer. Modern computers transduce a variety of
inputs, including voice, photos, keyboard, mouse clicks, and touch, into
a programming language for further processing.

once information from the sensory systems has been transduced into
neural signals and sent to the brain, the process of perception, or the
interpretation of the sensory information, begins. Perception allows us
to organize, recognize, and use the information provided by the senses.
an important gateway to perception is the process of attention, defined
as a narrow focus of consciousness. as we discuss in chapters 6, 9, and
10, attention often determines which features of the environment
influence our subsequent thoughts and behaviors. which stimuli are
likely to grab our attention? Unfamiliar, changing, or high-intensity
stimuli often affect our survival and have a high priority for our
attention. Unfamiliar stimuli in our ancestors' environment might have
meant a new source of danger (an unknown predator) or a new source of
food (an unfamiliar fruit) that warranted additional investigation. our
sensory systems are particularly sensitive to change in the environment.
notice how you pay attention to the sound of your heating system

Some types of snakes (vipers, boas, and pythons) can locate prey by
sensing infrared energy.

transduction The translation of incoming sensory information into neural
signals.

How Does sensation LeaD to PercePtion?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

151

cycling on or off but pay little attention to the noise it makes while
running. This reduced response to an unchanging stimulus is known as
sensory adaptation. high-intensity stimuli, such pay less attention to a
nonchanging source as bright lights and loud noises, draw our attention
because the situations that produce these of stimulation. stimuli, such
as a nearby explosion, can have obvious consequences for our safety.
bottom-up processing Perception We rarely have the luxury of paying
attention to any single stimulus. in most cases, we based on building
simple input into more complex perceptions. experience divided
attention, in which we attempt to process multiple sources of sensory
information. Students walk to class without getting run over by a car
while texting. These divided top-down processing A perceptual process in
which memory and other cogniattention abilities are limited. We simply
cannot process all the information converging simultative processes are
required for interpreting neously on our sensory systems. To prioritize
input, we use selective attention, or the ability to incoming sensory
information. focus on a subset of available information and exclude the
rest. These abilities may be disrupted in cases of attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (Adhd; Wimmer et al., If you think about the most
memorable 2015; also see Chapter 14). We refer to the brain's use of
incoming signals to construct perceptions as advertisements you have
seen lately on television bottom-up processing. For example, we
construct our visual reality from inforor online, it is likely that they
share the features of mation about light that is sent from the eye to
the brain. however, the brain also attention-getting stimuli: novelty
(we don't see imposes a structure on the incoming information, a type of
processing known talking geckos every day), change (rapid movement, as
top-down. in top-down processing, we use knowledge gained from prior use
of changing colors, and the dreaded pop-up), experience with stimuli to
perceive them. For example, a skilled reader has no and intensity (the
sound is often louder than the trouble reading the following sentences,
even though the words are jumbled: sensory adaptation The tendency to

All you hvae to do to mkae a snetnece raedalbe is to mkae srue taht the
fisrt and lsat letrtes of ecah wrod saty the smae. Wtih prcatcie, tihs
porcses becoems mcuh fsater and esaeir.

AP Images/Roberto Pfeil

We have all had the experience of watching events with others
(sensation) and then being shocked by the different interpretations we
hear of what just happened (perception).

Divided attention abilities are limited. Some people believe that
heads-up displays for cars assist drivers with divided attention, while
others believe the displays are too distracting.

152

Chapter 5

how can we explain our ability to read these sentences? First, we
require bottom-up processing to bring the sensations of the letter
shapes to our brain. From there, however, we use knowledge and
experience to recognize individual words. Many students have learned the
hard way that term papers must be proofread carefully. As in our
example, if the brain expects to see a particular word, you are likely
to see that word, even if it is misspelled, a

metamorworks/Shutterstock.com

program you're watching).

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

skyhawk x/Shutterstock.com

mistake that is unlikely to be made by the literal, bottom-up processing
of a computer spell-checker. Can we predict when the mind will use
bottom-up or top-down processing? There are no hard and fast rules.
Obviously, we always use bottom-up processing, or the information would
not be perceived. it is possible that bottom-up processing alone allows
us to respond appropriately to simple stimuli, like indicating whether
you saw a flash of light, or stimuli that are unfamiliar to us. As
stimuli become more complicated or familiar, like reading a sentence or
recognizing a friend in a crowd, we are more likely to engage in
top-down processing in addition to bottom-up processing.

Measuring Perception gustav Fechner (1801--1887) developed methods,
which he called psychophysics, for studying the relationships between
stimuli (the physics part) and perception of those stimuli (the psyche
or mind part) (see ● Figure 5.2). Fechner's careful methods not only
contributed to the establishment of psychology as a true science but are
still used in research today. The methods of psychophysics allow us to
establish the limits of awareness, or thresholds, for each of our
sensory systems. The smallest possible stimulus that can be detected at
least 50% of the time is known as the absolute threshold. Under ideal
circumstances, our senses are surprisingly sensitive (see ● Figure 5.3).
For example, you can see the equivalent of a candle flame 30 miles
(about 48 kilometers) away on a moonless night. We can also establish a
difference threshold, or the smallest difference between two stimuli
that can be detected at least 50% of the time. The amount of difference
that can be detected depends on the size of the stimuli being compared.
As stimuli get larger, differences must also become larger to be
detected by an observer.

Selective attention, or our focus on a subset of input, prioritizes
incoming information. However, we can sometimes be so focused that we
miss important information. An astonishing 20 out of 24 expert
radiologists completely missed the image of a gorilla superimposed on
scans of lungs while scanning for signs of cancer. Source: T. Drew et
al. (2013). "The Invisible Gorilla Strikes Again: Sustained
Inattentional Blindness in Expert Observers," Psychological Science,
24(9), 1848--1853, doi: 10.1177/0956797613479386

psychophysics The study of relationships between the physical qualities
of stimuli and the subjective responses they produce. absolute threshold
The smallest amount of stimulus that can be detected. difference
threshold The smallest detectable difference between two stimuli.

40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 Most pleasing Least pleasing

The Golden Rectangle

FIGURE

Photo Researchers, Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

Percent of choices

Signal Detection Many perceptions involve some uncertainty. Perhaps you
think you recognize the person coming toward you on the sidewalk. do you
wave right away? Or do you wait until the person is close enough that
you know for sure it's your friend? how do your personal feelings about
making mistakes affect your decision? how embarrassed would you be if
you waved at a stranger? This type of decision making can have serious
implications, such as in the case of decisions made by radiologists
examining the results of mammograms for signs of cancer or by
intelligence officers assessing the possibility of an attack. is there
reason for concern or not?

5.2

Connecting the Physical World and the Mind. "Golden" rectangles, named
for their proportions rather than color, appear in art and architecture
dating back to ancient Greece, but why are they attractive? Gustav
Fechner (1801--1887) made many attempts to link physical realities with
human psychological responses. He asked people to choose which
rectangles are most pleasing or least pleasing. His results indicated
that the most pleasing rectangle was fourth from the right. This
rectangle is the closest to having golden proportions (1:1.618). Its
sides have a ratio of 13:21.

hOW dOeS SenSATiOn LeAd TO PerCePTiOn?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

153

FIGURE

5.3

Absolute Sensory Thresholds. An absolute threshold is the smallest
amount of sensation that can be processed by our sensory systems under
ideal conditions. Moving from left to right in this image, we see that
the absolute threshold for touch is the equivalent of feeling the wing
of a fly fall on your cheek from a distance of 0.4 inches (about 1
centimeter), the absolute threshold for olfaction is a drop of perfume
in the air filling a six-room apartment, the absolute threshold for
sweetness is the equivalent of one teaspoon (about 5 grams) of sugar in
two gallons (about 7.5 liters) of water (the absolute threshold for
bitter tastes is even more sensitive), the absolute threshold for
hearing is the equivalent of the sound of a mosquito 10 feet (about 3
meters) away, and the absolute threshold for vision is seeing a candle
flame 30 miles (about 48 kilometers) away on a dark, clear night.

A drop of perfume diffused into the entire volume of air The wing of a
fly falling in a six-room apartment on you from a distance of 0.4 inches
(about 1 centimeter) Photos, left to right: Gladskikh
Tatiana/Shutterstock.com; Kuttelvaserova Stuchelova/Shutterstock.com;
Christopher Elwell/Shutterstock.com; AlexRoz/Shutterstock.com.

This situation is different from the thresholds described earlier
because it adds the cognitive process of decision making to the process
of sensation. in other words, signal detection is a and decision-making
processes in the detwo-step process involving (a) the actual intensity
of the stimulus, which influences the obtection of faint, uncertain
stimuli. server's belief that the stimulus did occur, and (b) the
individual observer's criteria for deciding whether the stimulus
occurred. experiments on signal detection provide insight into this type
Another example of signal detection is a jury's of decision making. in
these experiments, trials with a single, faint stimulus and trials with
no stimulus are presented randomly. The decision about whether a person
is guilty. Based participant states whether a stimulus was present on
each trial. The poson frequently uncertain and conflicting evidence,
sible outcomes of this experiment are shown in ● Table 5.1. in the case
jurors must weigh their concerns about convicting of reading mammograms,
we can use such experiments to help us an innocent person (false alarm)
or letting a real understand why two people might respond differently,
even if they criminal go (miss). were sensing the same information.
ideally, a radiologist would identify 100% of all tumors without any
false alarms, but mammograms are not that easy to evaluate. A
radiologist afraid of missing a tumor might identify anything that looks
remotely like a tumor as the basis for more testing. Few cases of cancer
would be missed (high hit rate), but many healthy patients would go
through unnecessary procedures (high false alarm rate). in contrast,
another radiologist According to Fechner's work on the might need a
higher difference threshold, British Olympian level of certainty about
Zoe Smith would be more likely to the presence of a tumor notice the
difference between 1 and before asking for fur2 kilogram (about 2- and
4-pound) ther tests. This would dumbbells than the difference reduce the
number of between her new record of 121 false alarms, but it would
kilograms (266.76 pounds) in the clean also run a higher risk of and
jerk event and the former record overlooking tumors (high of 120
kilograms (264.56 pounds). miss rate). YURI CORTEZ/AFP/Getty
Images/Newscom

signal detection The analysis of sensory

154

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The sound of a mosquito flying about 10 feet (about 3 meters) away

A teaspoon of sugar (about 5 grams) in two gallons (about 7.5 liters) of
water

A candle flame seen at 30 miles (about 48 kilometers) on a clear night

Photos, left to right: fotomak/Shutterstock.com;
seeyou/Shutterstock.com; taedong/Shutterstock.com; Karen H.
Ilagan/Shutterstock.com.

BSIP/Contributor/Universal Images Group/Getty Images

Does this mammogram indicate the woman has cancer or not? Many decisions
we make are based on ambiguous stimuli. Signal detection theory helps us
understand how an individual doctor balances the risks of missing a
cancer and those of alarming a healthy patient.

TABLE 5.1 Possible Outcomes in Signal Detection Participant response

stimulus Present

stimulus absent

Yes

Hit

False alarm

No

Miss

Correct rejection

hOW dOeS SenSATiOn LeAd TO PerCePTiOn?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

155

summary 5.1 Assessing Perception concept

Definition

example

Absolute threshold

The smallest amount of stimulation that is detectable.

Seeing light from a candle flame 30 miles away on a dark night.

Difference threshold

The smallest difference between two stimuli that can be detected.

Being able to detect the difference between two different weights.

Signal detection

Correctly identifying when a faint stimulus is or is not present.

A radiologist correctly detecting cancer from a mammogram.

Credits: Top row---Karen H. Ilagan/Shutterstock.com; Second row---YURI
CORTEZ/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom; Bottom row---BSIP/Contributor/Universal
Images Group/Getty Images.

vision The sense that allows us to process reflected light.

How Do We See? Vision, the processing of light reflected from objects,
is one of the most important sensory systems in humans. Approximately
50% of our cerebral cortex processes visual information, in comparison
to only 3% for hearing and 11% for touch and pain (Kandel & Wurtz, 2000;
Sereno & Tootell, 2005). We will begin our exploration of vision with a
description of the visual stimulus, and then we will follow the
processing of that stimulus by the mind into a meaningful perception.

The Visual Stimulus

FIGURE

5.4

Light Travels in Waves. The distance between two peaks in a light wave
(wavelength) is decoded by the visual system as color and the height, or
amplitude, of the wave as brightness.

visible light, or the energy within the electromagnetic spectrum to
which our visual systems respond, is a type of radiation emitted by the
Sun, other stars, and artificial sources such as a lightbulb. As shown
in ● Figure 5.4, light energy moves in waves, like the waves in the
ocean. Wavelength, or the distance between successive peaks of waves, is
decoded by our visual system as color or shades of gray. The height, or
amplitude, of the waves is translated by the visual system into
brightness. Large-amplitude waves appear bright, and low-amplitude waves
appear dim. The human visual world involves only a small part of this
light spectrum (review Figure 5.1). gamma rays, x-rays, ultraviolet
rays, infrared rays, microwaves, and radio waves lie outside the
capacities of the human eye.

Wavelength Amplitude Baseline

156

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Biology of Vision human vision begins with the eye. The eye is
roughly sphere shaped and about the size of a ping-pong ball. its hard
outer covering helps the fluid-filled eyeball retain its shape. Toward
the front of the eye, the outer covering becomes clear and forms the
cornea. The cornea begins the process of bending light to form an image
on the back of the eye. Traveling light next enters the pupil, which is
actually an opening formed by the muscles of the iris (see ● Figure
5.5). The iris, which means "rainbow" in greek, adjusts the opening of
the pupil in response to the amount of light present in the environment
and to signals from the autonomic nervous system, described in Chapter
4. Arousal is associated with dilated pupils, while relaxation is
associated with more constricted pupils. directly behind the pupil and
iris is the main optical instrument of the eye, the lens. Muscles
attached to the lens can change its shape, allowing us to accommodate,
or adjust our focus to see near or distant objects. Behind the lens is
the main chamber of the eye, and located on the rear surface of this
chamber is the retina, a thin but complex network of neurons specialized
for the processing of light. Located in the deepest layer of the retina
are specialized receptors, the rods and cones, that transduce the light
information. however, before light reaches these receptors, it must pass
through layers of blood vessels and neurons. We normally do not see the
blood vessels and neural layers because of sensory adaptation. As we
mentioned previously in this chapter, adaptation occurs when sensory
systems tune out stimuli that never change. Because the blood vessels
and neural layers are always in the same place, we see them only under
unusual circumstances, such as during certain ophthalmology (eye) tests.

cornea The clear surface at the front of the eye that begins the process
of directing light to the retina. pupil An opening formed by the iris.
iris The brightly colored circular muscle surrounding the pupil of the
eye.

lens The clear structure behind the pupil that bends light toward the
retina.

retina Layers of visual processing cells in the back of the eye.

Optic disk (blind spot) Blood vessels

James P. Gilman, C.R.A./Medical Images.com

Fovea

Retina

Fovea Optic disk Cornea

Pupil Iris Lens Blood vessels

FIGURE

5.5

The Human Eye. Light entering the eye travels through the cornea, the
pupil, and the lens before reaching the retina. Among the landmarks on
the retina are the fovea, which is specialized for seeing fine detail,
and the optic disk, where blood vessels enter the eye and the optic
nerve exits the eye. Source: Argosy Publishing, Inc.

hOW dO We See?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

157

FIGURE

5.6

Now You See It---Now You Don't. There are no photoreceptors in the optic
disk, producing a blind spot in each eye. We do not see our blind spots
with both eyes open because our brain fills in the hole. You can
demonstrate your blind spot by holding your textbook at arm's length,
closing one eye, focusing your other eye on the dot, and moving the book
toward you until the stack of money disappears.

FIGURE

5.7

What the Retina "Sees." The image projected on the retina is upside down
and reversed, but the brain is able to interpret the image to perceive
the correct orientation of an object. Source: Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Photoreceptors The human retina contains three types of photoreceptors:
rods, cones,

and a group of specialized ganglion cells that respond to brightness.
Rods and cones are named after their shapes. each human eye contains
over Retina 110 million rods and about 6 million cones. There are only
about 50,000 of the specialized ganglion cells. These photoreceptors are
responsible for different aspects of vision. rods are more sensitive to
light than cones, and they excel at seeing dim light. As we observed
previously, under ideal circumstances, the absolute threshold for human
vision is the equivalent of a single candle flame from a distance of 30
miles (about 48 kilometers; see hecht et al., 1942). rods become more
common as we move from the fovea to the periphery of the retina, so your
peripheral vision does a better job of viewing dim light than your
central vision does (see ● Figure 5.8). Before the developOptic nerve
ment of night goggles, soldiers patrolling in the dark were trained to
look to the side of a suspected enemy position rather than directly at
their target. Ariwasabi/Shutterstock.com

Light

We can identify several landmarks on the surface of the retina. The
blood vessels serving the eye and the axons that leave the retina to
form the optic nerve exit at the optic disk. Because there are no rods
and cones in the optic disk, each eye has a blind spot. normally, we are
unaware of our blind spots because perception fills in the missing
details. however, if you follow the directions in ● Figure 5.6, you
should be able to experience your own blind spot. Toward the middle of
the retina is the fovea, which is specialized for seeing fine detail.
When we stare directly at an object, the image of that object is
projected onto the fovea. The fovea is responsible for central vision,
as opposed to peripheral vision, which is the ability to see objects off
to the side while looking straight ahead. The image projected on the
retina is upside down and reversed relative to the actual orientation of
the object being viewed (see ● Figure 5.7). You can duplicate this
process by looking at both sides of a shiny spoon. in the convex (or
outwardly curving) side, you see your image normally. in the concave (or
inwardly curving) side, you see your image as your retina sees it.
Fortunately, the visual system easily decodes this image and provides
realistic perceptions of the actual orientations of objects.

Cornea Lens

fovea An area of the retina that is specialized for highly detailed
vision.

rod A photoreceptor specialized to detect dim light.

Rods

cone A photoreceptor in the retina that processes color and fine detail.

FIGURE

5.8

Distribution of Rods and Cones Across the Retina. In humans, cones,
indicated by red, blue, and green dots, become less frequent as you move
from the fovea to the periphery of the retina. The colors of the dots
representing cones indicate the colors to which each shows a maximum
response (see Figure 5.11). Rods (light brown dots) and cones are named
according to their shapes. Source: Argosy Publishing, Inc.

158

Chapter 5

Cones

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This extraordinary sensitivity of rods has costs. rods do not provide
information about color, nor do they provide Midbrain clear, sharp
images. Under starlight, normal human vision is 20/200 rather than the
normal daylight 20/20. in other words, an object seen at night from a
distance of 20 feet would have the same clarity as an object seen in
bright Optic chiasm sunlight from a distance of 200 feet. Cones function
best under bright light and provide the ability to see both sharp images
and color. The observation that animals lacking rods and cones Retina
still showed some visual responses led to the search for additional
photoreceptors in the retina. A special class of ganglion cells in the
retina turned out to be important for setting our biological clocks (see
Chapter 6), maintaining pupil reflexes, and assessing the brightness of
a visual stimulus (Yamakawa et al., 2019).

Primary visual cortex (occipital lobe) Thalamus

Optic tract Optic nerve

Visual Pathways When rods and cones absorb

light, they trigger responses in four additional layers of neurons
within the retina. Axons from the final layer of cells, the ganglion
cells, leave the back of the eye to form the optic nerve. The optic
nerves cross the midline at the optic chiasm (named after its X shape,
or the greek letter chi). At the optic chiasm, the axons closest to the
nose cross over to the other hemisphere, while the axons to the outside
proceed to the same hemisphere. This partial crossing means that if you
focus straight ahead, everything to the left of center in the visual
field is processed by the Visual field right hemisphere, while
everything of right eye to the right of center is processed by the left
hemisphere. This organization Visual field of left eye provides us with
significant advantages when sensing depth, which we discuss later in the
chapter. Beyond the optic chiasm, the visual pathways are known as optic
tracts (see ● Figure 5.9). About 90% of the axons in the optic tracts
synapse in the thalamus. The thalamus sends information about vision to
the amygdala and the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe. The
amygdala uses visual information to make quick emotional judgments,
especially about potentially harmful stimuli. The remaining optic tract
fibers connect with the hypothalamus, where their input provides
information about light needed to regulate sleep--wake cycles, discussed
in Chapter 6, or with the superior colliculi of the midbrain, which
manage a number of visually guided reflexes, such as changing the size
of the pupil in response to light conditions. The primary visual cortex
begins, but by no means finishes, the processing of visual input. The
primary visual cortex responds to object shape, location, movement, and
color (hubel & Wiesel, 1959; Livingstone & hubel, 1984; hubel &
Livingstone, 1987). Two major pathways radiating from the occipital
cortex into the adjacent temporal and parietal lobes continue the
analysis of visual input. The parietal pathway helps us process movement
in the visual environment. The temporal pathway responds to shape and
color and contributes to our ability to recognize objects and faces.

FIGURE

5.9

Visual Pathways. Visual information from the retina travels to the
thalamus and then to the primary visual cortex in the occipital lobe.
While looking straight ahead, visual stimuli to the right of center are
processed by the left hemisphere, while visual stimuli to the left of
center are processed by the right hemisphere. Source: Argosy Publishing,
Inc.

optic nerve The nerve exiting the retina of the eye.

optic tracts Nerve pathways traveling from the optic chiasm to the
thalamus, hypothalamus, and midbrain. hOW dO We See?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

159

Visual Perception and Cognition To see something requires the brain to
interpret the information gathered by the eyes. how do you know your
sweater is red or green, based on the information sent from the retina
to the brain? how do you recognize your grandmother at your front door?

5.10

Mixing Colored Lights. The primary colors of paint might be red, yellow,
and blue, but in the world of light, the primary colors are red, green,
and blue. Mixed together, they produce white.

trichromatic theory A theory of color vision based on the existence of
different types of cones for the detection of short, medium, and long
wavelengths.

opponent process theory A theory of color vision that suggests we have a
red--green color channel and a blue--yellow color channel in which
activation of one color in each pair inhibits the other color.

FIGURE

5.11

Responses by Cones to Colored Light. Our perception of color results
from a comparison of the responses of the red, green, and blue cones to
light. A 580-nanometer light is perceived as yellow and produces a
strong response in green cones, a moderate response in red cones, and
little response in blue cones.

FIGURE

Percentage of maximum response

FIGURE

Color Vision Most of us think about colors in terms of the paints and
crayons we used in elementary school. Any kindergartner can tell you
that mixtures of red and yellow make orange, red and blue make purple,
and yellow and blue make green. Mixing them all together produces a
lovely muddy brown. Colored lights, however, work somewhat differently
(see ● Figure 5.10). The primary colors of light are red, green, and
blue, and mixing them together produces white light, like sunlight. if
you have ever adjusted the color on your computer monitor or television,
you know that these devices also use red, green, and blue as primary
colors. Observations supporting the existence of three primary colors of
light gave rise to a trichromatic theory of color vision. Trichromatic
theory is consistent with the existence of three types of cones in the
retina that respond best to short (blue), medium (green), or long (red)
wavelengths. Our ultimate experience of color comes not from the
response of one type of cone but from comparisons among the responses of
all three types of cones (see ● Figure 5.11). Color vision deficiency
occurs when a person has fewer than the typical three types of cones. We
no longer use the term colorblind, as this is not accurate. Most people
with color vision deficiencies see color differently than someone with
all three cone types. very rarely, individuals have either one type of
cone or none. To these people, the world appears to be black, white, and
gray. Trichromatic theory does a good job of explaining color vision
deficiency, but it is less successful in accounting for other color
vision phenomena, such as color afterimages. For example, if you stare
at the yellow, green, and black flag in ● Figure 5.12 and then focus on
the dot within the white rectangle to the right, you will see an
afterimage of the American flag in its more traditional colors of red,
white, and blue. An opponent process theory of color vision does a
better job than the trichromatic theory in explaining these color
afterimages. This theory proposes the existence of color 100

Rods Cones

75

Green

50

Red

25

Blue

400

450

500

550 600 Wavelength (nm)

650

700

750

5.12

Afterimages Demonstrate Opponent Process Theory. If you stare at the dot
in the center of the yellow, green, and black flag for a minute and then
shift your gaze to the dot in the white space on the right, you should
see the flag in its traditional red, white, and blue.

160

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Dan Tuffs/Contributor/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images

channels: a red--green channel and a blue--yellow channel. We cannot see
a color like reddish green or bluish yellow because the two colors share
the same channel. The channels are "opponent" or competing. Activity in
one color group in a channel inhibits activity in the other color group.
returning to our green, yellow, and black flag, how can we use opponent
process theory to explain our experience of the red, white, and blue
afterimage? By staring at the flag, you fatigue some of your visual
neurons. Because the color channels compete, reducing activity in one
color group in a channel, such as green, increases activity in the other
group, which is red. Fatiguing green, black, and yellow causes a rebound
effect in each color channel, and your afterimage looks red, white, and
blue. (Black and white also share a channel.) if you stare at an image
of a real red, white, and blue flag and then look at a white piece of
paper, your afterimage looks like our green, black, and yellow
illustration. Which of these two theories of color vision, trichromatic
theory or opponent process theory, is correct? The trichromatic theory
provides a helpful framework for the functioning of the three types of
cones in the retina. however, as we move from the retina to higher
levels of visual analysis, the opponent process theory seems to fit
observed phenomena neatly. Both theories help us understand color vision
but at different levels of the visual system.

Monty Roberts, known as the Horse Whisperer, attributes his abilities to
observe horse behavior to his complete lack of color vision. This
condition is quite rare, occurring in only 1 person out of every 30,000.

PSYCHOLOGY AS A HUB SCIENCE Color and Accessible Web Design

FIGURE

PRISMA ARCHIVO/Alamy Stock Photo

NOW THAT YOU HAVE AN UNDERSTANDING of color perception, we can consider
one of the practical problems associated with individual differences in
color vision. Between 7% and 10% of males and about 0.4% of females have
a form of red--green color vision deficiency (see ● Figure 5.13). Males
are more affected than females because the genes for the pigments used
by red and green cones are located on the X chromosome, making
red--green color deficiency a sex-linked condition (see Chapter 3).
Smaller numbers of people lack blue cones (0.0011%) or cones altogether
(0.00001%). given the frequency of color vision deficiency, making
visual materials accessible to people with all types of color vision is
a serious concern. Color can be an effective tool for designing exciting
and engaging websites, but many graphic web designers, who typically
have excellent vision, fail to consider how the site might look to a
person with a color vision deficiency. One clue for designing an
accessible site can be found in other systems based on color, such as
traffic lights. Although most of us rely on the color information from
the red, yellow, or green lights, the lights also vary in location. in
other words, color should never be the only basis for extracting
meaning. A second major concern is contrast, which we discuss in the
next section. The strong contrast between black letters on the white
pages makes text easy to read for most people. Colored text against a
colored background might add interest, but it runs the risk of being
harder to read, especially when reds and greens are used. As shown in ●
Figure 5.14, online resources simulate how a web page looks to a person
with color vision deficiency, which helps designers maximize
accessibility. ■

5.13

Detecting Color Vision Deficiency. The Ishihara Color Test, designed by
Shinobu Ishihara in 1917, is a standard method for detecting color
vision deficiency. The test is printed on special paper, so the
recreated image here would not be considered a valid basis for
diagnosing color deficiency. hOW dO We See?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

161

Paul Dronsfield/Alamy Stock Photo

Original

FIGURE

Hue

1

Black

--°

2

Orange

41°

3

Sky blue

202°

4

Bluish green

164°

5

Yellow

56°

6

Blue

202°

7

Vermillion

27°

8

Reddish purple 326°

5.14

Making Websites Accessible. Web designers have found colors that work
for people with typical color vision and people who have color vision
deficiency. This set of colors shows how different shades would be seen
by people with typical vision and by people with three of the most
common forms of color vision deficiency. Even though these colors are
seen differently by the three groups, nobody mistakes one shade for
another.

FIGURE

Simulation Protanopia Deuteranopia Tritanopia (missing (missing (missing
red green blue cones) cones) cones)

Recognizing Objects We asked earlier how your brain uses incoming visual
signals to recognize your grandmother. A bottom-up approach assumes that
as information moves from the retina to higher levels of visual
processing, more complicated responses are built from simpler input. in
this hierarchical model, the result would be a hypothetical "grandmother
cell," or a single cell that could combine all previous input and
processing to tell you that your grandmother is at the door. Although
the hierarchical model is attractive in many ways, it does not fit
perfectly with what we know about the visual system. First, we would
need a large number of single neurons to respond to all the objects and
the events that we can recognize visually. in addition, the hierarchical
model is unable to account for top-down processing. ● Figure 5.15a may
appear to be a random pattern of black dots on a white background. ●
Figure 5.15b may not appear to be a recognizable object at all. The
sensations produced by these stimuli lead to no meaningful perceptions.
however, once we tell you that the first image is a dalmatian dog and
the second image is a cow, you can instantly pick out their shapes. now
that you know what the images are, you will probably never see them
again the way you did initially. recognizing these objects requires
knowledge and memory of what dalmatians and cows look like. it is
unlikely that a single cortical cell acting as a dalmatian or cow
detector could incorporate such complex inputs from memory. if we don't
use single cells to recognize objects, how can we accomplish this task?
The visual system might perform a mathematical analysis of the visual
field (de valois & de valois, 1980). While the hierarchical model
implies a reality built out of individual bars and edges, the
mathematical approach suggests that we analyze patterns of lines. The
simplest

5.15

Can You Figure Out What These Images Are? (a) This might look like a
splattering of black dots on a white page until you learn that it
represents a Dalmatian dog. (b) Top-down processing ensures that once
you know this is a photo of a cow, you can pick out its features easily.
From Richard L. Gregory (2005). "The Medawar Lecture 2001 Knowledge for
Vision: Vision for Knowledge," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B, 360, 1231--1251, by permission of the Royal Society. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2005.1662 From American Journal of Psychology. Copyright ©
1951 by the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois. Used with
permission of the University of Illinois Press. K. M. Dallenbach (1951).
"A Puzzle-Picture with a New Principle of Concealment," 64 (3) (July
1951), 431--433. doi: 10.2307/1419008

162

Chapter 5

(a) 
(b) 

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Frequency

1 degree

1 degree

3 cycles per degree

6 cycles per degree

High

High

Contrast

Gestalt Psychology As we observed in Chapter 1, a group of

FIGURE

5.16

Features of Gratings. An alternative to the hierarchical model suggests
that the visual system analyzes the visual environment as a collection
of patterns, like these gratings. Gratings vary in frequency (number of
bars in a given distance) and contrast (the difference in light
intensity from one bar to the next).

FIGURE

High (fine detail)

Julie Src/Shutterstock.com

100

5.17

What Do Cats See? Using gratings, we get a window into the visual world
of the cat. By comparing gratings to a uniform gray disk, we can learn
when a grating with a certain contrast and frequency simply looks gray
to humans or cats. We can see better detail than kitty, but she sees
large shadows that we don't even notice.

Gratings visible to humans, but not to cats

High

Contrast

Low

german researchers known as the gestalt psychologists tackled visual
perception with a number of ingenious observations. These psychologists
objected to efforts by Wilhelm Wundt and the structuralists to reduce
human experience to its building blocks, or elements. instead, the
gestalt psychologists argued that some experiences lose information and
value when divided into parts. The main thesis of the gestalt
psychologists, as stated by Kurt Koffka, maintains, "it is more correct
to say that the whole is something else than the sum of its parts"
(Koffka, 1935, p. 176). According to the gestalt psychologists, we are
born with built-in tendencies to organize incoming sensory information
in certain ways. This natural ability to organize simpliGratings visible
fies the problem of Gratings visible to both cats recognizing objects to
cats, but not 1000 and humans (Biederman, 1987). to humans One
organizing principle suggests that we spontaneously divide a scene into
a main 100 figure and ground. We frequently assume that the figure
stands in front of most of the 10 ground, and it seems to have more
substance and shape. it is possible to construct ambiguous images, 1
like the vase on the 1 10 0.1 next page, in which Low the parts of the
image Frequency (less detail) seem to switch roles (cycles/degree) as
figure or ground.

Low

Low

patterns of lines are gratings, as shown in ● Figure 5.16. gratings can
vary along two dimensions: frequency and contrast. high-frequency
gratings have many bars in a given distance and provide fine detail,
while low-frequency gratings have relatively few bars. high-contrast
gratings have large differences in intensity between adjacent bars, like
black next to white. The print you are reading in is an example of high
contrast because the black letters are quite different from the white
background. Low-contrast gratings have subtler differences in intensity
between bars, such as dark gray next to black. Observing responses to
gratings gives us a window into the visual capacities of other species.
At a certain point of contrast and frequency, gratings look plain gray.
Animals can be trained to make a distinction between gratings and gray
circles. For example, if a bird is rewarded with food for pecking at a
disk with a grating but not for pecking a uniform gray disk, any
performance that is better than 50-50, or chance, indicates that the
bird can see the difference between the grating and the gray. We can
graph the range of gratings that are visible to the observer as a
function of their contrast and frequency. ● Figure 5.17 illustrates the
visible ranges for human adults and cats. Compared to human adults, cats
see less detail. however, cats see large (low-frequency), low-contrast
objects better than humans do. Large, low-contrast shadows on the wall
may get kitty's attention but not yours. You will think kitty is chasing
ghosts again.

hOW dO We See?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

163

SSPL/Science Museum / Art Resource, NY

The Gestalt psychologists believe we naturally see the difference
between objects and their background, but this figure is designed to
make us switch back and forth from the vase to the background faces.
This vase was designed to commemorate an anniversary of Queen Elizabeth
II of England (face on the right) and her husband, Prince Philip (face
on the left). (a) Ambiguous pattern

(b) Similarity

(c) Proximity

A second gestalt principle is proximity (see ● Figure 5.18). Objects
that are close together tend to be grouped together. The dots that make
up our dalmatian in Figure 5.15a are close together, suggesting they
belong to the same object. The principle of similarity states that
similar stimuli are grouped together. On a close examination of the dog
image, the dots that make up the dog are similar to one another and
slightly different (more rounded perhaps) than the dots making up the
remainder of the image. The principle of continuity suggests that we
assume that points that form smooth lines when connected probably belong
together (see ● Figure 5.19). in our dog picture, continuity helps us
see the border of the curb or sidewalk and the ring of shadow around the
base of the tree. Continuity is perhaps a little less useful in
identifying the dog, although we can pick out the lines forming the
legs. Closure occurs when people see a complete, unbroken image even
when there are gaps in the lines forming the image (see ● Figure 5.20).
We use this approach in viewing the dog in Figure 5.15a when we "fill in
the blanks" formed by the white parts of its body. Finally, the gestalt
psychologists believed in the principle of simplicity, which suggests
that we will use the simplest solution to a perceptual problem. This
principle may help explain the fun in pictures like that of our
dalmatian dog. it is simpler to assume that this is a random splash of
black dots on white background. Finding a hidden picture within the dots
is not the simplest solution, which may account for our surprise.

Recognizing Depth An image projected onto the retina is two dimensional,

as flat as the sheet of paper or screen on which these words appear.
Somehow, the brain manages to construct a three-dimensional (3d) image
from these data. Adelbert Ames constructed a room that was named in his
honor, the Ames room, which illustrated vulnerabilities in our depth
perception (ittleson, 1952). When viewed directly from the front, the
room appears to be a rectangle. People within the room, shown in ●
Figure 5.21, seem to be larger or smaller than normal. This distortion
of perceived size results from the room's ability to confuse our
judgment of distance. To construct a 3d image, we use both monocular
cues (one eye) and binocular cues (two eyes). Many monocular cues are
found in paintings because the artists attempt to provide an illusion of
depth in their two-dimensional pieces. The use of linear perspective, or
the apparent convergence of parallel lines at the horizon, by italian
artists during the 15th century provided a realism unknown in earlier
works. Linear perspective revolutionized the video game and movie
industries, beginning humbly with Sega's Zaxxon in 1982 and advancing to
the ever more realistic environments of Halo, Pixar's animated films,
and the 2009 film Avatar. Other monocular cues include texture gradients
and shading. We can see more texture in objects that are close to us,
while the texture of distant objects is relatively blurry. Shading and
the use of highlights can be used to suggest curved surfaces. Among the
most powerful monocular depth cues is occlusion, or the blocking of
images of distant objects by closer objects. We also use relative size
to judge the distance of objects, although this method requires you to
be familiar with the real

FIGURE

5.18

The Gestalt Principles of Proximity and Similarity. The set of dots in
(a) do not appear to have any particular relationship with one another,
but when we color rows in (b), we suddenly see the dots in columns or
rows. Moving two columns or rows slightly closer to each other in (c)
makes us see the array differently too.

164

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE

5.19

The Gestalt Principle of Continuity. The Gestalt principle of continuity
says that we perceive points forming a smooth line as belonging to the
same object. If you follow this knot, you can see that it is formed by
two objects, but our initial perception is of a single form.

FIGURE

size of an object. We know how big people are. When the retinal image of
a person is small, we infer that the person is farther from us than when
the retinal image of a person is larger. Several illusions result from
our use of monocular cues to judge depth. relative size helps to explain
the moon illusion. You may have noticed that the moon appears to be
larger when it is just above the hills on the horizon than when it is
straight overhead. The moon maintains a steady orbit 239,000 miles
(385,000 km) above the earth. how can we account for the discrepancy in
its apparent size? When viewed overhead, the moon is seen without
intervening objects, such as trees and hills, that might provide cues
about its size and distance. however, when viewed near the horizon, we
see the moon against a backdrop of familiar objects whose sizes we know
well. We expect trees and hills to be smaller at the horizon than when
they are close to us, and if we group the moon with those objects, we
adjust its apparent size as well. The next time you are viewing the full
moon as it rises over the hills, form a peephole with your hand, and you
will see the moon in its normal small size. Although some researchers
argue that atmospheric differences between the two viewpoints may
contribute to the illusion, viewing the moon through your hand should
demonstrate that most of the effect arises from your use of other
objects to judge distance. in the Müller--Lyer illusion, shown in ●
Figure 5.22, we see the line with outward-pointing arrowheads as being
farther from our position, even though the main lines project images of
equal length on the retina. The Ponzo illusion, shown in ● Figure 5.23,
confounds size and distance judgments in a similar fashion. The parallel
lines signal depth, leading us to believe that the upper horizontal line
is farther away than the lower line. if both lines project the same
image on the retina, the more distant line must be longer. So far, we
have discussed monocular cues that involve a person and a scene that is
not moving. The introduction of motion can heighten the impression of
depth. As you ride in a car, focus your gaze at a distant point. The
objects you pass will appear to be moving in the opposite direction of
your car, with closer objects appearing to move faster than distant
objects.

5.20

The Gestalt Principle of Closure. Because of the principle of closure,
we "fill in the blanks" to see a single object, the World Wildlife Fund
logo, although it is made up of several objects. Source: © 1986 Panda
Symbol WWF - World Wide Fund For Nature

depth perception The ability to use the two-dimensional image projected
on the retina to perceive three dimensions. monocular cue A depth cue
that requires the use of only one eye.

binocular cue A depth cue that requires the use of both eyes.

FIGURE

5.21

The Ames Room Tricks Our Depth Perception. Many distance cues, such as
the apparently rectangular windows, conspire to make us believe that one
person is much bigger than the other. The person on the right is
actually much closer to us than the person on the left. The diagram
shows the actual layout of the Ames Room.

Field Museum Library/Contributor/PermiumArchive/Getty Images

Location of "small" man

Location of "large" man Apparent plane of men

Apparent location of "small" man

Observer using one eye

hOW dO We See?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

165

FIGURE

5.22

The Müller--Lyer Illusion. You might find it hard to believe that the
two red vertical lines are actually the same length.

retinal disparity The difference between the images projected onto each
eye.

FIGURE

5.23

The Ponzo Illusion. We perceive depth because of linear perspective,
which in turn make us see the upper horizontal bar as more distant than
the lower bar. Even though they are the same length, the bar perceived
as more distant looks longer.

next, focus on a point about midway between you and the horizon. now,
the closer objects will continue to move in the opposite direction, but
more distant objects appear to be traveling with you. This motion
parallax has been used to enhance the 3d feeling in video games. One of
our most effective depth cues is retinal disparity. Because this cue
requires the use of both eyes, we refer to retinal disparity as a
binocular cue. Predator species, including ourselves, have eyes placed
in the front of the head facing forward. As a result of this
configuration, the visual scenes observed by the two eyes are different
and overlapping, as shown in ● Figure 5.24. The differences between the
images projected onto each eye are called disparities. These disparities
do not tell us how far away an object is. instead, they provide
information about the relative distance between two objects in the
visual field. As the distance between the objects increases, disparity
increases. To illustrate the sensitivity of this system, you can
identify an object as being 1 millimeter (about 0.04 inch) closer than
another at a distance of 1 meter (about 3.3 feet) from your body, or a
difference of 0.1% (Blake & Sekuler, 2006). Why would this binocular
depth system be an advantage to predators? Most prey species do an
excellent job of hiding, often aided by an appearance that blends into
the nearby environment. however, retinal disparity allows us to spot
tiny variations in the depths of objects in the visual field. This might
make an animal stand out against its background, even though it is well
camouflaged. retinal disparity has been used to identify camouflaged
military equipment and counterfeit currency. retinal disparity is
imitated by cameras used to film 3d movies, which have two lenses
separated by about the same distance as our two eyes.

Developmental and Individual Differences in Vision

veryan dale/Alamy Stock Photo

Although human infants can't report what they see, we can take advantage
of their longer gazing at patterns than at uniform stimuli, like a patch
of a single color. This allows us to construct graphs of the contrasts
and the frequencies

166

Chapter 5

Video games, such as Minecraft, incorporate many monocular cues to
provide an experience of depth. The standard-sized blocks used to build
structures in the game are separated by lines, which when placed in a
row provide linear perspective. Texture gradients, shading, and relative
size (players understand the size of the blocks well) also contribute to
perceived depth.

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Object B

YOSHIKAZU TSUNO/AFP/Getty Images/Newscom

Object A

The two lenses of 3D cameras are separated by about 2 inches (about 50
millimeters), mimicking the distance between two human eyes that makes
retinal disparity possible. B

A A

B

1 month

2 months

3 months

FIGURE

5.24

Retinal Disparity. The right and left eyes see slightly overlapping
versions of the visual scene in front of us. We can use the retinal
disparity, or the discrepancy between the locations of where the two
objects A and B are processed on the two retinas, as a sensitive depth
cue that tells us which object is closer to us. Source: Argosy
Publishing, Inc.

We can filter out the frequencies and contrast that a baby cannot see to
simulate what the world looks like to an infant.

adult

hOW dO We See?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Felix Mizioznikov/Shutterstock.com

to which children respond, similar to those we saw previously for cats.
Based on these analyses, we know that human infants see everything human
adults see but with less detail. To see well, the infant also needs more
contrast than the adult. These findings help explain children's
preferences for large, high-contrast objects. The photographs shown
below provide insight into the visual world of the infant. Frequencies
that cannot be seen by the infant have been removed from each
photograph. Other research shows that infants as young as 4 months not
only show binocular disparity, but also show normal adult responses to
color (Bornstein et al., 1976). Other depth cues discussed previously
develop early too. infants as young as 2 months understand occlusion
(Johnson & Aslin, 1995), and the use of the relative size of objects to
judge depth appears between the ages of 5 and 7 months (granrud et al.,
1985). infants' abilities to perceive faces also develop quite rapidly,
as 2-day-old newborns spend more time gazing at their mothers' faces
than at a stranger's face (Bushnell, 2001; also see Chapter 11).
Predictable changes occur in other aspects of human vision as we grow
older. Accommodation of the lens, which allows us to change focus from
near to far objects, becomes slower beginning in middle adulthood. Older
adults respond more slowly to changes in brightness, such as leaving a
dark theater into the sunlight. The muscles of the iris lose their
elasticity, so pupils remain smaller, further reducing vision by
limiting the amount of light that enters the eye. The lens of the eye
begins to yellow, which protects the eye from ultraviolet radiation but
affects the perception of color. At any age, individual differences
shape what people see. in addition to the color vision deficiencies
discussed previously, people differ in their abilities to see near and
far objects.

167

FIGURE

5.25

Those who deviate from the average often wear corrective lenses or
undergo laser surgery to reshape the cornea. The most common visual
problems result from eyeball length, with elongated eyeballs interfering
with a person's vision for distant objects (nearsightedness) and
shortened eyeballs interfering with vision for close-up objects
(farsightedness), as in reading. vision is also affected by astigmatism,
which means that the surface of the cornea is uneven. You can test
yourself for astigmatism by looking at ● Figure 5.25.

Astigmatism. If you have astigmatism, which results from an uneven
surface of your corneas, some spokes of this figure will appear darker
than others.

CONNECTING TO RESEARCH Do Children with Autism See the World
Differently? IN ADDITION TO DEFICITS in social skills and language (see
Chapter 14), individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) often
demonstrate unusual responses to stimuli. In some cases, children seem
to barely notice things, but in others, children seem to be
hypersensitive to stimulation. Psychologists agree that diagnosing
autism as early as possible leads to the best treatment outcomes.
Identifying differences in sensation and perception at early ages might
lead to better diagnoses (Gliga et al., 2015). The Question: Do superior
visual search skills predict autism?

METHODS Eighty-two infants with older siblings diagnosed with ASD
(high-risk) and 27 control infants with no relatives with ASD took part
in a visual search task and measures of ASD risk (response to name, eye
contact, social reciprocity, and

X X

168

V X X X Chapter 5

X

X

X

X

imitation). Eye-tracking was used to measure the child's attending to
the "odd" character within a visual array (● Figure 5.26). Children were
assessed at 9 months, 15 months, and 2 years of age.

ETHICS Children enjoy extra protection when they serve as research
participants. Researchers must present parents with a thorough informed
consent form, and great care must be taken to avoid coercion through
rewards for participation. Procedures must be suited to the young
participants to avoid fatigue. Parents whose children show evidence of
risk for ASD should be referred to services.

RESULTS Superior performance on the visual search task at 9 months was
correlated with indicators of ASD symptoms at 15 months and 2 years of
age.

X X X +

X X

X X

X S X X

CONCLUSIONS Assessments of visual search might prove useful in
identifying infants who may be diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder.
The results also emphasize the role of attention and perception in the
development of ASD. Previously, much research about ASD has focused on
social deficits, but these might in fact emerge from more basic
differences in information processing. ■

FIGURE

5.26

Superior Visual Search in Autism. Eyetracking showed that 9-month-old
infants at risk for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) were able to find the
"odd" character within each display faster than children at low risk for
ASD. Performance on this visual search task predicted the severity of
autism symptoms at the ages of 15 months and 2 years.

X

X

X

X

X X -- X

X

O X

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

DIVERSE VOICES IN PSYCHOLOGY Culture Shapes Eye Movements PSYCHOLOGISTS
HAVE DISCOVERED a number of differences in the ways that East Asians
(e.g., people from China, Korea, and Japan) and European/North Americans
process information. In general, people in Eastern cultures process
information holistically, which means processing is based on context and
relationships. In contrast, people in Western cultures process
information analytically, focusing on salient objects and forming
categories. To illustrate this difference, consider the following images
(Chiu, 1972). Of the three images in each box, think about which go
together, and ask yourself why you think this is correct. Children from
East Asian cultures were most likely to group the woman shape with the
baby shape and the cow with the grass, whereas children from Western
cultures grouped the man and woman shape and the cow and chicken shape.
The East Asian children reported grouping the

woman and the baby together because the mother takes care of the baby
(relationship), whereas the Western children grouped the man and woman
together because they shared a category as adults. East Asian children
grouped the cow and grass together (context: the cow eats grass),
whereas the Western children grouped the chicken and cow together (both
are animals). Further research demonstrated that all children begin by
using holistic reasoning regardless of culture, but Western children
begin to ignore context and focus more on objects beginning around the
age of 5 years. What possible aspects of culture might shape thinking in
this way? It is possible that child-rearing practices, such as the
emphasis on appropriate social behavior in East Asian cultures versus
the emphasis on labeling objects in Western culture, could lead to a
divergent emphasis on context or object.

The stimuli used by Chiu (1972) are complex, and the connections among
them are even more so. What happens when we simplify the stimuli down to
something like the length of a line? When participants are asked to find
a long line among short and vice versa, North Americans found the first
task easier while Japanese participants performed equally well in both
cases (Ueda et al., 2018). It is difficult to explain these types of
cultural differences using the analytic/holistic distinction. Instead,
cultures can have influence over the way visual features are perceived
very early in the visual process, possibly due to exposure to
environmental factors such as written alphabets. These results do not
rule out an analytic/holistic distinction in the processing of more
complex stimuli. Instead, they suggest that culture can have multiple,
complex influences on visual perception. ■

FIGURE

5.27a and b

(a) Which Ones Go Together? Western children group the man and woman
    shapes and the cow and chicken shapes using categorical reasoning.
    East Asian children group the woman and baby shapes and the cow and
    grass together based on relationships and context.
(b) Perception of Simple Stimuli. American participants found the task
    on the left (finding the longer line) easier than the task on the
    right (finding the shorter line), but Japanese participants
    performed equally on the two tasks. This suggests that cultural
    differences in perception might begin at a very early stage of
    perceptual processing.

Longer line search

Shorter line search

Source: from Ueda, Y., Chen, L., Kopecky, J., Cramer, E. S., Rensink, R.
A., Meyer, D. E., . . . Saiki, J. (2018). "Cultural Differences in
Visual Search for Geometric Figures." Cognitive Science, 42(1), 286-310.
doi: 10.1111/cogs.12490

How Do we See?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

169

THINKING SCIENTIFICALLY The Roger Shepard Parallelogram Illusion:
"Turning the Tables" ANYONE CAN TELL, simply by looking, whether two
tabletops are the same shape, right? For instance, most people would
agree that the shapes and sizes of the two tabletops depicted in ●
Figure 5.28 are different. One tabletop appears to be rectangular, while
the other appears to be more square. As much as our perceptions may tell
us otherwise, these tabletops are identical.

What Am I Being Asked to Believe or Accept? We are being asked to
believe that two very different looking objects are not, in fact,
different, and that our visual system is playing a trick on us.

What Evidence Supports This Position? To verify that the tabletops are
the same, use a ruler to measure the sides of each table.

Are There Other Ways This Evidence Could Be Interpreted? Objective
measurement confirms that the two tables are in fact identical, but in
the

absence of the ability to measure, we would probably judge them to be
quite different.

What Other Evidence Would I Need to Evaluate These Alternatives? It
might be helpful to identify other instances in which we make similarly
inaccurate judgments.

What Are the Most Reasonable Conclusions? Roger Shepard combined a
profound scientific curiosity with a love of mischief. Shepard developed
a number of creative visual illusions, including "Turning the Tables,"
which he illustrated himself (Shepard, 1990). The visual illusion
produced in this illustration results from our use of a visual system
designed to cope with the three dimensions of the physical world on
stimuli that have only two dimensions.

out psychological significance. The tricks work by taking advantage of
fundamental perceptual principles that have been shaped by natural
selection in a three-dimensional world. Our ability to make pictures,
which emerged only recently on an evolutionary time scale, enables us to
present the eyes with visual patterns that systematically depart from
the patterns that we and our ancestors experienced in nature. In
considering the ways pictures can trick the eye, we can gain insight
into the nature and ultimate source of the principles of visual
perception. (Shepard, 1990, p. 121) More generally, examples like this
underscore the importance of relying on scientific investigation and
evidence to unveil how sensation and perception work. ■

In Roger Shepard's words: The drawings ... achieve their effects by
means of various visual tricks. But to call them tricks is not to imply
that they are witha' b b'

a

FIGURE

5.28

Are These Tables the Same or Different? You will probably want to use a
ruler to prove to yourself that the lines marked "a" are the same and
that the lines marked "b" are the same.

170

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

summary 5.2 Important Features of the Visual System Feature

significance

Cornea

Bends light toward the retina.

Cornea

Pupil

Forms an opening in the iris.

Pupil

Lens

Focuses light onto the retina.

Lens

Retina

Contains rods, cones, and other visual neurons in its layers of cells.
Retina

Fovea (area of the retina)

Processes detailed vision.

Fovea

Thalamus

Acts as the target for most axons forming the optic tracts. Thalamus

Primary visual cortex (area in the occipital lobe)

Receives visual input from the thalamus and performs initial analysis of
input.

Primary visual cortex (occipital lobe)

Credits: Top row---Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Second row---Argosy
Publishing, Inc.; Third row---Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Fourth
row---Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Fifth row---Argosy Publishing, Inc.;
Sixth row---Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Bottom row---Argosy Publishing,
Inc.

hOW dO We See?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

171

How Do We Hear? audition The sense of hearing.

We have spent a considerable amount of time on the sense of vision,
which might be considered a dominant source of information for humans.
however, when helen Keller, who was both blind and deaf, was asked which
disability affected her the most, she replied that blindness separated
her from things, while deafness separated her from people (Keller,
1933). Audition, our sense of hearing, not only allows us to identify
objects in the distance but also plays an especially important role in
our ability to communicate with others through language.

The Auditory Stimulus Sound begins with the movement of an object,
setting off waves of vibration in the form of miniature collisions
between adjacent molecules in air, liquid, or solids. Because sound
waves require this jostling of molecules, sound cannot occur in the
vacuum of space, which contains no matter. Those explosions we enjoy in
Star Wars films are great entertainment but not good science. earlier in
this chapter, we described light energy as waves with different
amplitudes and frequencies. Sound waves possess the same dimensions.
however, in the case of sound, the height or amplitude of the wave is
encoded as loudness or intensity and the frequency of the wave is
encoded as pitch. high-amplitude waves are perceived as loud, and
low-amplitude waves are perceived as soft. high-frequency waves (many
cycles per unit of time) are perceived as high pitched, whereas
low-frequency sounds are low pitched. in sound, amplitude is measured in
units called decibels (dB), and frequency is measured in cycles per
second, or hertz (hz; see ● Figure 5.29). As we observed in the case of
the light spectrum, parts of the auditory In addition to dizziness and
nausea, being spectrum are outside the range of human hearing.
Ultrasound stimuli occur at frequencies above the range of human
hearing, beginning around 20,000 exposed to infrasound makes people
report hz (see ● Figure 5.30). Ultrasound can be used to clean jewelry
or your teeth feelings of chills down the spine, fear, and or to produce
noninvasive medical images. infrasound refers to frequencies revulsion,
even though they cannot consciously below the range of human hearing, or
less than 20 hz. Many animals, includdetect the sound. Some scientists
believe that ing elephants and marine mammals, use infrasound for
communication. infrasound produced in certain places leads infrasound is
particularly effective in water because it allows sound to travel people
to conclude the places are haunted. long distances.

The Biology of Audition human audition begins with an ear located on
either side of the head. The components that make up the ear are divided
into three parts: the outer ear, the middle ear, and the inner ear (see
● Figure 5.31). The outer ear consists of the structures that are
visible outside the body. The pinna, the outer visible structure of the
ear, collects and focuses sounds, like a funnel. in addition, the pinna
helps us localize sounds as being above or below the head. Sounds
collected by the pinna are channeled through the auditory canal, which
ends at the tympanic membrane, or eardrum, at the boundary between the
outer and the middle ear. The boundary between the

5.29

Features of Sound. Like the light energy we see, sound waves are
characterized by frequency and amplitude. We perceive frequency as the
pitch of the sound (high or low), measured in hertz (Hz), and we
perceive amplitude as the loudness of the sound, measured in decibels
(dB).

172

Chapter 5

High

High

Low

Low

Pitch

FIGURE

Amplitude (measured in dB)

Wavelength (measured in Hz)

Time

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Frog Range of human hearing

Blue whale Insect

Earthquake

Infrasound

FIGURE

Photos, left to right: pathdoc/Shutterstock.com; Mike Hill/Alamy Stock
Photo; Eric Carr/Alamy Stock Photo; Erik Lam/ Shutterstock.com; Keith J.
Smith/Alamy Stock Photo; Matthias Clamer/Stone/Getty Images

Ultrasound Bat

5.30

Range of Hearing. Ultrasounds are above the range of human hearing, and
infrasounds are below the range of human hearing.

middle and the inner ear is formed by another membrane, the oval window.
The gap between these two membranes is bridged by a series of tiny
bones. The purpose of these bones is to transfer sound energy from the
air of the outer and middle ear to the fluid found in the inner ear.
Sound waves are weakened as they move from air to water. When you try to
talk to friends underwater, the result is rather garbled. Without the
adjustments provided by these small bones, we would lose a large amount
of sound energy as the sound waves moved from air to liquid. Middle ear

Outer ear

The fetus has no bubble of air in the middle ear, having never been
exposed to air. Because fluids do a better job than air of transmitting
sound waves, there is good evidence that the fetus can hear outside
sounds, such as mother's voice, quite well during the final trimester of
pregnancy.

Inner ear Oval window

Bone

Ossicles

Auditory nerve

FIGURE Pinna Auditory canal

Tympanic membrane

Eustacian tube Cochlea

5.31

Parts of the Ear. The human ear is divided into the outer, middle, and
inner ear. Source: Argosy Publishing, Inc.

hOW dO We heAr?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

173

FIGURE

5.32

Perception of Pitch. Sound waves produce peak responses on the basilar
membrane according to their frequencies. Like the strings on a musical
instrument, high tones produce the greatest response at the narrow,
stiff base of the basilar membrane, while low tones produce the greatest
response at the wide, floppy part of the basilar membrane near the apex.
Sound waves travel through the cochlea from the oval window, around the
apex, and back to the round window. The waves cause movement of tiny
hair cells in the cochlear duct, which we perceive as sound. Source:
Argosy Publishing, Inc.

cochlea The structure in the inner ear that contains auditory receptors.
basilar membrane Membrane in the cochlea on which the organ of Corti is
located.

organ of Corti A structure located on the basilar membrane that contains
auditory receptors.

auditory nerve Nerve carrying sound information from the cochlea to the
brain.

Cochlea

Vestibular canal

Basilar membrane

Sound wave Apex

Oval window

Round window Tympanic canal Cochlear structure unrolled for clarity

Cochlear duct

The inner ear contains two sets of fluid-filled cavities embedded in the
bone of the skull. One set is part of the vestibular system, which we
will discuss later in this chapter. The other set is the cochlea, from
the greek word for "snail." When rolled up like a snail shell, the human
cochlea is about the size of a pea. it contains specialized receptor
cells that respond to vibrations transmitted to the inner ear. The
cochlea is a complex structure, which is better understood if we pretend
to unroll it (see ● Figure 5.32). The cochlea may be divided into three
parallel chambers divided from one another by membranes. Two of these
chambers, the vestibular canal and the tympanic canal, are connected at
the apex of the cochlea, or the point farthest from the oval window.
vibrations transmitted by the bones of the middle ear to the oval window
produce waves in the fluid of the vestibular canal that travel around
the apex and back through the tympanic canal. Lying between the
vestibular and the tympanic canals is the cochlear duct. The cochlear
duct is separated from the tympanic canal by the basilar membrane.
resting on top of the basilar membrane is the organ of Corti, which
contains many rows of hair cells that transduce sound energy into neural
signals. each human ear has about 15,500 of these hair cells. As waves
travel through the cochlea, the basilar membrane responds with a
wavelike motion, similar to the crack of a whip. The movement of the
basilar membrane causes the hair cells of the organ of Corti to move
back and forth within the fluid of the cochlear duct. Bending the hair
cells stimulates the release of neurotransmitters onto the cells of the
auditory nerve. The basilar membrane needs to move very little before
the hair cells are stimulated. if the hairlike structures extending from
the top of the hair cells were the size of the eiffel Tower in Paris,
the movement required to produce a neural response would be the
equivalent of 1 centimeter, about 0.4 inches (hudspeth, 1983). As we
mentioned earlier, hair cells stimulate axons forming the auditory
nerve. One branch of each auditory nerve cell makes contact with the
hair cells, while the other branch proceeds to the medulla of the
brainstem. From the medulla, sound information is sent to the midbrain,
which manages reflexive responses to sound, such as turning toward the
source of a loud noise. in addition, the midbrain participates in sound
localization, or the identification of a source of sound. The midbrain
passes information to the thalamus, which in turn sends sound
information to the primary auditory cortex, located in the temporal
lobe. The primary auditory cortex conducts the first basic analysis of
the wavelengths and amplitudes of incoming information (see ● Figure
5.33). Surrounding the primary auditory Prof. P.M. Motta/Univ. "La
Sapienza", Rome/Science Source

The movement of tiny hair cells in the inner ear produces neural signals
that travel to the brain.

Vestibular system

174

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cortex are areas of secondary auditory cortex that respond to complex
types of stimuli, like clicks, noise, and sounds with particular
patterns.

Auditory Perception and Cognition

Primary auditory cortex Parietal lobe

Frontal lobe

Occipital lobe

now that we have an understanding of the structures and the pathways
used to process the sensations that lead to the perception of sound, we
turn our attention to the brain's interpretation and organization of
these sounds in terms of pitch, loudness, and spatial localization.

Temporal lobe

Pitch Perception Perception of pitch begins with the basilar membrane of
the cochlea

(see Figure 5.32). Place theory suggests that the frequency of a sound
is correlated with the part of the basilar membrane showing a peak
response. The base of the basilar membrane, closest to the oval window,
is narrow and stiff. in contrast, at its farthest point near the apex,
the basilar membrane is wide and flexible. if you are familiar with
stringed instruments like guitars, you know that high tones are produced
by striking the taut, small strings, and low tones are produced by
striking the floppy, wide strings. The same principle holds for the
basilar membrane. high-frequency tones produce the maximum movement of
the basilar membrane near the base, while low-frequency tones produce
maximum movement near the apex. The hair cells riding above these areas
of peak movement show a maximum response. Place theory works well for
sounds above 4,000 hz, which is about the frequency produced by striking
the highest key on a piano, C8. Below frequencies of 4,000 hz, the
response of the basilar membrane does not allow precise localization. in
these cases, we appear to use another principle described as temporal
theory, in which the patterns of neural firing match the frequency of a
sound.

Secondary auditory cortex

FIGURE

5.33

Auditory Cortex. The auditory cortex is located in the temporal lobe.
The primary auditory cortex processes basic features of sound while the
surrounding secondary auditory cortex processes more complex sounds,
such as clicks and general noise.

Perceiving Loudness humans can perceive sounds that vary in intensity by
a factor of more than 10 billion, from the softest sound we can detect
up to the sound made by a jet engine at takeoff, which causes pain and
structural damage to the ear. ● Table 5.2 identifies the intensity
levels of many common stimuli, measured in the logarithmic decibel
scale. Our

TABLE 5.2 Loudness of Common Sounds source of sound

intensity (measured in decibels, or db)

Threshold of hearing

0 dB

Rustling leaves

10 dB

Whisper

20 dB

Normal conversation

60 dB

Busy street traffic

70 dB

Vacuum cleaner

80 dB

Water at the foot of Niagara Falls

90 dB

iPod with standard earbuds

100 dB

Front rows of a rock concert

110 dB

Propeller plane at takeoff

120 dB

Threshold of pain/machine gun fire

130 dB

Military jet takeoff

140 dB

Instant perforation of the eardrum

160 dB hOW dO We heAr?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

175

5.34

Source: Argosy Publishing, Inc.

ce

an ist

Distance to near ear

D

t

r

ea

on ea re ar

Where Is That Sound Coming From? We localize sound to the left and right
by comparing the differences between the arrival times of the sounds to
our two ears.

ar of

Dis tan ce t

FIGURE

Distance to far ear Time difference: 0.6 msec (a) Sound perpendicular to
head

Time difference: 0.0 msec (b) Sound directly in front of or behind head

Time difference: 0.3 msec (c) Sound at 45 degrees from head

perception of loudness does not change at the same rate as actual
intensity. When the intensity of a sound stimulus is 10 times greater
than before, we perceive it as being only twice as loud (Stevens, 1960).
The frequency of a sound interacts with our perception of its loudness.
humans are maximally sensitive to sounds that normally fall within the
range of speech, or between 80 and 10,000 hz. Sounds falling outside the
range of speech must have higher intensity before we hear them as well.
One feature that distinguishes an expensive sound system from a cheaper
model is its ability to boost frequencies that fall outside our most
sensitive range.

Localization of Sound The pinna helps us localize sounds in the vertical
plane, or in

space above or below the head. Our primary method for localizing sound
in the horizontal plane (in front, behind, and to the side) is to
compare the arrival time of sound at each ear. As illustrated in ●
Figure 5.34, the differences in arrival times are quite small, between 0
milliseconds for sounds that are directly in front of or behind us to
0.6 milliseconds for sounds coming from a source perpendicular to the
head on either side. Because arrival times for sounds coming from
directly in front of or behind us are identical, it is difficult to
distinguish these sources without further information. in addition to
arrival times, we judge the differences in intensity of sounds reaching
each ear. Because the head blocks some sound waves, a sound "shadow" is
cast on the ear farthest from the source of sound. As a result, a weaker
signal is received by this ear. Just as our visual systems can be fooled
by certain types of input, our ability to localize sounds is influenced
by interactions between vision and audition. even before the invention
of surround sound, which provides many effective sound localization
cues, moviegoers perceived sound as originating from the actors' lips,
even though the speakers producing the sound are located above and to
the sides of the screen. Our willingness to believe that the sound is
coming from the actors' lips probably results from our everyday
experiences of watching people speak.

Auditory Groupings in our previous discussion of visual perception, we
reviewed the

grouping principles developed by gestalt psychologists. Similar types of
groupings occur in audition. Sounds from one location are grouped
together because we assume they have the same source, whereas sounds
identified as coming from different locations are assumed to have
different sources. Sounds that start and stop at the same time are
perceived as having the same source, while sounds with different
starting and stopping times usually arise from separate sources, such as
two voices in a conversation. grouping plays an especially significant
role in the perception of music and speech. in these cases, we see
evidence of topdown processing as well, because our expectations for the
next note or word influence our perceptions (Pearce et al., 2010).
Similarities between the processing of music and language have led
researchers to argue for more music instruction in school to assist
children with language learning (Strait et al., 2010).

176

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Perception

Sound from monitor Da-da

FIGURE

5.35

Ba-ba

Lips ga-ga

The McGurk Effect The McGurk effect is an auditory illusion that occurs
when we combine vision and hearing. In this demonstration, hearing
"ba-ba" at the same time you see a person's lips making "ga-ga" results
in your perceiving "da-da."

Developmental and Individual Differences in Audition hearing in the
human fetus is functional at 24 weeks of gestation, and the fetus shows
evidence of recognizing the mother's voice (Moon, 2017). newborns as
young as 2 days respond preferentially to their native language (Moon et
al., 1993). infants younger than 3 months show strong startle reactions
to noise. By the age of 6 months, infants turn their heads in the
direction of a loud or interesting sound. it is likely that their
thresholds for sounds are nearly at adult levels by this age (Olsho et
al., 1987). By the age of 1 year, children should reliably turn around
when their name is called (nadig et al., 2007). An important
developmental change in audition is age-related hearing loss. hearing
loss occurs first at higher frequencies. After the age of 30, most
people cannot hear sounds above 15,000 hz. After the age of 50, most
people cannot hear above 12,000 hz, and people older than 70 years have
difficulty with sounds above 6,000 hz. Because speech normally ranges up
to 8,000 to 10,000 hz, older adults might begin to have difficulty
understanding the speech of others. Among individual differences in
hearing is having absolute pitch, which means that you can name a
musical tone that you hear. The brains of individuals with absolute
pitch are structurally different from those of people who do not have
this ability. Areas of the left hemisphere are larger in musicians with
absolute pitch (Schlaug et al., 1995). Large-scale genetics studies have
identified genes associated with absolute pitch (Theusch et al., 2009).
Musicians who do have absolute pitch show a higher level of autistic
traits (see Chapter 14), and relatively high numbers of people with
autism spectrum disorder have absolute pitch (Wenhart et al., 2019).
Brain activity in both populations shows weaker network connectivity
compared to typical individuals.

Sociocultural Influences on Auditory Perception human culture and social
life often provide a framework for the interpretation of stimuli. A
dramatic example of this type of influence is our reaction to sine wave
speech. To produce this stimulus, scientists artificially alter
recordings of speech to resemble regular, repeating sine waves, as shown
in ● Figure 5.36 (davis, 2007). When people hear these artificial sounds
without further instructions, they describe them as tweeting birds or
other nonlanguage stimuli. however, if people are told the sounds
represent speech, they suddenly "hear" language elements (remez et al.,
1981). hOW dO We heAr?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

177

5.36

5 kHz

Expectations Influence the Interpretation of Sine Waves. Sine waves are
regular and repetitive waveforms, such as the ones we included earlier
to show how the height and frequency of light and sound waves are
interpreted by the mind. Researchers can record speech sounds and
transform the recordings into artificial sine waves, such as those in
this image. If the sounds are played without information about their
source, most people interpret the sounds as tweeting birds. However, if
people are told that the recordings are language, they report "hearing"
language, another example of top-down cognitive influences on
perception.

4 kHz 3 kHz 2 kHz 1 kHz 500 ms © Remez, R. E. (1998). Sine-wave speech.
Scholarpedia, 3: 2394

FIGURE

1000 ms

1500 ms

2000 ms

2500 ms

3000 ms

2000 ms

2500 ms

3000 ms

Natural utterance ("jazz and swing fans like fast music") 5 kHz 4 kHz 3
kHz 2 kHz 1 kHz 500 ms

1000 ms

1500 ms

Sine-wave replica of natural utterance

Sine wave speech shows us how culture in the form of experience with
language can shape perception, but in other instances, perception can
shape culture. For many people with hearing loss and for their families
and friends, being deaf means something other than having a disability.
instead, deafness is viewed as a culture, complete with its own set of
attitudes, language, and norms. American Sign Language (ASL) is viewed
as being quite distinct from signed english and is difficult for signing
people in great Britain and Australia to understand (Mindess, 2006).

How Do We Feel Body Position, Touch, Temperature, and Pain?

somatosensation The body senses, including body position, touch, skin
temperature, and pain.

178

Chapter 5

Somatosensation (soma comes from the greek word for "body") provides us
with many types of information about the position and movement of our
bodies, touch, skin temperature, and pain. Like many other organisms,
human beings even have the ability to sense magnetic fields impacting
the body (Wang et al., 2019). Although these senses may not seem as
glamorous as vision and hearing, we are severely disabled by their loss.
You might think it would be a blessing to be born without a sense of
pain, but people who have impaired pain reception often die prematurely
because of their inability to respond to injury. Although unpleasant,
pain tells us to stop and assess our circumstances, which might have
promoted the survival of our ancestors. Unlike the visual and auditory
stimuli we have discussed so far in this chapter, somatosensory stimuli
arise from within the body or make contact with its surface. As a
result, these stimuli provide an organism little time to react. We can
deal with a predator seen or heard from a distance using strategies
different from those we use for one that is touching us. nonetheless,
the somatosenses provide essential feedback needed for movement, speech,
and safety.

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Body Position

Peter Mumford/Alamy Stock Photo

To begin our exploration of the somatosensory systems, we return to the
inner ear. Adjacent to the structures responsible for encoding sound, we
find the structures of the vestibular system, which provide us with
information about body position and movement (review Figure 5.32). The
proximity of these structures to the middle ear, which can become
congested because of a head cold, is often responsible for those rather
unpleasant feelings of dizziness that accompany an illness. The
receptors of the vestibular system provide information about the
position of the head relative to the ground, linear acceleration, and
rotational movements of the head. We sense linear acceleration when our
rate of movement changes, such as when our airplane takes off. Like the
cochlea, the vestibular receptors contain sensitive hair cells that are
bent back and forth within their surrounding fluid when the head moves.
When extensive movement stops suddenly, perhaps at the end of an
amusement park ride, these fluids reverse course. You may have the odd
sensation that your head is now moving in the opposite direction, even
though you are sitting or standing still. The movement of these hair
cells results in the production of signals in the auditory nerve, the
same nerve that carries information about sound. These axons form
connections in the medulla and in the cerebellum. You may recall from
Chapter 4 that the cerebellum participates in balance and motor
coordination, functions that depend on feedback about movement. in turn,
the medulla receives input from the visual system, the cerebellum, and
other somatosenses. This arrangement provides an opportunity to
coordinate input from the vestibular system with other relevant
information. The medulla forms connections directly with the spinal
cord, allowing us to adjust our posture to keep our balance. vestibular
information travels from the medulla to the thalamus, the primary
somatosensory cortex of the parietal lobe, and then the primary motor
cortex in the frontal lobe. This pathway allows vestibular information
to guide voluntary movement. in humans particularly, information from
the vestibular system is tightly integrated with visual processing. As
we move, it is essential that we maintain a stable view of our
surroundings. To accomplish this task, rotation of the head results in a
reflexive movement of the eyes in the opposite direction. This action
should allow you to maintain a steady view of the world, even on the
most extreme roller coaster.

The vestibular system helps us maintain a steady view of the world, even
when riding the most extreme roller coaster.

vestibular system The system in the inner ear that provides information
about body position and movement.

Touch Touch provides a wealth of information about the objects around
us. By simply exploring an object with touch, we can determine features
such as size, shape, texture, and consistency. These judgments confirm
and expand the information we obtain about objects through visual
exploration. Touch is not only a means of exploring the environment.
Particularly in humans, touch plays a significant role in social
communication. infants who are touched regularly sleep better, remain
more alert while awake, and reach cognitive milestones at earlier ages
(Cascio et al., 2019). We hug our friends and loved ones to provide
comfort, pat others on the back for a job well done, and shake hands to
greet a colleague or conclude a deal. The contributions of the sense of
touch to human sexuality are obvious. Our sense of touch begins with
skin, the largest and heaviest organ in the human body. embedded within
the skin are several types of specialized neurons that produce action
potentials whenever they are physically bent or stretched. different
types of receptors respond to certain features of a touch stimulus, such
as pressure, vibration, or stretch (see ● Figure 5.37). in addition to
their locations in the skin, receptors are located in blood vessels,
joints, and internal organs. Unpleasant sensations from a headache or a
too-full stomach or bladder originate from some of these receptors. Some
receptor fibers wrap around hair follicles and respond whenever a hair
is pulled or bent. Others, as we will see later in this section,
participate in our senses of pain and skin temperature. information
about touch travels from the skin to the spinal cord. Once inside the
spinal cord, touch pathways proceed to the thalamus, along with input
from the cranial nerves hOW dO We FeeL BOdY POSiTiOn, TOUCh,
TeMPerATUre, And PAin?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

179

Advances in robotics combined with better understanding of how touch is
processed in the brain are leading to the development of prosthetics
that can feel. Using fMRI, researchers were able to map areas of the
sensory cortex that reacted when a participant imagined something
touching different parts of the hand. With electrodes implanted in the
relevant areas, the participant could then respond accurately to touch
applied to the prosthetic hand, even when blindfolded. With this more
natural feedback, the prosthetic hand should be able to manage delicate
tasks, like picking up an egg.

180

Chapter 5

H.S. Photos/Alamy Stock Photo

originating in the touch receptors in the skin of the face, the mouth,
and the tongue. The thalamus transmits touch information to the primary
somatosensory cortex, located in the parietal lobe. A classic map of the
body's representation in the primary somatosensory cortex is called a
sensory homunculus ("little man") (Penfield & Boldrey, 1937). This odd
figure illustrates how areas of the body are represented based on their
sensitivity rather than their size (see ● Figure 5.38). different
species show different patterns of cortical organization for touch.
humans need sensitive feedback from the lips and the hands to speak and
make skilled hand movements for Touch tool use and other tasks. rats
devote a great deal of cortical receptors real estate to whiskers,
whereas lips have a high priority in squirrels and rabbits. A notable
area that is missing from the homunculus is the brain, which has neither
touch receptors nor pain receptors. We can only assume that for much of
evolutionary history, intrusion into the brain was likely to be fatal.
Consequently, there would be no advantage to "feeling" your brain.
Because of the lack of somatosensation in the brain, neurosurgeons can
work with an alert patient using local anesthesia for the skull and
tissues overlying the brain. The surgery produces no sensations of
pressure or pain. The representation of touch in the primary sensory
cortex is plastic, which means that it changes in response to increases
or decreases in input from a body part. Many individuals who lose a body
part experience a phenomenon known as phantom limb, a term first used by
a Civil War physician to describe his patients' experience of pain from
a missing limb. Phantom sensations can FIGURE 5.37 result from the
reorganization of the somatosensory cortex following the loss of a body
part (Borsook et al., 1998). in one case study, touching different parts
of a patient's face produced Touch Receptors. Different "feeling" from
the patient's missing hand (ramachandran & rogers-ramachandran, 2000).
receptors in the skin help us sense When his cheek was touched, he
reported feeling his missing thumb, along with the expected pressure,
vibration, stretch, or pain. cheek, while touching his lip elicited
feeling from the missing index finger, along with the Source: Argosy
Publishing, Inc. normal lip sensations. in an even more bizarre example,
a patient was embarrassed to report that he experienced a sensation of
orgasm in his missing foot. increased input also changes the
organization of the somatosensory cortex. When monkeys were trained to
use specific fingers to discriminate among surface textures to obtain
food rewards, the areas of the cortex responding to the trained
fingertips expanded (Merzenich & Jenkins, 1993). A similar
reorganization occurs when blind individuals learn to read Braille

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Breast Aurbach et al., 2009

Nipple Rothemund et al., 2005; Komisaruk et al., 2011

FIGURE

Index finger Rothemund et al., 2005 Clitoris Allison et al., 1996

External genitals Yang & Kromm, 2004; Genital region Erikson, 1945

Clitoris, vagina, cervix Komisaruk et al., 2011; Labia, buttock, breast
Penfield & Rasmussen, 1950 Clitoris Michels et al., 2010

5.38

Sensory Homunculus. For over 70 years, textbooks have featured versions
of the original homunculus published by Penfield and Boldrey (1937),
which depicts a male. Only recently have scientists attempted to map the
female somatosensory cortex in a similar manner. One attempt, shown
here, outlines the female "hermunculus" against the grayed out
background of the original male image by Penfield and Boldrey. Much work
still needs to be done on the female version (Di Noto et al., 2012).

(Pascual-Leone & Torres, 1993) or when people train extensively on
stringed musical instruments (elbert et al., 1995). Using your thumbs
for text messaging will probably result in adaptations in cortical
representation not seen in older generations (ghosh, 2017). individuals
with autism spectrum disorder (ASd) experience a very different sensory
world (see Chapter 14). Many individuals with ASd are oversensitive to
touch, leading to rejection of hugs and cuddling. in addition, brain
responses to touch of self or others differ between individuals with ASd
and healthy controls (deschrijver et al., 2017). The extent of the
differences correlated with the individuals' reports of sensory and
social difficulties.

Pain

wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock.com

Source: Di Noto, P. M., Newman, L., Wall, S., & Einstein, G. (2012). The
Hermunculus: What Is Known about the Representation of the Female Body
in the Brain? Cerebral Cortex, 23(5), 1005-1013. doi:
10.1093/cercor/bhs005

given the anguish experienced by patients with chronic pain, it is
tempting to think that not having a sense of pain would be wonderful.
however, as mentioned earlier, we need pain to remind us to stop when we
are injured, to assess the situation before proceeding, and to allow the
body time to heal. Free nerve endings and networks of glial cells (see
Chapter 4) that respond to pain are triggered by a number of stimuli
associated with tissue damage (Abdo et al., 2019). Some pain receptors
respond to mechanical damage, such as that caused by a sharp object,
while others respond to temperature or chemicals. Among the chemicals
that stimulate pain receptors is capsaicin, an ingredient found in hot
peppers (Caterina et al., 1997). information about pain is carried
centrally to the brain by two types of fibers. Fast, myelinated axons
are responsible for that sharp "ouch" sensation that often accompanies
an injury. Slower, unmyelinated axons are responsible for dull, aching
sensations. Pain fibers from the body form synapses with cells in the
spinal cord, which in turn sends pain messages to the thalamus. This
information takes a relatively direct route, with only

The representation of body parts in the primary sensory cortex changes
in response to the amount of input from a body part. Children who study
stringed instruments show more space in the sensory cortex devoted to
fingers.

hOW dO We FeeL BOdY POSiTiOn, TOUCh, TeMPerATUre, And PAin?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

181

EVENT OR INJURY

FIGURE

5.39

The Gate Theory of Pain. According to the gate theory, incoming pain
messages can be influenced by factors such as chronic stress (opening
the gate wider and producing a greater sensation of pain) or rubbing an
injured body part (closing the gate and reducing the sensation of pain).

Gate in spinal cord

Factors that close the gate (rubbing elbow, high levels of arousal)

Pain experienced depending on how far the gate is open or closed.

Juriah Mosin/Shutterstock.com

Factors that open the gate (e.g., chronic stress)

AP Images/Stephen Morton

one synapse in the spinal cord separating the periphery of the body and
the thalamus in the forebrain. This arrangement ensures that pain
messages are received by the brain with great speed. From the thalamus,
pain information is sent to the anterior cingulate cortex, the insula,
and the amygdala, which manage the emotional qualities of pain, and to
the somatosensory cortex in the parietal lobe, which manages information
about the location and intensity of pain (Wiech, 2016; Corder et al.,
2019). Pain messages traveling to the brain may be modified by competing
incoming sensory signals. Many of us spontaneously rub our elbow after
bumping it painfully. The gate theory of pain accounts for this
phenomenon (Melzack & Wall, 1965). According to this model, input from
touch fibers (reacting to rubbing your elbow) competes with input from
pain receptors Ashlyn Blocker was born with a rare for activation of
cells in the spinal cord (see ● Figure 5.39). Activation of the touch
fibers efcondition preventing her from feeling fectively dilutes the
amount of pain information reaching the brain. pain. Without complaint,
she went The perception of pain is affected by the descending influence
of higher brain centers. several days with a broken ankle after Many
forebrain structures form connections with the periaqueductal gray of
the midbrain. As falling off her bicycle. we observed in Chapter 4, this
area is rich in receptors for our natural opioids, the endorphins. The
periaqueductal gray is a major target for opioid painkillers, such as
morphine. electrical stimulation of the periaqueductal gray produces a
significant reduction in the experience of pain (hosobuchi et al.,
1977). gate theory The theory that suggests that input from touch fibers
competes with Pain is an actively constructed experience that involves
our expectations and past experiinput from pain receptors, possibly
preventences (Wiech, 2016). The power of expectation can be seen in
placebo effects, which occur when ing pain messages from reaching the
brain. people experience pain reduction, even though they have been
exposed to an ineffective substance or treatment, such as a sugar pill
instead of an aspirin tablet. TraditionIn one of the most dramatic
examples of how ally, scientists thought placebo effects were due to the
ability of people's belief stress can interfere with the perception of
pain, that they are being treated for pain to initiate a real decrease
in pain sensation. Guy Gertsch unknowingly ran the final 19 miles
however, even when people are told they are receiving a placebo, pain
relief (about 30 km) of the 1982 Boston Marathon on a can occur as long
as they are also told that placebo effects can be powerful broken leg.
Gertsch finished the race with a highly (Carvalho et al., 2016). no
other sensory modality is as dramatically affected by culture, context,
respectable time of 2 hours and 47 minutes. and experience as our sense
of pain. The connection between culture and experience of pain is
vividly illustrated by the hook-swinging ritual practiced in india
(Melzack & Wall, 1983). This ritual, designed to promote the health of
children and crops, involves

182

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

How Do We Process Smells and Tastes? The famous philosopher immanuel
Kant (Kant, 1798/1978, p. 46) considered olfaction, or our sense of
smell, to be the "most dispensable" sense. Other species rely more
heavily on olfaction and gustation, or the sense of taste, than humans
do. nonetheless, our chemical senses provide warning of danger, such as
smelling smoke from a fire or tasting spoiled food. The chemical senses
also contribute a richness to our emotional and social experiences. The
smell of perfume or the taste of chocolate may be accompanied by strong
emotional reactions. Contrary to Kant's view, people who have lost their
sense of smell because of head injury often experience profound
depression (Zuscho, 1983). Sharing a meal has a strong effect on bonding
for humans and other primates (Brosnan, 2010; Wobber et al., 2010). Our
chemical senses begin with molecules suspended in the air in the case of
olfaction and dissolved in saliva in the case of gustation. Olfaction
provides more information from a distance, like vision and audition,
whereas gustation, like the somatosenses, involves information from
contact with the body. Like the somatosenses, the chemical senses are
quite ancient in terms of evolution and have undergone little change
over time. however, our sense of smell has been influenced by walking on
two feet instead of four. Most olfactory stimuli are relatively heavy
and tend to fall to the ground. Consider how your dog puts its nose to
the ground when tracking something interesting.

Louise Batalla Duran/Alamy Stock Photo

hanging a male volunteer from steel hooks embedded into the skin and
muscles of his back. instead of suffering excruciating pain, as
Westerners might expect, the volunteers appear to be in a state of
exaltation. Women who have participated in prepared childbirth classes
report less pain than women who are uninformed regarding the birth
process. Although athletes and nonathletes share similar pain
thresholds, these groups are quite different in their tolerance of pain
(Scott & gijsbers, 1981). Compared to nonathletes, athletes in contact
sports such as boxing, rugby, and football tolerate higher levels of
pain before identifying a stimulus as painful. Patients who are allowed
to self-administer morphine for pain require less medication than
patients who receive injections from hospital staff (Bennett et al.,
1982). The sense of control may reduce anxiety and the need for pain
medication.

Culture, context, and experience can shape our perception of pain.
During a festival dedicated to penance and atonement, Tamil Hindus
walked through the streets carrying devices called kavadis that hold
hooks that are pierced through the skin. Without this cultural context,
it is likely that most people would find this experience excruciatingly
painful.

Olfaction Air containing olfactory stimuli is taken in through the
nostrils and circulated within the nasal cavities connected to the
nostrils, where it interacts with olfactory receptors (see ● Figure
5.40). The receptors are located in a thin layer of cells within the
nasal cavity. Unlike most neurons, the olfactory receptors regularly die
and are replaced by new receptor cells in cycles lasting 4 to 6 weeks.
Cells at the base of the receptors are responsible for producing the
mucus surrounding the receptors. One branch of each receptor interacts
with molecules dissolved in the mucus. The other branch carries
information back to the central nervous system as part of the olfactory
nerve. The olfactory nerve fibers synapse in one of the two olfactory
bulbs, located just below the mass of the frontal lobes. Although we
often hear that human olfaction is not as good as olfaction in other
species, human olfactory bulbs have about the same number of neurons as
in 24 other mammalian species (Mcgann, 2017). Unlike most other sensory
input to the brain, olfactory pathways do not make direct connections
with the thalamus before the information reaches the cerebral cortex.
instead, fibers from the olfactory bulbs proceed to the olfactory
cortex, located in the lower portions of the frontal lobe extending into
the temporal lobe, and to the amygdala. Because of the role these areas
of the brain play in emotion, which we described in Chapter 4, these
pathways may account for the significant emotional reactions we
experience (disgust or pleasure) in

olfaction The sense of smell. gustation The sense of taste. olfactory
nerve A nerve carrying olfactory information from the olfactory
receptors to the olfactory bulbs.

olfactory bulb One of two structures below the frontal lobes of the
brain that receive input from the olfactory receptors in the nose.

hOW dO We PrOCeSS SMeLLS And TASTeS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

183

Frontal lobe Thalamus

Hypothalamus Olfactory cortex Orbitofrontal cortex Hippocampus Olfactory
bulb To limbic system

Inhaled air

Amygdala Olfactory nerve (to brain) Olfactory bulb Axons of olfactory
receptor cells Olfactory neuron

FIGURE

Bone

Olfactory receptor cell

5.40

Olfactory Receptors. Receptors in the nose interact with airborne
chemicals to begin the sensing of odor. Source: Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Mucus Odorant molecules

Air flow

response to odor. The olfactory cortex makes connections with the
thalamus, which in turn sends information to the orbitofrontal cortex.
it is likely that this pathway contributes to the conscious awareness of
odors.

Gustation The most likely original purpose of our sense of gustation, or
taste, was to protect us from eating poisonous or spoiled food and to
attract us to foods that boost our chances of survival. Although we seem
biased toward detecting negative stimuli (Cacioppo & gardner, 1999), our
attraction to certain tastes also reflects our historical past. Because
most of our ancestors were constantly facing the threat of famine, we
find fatty and sugary foods to be especially tasty. Unfortunately, given
the current availability of safe and palatable foods, our sense of taste
may drive us to eat more than we need. Most of us are familiar with four
major categories of taste: sweet, sour, salty, and bitter. A fifth type
of taste has been proposed, known by the Japanese term umami, which
roughly translated means "savory" or "meaty" (Chaudhari et al., 2000).
in addition, the tongue and the mouth contain receptors for
carbohydrates (Turner et al., 2014) and capsaicin, an active ingredient
in hot peppers. Mice lacking capsaicin receptors happily consumed water
containing capsaicin at levels that were rejected by normal mice
(Caterina et al., 2000).

184

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Taste receptors are located on the tongue and in other parts of the
mouth (see ● Figure 5.41). Contrary to a popular myth (usually
accompanied by an equally mythological map of "taste centers" on the
tongue), receptors sensitive to all types of taste are equally
distributed across the tongue. You are probably aware of the bumpy
texture of your tongue, which results from the presence of papillae.
Most papillae contain somewhere between 1 and 100 taste buds. each taste
bud contains between 50 and 150 receptor cells, which extend tiny
hairlike cilia into the saliva that interact with dissolved taste
stimuli and transduce the resulting information into neural signals.
Like olfactory receptors, taste buds have a limited life before they are
replaced. if you burn your tongue by drinking hot liquid, your taste is
affected for a day or two. however, when the taste buds are replaced,
taste should be back to normal. information about taste travels from the
mouth and the tongue to the medulla. The medulla in turn communicates
with the thalamus, which sends taste information to the insula, lower
somatosensory cortex of the parietal lobe, and to the orbitofrontal
cortex, where the emotional pleasantness or unpleasantness of particular
stimuli is processed (Kobayakawa et al., 2005). As we will see in
Chapters 7 and 8, taste information interacts with motivation and
learning.

Perception and Cognition in the Chemical Senses Olfaction and gustation
share three interesting perceptual themes: (a) We can easily identify a
number of complex stimuli combining many types of molecules, such as the
aroma of coffee; (b) we can detect small differences among similar
smells and tastes; and (c) our experience often shapes our perception of
an olfactory or gustatory stimulus (goldstein, 2010). humans can
distinguish among at least 1 trillion odors (Bushdid et al., 2014). An
example of the impact of experience and top-down processing on olfaction
is the effect of labeling an odor on people's rating of its
pleasantness. if participants smell an onion stimulus labeled "pizza,"
they rate the odor as more pleasant than if the identical stimulus is
labeled "body odor" (herz, 2003). The chemical senses interact to
provide the perception of flavor. You have probably noticed that food
doesn't taste good when your sense of smell is decreased by a bad cold.
if you close your eyes and hold your nose, you are unable to distinguish
between a slice of apple and a slice of raw potato. The orbitofrontal
cortex plays an important role in the perception of flavor because the
pathways serving olfaction and gustation converge in this part of the
brain (rolls, 2000).

Tongue

Microvilli

Taste bud

Papillae

papillae Small bumps on the tongue that contain taste buds.

taste bud A structure found in papillae that contains taste receptor
cells.

Supporting cells Taste receptor cells Axons of cranial nerves Cross
section of papilla

Taste buds

Steve Gschmeissner/Science Source

Papilla

FIGURE

5.41

Taste Receptors. Taste buds are located in the bumps, or papillae,
located on the tongue. Source: Source: Argosy Publishing, Inc.

hOW dO We PrOCeSS SMeLLS And TASTeS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

185

Developmental and Individual Differences in the Chemical Senses Young
children are notorious for putting things in their mouths that adults
would quickly reject based on taste, including poisonous substances such
as drain cleaner. however, this propensity does not mean that children
lack a sense of taste. Using facial expressions, researchers have
demonstrated that newborns differentiate among sweet, bitter, and sour
tastes but seem relatively oblivious to salty tastes (rosenstein &
Oster, 1988). As we get older, the overall number of taste buds
decreases, reducing the intensity of many tastes and providing a
possible explanation for why some strong flavors, such as that of
broccoli, are enjoyed more by adults than by children. As we age, our
sensitivity to smell also decreases (Cain & gent, 1991). Because
olfaction and taste interact to form the flavor of foods, decreased
sensitivity in both senses might affect overall appetite as we age. Like
the other sensory modalities discussed in this chapter, the chemical
senses vary from person to person. Females are generally more sensitive
to smell than are males (doty et al., 1984). The average person has
approximately 6,000 taste buds, but this number may vary widely.
Supertasters have unusually high numbers of papillae and, therefore,
have more taste buds (Bartoshuk, 2000). disturbances in the chemical
senses are correlated with several psychological disorders. Olfaction
and the experience of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSd; see Chapter
14) appear to interact in combat veterans. PTSd is often characterized
by intrusive, disturbing flashbacks in which the patient essentially
relives the traumatic experience. given the close association

EXPERIENCING PSYCHOLOGY Are You a Supertaster? ABOUT 25% OF THE
POPULATION are supertasters, or people who are extrasensitive to taste;
25% are nontasters, or people who are relatively insensitive to taste;
and the remaining 50% fall between these two extremes. You can use the
following exercises to determine your taste category.

1.  How Does Mint Taste to You? Place a mint Life Saver on your tongue,
    and allow it to dissolve (no chewing please). Rate the following
    qualities of the Life Saver on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being "very
    intense" and 5 being "not intense":

Sweetness

1

2

3

4

5

Smell

1

2

3

4

5

Coolness

1

2

3

4

5

"Rush"

1

2

3

4

5

How to interpret your results: Mint tasters fall into four groups: Group
1: Mint is mild, no rush. Group 2: Mint is moderate, no rush.

186

Chapter 5

TABLE 5.3 Interpreting Your Supertaster Results mildly sensitive tasters
(group 1)

moderately sensitive tasters (groups 2 and 3)

supertasters (group 4)

Weak to undetectable sensation from mint.

Moderate to strong sensation from mint.

Very strong sensation from mint.

Flavor of food is not that important.

Flavor of food is important.

Flavor of food is important.

Many foods liked, few foods disliked, and not passionate about food.

Many foods liked, few foods disliked, and often passionate about food.

Great variation in the number of foods liked and often passionate about
food.

Group 3: Mint is moderate, rush. Group 4: Mint is intense, rush. ● Table
5.3 shows further characteristics of these taste groups.

2.  Count Your Papillae You need a gummed reinforcer (sticky white ring
    for notebooks), a swab, blue food coloring, and a mirror.

Place one reinforcer on the front of your tongue just to the side of
midline. Use a swab to apply blue food coloring to the part of your
tongue that shows through the center of the reinforcer. The blue food
coloring should make your papillae (bumps) more obvious. Count the
number of papillae you see in the ring. More than 25 papillae within the
reinforcer ring means you're a super-

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

between olfaction and memory, researchers hypothesized that some PTSd
flashbacks could be initiated by relevant smells. When compared to
combat veterans who did not have PTSd, combat veterans with the disorder
experienced marked anxiety when exposed to the smell of diesel,
accompanied by changes in the activity of the amygdala (vermetten et
al., 2007).

Sociocultural Influences on the Chemical Senses The sense of smell might
seem to play a secondary role to vision and audition in humans, but
people have manipulated scent for religious, medicinal, and personal
purposes since ancient times. We can speculate that once people learned
to control fire, a recognition that some burning things smelled better
than others could not have been far behind, possibly leading to the use
of incense in religious rituals. Use of natural materials for medicine
and self-adornment provides the historical roots for large, contemporary
industries that manufacture scent for a host of consumer products,
including perfume, air fresheners, "new car smell" products, and
detergents. Although olfaction often seems to run in the background of
our other cognitive processes, it is not immune to the effects of
culture and experience. Americans spend millions on products that remove
or mask body odor, whereas other cultures do not find such odors
offensive. One study compared the categorization of odors by French,
American, and vietnamese participants (Chrea et al., 2004). Although the
participants sorted odors similarly into broad categories of floral,
sweet, bad, and natural, they differed along subtler dimensions. The
French and American participants quickly sorted odors into fruit or
flower categories, but this separation had little relevance to the
vietnamese participants. French and French-Canadian

taster. The number of papillae of mildly or moderately sensitive tasters
will be less than 25, but these two groups cannot be distinguished based
on this factor.

children and are better at detecting differences in fats in foods. ■

Supertasters tend to dislike bitter foods; they have many low numbers.
Supertasters also tend to be picky eaters as

3.  Other Eating Habits Rate the tastes of the following foods and
    drinks using a 1-to-5 scale, with 1 being "dislike strongly" and 5
    being "like a great deal":

2

3

4

5

Grapefruit

1

2

3

4

5

Coffee (black)

1

2

3

4

5

Dark chocolate

1

2

3

4

5

As a child, were you ever described by a parent, teacher, or other adult
as a "picky eater"? (circle one) • YES • NO Can you easily tell the
difference between the fat content of milk, for example, between whole
and 2% milk or between 1% and 2% milk? (circle one) • YES • NO

hOW dO We PrOCeSS SMeLLS And TASTeS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Roger Freberg

1

Blend Images/Alamy Stock Photo

Broccoli

Placing blue food coloring on the tongue makes the papillae easier to
see. Supertasters have many more papillae, and thus more taste buds,
than other people.

187

Jamie Stamey/iStock/Getty Images

Different cultures can prefer different foods. It is unlikely that you
will find crispy tarantulas, a popular snack in Cambodia, in many
American restaurants.

participants rated the pleasantness of wintergreen quite differently
(Ferdenzi et al., 2016). Wintergreen is used in candy in Canada, but in
medicine in France. experience clearly plays a role in developing an
individual's taste preferences. The effects of experience on taste begin
in the prenatal environment. infants whose mothers consumed carrot juice
during pregnancy showed stronger preferences for carrot flavor (Mennella
& Beauchamp, 1996; Mennella et al., 2001). in terms of survival, this
result makes perfect sense. infants are born with a predisposition to
like the safe foods available in their environment. Because the food
supply historically has varied widely from place to place, delicacies
such as crispy fried tarantulas are appreciated in Cambodia but not
necessarily in the United States.

Interpersonal Relationships Sensation and Perception Perspectives

Science Photo Library/Alamy Stock Photo

CAN RELATIONSHIPS BUFFER THE EXPERIENCE OF PAIN? WE MENTIONED EARLIER
that of the senses we discussed in this chapter, pain was particularly
influenced by cognition and context. Can being in a close relationship
affect the way you feel pain? The answer appears to be "yes." Physical
contact with a loved one can affect how the brain processes pain. Women
who were expecting an electric shock showed reduced activity in parts of
the brain associated with the emotional and arousing aspects of pain
when they held their husbands' hands (Coan et al., 2006). in addition,
the amount of reduction of activity in these pain areas of the brain
correlated with the quality of the marriage---happily married women
experienced greater decreases in activity associated with pain than less
happily married women. Perhaps this buffering effect is why you may
reach for your partner when frightened during a scary movie. Knowing
that such intimacy could reduce a loved one's pain might compel you to
accompany your partner to a doctor's appointment or visit a friend
Research shows that physical contact with loved ones reduces the in the
hospital. Our understanding of pain in connection with our sensation of
pain. interpersonal relationships can help us in tangible ways to create
and maintain stronger, healthier relationships. ■

188

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology Takes on Real-World Problems Social Distancing, Loneliness
and the Perception of Social Threat images of snakes (Cacioppo et al.,
2016). These differences in reactions to social and non-social threat
happen so quickly that they are likely to result from implicit, or
unconscious processing as opposed to explicit, conscious reasoning. What
might be the implications of this heightened sensitivity to social
threats? At the same time lonely people should be working to repair weak
social connections, their heightened sensitivity to social threats might
instead initiate self-preservation, or putting their own needs ahead of
the needs of others. Self-preservation behavior is not exactly
endearing, so behaving in this way can perpetuate feelings of loneliness
(Cacioppo, Chen, & Cacioppo, 2017). ■

Joel Sartore/National Geographic Image Collection

reporting feeling lonely (Mental Health Foundation, 2020). Perception is
key to our understanding of loneliness. Feelings of loneliness are not
initiated until an individual perceives insufficient or unsatisfactory
social connection (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2014). In other words, one
person might be unhappy in spite of having many close friends while
another might be perfectly happy with one or two friends. It is the
perception of one's social life falling short of expectations that
initiates feelings of loneliness. Once loneliness has taken hold,
further changes in perception take hold. People who are lonely become
more sensitive to social threats, such as images of social rejection,
compared to non-social threats, such as

gpointstudio/Shutterstock.com

AS WE HAVE SEEN IN THIS CHAPTER, different people watching the same
event can reach different conclusions about what just happened. If we
are to develop effective policies for solving real-world problems, we
must have methods for identifying perceptions of the experience from the
perspectives of those involved. While we understand the benefits of
lockdowns and social distancing in a pandemic, we also understand that
these preventive measures can increase loneliness. In a matter of just a
few weeks of lockdown, the number of UK adults who reported feelings of
loneliness more than doubled. Young people between the ages of 18 and 24
were the most likely to be lonely as a result of the lockdown, with
nearly half

Lonely people become more sensitive to social threats, such as social
rejection, but not to non-social threats, such as snakes.

hOW dO We PrOCeSS SMeLLS And TASTeS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

189

summary 5.3 Important Structures in the Non-visual Senses structure

Function

Ear

Transduces sound waves to neural signals. Includes pinna, tympanic
membrane, and cochlea.

Vestibular system

Provides information about body movement and position.

Touch receptors

Receptors embedded in the skin report about pressure, vibration,
stretch, and pain.

Olfactory receptors

Airborne chemicals interacting with olfactory receptors in the nose
begin the process of sensing odors.

Taste receptors

Taste receptors located in the mouth and in the bumpy papillae of the
tongue interact with chemicals dissolved in saliva to provide
information about taste.

Credits: Top row---Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Second row---Argosy
Publishing, Inc.; Third row---Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Fourth
row---Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Bottom row---Argosy Publishing, Inc.

190

Chapter 5

The PerCeiving Mind: SenSATiOn And PerCePTiOn

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Key terms The Language of Psychological Science Be sure you can define
these terms and use them correctly.

absolute threshold, p. 153 audition, p. 172 auditory nerve, p. 174
basilar membrane, p. 174 binocular cue, p. 164 bottom-up processing,
p. 152 cochlea, p. 174 cone, p. 158 cornea, p. 157 depth perception,
p. 164 difference threshold, p. 153 fovea, p. 158 gate theory, p. 182
gustation, p. 183

iris, p. 157 lens, p. 157 monocular cue, p. 164 olfaction, p. 183
olfactory bulb, p. 183 olfactory nerve, p. 183 opponent process theory,
p. 161 optic nerve, p. 159 optic tracts, p. 159 organ of Corti, p. 174
papillae, p. 185 perception, p. 150 psychophysics, p. 153 pupil, p. 157

retina, p. 157 retinal disparity, p. 166 rod, p. 158 sensation, p. 150
sensory adaptation, p. 152 signal detection, p. 154 somatosensation,
p. 178 taste bud, p. 185 top-down processing, p. 152 transduction,
p. 151 trichromatic theory, p. 160 vestibular system, p. 179 vision,
p. 156

hOW dO We PrOCeSS SMeLLS And TASTeS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

191

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Do we have free will? Transcranial magnetic stimulation switched the
hand chosen to carry out a task from right to left, but participants
insisted that switching hands was their own idea.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6

The Aware Mind ELEMENTS OF CONSCIOUSNESS Learning Objectives 1. Compare
and contrast the different meanings of consciousness.

2.  Describe the effects of different stages of waking and sleep on
    consciousness, electroencephalogram (EEG) patterns, autonomic
    nervous system function, and muscle activity.

3.  Differentiate several sleep-wake disorders in terms of their
    symptoms and the type of sleep disturbed.

4.  Explain disorders of consciousness in terms of damage or dysfunction
    of the brain.

5.  Categorize the neurochemical mechanisms and effects on consciousness
    of major types of psychoactive drugs.

6.  Describe the use of hypnosis, meditation, and other nondrug methods
    for altering consciousness.

WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO HAVE "FREE WILL"? THIS MIGHT sound more like a
philosophy question than a psychology question, but advances in
biological and cognitive psychology have allowed psychologists to tackle
it. Usually, we think of free will as the ability to consciously control
our actions and decisions. In the children's game of "rock, paper,
scissors," we feel like we are making a conscious decision to choose one
of the three options, but how would such a decision be made? What types
of processes in the brain correspond to choosing scissors over the other
two possibilities? Controversial research into voluntary movements, such
as forming your hand into scissors, has shown that the brain makes a
commitment to a choice before we become aware of the decision (Libet et
al., 1993; Soon et al., 2008). (See ● Figure 6.1.) Other research shows
that the brain can be manipulated to make an unusual choice without
disrupting the individual's sense of free will. Right-handed people
normally use their right hand 60% of the time or more when forced to
choose to use one hand over the other, but when researchers exposed
right-handed subjects' right hemispheres to transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS), illustrated in the large image 1990). Despite making
the uncharacteristic choice to use "the wrong hand," the participants in
this experiment reported feeling in control of their hand movements. If
the brain has already committed to a movement, what purpose does a
conscious sense of having decided to move serve? Insight into this
question emerged from the study of split-brain patients described in
Chapter 4. These patients have undergone surgery that severs the
connections between their right and their

LeventeGyori/Shutterstock.com

on the previous page, they chose to use their left hand 80% of the time
(Ammon & Gandevia,

193 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Finger begins to move

FIGURE 6.1

Awareness of intention to act

The Intention to Move Precedes Conscious Awareness. Benjamin Libet
demonstrated that a "readiness potential," or a change in the
participant's EEG activity, could be seen about 350 msec (1 msec is one
one-thousandth of a second, so about 1 3 second) prior to the
participant's conscious intent to flex a finger. Libet's results
initiated a lively discussion among psychologists and philosophers about
the nature of human free will.

Activity in motor cortex begins

--550

Source:
https://www.world-of-luciddreaming.com/is-free-will-an-illusion.html

--200

0

Time in milliseconds

left hemispheres, making it possible to expose one hemisphere at a time
to a stimulus. For example, you can show the relatively nonverbal right
hemisphere the word stand, and the patient usually stands up. However,
because of the limitations of the right hemisphere in processing
language, the patient is consciously unaware of having read the word.
When asked why they stood up, patients responded by saying they felt the
need to stretch. In other words, the mind is building a theory
Maximilian Weinzierl/Alamy Stock Photo

about the behavior that was just performed (Gazzaniga, 2011). This

Social context plays a role in sleep, even for the fruit fly. Fruit
flies living with other fruit flies rather than alone need more sleep,
suggesting that one of the functions of sleep is to process learning
about social experiences. The larger the group of flies, the longer each
fly needed to sleep. From I. Ganguly-Fitzgerald, J. Donlea, & P. J. Shaw
(2006). "Waking Experience Affects Sleep Need in Drosophila," Science,
313(5794), 1775--1781. doi:10.1126/science.1130408

consciousness A state of awareness. self-awareness The special
understanding of the self as distinct from other stimuli.

194

Chapter 6

type of observation leads to a view of consciousness as an interpreter,
making sense out of our actions and the world within and around us. This
view helps us understand the observed delay between the brain's
commitment to an action and our conscious awareness of that
decision---the interpreter needs time to analyze the situation. In this
chapter, we will explore many situations that affect the performance of
the interpreter, from the variations found in stages of sleep and waking
to the alterations produced by psychoactive drugs

and damage to the brain. This journey will require us to zoom in to
observe underlying processes in the brain and then zoom out again to
understand the influences of the social context on the phenomenon of
conscious awareness.

What Does It Mean to Be Conscious? Our english word conscious is derived
from the Latin conscientia, which means "to know." Consciousness refers
to knowing or being aware of ongoing experiences occurring both
internally and in the world around us. we understand that to be
unconscious, perhaps because of a blow to the head, means that we are
unaware of what is happening within and around us. however, the term
consciousness has multiple meanings. Consciousness can refer to a state
of awareness (alert versus drowsy, for example) or the current content
of awareness (while reading this page, you hear your neighbor's music).
A special type of consciousness, selfawareness, occurs when we focus on
ourselves as individuals. Consciousness has been a favorite topic among
psychologists for many years. william James coined the term "stream of
consciousness" to capture the moving, seemingly

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

unbroken flow of conscious awareness (1899, p. 15). Sigmund Freud used
the term consciousness to refer to aspects of the mind that could be
retrieved voluntarily, in contrast to the unconscious parts of the mind
that remain hidden to voluntary searches for information. Cognitive
psychologists debate why some information becomes conscious while other
information does not (Baars, 1988).

The Evolution of Consciousness

Consciousness as Variations in Alertness Varying states of awareness
might allow animals to repair their bodies and conserve energy. Food
requirements would be higher if we stayed awake for 24 hours, as you may
have noticed while studying for final exams. Another possible benefit of
varying states of awareness is maximizing safety. Most animals are
specialized for activity in either the light or the dark. Sleeping
during the cycle for which an animal is poorly equipped for activity
might contribute to its survival. however, being inactive is not a safe
thing to do unless you have a safe place to hide (Allison & Cicchetti,
1976). horses and rabbits are both frequently preyed upon, but horses
sleep in the open, while rabbits sleep in burrows. Consequently, wild
horses sleep as little as 1 or 2 hours per day, while wild rabbits sleep
at least 8 hours.

ARCO/W Dolder/AGE Fotostock

Most of us would agree that bacteria do not possess consciousness, but
people do. This implies that consciousness emerged at some point in the
course of evolution. The exact location of that point remains highly
debatable. James (1890, p. 141) maintained that "consciousness grows the
more complex and intense the higher we rise in the animal kingdom. That
of a man must exceed that of an oyster." if consciousness evolved as
suggested by James, what advantages might account for this development?
The question of the emergence of consciousness in animals is complicated
by the multiple meanings of consciousness described previously. Most
animals show variations in states of awareness. even the humble fruit
fly takes periods of rest, which are believed to be the fruit fly
equivalent of sleep (Shaw et al., 2000). Consciousness defined as an
awareness of ongoing sensations is probably less common in the animal
kingdom. Many animals would survive quite well by simply responding
automatically to the world around them ("food" or "predator") without
necessarily thinking "i smell food" or "i see a predator." The
self-awareness aspect of consciousness---as exemplified in "i"
statements---might be the rarest of all among living things, as we will
see later.

Consciousness as an Awareness of Ongoing Sensations One possible
advantage

of being consciously aware of ongoing sensations is the ability to
choose responses rather than to respond instinctively (Gazzaniga, 2011).
if suddenly faced with a predator, any animal could respond
automatically using reflex and instinct, which we discuss in Chapter 8.
horses are notorious for running whenever the slightest stimulus bothers
them. it is unlikely that the horse in these cases is thinking, "i hear
a mountain lion---i should run." Conscious awareness of sensations
provides more options. if a conscious animal hears a sound in the
distance that might indicate the presence of a predator, it could choose
to continue on, flee, or pause while obtaining further information. This
flexibility would be likely to increase the animal's chances of
survival.

Sleeping habits of different species reflect how likely they are to be
preyed upon by other animals and whether they have shelter. The lion has
few predators and is likely to fall asleep wherever it is convenient.

Consciousness as Self-Awareness The self-awareness aspect of
consciousness

could heighten an animal's drive to survive. recognition and
understanding of being alive is correlated with heightened
meaningfulness of self-preservation. developmental psychologists have
provided a technique for demonstrating self-awareness that can be used
with many species. recognizing one's self in the mirror is believed to
be a major developmental milestone in achieving self-awareness. in the
so-called rouge test, a dot of rouge or other odorless dye is placed on
a child's forehead, and the child is allowed to look in a mirror (Lewis
& Brooks-Gunn, 1979). Before the age of about 18 months, children do not
seem to understand the image in the mirror is their own. At about that
age, they rub at the spot whAT dOeS iT MeAn TO Be COnSCiOUS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

195

Rensselaer Artificial Intelligence and Reasoning Lab

Diana Reiss, Ph.D.

Ghislain & Marie David de Lossy/The Image Bank/Getty Images

Babies 18 months and older are able to recognize themselves in a mirror,
which psychologists believe indicates a sense of self-awareness. Happy
the elephant, a resident of the Bronx Zoo, repeatedly used her trunk to
touch a mark that researchers placed above her eye, suggesting that she
too can recognize her image in the mirror. Researchers have suggested
that even robots might be able to pass the mirror test.

of rouge or turn their bodies to get a better look, thus demonstrating
self-awareness. Chimpanzees "pass" the rouge test by demonstrating
behavior similar to that of 18-month-old children (Gallup, 1970). in
addition to chimpanzees, orangutans, gorillas raised by humans,
bottle-nosed dolphins, Asian elephants, magpies, and parrots have
demonstrated self-awareness in this type of experiment (Patterson, 1984;
Gallup & Suarez, 1986; Povinelli, 1993; Patterson & Cohn, 1994; Plotnik
et al., 2006; Prior et al., 2008). Other researchers restrict the
possibility of self-aware consciousness to species that exhibit complex
social behavior. Of what use would self-awareness be if one did not
frequently interact with others of the same kind? Social animals must be
able to recognize other individuals and respond to them accordingly.
dolphins appear to have special whistles that they use for particular
individuals, like names (Janik et al., 2006). Some social animals,
including chimpanzees and elephants, show an awareness of death and
appear to grieve at the loss of family members. elephants in particular
have been known to remain in the area of a relative's bones for lengthy
periods (McComb et al., 2006). Dr Morley Read/Shutterstock.com

Organisms like the army ant stretch our definitions of what it means to
be conscious. Individual army ants (Eciton) are not impressive, but
colonies of army ants show signs of collective intelligence and
sophisticated problem solving, such as using their bodies to build nests
of up to 700,000 individuals (Franks, 1989).

Psychology as a hub science Can Machines Become Conscious? ExtEnding thE
quEstion of what crEaturEs arE conscious a stEp furthEr, we can ask
whether it is possible to construct an artificial consciousness. From
the Terminator to Her's Samantha, hollywood loves to tell the story of
the machine that develops consciousness. Stephen hawking, Bill Gates,
and elon Musk have warned us that self-aware robots are likely to
jeopardize the continuity of the human race. what does it mean for a
machine to be conscious? John Searle (1980) distinguishes between
"strong" and "weak"

196

Chapter 6

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Daily Mail

artificial intelligence (Ai). weak Ai, which all current robots possess,
refers to the ability to demonstrate intelligent behavior but without
the ability to experience conscious states or subjective awareness.
Strong Ai refers to machines possessing the full range of human
cognition. how would we judge whether a machine has achieved
consciousness? in 1950, Alan Turing devised a test of a machine's
ability to think. According to the Turing test, if a human had a
conversation with two other beings, one human and one machine, without
being able to distinguish between them, then the machine would have
passed the test. The 2014 eugene Goostman program, which impersonated a
13-year-old from the Ukraine, managed to convince 10 out of 30 judges
that "he" was human. The ability to meet Turing's criteria may be within
reach. One type of consciousness discussed in this chapter is
self-awareness. Selmer Bringsjord and his colleagues (2015) claim that
their robots have demonstrated evidence of self-awareness in the mirror
test described in this chapter. in another demonstration, the
researchers told three nao robots that two were given "dumbing" pills to
prevent them from speaking, while one was given a placebo. in actuality,
mute buttons were pressed on two of the robots. when asked who had been
given the active pills, all three tried to answer, but of course only
one was able to say, "i don't know." The robot paused, then stood up and
said, "Sorry, i know now. i was able to prove that i was not given a
dumbing pill." daniel dennett (1991) argues that it might be more
interesting to set aside the question of consciousness and simply build
the most human robot possible. robots are becoming more natural both in
looks and behavior, and robotics experts hope to make them
indistinguishable from humans. hanson robotics' Sophia has cameras in
her eyes that allow her to make eye contact and recognize people. She
uses Google Chrome voice recognition to process speech, chat with
people, and learn. hiroshi ishiguro has plans to make his robots
suitable for jobs such as a hotel receptionist, a museum tour guide, and
a language tutor. Already, 80% of ishiguro's participants greeted his
robots by saying "hello," as they mistakenly believed the robots to be
human. where will this technology lead us? That remains unknown, but the
effort to construct artificial consciousness might yield new insights
into our own human consciousness. ■

One Nao robot appears to have the answer to the dilemma posed to the
group, which researchers claim is evidence for self-awareness.

Searching for Consciousness in the Brain is it possible to find
consciousness in the brain? Consciousness, the mind, and the brain are
like a set of nested russian dolls. The brain, the outside doll, houses
the mind but has other functions as well, such as maintaining breathing
and body temperature. The mind, the middle doll, houses consciousness,
the innermost doll, but also manages unconscious functions such as
long-term memory, discussed in Chapter 9. in this chapter, we will
examine a number of natural, artificial, and pathological circumstances
that correlate with variations in consciousness. As a result of these
investigations, we can begin to view consciousness as requiring complex
interactions between areas of the cerebral cortex and the thalamus,
discussed in detail in Chapter 4. in particular, lesions of the thalamus
result in the type of profound unconsciousness typically associated with
brain death (Bogen, 1995). we discuss the concept of brain death more
fully in a later section of this chapter. Certain structures in the
brain, such as the thalamus, might be necessary, but not sufficient, for
consciousness. For example, observing that your television screen no
longer produces a picture after you remove a component does not
necessarily imply that the sole source of the picture is that particular
component; it's likely that other components need to be attached
simultaneously and contribute to the creation of the visual image.
Likewise, additional brain structures, such as the reticular formation
of the brainstem, play an active role in raising or lowering the
thresholds of conscious awareness (see ● Figure 6.2). Because of these
variations, you are far more likely to hear and respond to a sound while
awake than while deeply asleep. Structures such as the thalamus and
reticular formation have been described as "enabling" consciousness, but
they do not produce its content (Crick & Koch, 2003). whAT dOeS iT MeAn
TO Be COnSCiOUS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

197

Cerebral cortex

Thalamus

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Reticular formation

FIGURE 6.2 Brain Structures Associated With Consciousness. Among the
brain structures that are believed to participate in consciousness are
the cerebral cortex, thalamus, and reticular formation, as well as the
complex pathways connecting these parts of the brain. These structures
make consciousness possible, which we know because damage to these
circuits results in unconsciousness, but they do not determine the
content of consciousness.

instead of looking for consciousness as resulting from the activity of
particular structures, it is more useful to consider consciousness as
resulting from activity changes in brain networks. neuroscientists
initially believed that when your thought is unfocused during a state
known as mind wandering, the brain would be quiet, but as you focus on a
specific task, the brain would "light up." This does not seem to be the
case. The brain uses only about 5% more energy when people are focused
compared to when they are unfocused (raichle & Snyder, 2011; raichle,
2015). These observations have led to the identification of a default
mode network (dMn), which maintains a high level of unconscious,
background activity as it helps prepare the brain for conscious thought
(see ● Figure 6.3). Activity in the dMn actually decreases a bit when
the person engages in a conscious task requiring attention. Activity in
the dMn is correlated with thinking about the self, others, and a
person's past and future. Functional connectivity in the dMn in healthy
individuals is stronger in adulthood than in childhood and older
adulthood (Mak et al., 2017). Functional connectivity of the dMn, in
turn, is associated with cognitive function. Abnormal connectivity of
the dMn has been observed in individuals with autism spectrum disorder
(Cherkassky et al., 2006) and Alzheimer's disease (Greicius et al.,
2004). it is possible that other psychological disorders might have
correlating disturbances in dMn function.

Inside right hemisphere

Outside left hemisphere Medial prefrontal cortex

Medial prefrontal cortex

Medial parietal cortex Default mode network

Lateral parietal cortex

Lateral temporal cortex

FIGURE 6.3 The Default Mode Network (DMN) of the Brain. Activity of the
DMN corresponds to mind wandering, thinking about the self, and
preparing for conscious thought. Source: Adapted from M. E. Raichle
(2010). "The Brain's Dark Energy," Scientific American, 314(5803),
44--49. doi: 10.1126/science. 1134405

198

Chapter 6

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

summary 6.1 Definitions of Consciousness aspect of consciousness

Definition

State of awareness

The level of conscious awareness of internal states or surroundings,
which can be high or low and realistic or distorted.

Content of awareness Cerebral cortex

Thalamus

The ongoing catalog of internal and external stimuli that are the focus
of current attention.

example ●

Asleep or awake.

●

Perceiving realistically or hallucinating.

●

Hypnotized or not.

●

Meditating or not.

●

Hearing a neighbor's music.

●

●

Reticular formation

Self-awareness

The special understanding of the self as distinct from other stimuli.

●

●

Thinking that you're hungry and it's time to eat. Considering the
implications of a news report.

Knowing that you are looking at yourself in the mirror. Knowing that you
are sleeping and dreaming.

Credits: Top row---ARCO/W Dolder/AGE Fotostock; Second row---Argosy
Publishing Inc.; Bottom row---Ghislain & Marie David de Lossy/The Image
Bank/Getty Images / Diana Reiss, Ph.D.

What Happens to Consciousness During Waking and Sleep? Our first meaning
of consciousness involves variations in an animal's state of awareness.
Awareness changes dramatically across cycles of sleep and waking. These
cycles follow circadian rhythms, or daily rhythms. The term circadian
comes from the Latin words for "about a day." Circadian rhythms are only
one example of a number of important biorhythms. Animals have birth
seasons and migration patterns. human females experience menstrual
cycles. within a single day, we also see regular fluctuations in
arousal, with peaks occurring every 90 to 120 minutes. sleep A normal
state of consciousness

Circadian Rhythms

characterized by reduced awareness of external stimuli.

Circadian rhythms respond to a combination of internal and external
factors. internal biological clocks, controlled by the hypothalamus,
provide an approximate schedule for various physical processes,
including sleep and waking, body temperature, and hunger. These internal
biological clocks interact with external stimuli, known as zeitgebers
(zeit means "time" and geber means "to give" in German; hence, these
stimuli are "time givers"). Light is one of the most important
zeitgebers for humans. exposure to the rising sun each day helps to
reset the internal biological clocks to the correct time. in the absence
of light, our internal clocks run a few minutes longer than a 24-hour
cycle. Over time, the distortion adds

waking A normal state of consciousness characterized by alertness and
awareness of external stimuli.

circadian rhythm A daily biological rhythm.

biological clock An internal mechanism that provides an approximate
schedule for various physical processes.

whAT hAPPenS TO COnSCiOUSneSS dUrinG wAKinG And SLeeP?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

199

up, and behavior is only occasionally synchronized with normal cycles of
day and night. Totally blind people and sailors on submarines experience
longer than normal circadian cycles because of their lack of exposure to
natural light (Kelly et al., 1999; Skene et al., 1999). eating patterns
are also significant zeitgebers, as many midnight snackers know. Mice
normally sleep during the day and feed at night. however, when mice are
fed only during the day, they begin sleeping at night and exploring more
during the day (Mieda et al., 2006).

Modern Living and Circadian Rhythms Our human ancestors remained awake
during daylight and slept throughout the dark of night, although some
historians argue they did so in two shifts rather than continuously
(ekirch, 2001). They lacked the technology needed to travel rapidly
across time zones. Modern sleep and waking patterns are substantially
different from those of our ancestors, often resulting in challenges to
health. Technology, particularly the invention of artificial light, has
shaped our contemporary sleep--wake patterns by making it easy to be
awake at night (see ● Figure 6.4). Artificial lighting, including that
produced by tablets and phones, affects sleep by breaking down
melatonin, a hormone released in the evening that regulates sleep
cycles. Changes in melatonin release have been implicated in a long list
of human diseases, including cancer, diabetes, and heart disease, which
might be more common among people who work night shifts (Touitou et al.,
2017). "Social jet lag," or the disrupted sleep resulting from modern
inconsistencies in weekday and weekend sleep times, has been associated
with overweight, obesity, and metabolic syndrome (espitia-Bautista et
al., 2017). Some occupations, such as hospital and public safety jobs,
involve work around the clock, which in turn is correlated with physical
and psychological problems (Kecklund & Axelsson, 2016). Between 40% and
80% of workers on graveyard shifts (11:00 p.m. to 7:30 a.m.) experience
shift maladaptation syndrome, characterized by health, personality,
mood, and interpersonal problems (wagner, 1996). Accident rates in the
industrial swing shift (3:00 p.m. to 11:30 p.m.) are higher than in the
traditional day shift, and the graveyard shift is the most dangerous
work period (Caruso, 2014). not only do shift workers experience more
accidents, but they also make more errors. hospital workers are more
likely to make significant errors during evening shifts than during day
shifts (Chang et al., 2011). Our modern ability to cross time zones
leads to the experience of jet lag, which produces fatigue,
irritability, and sleepiness. The travel is not to blame because
north--south travel of equal distance does not produce the symptoms of
jet lag (herxheimer & waterhouse, 2003). Chronic jet lag has even more
serious consequences. Flight attendants with 4 or more years of
experience in which time zones were crossed at least once a week had
reduced reaction times and made 9% more mistakes on memory tasks than
local crews (Cho et al., 2000).

Wake time

Time before leaving for work

Commute

Workday

Commute

Time before bed

1 hour 35 minutes

23 minutes

9 hours 28 minutes

23 minutes

6 hours 6 minutes

5:00 a.m. 5:35 a.m.

FIGURE 6.4

7:45 a.m.

8:09 a.m.

5:04 p.m.

5:27 p.m.

Time in bed 6 hours 55 minutes

10:53 p.m. 5:35 a.m.

A Day in the Life of a Typical American Worker. Americans are believed
to be somewhat sleep deprived because the average adult spends only 6
hours and 55 minutes in bed, which includes time needed to initiate
sleep. Although people try to make up for lost sleep on weekends by
sleeping longer, this solution is not very effective. Source: Data from
National Sleep Foundation (2008). "2008 Sleep in America Poll,"
retrieved from http://www.sleepfoundation.org/sites/default /
files/2008%20POLL%20SOF.PDF Illustration: photos, left to right: Hurst
Photo/Shutterstock.com; Martin Novak/Shutterstock.com;
StockLite/Shutterstock.com; Martin Novak/Shutterstock.com;
iStock.com/hocus-focus; iStock.com/funkypoodle

200

Chapter 6

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Time zone Pacific

Mountain

Central

Time zone

Eastern

Pacific

Mountain

Central

Eastern

A Los Angeles resident traveling to New York may . . .

But it feels like . . .

A New Yorker traveling to Los Angeles may . . .

But it feels like . . .

go to bed at 10:00 p.m. . . .

going to and getting bed at up at 7:00 p.m. . . . 3:00 a.m.

go to bed at 10:00 p.m. . . .

going to and getting bed at up at 1:00 a.m. . . . 9:00 a.m.

and get up at 6:00 a.m.

Eastward travel

and get up at 6:00 a.m.

Westward travel

Some challenges to our circadian rhythms are easier to manage than
others. it is easier to adjust when we set the clock to a later point
than to an earlier point. The experiences of two people, one traveling
from Los Angeles to new York City (setting the clock forward) and the
other traveling from new York City to Los Angeles (setting the clock
back), are compared in ● Figure 6.5. Let's assume that both travelers
usually go to bed at 10:00 p.m. and get up at 6:00 a.m. To stay on the
same sleep schedule, the LA--nYC traveler must now go to sleep at 7:00
p.m. and wake up at 3:00 a.m., which is difficult, whereas the nYC--LA
traveler must stay up until 1:00 a.m. but can sleep until 9:00 a.m.,
which is easier. daylight saving time offers another opportunity to
observe our responses to abrupt changes in our daily schedules (see ●
Figure 6.6). This energy-saving relic from world war i requires the
setting of clocks forward 1 hour in the spring and back 1 hour in the
fall. when Canadian traffic accident data were correlated with the two
annual daylight saving shifts, the shift back in the fall resulted in a
7% decrease in traffic accidents on the following Monday compared to
other fall Mondays. in the spring setting of the clock forward, a
comparable 7% increase in traffic accidents occurred (Coren, 1996). when
less light is available for setting the body's internal clocks,
approximately 4 to 6% of the population experience major depressive
disorder with seasonal pattern, formerly known as seasonal affective
disorder (Jepson et al., 1998; APA, 2013). during the winter months at
higher latitudes, the reduction in daylight hours interferes with
circadian rhythms. This disruption may lead to symptoms of depression,
discussed in more detail in Chapter 14, that lift once the days become
longer again. A relatively small group of individuals experience
symptoms in the spring and summer instead. rates of seasonal depression
vary from 1.4% in Florida to 9.7% in new hampshire (Jepson et al.,
1998). Seasonal depression is typically treated by exposure to bright
light, with or without melatonin supplements or antidepressant
medications (wirz-Justice, 2018). The lights used in this therapy are
stronger than what is normally experienced indoors but not as strong as
the light at the beach on an August afternoon.

Individual Variations in Circadian Rhythms You might believe that the
day

should start around 2:00 p.m., whereas your roommate pops out of bed
smiling at an alarming 6:30 in the morning. what accounts for these
individual differences in sleep patterns? Some individual differences
become evident in infancy and remain consistent over the life span.
"Morning" people have been called larks, and "night" people have been
called owls

FIGURE 6.5 Jet Lag Is Worse When Traveling East. Traveling eastward is
more disruptive to circadian rhythms than traveling westward. Los
Angeles residents visiting New York feel like they are going to bed 3
hours earlier than usual (7:00 p.m. Los Angeles time) and waking up in
the middle of the night (3:00 a.m. Los Angeles time). New Yorkers
traveling to Los Angeles have to stay up a little later (1:00 a.m. New
York time) but then can sleep later to compensate (9:00 a.m. New York
time). Most people find the latter scenario easier.

major depressive disorder with seasonal pattern A mood disorder in which
depression occurs regularly at the same time each year, usually during
the winter months; formerly known as seasonal affective disorder (SAD).

whAT hAPPenS TO COnSCiOUSneSS dUrinG wAKinG And SLeeP?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

201

1.20 Incident ratio

1.15 1.10 1.05 Spring

1.00

Autumn

0.95 0.90 0

Sunday

Monday

Tuesday

Wednesday

Thursday

Friday

Saturday

FIGURE 6.6 Daylight Saving Time Affects the Number of Heart Attacks.
Fifteen years of data show that rates of heart attack increase
significantly in the days following the spring shift in daylight saving
time and decrease following the fall shift. The incidence ratio is
computed by comparing the number of heart attacks on the specified day
following the shift to the mean number of heart attacks for the same day
2 weeks before and 2 weeks after the shift. The likely reason for the
increase is sleep deprivation; it increases sympathetic nervous system
activation and inflammation, which can be dangerous to people with
existing health problems. Source: I. Janszky & R. Ljung (2008). "Shifts
to and from Daylight Saving Time and Incidence of Myocardial
Infarction," New England Journal of Medicine, 359(18), 1966--1968. doi:
10.1056/NEJMc0807104.

(Åkerstedt & Fröberg, 1976). Many people fall somewhere between these
two extremes and are at their best in the middle of the day. research on
the genetic basis of circadian rhythms suggests that the different
patterns result from different versions of the genes responsible for the
activity of our internal clocks (Katzenberg et al., 1998). Other
differences appear to be more age related. nearly everyone acts like an
owl during adolescence and young adulthood (Carskadon et al., 1998). in
their mid to late 20s, many temporary owls revert to their previous lark
or medium state. The exact cause for such a shift during and after
adolescence and young adulthood is unclear, but researchers suspect that
the shift correlates with a burst of brain development that is initiated
at puberty. Some researchers view the return to a previous sleep pattern
in young adulthood as a reliable indicator that the brain is fully
mature (roenneberg et al., 2004).

Waking

CrackerClips Stock Media/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy Earth
Observatory/NASA

Varying states of awareness can be described using electroencephalogram
(eeG) recordings, which provide a general measure of overall brain
activity. during waking, we alternate among three patterns of activity
indicated by the recording of beta waves, alpha waves, and gamma waves
in the eeG (see ● Figure 6.7). during beta activity, a person is
actively

202

Chapter 6

Modern artificial light breaks down the hormone melatonin, which is
released only at night. Disruptions caused by the effects of light on
melatonin might be responsible for higher rates of disease among
employees who work at night. The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Alpha band

Gamma band 0.2

0.4 0.6 Time (sec)

0.8

1

FIGURE 6.7 The EEG During Waking. EEG recordings during waking usually
alternate between alpha waves and beta waves. Alpha waves are associated
with a relaxed, possibly drowsy state, whereas beta waves are associated
with alertness. Gamma waves are seen in response to sensory input.

thinking and alert. Beta activity is characterized by rapid (15 to 30
cycles per second), irregular, low-amplitude waves that indicate the
cerebral cortex is processing large amounts of diverse data. A person
showing alpha activity is awake but relaxed. Alpha waves are slightly
slower, larger, and more regular than beta waves, with a frequency of 9
to 12 cycles per second. improvements in eeG technology provided the
means to record waking waveforms that are faster than 30 cycles per
second, known as gamma waves (Miller, 2007). Gamma waves accompany the
processing of sensory input, particularly visual stimuli. daydreaming,
or mind wandering, "refers to spontaneous, subjective experiences in a
no-task, no-stimulus, no-response situation" (Vaitl et al., 2005,
p. 100). daydreaming is correlated with activity in the dMn, as
described earlier in the chapter. eeG studies show that activity in the
dMn is most closely correlated with alpha waves (Knyazev et al., 2011).
The function of daydreaming is unclear. we might daydream simply because
we evolved the ability to divide our attention, as described in Chapter
5 (Mason et al., 2007). however, during activation of the dMn, we often
think about our past experiences and plan our future (Kahn, 2013). This
contradicts the commonly held view that daydreaming is a "waste of
time."

JohnMeyers/Shutterstock.com

Beta band

Sleep we spend one-third of our lives sleeping. despite all that
experience, few of us know what is going on during sleep. By carefully
recording and observing the experience of volunteers sleeping in
laboratories, psychologists have been able to unravel many mysteries of
sleep.

Regardless of whether they were larks or owls as children, most teens
act like owls by naturally staying up late and sleeping in. Legislators
in the United States have recently begun to take notice, and have
mandated later start times for middle and high schools. Usually by the
mid-20s, young adults go back to whichever sleeping pattern they showed
before puberty, a change that may mark the final maturity of the brain.

Stages of Sleep On the basis of observations of sleeping volunteers, we
divide sleep into two types: rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and
non--rapid eye movement (N-REM) sleep. These types of sleep are
differentiated by eeG recordings, muscle tone, beta wave A waveform of
15 to 30 autonomic activity, and mental activity (see ● Figure 6.8).
cycles per second recorded by electron-reM sleep is divided into four
stages. Stage 1 usually encephalogram that usually indicates occurs when
we first go to sleep. Our examination of the paralert waking. ticipant's
eeG shows patterns that are difficult to distinguish alpha wave A
waveform of 9 to 12 from those of the drowsy, waking volunteer. Some
theta waves cycles per second recorded by electro(4 to 7 cycles per
second), which are larger and slower than encephalogram that usually
indicates relaxed waking. alpha waves, are now observed. At this stage,
people may not be gamma wave A waveform of more aware that they are
sleeping. Frequently, we awaken a friend or than 30 cycles per second
recorded by a family member who has fallen asleep in front of the
television electroencephalogram that indicates by turning off the
program only to have the sleeping person attention to sensory input.
deny being asleep.

rapid eye movement (REM) sleep The component of sleep characterized by
waveforms resembling waking, as measured by electroencephalogram,
accompanied by rapid motion of the eyes, muscular paralysis, and
sympathetic nervous system activation.

whAT hAPPenS TO COnSCiOUSneSS dUrinG wAKinG And SLeeP?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

203

REM sleep

Beta waves

Stage 1 N-REM

Theta waves

Stage 2 N-REM

FIGURE 6.8 The EEG During Sleep. Sleep is divided into two components:
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and nonREM (N-REM) sleep. The EEG during
REM sleep is similar to wakefulness. Stages 1 and 2 of N-REM sleep
feature theta waves. Special waveforms known as sleep spindles and K
complexes, which might represent the brain's attempts to tune out
environmental stimuli, appear in stage 2. Stages 3 and 4 of N-REM sleep
feature delta waves and represent the deepest stages of sleep.

ized by theta and delta wave activity, as recorded by
electroencephalogram, and deep physical relaxation.

theta wave A waveform of 4 to 7 cycles per second recorded by
electroencephalogram that is characteristic of lighter stages of
non--rapid eye movement sleep. delta wave A waveform of 1 to 4 cycles
per second recorded by electroencephalogram that usually indicates deep
non--rapid eye movement sleep.

K-complex

Stage 3 N-REM Delta waves

Stage 4 N-REM

Source: Adapted from J. Horne (1988). Why We Sleep: The Functions of
Sleep in Humans and Other Mammals, New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.

non--rapid eye movement (N-REM) sleep The components of sleep character-

Sleep spindle

Delta waves 0

5

10 Time (sec)

15

After 10 to 15 minutes, stage 1 of n-reM sleep gives way to stage 2. now
there is no doubt that the person is asleep. Further reductions in heart
rate and muscle tension occur, and the eeG begins to show special
waveforms called K complexes and sleep spindles that occur only in n-reM
sleep. Spindles reflect brain activity associated with the consolidation
of memories, and their frequency increases after a period of pre-sleep
learning (Jegou et al., 2019). decreased spindle frequency is
characteristic of Alzheimer's disease and reduced cognitive functioning
(Gorgoni et al., 2016). After about 15 minutes in stage 2, we enter
stage 3 and then stage 4 n-reM sleep. Both of these stages show delta
wave activity, which is the largest, slowest (1 to 4 cycles per second)
eeG waveform. Stages 3 and 4 differ primarily in the amount of delta
activity that occurs, with stage 4 having the most. we are deeply asleep
in these stages. Awakening from stage 4 is

ExpErIEnCIng Psychology The Epworth Sleepiness Scale COLLEGE STUDENTS
OFTEN neglect sleep time to study, work, and socialize. Sixty percent of
students reported staying awake for an entire night at least once since
coming to college (Thacher, 2008). Poor sleep habits lead to daytime
sleepiness, which can affect how much you learn in your classes, how
well you work, and

204

Chapter 6

your safety when driving and operating other machinery. How much
sleepiness is too much? Try using the Epworth Sleepiness Scale to see
how sleepy you tend to be (Johns, 1991). In contrast to just feeling
tired, how likely are you to doze off or fall asleep in the situations
in the list? Even if

you have not done some of these things recently, try to work out how
they would have affected you. Use the scale to choose the most
appropriate number for each situation. A score greater than 10 indicates
excessive daytime sleepiness. If you scored at this level or above, it's
time for some lifestyle changes. ■

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

difficult, and considerable disorientation may occur before a person
becomes fully awake. You may have received a telephone call about an
Awake hour after you first go to sleep, when you are likely to be
experiencing stage 4 n-reM sleep. if you hear the telephone, it may take
several seconds to locate the phone and wake up enough to have a decent
REM sleep conversation. The first episode of reM sleep occurs between 90
and 120 minutes after the onset of sleep. This stage is often called
paradoxical Stage 1 sleep, reflecting a combination of brain activity
resembling waking N-REM with the external appearance of deep sleep.
during reM sleep, the eeG cycles between beta and theta rhythms (Vijayan
et al., 2017). The Stage 2 eyes make the periodic movements back and
forth that give this stage N-REM its name. The sympathetic nervous
system becomes very active. heart rate, blood pressure, and breathing
become rapid or irregular. Males Stage 3 experience erections, while
females experience increased blood flow in N-REM the vicinity of the
vagina (hirshkowitz & Moore, 1996). if awakened during this stage, most
people report vivid, storylike dreams, which we Stage 4 discuss in more
detail in a later section. N-REM Major postural muscles are inactive
during reM sleep, effectively paralyzing the sleeper, although smaller
muscles in the fingers and the toes might twitch. You might have
experienced dreams in which some0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 thing terrible was
coming, but you couldn't move. Your dream probably Time (hours) reflects
recognition on the part of the brain that you are paralyzed. This
paralysis provides a protective mechanism that prevents you FIGURE 6.9
from acting out your dreams. in cases of reM sleep behavior disorder,
paralysis fails, and people injure themselves or their sleeping
partners. Nightly Sleep Patterns. Sleep shows a typical progression over
when one patient dreamed of playing football, he knocked everything the
night. The first 4 hours are dominated by N-REM sleep, and off his
dresser, hit his head against the wall, and banged his knee on the most
stage 3 and 4 N-REM sleep occurs at this time. The second 4 dresser
(Schenck et al., 2002). hours feature large amounts of REM sleep.
Because the body is paralyzed during reM sleep, sleepwalking Source:
Adapted from R. D. Cartwright (1978). A Primer on Sleep and cannot
happen in this stage. instead, sleepwalking occurs when a perDreaming,
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. son is in stage 3 or 4 of n-reM sleep.
Sleep talking is most common during lighter stages of n-reM sleep, but
it is also possible during reM sleep. These phenomena become
progressively less common with age. The cycling between reM sleep and
n-reM sleep in humans follows a characteristic pattern over a period of
8 hours of sleep (see ● Figure 6.9). The first half of a night's sleep
is characterized by longer periods of n-reM sleep and brief periods of
reM sleep. Stages 3 and 4 of n-reM sleep are especially dominant during
these first 4 hours. The second half of

situation Sitting and reading Watching television

chance of dozing

0 = Would never doze 1 = Slight chance of dozing 2 = Moderate chance of
dozing 3 = High chance of dozing

Sitting inactive in a public place (e.g., a theater) Riding as a car
passenger for an hour without a break Lying down to rest in the
afternoon Sitting and talking to someone Sitting quietly after lunch
without alcohol In a car, while stopping for a few minutes in traffic
tOtaL scOre

whAT hAPPenS TO COnSCiOUSneSS dUrinG wAKinG And SLeeP?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

205

the night's sleep switches to a different pattern. reM sleep is now
dominant, and n-reM sleep remains in the lighter stages. Stages 3 and 4
may be infrequent or absent during the last 4 hours of sleep. we usually
spend the last half hour or so of the night's sleep in reM sleep and
often wake up with the awareness that we have been dreaming.

The Benefits of Sleep

Human error, and sleep deprivation in particular, frequently contributes
to major accidents and disasters. The 1979 nuclear meltdown at Three
Mile Island changed the power industry in the United States. The 1986
explosion of the space shuttle Challenger rattled confidence in the U.S.
space program. The 1989 oil spill caused by the running aground of the
tanker Exxon Valdez, shown in this photo, energized concerns about
environmental protection. More recently, the operator of a commuter
train that ran off the tracks up an escalator at Chicago O'Hare
International Airport admitted to "dozing off."

FIGURE 6.10 Human Growth Hormone Release. Human growth hormone
stimulates growth and repair. Most human growth hormone release occurs
during the first 4 hours of sleep each night, primarily during stages 3
and 4 of N-REM sleep. The drop in time spent in stages 3 and 4 among
older adults might contribute to reduced abilities to heal compared to
those of younger adults. Source: Adapted from R. M. Coleman (1986). Wide
Awake at 3:00 a.m. by Choice or by Chance? New York, NY: W. H. Freeman.

206

Chapter 6

Growth hormone (ng/mL)

Natalie Fobes/SuperStock

Although we still have many unanswered questions about why we spend
one-third of our lives sleeping, we know that lack of sleep can have
many negative effects. excess sleepiness on the part of decision makers
has contributed to many disasters, including the Three Mile island
nuclear meltdown, the Challenger space shuttle explosion, and the
grounding of the oil tanker exxon Valdez (Coren, 2012). in 2014, a
commuter train at Chicago's O'hare airport controlled by an operator who
admitted to dozing off ran off the tracks and climbed an escalator.
Staying awake for 17 to 19 straight hours produces worse reaction time
than being legally drunk (williamson & Feyer, 2000). Sleep deprivation
can result in obesity and risk for type 2 diabetes (Benedict et al.,
2016). Sleep, and in particular stages 3 and 4 of n-reM sleep, plays an
important role in repairing the body. Sleep deprivation slows the
healing of injuries (Murphy et al., 2007), reduces the activity of the
immune system (Zager et al., 2007), and results in the production of
fewer new neurons in adult brains (Akers et al., 2018). nearly all human
growth hormone, which plays important roles in repairing the body, is
released during stages 3 and 4 of n-reM sleep but rarely during other
stages of sleep and waking (Savine & Sönksen, 2000) (see ● Figure 6.10).
Another line of evidence supporting the restorative hypothesis of sleep
is the behavior of people following daytime physical activity. Aerobic
exercise increased the amount of n-reM sleep as well as subjective
reports of "feeling rested" (Aritake-Okada et al., 2019). it is possible
to selectively deprive volunteers in a sleep laboratory of stage 3 and 4
n-reM sleep. After a night of such deprivation, volunteers typically
complain of muscle and joint pain (Moldofsky & Scarisbrick, 1976).
Because time spent in n-reM sleep decreases about 30 minutes per decade
after the age of 50 (Van Cauter et al., 2000), it is possible that
reduced n-reM sleep is the source of some of the muscle and joint aches
and pains experienced by older adults. Sleep plays a significant role in
memory. Staying up all night results in poor memory performance, and two
subsequent nights of normal sleep do not make up for the initial sleep
deprivation effects (Stickgold & walker, 2007). Sleep may serve as a
special state for consolidating memories, in contrast to the acquisition
and initial processing of new memories that occurs during waking (rasch
& Born, 2013). during n-reM sleep, memories are reactivated

15 10 5 6 Sleep

12

18 Awake

24

6 Sleep

12

18 Awake

24 Sleep

Time of day (over 48 hours)

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and transformed into versions that can be stored in long-term memory
(see Chapter 9). reM sleep then stabilizes the newly transformed
memories (Li et al., 2017). while students often view forgetting as a
bad thing, the ability to forget unnecessary information is essential to
maintaining an efficient memory, and much of this forgetting occurs
during sleep (hashmi et al., 2013). Overall, students who wish to retain
the material they've studied and the ability to retrieve it easily would
be well advised to get a good night's sleep (Mazza et al., 2016).

The Special Benefits of REM Sleep Birds and mammals are the only
creatures to

show clear evidence of reM sleep, suggesting that this sleep stage is a
fairly recent development in the course of evolution. when volunteers
are specifically deprived of reM sleep, they show many of the same
symptoms as people who experience an overall lack of sleep, including
irritability and difficulty concentrating. in addition, reM
sleep-deprived individuals show a phenomenon known as reM rebound
(dement, 1960). when allowed to sleep normally, they spend an unusually
large amount of their sleep time in reM sleep. You may have experienced
reM rebound during a nap following a night with little sleep. You might
be aware of having dreamed vividly during the nap, and you're unlikely
to feel rested. These attempts to make up for lost reM sleep suggest
that reM sleep is associated with necessary functions. One clue to a
possible function of reM sleep is the fact that the proportion of sleep
spent in reM sleep is a function of a species' relative maturity at
birth (Siegel, 2001). The human infant, born at an immature stage of
brain development relative to other primate species, spends about half
of its sleep time in reM sleep (see ● Figure 6.11), compared to the 20%
of sleep time spent in reM sleep by adolescents and adults (McCarley,
2007). Premature infants spend up to 80% of their sleep time in reM
sleep. reM sleep may provide at least part of the stimulation necessary
to correctly "wire" the immature brain (Grigg-damberger, 2017; Marks et
al., 1995). reM sleep and mood are tightly interwoven, providing us with
a further clue regarding the possible functions of reM sleep. As we will
see in Chapter 14, individuals with depression experience disruptions in
their normal sleep patterns. without treatment, they enter reM sleep
earlier in the night than typical participants do, and they spend a
greater proportion of their sleeping time in reM sleep. One of the
possible mechanisms by which antidepressant medications regulate mood is
their suppression of reM sleep. individuals with bipolar disorder, which
can be characterized by moods that swing from euphoria to depression,
experience an abnormally low need for sleep, including reM sleep.

50

\% REM sleep

40 30 20 10 0 1--15 days 3--5 months 6--23 months 2--3 years 3--5 years
5--9 years 10--13 years 14--18 years 19--30 years 33--45 years 50--70
years 70--80 years

Age

FIGURE 6.11 REM Sleep Over the Life Span. Infants and young children
spend greater percentages of their sleep time in REM sleep than do
adolescents and adults, suggesting that brain activity during REM sleep
might help wire the developing brain. Source: Adapted from H. P.
Roffwarg et al. (1966). "Ontogenetic Development of the Human
Sleep--Dream Cycle," Science, 152, 604--619. doi:
10.1126/science.152.3722.604

whAT hAPPenS TO COnSCiOUSneSS dUrinG wAKinG And SLeeP?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

207

These correlations between reM sleep and mood may represent a common
underlying biochemical mechanism. Brainstem neurons that release
serotonin and norepinephrine are especially quiet during reM sleep,
although they are active during waking and somewhat active during n-reM
sleep (Gottesman, 2002). These same neurotransmitters have also been
implicated in the regulation of mood states, which helps explain links
between reM sleep and mood.

Jose Luis Pelaez, Inc./Blend Images/Corbis

Dreams From the earliest times in our history, people have searched for

The activation-synthesis theory of dream content suggests that the
content of dreams represents the mind's efforts to make sense out of
real physical sensations. During REM sleep, the vestibular system of the
inner ear is quite active. Because the vestibular system normally
informs us about the position and movement of the head, vestibular
activity during REM sleep might lead to the commonly experienced dreams
of flying or falling.

the significance and meaning of their dreams. in ancient egypt, many
people believed that dreams predicted the future. in his classic book
The Interpretation of Dreams, Freud (1900/1953) argued that the
unconscious mind expressed itself symbolically through our dreams. These
are interesting ideas, but what does science have to say about dreaming?
The use of eeG technology to track a volunteer's sleep patterns allowed
researchers to awaken volunteers and assess a dream experience
scientifically for the first time (Aserinsky & Kleitman, 1953; dement &
Kleitman, 1957). improved methods, including brain imaging, magnetic
stimulation, and improved eeG, have produced further insights into
dreaming (Cipolli et al., 2016). rather than proposing sharp
distinctions between dreaming during sleep and other types of thought,
dream activity is seen as being on a continuum extending across focused
thought and mind wandering during wakefulness to thought-like and
dream-like behaviors during sleep. An activation--synthesis theory of
dreaming suggests that the content of dreams simply reflects ongoing
neural activity. For example, dreams of being unable to move in a
dangerous situation might accurately mirror the muscle paralysis present
during the reM state (hobson & McCarley, 1977). Common dreams of flying
or falling may be caused by the unusual activation of the vestibular
system during reM sleep (hunt, 1989). in Chapter 5, we discussed the
vestibular system's role in helping us maintain balance. dreams with
sexual content are consistent with the physical sexual arousal that
occurs during reM sleep. Combining results of brain imaging experiments
and cognitive psychology leads to yet another view of dreams. dreaming
behavior correlates with activity in circuits that overlap substantially
with the dMn (Fox et al., 2013). According to this view, daydreaming and
dreaming during sleep are on a continuum. Simultaneous changes in
brainstem activity result in lower sensitivity to outside stimuli, and
reduced overall frontal lobe activity might lead to less self-awareness
and logical thought than occurs during daydreaming. Once the dream state
is initiated, the brain draws on memories of general knowledge and
personal experience to produce a story line (Foulkes, 1999). About 55%
of adults report having experienced at least one episode of lucid
dreaming, in which dreamers become aware that they are dreaming and may
use this awareness to control or direct the content of the dream
(Saunders et al., 2016). Lucid dreaming occurs when frontal areas of the
brain inexplicably "wake up" during a dream (Mota-rolim & Araujo, 2013).
Lucid dreaming is particularly associated with increased activity in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, an area of the brain believed to
participate in higher-order executive functions, including people's
sense of control and voluntary behavior (dresler et al., 2013). People
with narcolepsy, a sleep disorder described in the next section, are
more likely than others to experience lucid dreaming (dodet et al.,
2015).

Sleep Disorders dreaming A mental state that usually occurs during sleep
that features visual imagery.

lucid dreaming A conscious awareness of dreaming accompanied by the
ability to control the content of the dream.

208

Chapter 6

Observing what goes wrong during sleep provides additional insights into
the natural variations of consciousness we experience.

Nightmares and Sleep Terrors when the content of a reM dream is
especially upsetting, we refer to the experience as a nightmare. if
lucid dreamers become stuck in a nightmare, they may have the option of
"changing channels" and exiting that line of content. Some researchers
report that training in lucid dreaming may serve as an effective
treatment for recurring, upsetting nightmares (Mota-rolim & Araujo,
2013).

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

nightmares are often mistaken for sleep terrors, but these are different
phenomena. nightmares are dreams that occur during reM sleep, while
sleep terrors occur during nreM sleep, particularly during the first 3
hours of sleep. in sleep terrors, the usually smooth transition from
stage 4 n-reM sleep upward into reM sleep goes awry. The sleeper becomes
acutely distressed despite remaining deeply asleep. if awakened, the
person shows the disorientation and confusion typically demonstrated
when a sleeper is disturbed during deep nreM sleep. There is usually no
memory of the sleep terror the next day. Twin studies suggest that there
is a genetic predisposition to sleep terrors (Taheri & Mignot, 2002).

sleep terror A sleep disorder occurring in non--rapid eye movement sleep
in which the sleeper wakes suddenly in great distress but without
experiencing the imagery of a nightmare.

insomnia A sleep disorder characterized by an inability to either
initiate or maintain normal sleep.

narcolepsy A sleep disorder characterized by the intrusion of rapid eye
movement phenomena into waking.

Insomnia After nightmares, the most common sleep problem is insomnia, in
which a

person has difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep. Although most
people seem to need about 7 to 9 hours of sleep per night to function
effectively, wider healthy variations exist. in one case of "healthy
insomnia," an elderly woman slept only 1 hour per night without apparent
detrimental effects (Meddis et al., 1973). insomnia occurs in one of two
forms. in cases of onset insomnia, a person lies in bed for what seems
to be a long period but is unable to go to sleep. Stress and anxiety are
frequent causes of this type of insomnia. Maintenance insomnia occurs
when sleep is frequently interrupted or early waking occurs. These cases
typically result from stress, substance use, or psychological disorders.
insomnia medications, such as zolpidem (Ambien), have minor effects on
sleep, producing sleep 15 minutes faster and lengthening it for about 30
minutes, which might not offset significant side effects, including
dependence on the medication, driving or walking while asleep, memory
loss, and loss of coordination (Buscemi et al., 2007). Light, and
especially the blue light that characterizes mobile technologies, can
interfere with the sleep hormone melatonin. As a result, the use of
tablets and smartphones right before bed can interfere with sleep
quality (Grønli et al., 2016). individuals with insomnia might benefit
from wearing amber glasses, which block the blue light emitted from
mobile devices, prior to bedtime (Shechter et al., 2018).

sleep apnea A sleep disorder in which the person stops breathing while
asleep.

narcolepsy consists of "sleep attacks," in which reM sleep occurs during
wakefulness (dahl et al., 1994). in addition to sleep attacks, other
aspects of reM sleep may intrude into the wakefulness of patients with
narcolepsy. Cataplexy occurs when the muscle paralysis normally
associated with reM sleep occurs during wakefulness without loss of
consciousness. Many patients with narcolepsy also experience sleep
paralysis or muscle paralysis that either precedes actual sleep or
lingers once the person has awakened. Although upsetting, this paralysis
is easy to resolve. Simply touching the person is enough to end the
paralysis. Cells in the hypothalamus that normally secrete
neurochemicals known as orexins are missing or damaged in the brains of
patients with narcolepsy (Thannickal et al., 2000). Orexins help
regulate sleep, arousal, and appetite. Although researchers have been
able to selectively breed for narcolepsy in dogs (Foutz et al., 1978),
the contribution of genetics to human narcolepsy is more complex.
narcolepsy results from a combination of genetic vulnerability and
autoimmune processes that attack the cells in the brain that produce
orexins (Taheri & Mignot, 2002). This interaction helps to explain an
increase in narcolepsy cases in response to certain vaccines for the
2009-2010 h1n1 virus (Bomfim et al., 2017). in genetically vulnerable
individuals, the vaccine appeared to have triggered an autoimmune
process that resulted in narcolepsy.

Breathing-Related Sleep Disorders we take it for granted that automatic
functions such as breathing continue uninterrupted during sleep, but
this is not the case in sleep apnea. in a person with sleep apnea,
breathing can stop for a minute or two, and the sleeper awakens abruptly
gasping for air. not only does this lack of air disrupt the sleep
quality of the person with sleep apnea, but it can increase the risk for
heart disease (Kendzerska et al., 2014). Because many cases of sleep
apnea occur in people who are obese and who snore, losing weight and
surgical correction of airway blockages are common treatments. Other
cases occur when brainstem neurons responsible for maintaining breathing
during sleep malfunction. in these cases, the use of a machine that
regulates airflow during sleep is an inconvenient but effective
solution.

Courtesy A. R. Braun, National Institute of Deafness, NIH, Bethesda

Narcolepsy and Cataplexy Probably the most dramatic sleep disorder is
narcolepsy.

Brain imaging can be used to compare activity during waking with
activity during sleep. In this image, areas that are blue or purple are
less active during REM sleep than during waking, and areas that are red
or yellow are more active during REM sleep than during waking. The
bizarre content of dreams occurring during REM sleep might be the result
of the lower activity in the frontal lobes (purple) at the top of the
image. The visual vividness of dreams might be accounted for by the
higher amount of activity in the visual areas of the occipital lobes
toward the bottom of the image (yellow and red).

whAT hAPPenS TO COnSCiOUSneSS dUrinG wAKinG And SLeeP?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

209

Bettmann/Contributor/Getty Images

Despite her suspected narcolepsy, Harriet Tubman (1820--1913) helped
hundreds of slaves escape through the Underground Railroad during the
Civil War era. Tubman appears on the left in this photo with some of the
former slaves whom she helped. Unfortunately, narcoleptic attacks are
often brought on by stress. Tubman had a number of close escapes when
she experienced sleep attacks while being pursued by Confederate troops
and irate slave owners.

Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)

Dr. Mignot

occurs when a healthy infant simply dies while asleep. Approximately
3,500 infants die from SidS in the United States each year (Moon & Task
Force on Sudden infant death Syndrome, 2016). rates prior to the 1990s
were even higher. Between 1992 and 2003, rates of SidS in the United
States were cut in half when the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
began telling parents to put their infants to sleep on their backs
instead of on their stomachs (national institute of Child health and
human development \[niChhd\], 2003). As we will see in Chapter 11, young
infants cannot turn over easily for the first few months of life, making
Sleep researcher Emmanuel Mignot suffocation on blankets and stuffed
animals a greater risk. is holding Bear, one of his dogs with despite
these improvements, SidS remains the most common cause of death in the
first 6 narcolepsy. Research with dogs like months of life in
industrialized nations, even as the cause of these cases remains elusive
(Krous, Bear showed that narcolepsy is a 2014). A Triple risk Model of
SidS suggests that a combination of individual vulnerabilities,
degenetic disorder often triggered by velopmental period, and stressors
such as infection result in death. Current recommendations for exposure
to flu viruses. Sadly, Bear preventing SidS from the American Academy of
Pediatrics include putting infants to sleep on their passed away in
2014. backs; using a firm sleep surface; room-sharing without
bed-sharing; avoidance of soft bedding and overheating; avoidance of
exposure to smoke, alcohol, and illicit drugs; breastfeeding; routine
immunization; use of pacifiers; and skin-to-skin care for newborns (Moon
& Findings that new narcolepsy cases resulted Task Force on Sudden
infant death Syndrome, 2016).

from either infection with or vaccination for the H1N1 flu virus support
the idea that narcolepsy is linked to activity in the immune system.
American vaccines provoking weaker immune responses were less likely to
result in narcolepsy than stronger European vaccines and the disease
itself (Dauvilliers et al., 2010; Dauvilliers et al., 2013).

sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) A sleep disorder in which an
otherwise healthy infant dies while asleep.

restless legs syndrome (RLS) A disorder characterized by the involuntary
movement of an extremity, usually one leg.

210

Chapter 6

The number of deaths from SIDS dropped dramatically when the American
Academy of Pediatrics began telling parents to put their babies to sleep
on their backs instead of on their stomachs. SIDS still occurs, however,
so sleeping position is only one of many risk factors, including
exposure to cigarette smoke in the home.

iStock.com/alice-photo

Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) Restless legs syndrome (RLS) occurs when
one of a person's limbs, usually a leg, experiences a tingling feeling
and moves at regular intervals. rLS appears to be quite common, with 15%
of a large sample of adults in the United States reporting these
symptoms (national Sleep Foundation, 2009). Of special interest to
psychologists is the high frequency of rLS among children and adults
with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (Adhd) and the potential
links between these two conditions (Schimmelmann et al., 2009). As we
will see in Chapter 14, Adhd is correlated with differences in dopamine
functioning, a characteristic shared by rLS (Taheri & Mignot, 2002).

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

summary 6.2 Features of Waking and Sleep stage of waking or sleep

brain activity recorded by eeg

Observations

Waking

Alpha, beta, gamma

●

Alpha band

Beta band

Gamma band 0.2

0.4 0.6 Time (sec)

0.8

N-REM sleep

REM sleep

Stage 1 REM N-REM sleep

Theta waves

Stage 2 1 N-REM

Theta waves

●

Responsive to stimuli.

Stage 1

Some theta

●

Logical thought.

●

Reduced heart rate and muscle tension.

●

Some responsiveness to stimuli.

Stage 2

Larger amounts of theta

K-complex Beta waves Delta waves

●

Less responsiveness to stimuli.

●

Delta waves

Sleep spindleDelta waves K-complex

5 10 Sleep spindle K-complex Time (sec)

N-REM

5

Stage 4 N-REM

15

Delta waves Delta waves 10 15 Time (sec) Delta waves

Delta waves 0

5

10 Delta(sec) waves Time

0

5

10 Time (sec)

Stage 3

Some delta

●

Stage 4

Larger amounts of delta

●

15

15

REM sleep

Similar to waking

REM sleep

Beta waves

Stage 1 N-REM

Voluntary movement.

1

Theta waves

Stage 3 0 N-REM

Logical thought.

●

K-complex Beta waves

Sleep spindle

Stage 2 N-REM Stage 4 0 N-REM3 Stage

●

Beta waves

Theta waves Sleep spindle

REM Stage 2 sleep Stage N-REM3 REM N-REM sleep Stage 1 N-REM Stage 3 1
N-REM Stage 4 Stage N-REM2 N-REM

Stage 4 N-REM

Beta waves

Sleep spindle

K-complex

Further reductions in heart rate and muscle tension. Further reductions
in heart rate and muscle tension. Profound reductions in heart rate and
muscle tension.

●

Very low responsiveness to stimuli.

●

Rapid motion of the eyes.

●

Muscle paralysis.

●

Irregular autonomic activity.

●

Vivid dreams.

Theta waves

Stage 2 N-REM

Alternating periods of alertness and relaxation.

Stage 3 N-REM Delta waves

Stage 4 N-REM Delta waves 0

5

10 Time (sec)

15

How Is Consciousness Affected by Brain Damage? if consciousness is a
function of the brain, we should be able to identify aspects of
consciousness that change reliably when the brain is damaged.

Specific Areas of Brain Damage and Consciousness Lessons about
consciousness have emerged from the clinical study of patients with
damage to specific parts of the nervous system. The effects of brain
damage on face recognition illustrate how the brain integrates sensory
information, memory, and emotion to form a conscious experience.
Prosopagnosia is a condition that affects a person's ability to
recognize faces (Bauer, 1984). One patient was unable to identify
familiar faces but was still able to show differing autonomic responses
to familiar versus unfamiliar faces. Separate pathways process the
features of faces, emotional responses to faces, and recognition of
faces. in a situation that is reminiscent of many horror film classics,
patients with Capgras syndrome are convinced that imposters have taken
the place of familiar people. in certain hOw iS COnSCiOUSneSS AFFeCTed
BY BrAin dAMAGe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

211

Image courtesy Timothy J. Andrews

tragic instances, patients with Capgras even try to harm the
"imposters." Capgras syndrome and prosopagnosia produce opposite
effects. in Capgras syndrome, the ability to recognize faces remains
intact, but the sense of emotion and familiarity is distorted. Capgras
syndrome appears to result from damage to general brain circuits that
process familiarity and violations of expectations (darby et al., 2016).

Coma, Vegetative State, Brain Death, and Near-Death Consciousness is
altered not only by damage in particular areas of the brain but by the
severity of damage as well.

Prosopagnosia results from damage to a part of the temporal lobes on the
bottom of the brain known as the fusiform face area (FFA). In this scan
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), the FFA activity
indicates that the person is looking at the image of a face as opposed
to a landscape or building. Source: From Timothy J. Andrews et
al. (2010). "Internal and External Features of the Face Are Represented
Holistically in Face-Selective Regions of Visual Cortex," The Journal of
Neuroscience, 30(9), 3544--3552, doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4863--09.2010.

Coma Our word coma comes from the Greek word for "deep sleep." Coma
produces a profound state of unconsciousness in which the person does
not have sleep--wake cycles, cannot be awakened, does not respond to
pain or light, and is incapable of voluntary behavior. Coma usually
results from disruptions in the functions of the reticular formation or
both cerebral hemispheres (Liversedge & hirsch, 2010). A stroke
affecting a single hemisphere typically does not lead to coma. Comas
last anywhere from a few days to several weeks. After a period of 2 to 4
weeks, most patients recover, move into a vegetative state (described
later in this section), or die. Among those who recover, improvement is
usually slow and gradual. eeG recordings of comatose patients vary
depending on the problem that initially led to coma. Following
resuscitation from cardiac arrest, many patients show a distinctive
pattern of alpha rhythms, especially in the frontal lobes, known as
alpha coma (Chatrian, 1990). These alpha patterns do not change when the
patient is exposed to various types of stimulation. Other patterns
feature a low level of overall activity occasionally interrupted by
spikes. none of these patterns are found in the typical, healthy eeG
described previously in our section on sleep and waking (see ● Figure
6.12). Vegetative State (VS) Coma can be distinguished from similar
conditions, such as

coma A state of deep unconsciousness resulting from brain damage or
illness. vegetative state (VS) An abnormal state following brain injury
featuring wakefulness without consciousness.

vegetative state (VS) and brain death. VS often follows a period of
coma. VS is characterized by waking without consciousness. in contrast
to the patient with coma, patients with VS look rather normal. Their
eyes open periodically; they demonstrate sleep and waking cycles; they
grind their teeth, scream, smile, and cry. Some are responsive to pain.
The discovery that about 20% of patients diagnosed as being in a
vegetative state are actually conscious yet unable to respond physically
has changed the evaluation, treatment, and legal standing of
unresponsive patients (Owen, 2019; see ● Figure 6.13).

Brain Death with the advent of technologies that can artificially
maintain bodily

functions, including respiration and blood circulation, we have been
placed in the odd position of requiring a new definition of death. Brain
death is defined as an irreversible loss of all functions of the brain
including the brainstem (russell et al., 2019). Although professional

Normal EEG

Comatose EEG

FIGURE 6.12 Normal Versus Comatose EEGs. Even though the patient with
the normal EEG recording is drowsy, which should produce a dominant
pattern of alpha waves, the normal recording is quite different from the
more uniform alpha activity recorded from a patient in a coma.

212

Chapter 6

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A Healthy Controls

FIGURE 6.13

B Patient 54

Is Consciousness Possible in VS Patients? Using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), a small number of patients diagnosed as being
in a vegetative state (VS) showed brain activation to specific tasks
that closely resembled the activation of healthy control participants.
The yellow-red areas were active when thinking about movement, and the
bluish areas were active when thinking about a spatial task. This
research emphasizes the need to develop new ways of assessing the
cognitive correlates of brain injuries so that patients can receive the
best care possible. Source: From Martin M. Monti et al. (2010). "Willful
Modulation of Brain Activity in Disorders of Consciousness," New England
Journal of Medicine, 362(7), 579--589, doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0905370

associations have provided guidance regarding the determination of brain
death, actual practices and policies vary widely within the United
States and abroad (Greer et al., 2016). Although medical experts claim
that no patients appropriately diagnosed with brain death have ever
recovered, sensational media accounts of individuals who recover after
hearing their organ donation process discussed by hospital staff
emphasize the need to have complete compliance with the best standards
possible (nguyen, 2016).

Near-Death Experiences Because of improvements in technology that
literally bring

people "back to life," as many as one out of ten people has reported a
near-death experience. Patients who recover following a cardiac arrest
or some other life-threatening condition often report similar
experiences. These experiences typically feature an out-of-body
experience in which people feel they are viewing their body from a
floating position above it. in addition, many people report a "light at
the end of the tunnel" visual experience, which may include images of
deceased friends, relatives, or deities. These visual sensations are
accompanied by a peaceful, calm emotional state and followed by a
reluctant return to the body. The similarities among documented cases of
near-death experiences suggest that the dying-revival experience
produces consistent responses in the human brain similar to the
intrusion of reM sleep into waking. in animal models of cardiac arrest,
a surge of brain activity occurs near death, suggesting a state of
heightened consciousness (Borjigin et al., 2013). Strong out-of-body
sensations and other near-death phenomena occur in volunteers using
ketamine (Martial et al., 2019). A damaged brain may release its own
chemicals, similar to ketamine, in an effort to minimize cell loss.

Seizures Seizures are uncontrolled electrical disturbances in the brain
that often produce changes in consciousness, providing further evidence
that cortical activity is correlated with consciousness. People with
recurring seizures are diagnosed with epilepsy. Seizures occur as a
result of brain injury or infection but can also appear without an
obvious cause. disturbances in the activity of the inhibitory
neurotransmitter GABA might account for many seizures. drugs that
inhibit GABA reliably produce seizures, while drugs that enhance GABA
activity, such as barbiturates, prevent or control seizures.

Brain death is often determined by a study of blood circulation. In this
image, blood can be seen flowing into the neck, scalp, and face
(particularly the nose, which leads to the phrase "hot nose sign").
However, no blood flow is seen in the brain itself, which remains dark.
A careful determination of brain death is required because of the common
practice of organ donation following death. Source: Reprinted by
permission of the Society of Nuclear Medicine from: A. MacDonald, & S.
Burrell (2009). "Infrequently Performed Studies in Nuclear Medicine:
Part 2," Journal of Nuclear Medicine Technology, 37(1), 1--13. Figure 5.
doi: 10.2967/jnmt.108.057851

hOw iS COnSCiOUSneSS AFFeCTed BY BrAin dAMAGe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

213

Primary seizure focus

Corpus callosum

Pathways for the Spread of Partial and Generalized Seizures. (a) Partial
seizures originate in a focal area and spread to cortical and
subcortical structures. (b) Generalized seizures do not originate in a
focal area. Once they begin, generalized seizures spread through the
brain symmetrically via connections between the thalamus and the cortex.

Thalamus (a) Partial seizure

(b) Generalized seizure

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

FIGURE 6.14

Seizures are classified as partial or generalized. Partial seizures
originate in a particular part of the brain known as the focal area and
are often accompanied by an aura or a premonition that a seizure is
about to occur. Generalized seizures do not arise from a focal area.
instead, these seizures are characterized by the abnormal activation of
circuits connecting the cortex and the thalamus. Generalized seizures
are typically not accompanied by an aura (see ● Figure 6.14). Partial
seizures originating in the temporal lobe often produce distortions of
consciousness, leading to the experience of déjà vu (French for "already
seen"), a feeling that one is reliving the past, or jamais vu (French
for "never seen"), a sense that one's familiar circumstances are
suddenly foreign or strange. Consciousness is lost completely in
generalized seizures. The two major categories of generalized seizure
are tonic-clonic and absence seizures. Tonic-clonic seizures begin with
a loss of consciousness, cessation of breathing, and intense muscular
contraction. This phase usually gives way to violent, rhythmic
contractions that may result in broken bones or other physical injuries.
These phases are followed by a period of coma, lasting about 5 minutes.
in an absence seizure, the person loses consciousness and awareness of
surroundings, and motor movements are limited to blinking, head turns,
and eye movements.

near-death experience An altered state of consciousness reported by
people who were close to death because of cardiac or other medical
problems that features out-of-body experiences,
light-at-the-endof-a-tunnel perceptions, and a state of calmness.
seizure An abnormal level of brain activation with a sudden onset.

214

Chapter 6

How Do people Intentionally Alter Their States of Consciousness? humans
have intentionally altered consciousness in religious, recreational, and
healing contexts. Methods may vary dramatically, but we will see that
some common themes of these efforts emerge. individuals who deliberately
alter their state of consciousness may be seeking insight, positive
emotion (bliss or ecstasy), or a sense of unity or "oneness." The
universality of such efforts, which often underlie religious behavior,
strongly suggests that these states confer some advantages, although
what those advantages may be remains unknown.

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

General Features of Psychoactive Drugs

Tolerance and Withdrawal Tolerance occurs when a person must take larger

quantities of a drug to produce the desired effects. The nervous system
seeks to maintain homeostasis, a steady internal balance or equilibrium
discussed further in Chapter 7. when a person takes a drug repeatedly,
the nervous system attempts to compensate for the drug's effects. These
compensations are both biological and learned (via mechanisms described
in more detail in Chapter 8). The user must take more of a drug to
overcome these compensations. when some habitually used drugs are no
longer available, the user might experience withdrawal, a set of effects
that are the opposite of those produced by the drug. withdrawing from
alcohol, which slows down the nervous system, produces a rebound effect
characterized by so much excess brain activity that life-threatening
seizures might occur. withdrawing from stimulants such as caffeine can
make the user sluggish and lethargic. not all drugs that are abused
produce significant withdrawal. For example, heroin and nicotine produce
powerful withdrawal effects, but cocaine usually does not (Coffey et
al., 2000).

Zalmai/Contributor/Reportage Archive/Getty Images

Addiction Addiction is a compulsive physical or psychological dependence
on a substance or activity that continues in spite of negative
consequences. Addiction overwhelms normal control of behavior, distorts
typical systems of reward, and interferes with the recognition of
problems. in addiction, people make choices on the basis of short-term
outcomes (getting high) instead of on the basis of long-term outcomes
(family, finances, job, and staying out of jail). This disruption in
normal, logical decision making can occur because of distortions in one
or more of three related neural systems: an impulsive system involving
dopamine pathways connecting the midbrain and the basal ganglia, a
reflective system in the frontal lobes that weighs the pros and the cons
of a decision and controls impulses, and a craving system involving the
insula (noël et al., 2013; see ● Figure 6.15). Activity in the insula is
correlated with participants' craving for their drug of choice, and
strokes that damage the insula eliminate the urge to use some addictive
drugs (Verdejo-Garcia et al., 2012). excess activity in the impulsive
system, inadequate activity in the reflective system, and increased
desire appear to set the stage for maintaining compulsive addictive
behaviors.

AP Images/Per Johansson

historically, humans have gone to great lengths to obtain psychoactive
drugs, or substances that alter consciousness. humans may be unique
among animals in their willingness to voluntarily seek alterations in
consciousness through the deliberate use of psychoactive substances.
Most psychoactive substances are quite poisonous (livestock eating
tobacco leaves in the field will die) and usually have the bitter taste
associated with most poisons. On the rare occasions when nonhuman
animals consume psychoactive substances (cats and catnip or elephants
and alcohol), we have no way of knowing whether this consumption is
motivated by a desire to alter consciousness. Before exploring commonly
used drugs, we will outline several general principles related to their
use, including tolerance, withdrawal, and addiction.

Most animals avoid psychoactive substances, but this Swedish moose
managed to get stuck in a tree after eating fermented apples that had
fallen on the ground. We have no way of knowing whether the moose was
motivated by a desire to experience an altered state of consciousness or
it simply liked the taste of the fruit. psychoactive drug Any drug with
the capability of altering a person's state of consciousness. tolerance
The need to administer greater quantities of a drug to achieve the same
subjective effect. withdrawal Physical responses to the removal of some
habitually administered drugs.

addiction A compulsive physical or psychological dependence on a
substance or activity that continues in spite of negative consequences.

Should we be concerned about military veterans returning from service in
Afghanistan with opioid addictions? If the experiences of returning
Vietnam veterans are repeated, the answer will be "no." Even though
heroin was readily available in Vietnam and large numbers of soldiers
used heroin while serving, nearly all quit using upon their return to
the United States. These observations remind us that addiction is a
complex phenomenon with multiple causes.

hOw dO PeOPLe inTenTiOnALLY ALTer Their STATeS OF COnSCiOUSneSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

215

hallucinogen A drug that stimulates the experience of false perceptions.

Insula

Basal ganglia Frontal lobe

(b) FIGURE 6.15 Addiction Involves Multiple Brain Networks. Addiction is
    correlated with activity in a number of brain circuits.
(c) An impulsive, reward-seeking system that uses the neurochemical
    dopamine connects the midbrain (ventral tegmental area and
    substantia nigra) with the basal ganglia, including the nucleus
    accumbens. A reflective system involving the frontal lobes controls
    impulses and makes decisions. (b) A craving system involves the
    insula.

Nucleus accumbens Amygdala Hippocampus Ventral tegmental area

(a) 

Substantia nigra

Projections of dopaminergic neurons

Commonly Used Psychoactive Drugs Marijuana Cannabis, from the Cannabis
sativa plant, has a long human history. it was

Prefontal cortex (reasoning)

Hypothalamus (appetite)

included in the pharmacy written by Chinese emperor Shen neng nearly
5,000 years ago. Marijuana, the smoked form of cannabis, remains the
most commonly used federally illegal substance in the United States
today. The behavioral effects of cannabis are often so subtle that
people may report no changes in response to its use. Most individuals
Basal ganglia experience some excitation, vivid imagery, and mild
euphoria. Others respond (movement) with depression and social
withdrawal. Cannabis distorts perception of time and space and produces
hallucinations in some users, leading to its formal classification as a
hallucinogen. Cannabis contains more than 50 psychoactive compounds,
known as cannabinoids. The most important of these is
tetrahydrocannabinol (ThC). ThC produces some of its behavioral effects
by interacting with receptors for endogenous cannabinoids, natural
substances that are similar to ThC in chemical composition. One type of
cannabinoid receptor is located in parts of the brain involved with
pain, appetite, learning, reasoning, and movement (see ● Figure 6.16).
Another type is found elsewhere in the body, particularly in structures
associated with the immune system.

FIGURE 6.16

Hippocampus (memory) Medulla (nausea)

216

Chapter 6

Cerebellum (movement) Spinal cord (pain)

Locations of Cannabinoid Receptors in the Brain. Cannabinoids, such as
THC, interact with receptors located in many parts of the brain. In
particular, cannabinoid receptors are numerous in the hippocampus and
the prefrontal cortex.

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THInKIng scienTiFically Do Hallucinogens Have Therapeutic Potential?

45 40 % Drinking days 35

\% Heavy drinking days

30 25 20 15 10 5

First psilocybin treatment following week 4 assessment

25 --3 6 s

13 --2 4

W ee k

9-- 12 ks

W ee ks

5-- 8 W ee

FIGURE 6.17

s

1-- 4

0

W ee k

Since the 1950s, studies evaluating the safety and efficacy of
hallucinogens for the treatment of a number of psychological disorders
have produced promising results. This line of research was complicated
by the recreational use of hallucinogens in the 1960s and 1970s, which
led to government restrictions of their availability and use in
research. Research on the therapeutic potential of hallucinogens resumed
in the 1990s and continues to expand (dos Santos & Hallack, 2020).
Hallucinogens appear particularly effective in treating cases of MDD,
anxiety, and substance abuse. In published research, adverse reactions
have been very infrequent or completely absent. Results have been
promising enough to gain support of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for further research with larger sample sizes.

Preliminary results seem to support further research in this area,
assuming the safety of the participants is managed carefully. ■

As dos Santos and Hallack (2020) have recommended, studies with larger

ks

WhaT EVIDENCE SUppORTS ThIS pOSITION?

WhaT aRE ThE MOST REaSONaBLE CONCLUSIONS?

WhaT OThER EVIDENCE WOULD I NEED TO EVaLUaTE ThESE aLTERNaTIVES?

W ee

We are being asked to believe that hallucinogens can be useful in
treating conditions such as depression, anxiety, and substance abuse.

sample sizes would be helpful. Although the double-blind,
placebo-controlled design is preferred, alternatives do exist. For
example, patients with MDD could experience standard care (see Chapter
15) or standard care plus hallucinogens to see if the hallucinogens
produced a superior outcome. This design provides an ethical advantage
in that none of the participants would be treated with placebo only.
Individuals could be screened for a family history and symptoms of
psychosis before being accepted as participants.

The sample size in many of these studies has been quite small, on the
order of a dozen individuals. It is virtually impossible to run "gold
standard" double-blind, placebocontrolled studies, in which neither
participant nor experimenter knows whether the participant is receiving
the active drug or a placebo until the study is concluded, due to the
lack of a believable placebo. An additional challenge is the fact that
hallucinogens can provoke psychosis (see Chapter 14) in individuals at
risk for schizophrenia or other psychotic conditions (De Gregorio et
al., 2016).

Ba se lin e

WhaT aM I BEINg aSkED TO BELIEVE OR aCCEpT?

aRE ThERE OThER WayS ThIS EVIDENCE COULD BE INTERpRETED?

Percent drinking days/percent heavy drinking days

Elsewhere in this chapter, you will read about the use of ayahuasca,
which contains DMT, and MDMA (Ecstasy) to achieve positive altered
states of consciousness. The active chemicals in these substances have
something in common with each other and with most hallucinogens---they
interact with serotonin systems in the brain. Psychologists are
interested in the potential of using LSD, ketamine, and psilocybin (from
hallucinogenic mushrooms), along with DMT (the active ingredient in
ayahuasca) and MDMA, to treat patients with a variety of disorders,
including major depressive disorder (MDD), anxiety, posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD), and substance abuse disorders.

Participants in treatment for alcohol dependence received psychotherapy
during weeks 1 through 4, followed by two treatments with psilocybin at
week 4 and again at week 8. Both drinking days and heavy drinking days
were reduced significantly and persistently following treatment. Source:
M. P. Bogenschutz et al. (2015). "Psilocybin-assisted Treatment for
Alcohol Dependence: A Proof-of-concept Study." Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 29(3), 289--299. doi: 10.1177/0269881114565144

hOw dO PeOPLe inTenTiOnALLY ALTer Their STATeS OF COnSCiOUSneSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

217

Laguna Design/Science Photo Library/Corbis

Lysergic acid, a metabolite of LSD, is similar in chemical structure to
naturally occurring serotonin. Although the exact mechanism responsible
for producing hallucinations is poorly understood, we do know that
lysergic acid interacts with serotonin receptors. stimulant Any drug
that increases the

Our main endogenous cannabinoid, anandamide, removes unnecessary
memories and slows movement, leading to relaxation. Unlike ThC, though,
anandamide's effects last only briefly. Anandamide increases dopamine
activity, and substances that increase dopamine activity are often
addictive for many people. Because ThC shares anandamide's ability to
stimulate dopamine activity, cannabis has the potential to produce
dependency (weinstein & Gorelick, 2011).

LSD in 1938, researcher Albert hoffman reported some unusual sensations

after working with lysergic acid diethylamide (LSd). hoffman then
deliberately ingested some of the chemical and reported vivid, colorful
visual hallucinations. LSd is chemically similar to serotonin, and it
interacts with serotonin receptors (Carhart-harris et al., 2016). LSd
use is correlated with increased activity in the visual cortex, changes
in alpha activity recorded using eeG, and decreased connectivity in the
default mode network (Carhart-harris et al., 2016). These findings are
consistent with participants' reports of their hallucination
experiences. One of the interesting cognitive outcomes of LSd use is the
experience of flashbacks, intrusive and involuntary hallucinations, even
after the drug has been discontinued (halpern & Pope, 2003). Further
research is necessary to identify the mechanisms for this experience.

Caffeine Caffeine, used by 85% of adults in the United States, is a
stimulant found in a range of sources, including coffee, tea, cola,
energy drinks, and many over-the-counter pain relievers (Temple et al.,
2017; see ● Figure 6.18). Caffeine interferes with the inhibition

activity of the nervous system.

COnnECTIng To ReseaRch Psychedelics and Consciousness

The Question: What do psychedelics do to consciousness?

METhODS Forty-eight healthy adults underwent magnetoencephalography, a
method for recording the tiny amounts of magnetic output from the brain,
after having been administered a placebo and again after the
administration of one of the following drugs: LSD, psilocybin, or
ketamine.

EThICS While the doses used in this experiment were within safe
boundaries, the researchers

218

Chapter 6

took care to exclude participants who were pregnant, who reported any
one of a number of health conditions, or who reported a history of
substance abuse or mental health issues. It is interesting to note that
all participants had used psychedelics before, although the authors did
not provide further information about their recruiting methods. The
study was cleared by the appropriate institutional review board (see
Chapter 2).

Adam Hart-Davis/Science Source

Psychedelic drugs, including LSD, psilocybin, and ketamine, produce
profound changes in perception and ongoing awareness without a loss of
consciousness like that occurring during sleep or anesthesia. As such,
they provide interesting insights into our definitions of conscious
experience. Researchers investigated the effects of these three
psychedelics on a measure of consciousness (Schartner et al., 2017).

RESULTS Compared to placebo, all three drugs increased measures of
"signal diversity." High levels of signal diversity imply that the brain
is busy doing multiple, complex things, whereas low levels imply a more
quiet, less complex mental state.

CONCLUSIONS The authors argued that the psychedelic state provides an
even more active state of consciousness than that which occurs during
focused wakefulness and REM sleep. They suggested using similar analyses
to assess

Psilocybin extracted from hallucinogenic mushrooms, along with ketamine
and LSD, produced a higher level of brain activity than that which is
usually seen in conscious waking. the levels of signal diversity that
might characterize typical variations in sleep and waking but also less
typical states such as mania (see Chapter 16). ■

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Brewed coffee --- 8 oz.\*

FIGURE 6.18

Instant coffee --- 8 oz.\*

Source: Adapted from C. O. Byer & L. W. Shainberg (1995). Living Well:
Health in Your Hands (2nd ed.), New York, NY: HarperCollins. The
Starbucks Jolt and Red Bull data are from L. P. Somogyi (2010). Caffeine
Intake by the U.S. Population, retrieved from http://
www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/ CentersOffices/OfficeofFoods/CFSAN /
CFSANFOIAElectronicReadingRoom/ UCM333191.pdf

Decaffeinated coffee --- 8 oz. *Tea --- 8 oz.* Cola---12 oz. *Chocolate
candy bar ---1 oz.* No-Doz ® ---1 tablet Anacin ® ---1 tablet Starbucks
Chai Latte---16 oz. Jolt Cola---12 oz. Red Bull---8.3 oz. 20

40

60

80 100 120 140 Caffeine (in milligrams)

160

180

200

\*Amount of caffeine depends on type of product, brewing method, and
formulation.

iStock.com/Studiocasper

Sources of Caffeine. Although most people think immediately of coffee
when they hear the word caffeine, caffeine can be found in many
beverages, foods, and overthe-counter medications.

DiVeRse Voices in Psychology Entheogens Across Cultures illegal in most
countries. However, legal exceptions have been made for use of ayahuasca
in religious settings. In 2006, the U.S. Supreme Court decided to allow
ayahuasca churches to continue to use tea during their ceremonies. A
popular interest in ayahuasca has led to the development of ayahuasca
retreats in Peru, Colombia, and Brazil. This commercialization of the
practice brings money to poor regions but threatens the

Abigail Taylor

AS WE MENTION in this chapter, many historical efforts to achieve
altered states of consciousness emerged in religious contexts. These
methods for producing altered states frequently move out of their
original contexts, such as the migration of drum circles from Native
American culture into contemporary men's gatherings. Use of drugs, and
hallucinogens in particular, have a long history in religious rituals.
When used in religious contexts, hallucinogens are often referred to as
entheogens, loosely translated as "generating the divine within." In
South America, people were using a brew known as ayahuasca centuries ago
as part of their religious rituals, but the practice has since spread
globally. Ayahuasca contains the hallucinogen N, N-dimethyltryptamine
(DMT), which like most hallucinogens is chemically very similar to
serotonin. DMT, which occurs naturally in small amounts in the brain,
produces vivid visual hallucinations and euphoria but also intense
vomiting. In contrast to the acceptance of ayahuasca in South America,
DMT use is

original context of the ritual. "Pseudoshamans" are quite ready to make
money from gullible tourists. The death of several ayahuasca tourists
has raised concerns about the safety of the ayahuasca retreats. Outside
the religious context, scientists continue to be interested in possible
applications of the main ingredients of ayahuasca for treating
depression and other psychological disorders (Sessa & Johnson, 2015;
Domínguez-Clavé et al., 2016).

Many hallucinogens have their historical roots in religious practice. In
South America, a hallucinogenic tea known as ayahuasca has been used for
centuries. Interest on the part of tourists has led to the establishment
of ayahuasca retreats, but opinions about the commercialization of
historical religious practices are mixed.

hOw dO PeOPLe inTenTiOnALLY ALTer Their STATeS OF COnSCiOUSneSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

219

normally produced by adenosine in the brain. if you keep an inhibitory
substance such as adenosine from doing its job, the result is increased
excitation and alertness. Caffeine produces a withdrawal syndrome
characterized by headaches and fatigue. Some people experience problems
with heart rhythms related to caffeine use. Caffeine crosses the
placenta easily and also enters breast milk, leading to reduced rates of
growth and other complications in the fetus and breastfed infant of a
mother using the drug (Temple et al., 2017). On the positive side,
caffeine use is correlated with a lower risk of Parkinson's disease,
which causes difficulty moving (ross & Petrovitch, 2001), as well as
Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia (eskelinen & Kivipelto,
2010). Because these are correlations, we don't know whether the
apparent protection against these conditions is because of some specific
action of caffeine in the brain or is simply the result of the
characteristics of people who enjoy large amounts of caffeine.

Nicotine After caffeine, the most commonly used stimulant in the United
States is nicotine, usually in the form of smoked or chewed tobacco (see
● Figure 6.19). Although rates of smoked tobacco use have dropped
dramatically, use of e-cigarettes is growing, fueled by an inaccurate
belief in the relative "safety" of smokeless nicotine (Perikleous et
al., 2018). nicotine mimics the action of the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine, increasing heart rate and blood pressure, reducing
fatigue, and improving cognitive performance while at the same time
producing muscular relaxation. normally, our bodies feel somewhat tense
when we are mentally alert, so nicotine's combination of relaxation with
alertness is unique. despite repeated warnings of the dangers of using
nicotine, it continues to be a widely used substance (see Chapter 16).
nicotine use typically begins in adolescence, and adolescents become
more rapidly dependent on the substance than do adults (dani & harris,
2005). People with anxiety, depression, and substance abuse disorders
are more likely to use nicotine than others (Stanton et al., 2016). Use
of tobacco is very common 20 Blood nicotine concentration (ng/ml)

Blood nicotine concentration (ng/ml)

20

15

10

5

0

0 Drug administered

30

60

90

120

Time (in minutes) Peak response

15

10

5

0

0

30

60

90

120

Time (in minutes) Drug administered

(a) Smoking cigarettes

Peak response (b) Chewing tobacco

FIGURE 6.19 Concentration of a Drug in the Blood Supply Depends on the
Method of Administration. Drug effects depend on the concentration of
the drug in the blood supply, and some methods of administration produce
effective concentrations faster than others. In the case of nicotine,
smoking a cigarette (a) produces a faster increase in blood nicotine
concentration than produced by chewing an equivalent dose of tobacco
(b). However, chewing tobacco produces higher sustained concentrations
of nicotine than smoking does. Source: Adapted from W. Bennett (1983).
"The Nicotine Fix," Rhode Island Medical Journal, 66, 455--458.

220

Chapter 6

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

among people with schizophrenia, and adolescent use of nicotine doubles
a person's risk of developing schizophrenia (Scott et al., 2018). Again,
because these are correlations, we do not know whether nicotine has any
causal role in the development of psychological disorders or whether
people vulnerable to disorders are simply more likely to enjoy the
effects of nicotine.

Cocaine and Amphetamines The behavioral effects of cocaine and
amphetamines are quite similar. At moderate doses, cocaine and
amphetamines produce alertness, elevated mood, confidence, and a sense
of well-being. At higher doses, these drugs can produce symptoms that
are quite similar to schizophrenia (see Chapter 14). Users experience
hallucinations, such as a feeling of bugs running on the skin, and
delusional fears that others are trying to harm them. Some users
experience repetitive motor behaviors, such as chewing movements or
grinding the teeth. Methamphetamine, the current commonly abused form of
amphetamines, is particularly likely to lead to symptoms of psychosis
(Lecomte et al., 2018; see ● Figure 6.20). Although they produce similar
types of behavior, cocaine and amphetamines act somewhat differently at
the synapse. Both drugs distort the action of dopamine transporters,
gates that move previously released dopamine back into the presynaptic
cell (see Chapter 4), but they do so differently. Methamphetamine mimics
dopamine, leading it to be moved out of the synaptic

FIGURE 6.20

(b) 

Courtesy of the Minnesota Department of Corrections

(a) 

Methamphetamine Produces Serious Health Consequences. (a)
Methamphetamine users are likely to experience psychotic symptoms,
probably because of substantial loss of brain volume in areas related to
memory, emotion, and reward. (b) Methamphetamine also stimulates
clenching and grinding of teeth, leading to a pattern of dental decay
known as "meth mouth." Source: Adapted from S. Berman et al. (2008).
Abuse of amphetamines and structural abnormalities in the brain. Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1141, 195--220. doi: 10.1196/
annals.1441.031

hOw dO PeOPLe inTenTiOnALLY ALTer Their STATeS OF COnSCiOUSneSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

221

gap into neurons by dopamine transporters. Once inside the neuron,
methamphetamine enters synaptic vesicles, pushing the dopamine molecules
out into the intracellular fluid of the axon terminal. The presence of
large amounts of dopamine outside of vesicles makes the transporters
begin to work in reverse, pushing dopamine out of the cell. with the
transporters working in reverse and unable to retrieve the released
dopamine, the molecules of dopamine become trapped in the synaptic gap,
stimulating receptors continuously. Cocaine's action on the dopamine
transporters is simpler. Cocaine simply blocks the transporters, keeping
all previously released dopamine active in the synaptic gap. Because of
their direct actions on the dopamine reward systems in the brain, these
drugs are among the most addictive available substances.

Bettmann/Contributor/Getty Images

Methylphenidate (Ritalin) As we will see in Chapter 15, many children

MDMA

(Ecstasy) 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MdMA, or ecstasy) is a
relative of amphetamines and the hallucinogen mescaline that increases
heart rate, blood pressure, and body temperature. MdMA increases
sociability by stimulating the activity of serotonin and oxytocin
(Thompson et al., 2007). MdMA mimics serotonin and is actually taken up
more readily than serotonin itself by serotonin transporters. Once
inside the cell, MdMA interferes with the storage of serotonin in
vesicles and causes the transporters to begin acting in reverse,
resulting in the release of large amounts of serotonin. Serotonin
becomes trapped in the synaptic gap by the malfunctioning transporters,
allowing it to continue to interact with receptors. Any excess serotonin
activity resulting from MdMA use, overdose of antidepressants, or
combinations of certain drugs can produce serotonin syndrome. Symptoms
include dehydration, exhaustion, hyperthermia (high core body
temperature), convulsions, and death (Pilgrim et al., 2011). MdMA has a
smaller effect on dopamine than on serotonin, but the drug can still
produce some dependency. Use of MdMA is controversial, with some
scientists expressing concern about its apparent detrimental effects on
neurons that release serotonin (Capela et al., 2007; Biezonski & Meyer,
2011). On the other hand, MdMA has been used experimentally to treat
alcohol use disorder and the anxiety related to autism spectrum disorder
(Sessa et al., 2019). Use of MdMA for the treatment of posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSd) is awaiting approval by the U.S. Food and drug
Administration (FdA; Sessa et al., 2019). National Institute on Drug
Abuse

Before World War I, many commercial products contained cocaine. Freud
originally believed that cocaine was an effective antidepressant. The
ability of cocaine to produce rapid addiction eventually changed
people's minds about the safety of the drug.

diagnosed with Adhd are treated with stimulant medications. The two most
common choices are methylphenidate or a combination of amphetamine salts
(Adderall). Both of these drugs boost the activity of dopamine and
norepinephrine, which in turn increases users' ability to stay alert and
concentrate. At clinical doses, these drugs do not seem to produce
dependence, although they affect sleep and appetite. it is a common
misconception that only people diagnosed with Adhd respond to these
drugs with increased concentration. in fact, everybody reacts to these
drugs in similar ways (Agay et al., 2010), which has led to an increase
in their nonprescribed use by college students and others wishing to get
a competitive edge in intellectual work.

MDMA (Ecstasy) appears to have long-term detrimental effects on neurons
that release serotonin, associated with mood, appetite, sleep, and
aggression.

222

Chapter 6

Alcohol Alcohol is one of the earliest psychoactive drugs used by
humans, dating back into our prehistory. in addition to seeking the
relaxation produced by alcohol, early humans might have turned to
fermented beverages as a safety precaution against contaminated water
supplies because alcohol has natural antiseptic qualities. At low doses,
alcohol dilates blood vessels, giving people a warm, flushed feeling. it
reduces anxiety, which makes relatively shy people more outgoing at a
party. At higher doses, alcohol's inhibition of the higher levels of the
brain leads to aggression, risky behaviors, and poor motor coordination.
At very high doses, alcohol can produce coma and death, either from
suppression of breathing or aspiration of vomit.

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Alcohol produces its main behavioral effects by boosting the effects of
GABA, the main inhibitory neurochemical in the brain. By boosting an
inhibitor, alcohol depresses the activity of the brain, particularly
that of the cerebral cortex. At the same time, alcohol blocks receptors
for the brain's major excitatory neurotransmitter, glutamate. Finally,
alcohol also stimulates reward pathways that release dopamine, which
probably accounts for its addictive potential. Further information on
the detrimental effects of alcohol on the developing fetus will be
discussed in Chapter 11. Alcohol's impact on health in general is
discussed in Chapter 16.

Opioids natural or synthetic substances that interact with endorphin
receptors are known as opioids. Opioids that are derived from the opium
poppy are known as opiates. The opium poppy is the source of several
psychoactive opiates, including morphine and codeine. heroin can be
synthesized through further processing of morphine. These substances are
effective because they imitate the action of endorphins (short for
endogenous morphine). neurons possessing endorphin receptors are located
in parts of the brain involved with pain, stress, and attachment. The
activity of both natural endorphins and opioids results in the release
of large amounts of dopamine, leading to feelings of well-being and
reduction of pain. Opioids have legitimate medical purposes, including
pain control, cough suppression, and control of diarrhea. At low doses
typical in medical practice, opioids produce a sense of euphoria, pain
relief, reduced anxiety, muscle relaxation, and sleep. The higher doses
characteristic of opioid abuse affect consciousness by producing a
strong, rapid onset feeling of euphoria, or a "rush." with even higher
doses, opioids exert a strong depression on breathing, occasionally
leading to death. Beginning in the 1990s, the United States has
experienced an "opioid epidemic." Between 1999 and 2017, 700,000 people
died from opioid overdose, or a current rate of about 130 per day
(Centers for disease & Prevention, 2019). The epidemic struck in three
waves: a period of abuse of prescription opioids, abuse of heroin, and
most recently, abuse of synthetic opioids such as fentanyl (see ● Figure
6.21). Law enforcement and health care entities are scrambling to
intervene through awareness and education efforts.

10 Other synthetic opioids e.g., Tramadol and fentanyl, prescribed or
illicitly manufactured

9

Deaths per 100,000 population

8 7 Commonly prescribed opioids Natural & semi-synthetic opioids and
methadone

6 5

Heroin

4 3 2

Wave 1: rise in prescription opioid overdose deaths

Wave 2: rise in heroin overdose deaths

Wave 3: rise in synthetic opioid overdose deaths

2017

2016

2015

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

0

1999

1

FIGURE 6.21 The U.S. Opioid Epidemic. Beginning in 1999, the United
States has experienced three waves of an opioid epidemic that has
claimed over 700,000 lives. The current rate of opioid overdose is about
four times higher than the homicide rate and nearly double the rate of
traffic fatalities. Source: https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/
images/epidemic/3WavesOfTheRiseInOpi oidOverdoseDeaths.png

hOw dO PeOPLe inTenTiOnALLY ALTer Their STATeS OF COnSCiOUSneSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

223

Nondrug Methods for Altering Consciousness

Sergey Peterman/Shutterstock.com

hypnosis An altered state of consciousness characterized by relaxation
and increased suggestibility.

Hypnosis Hypnosis is "a state of consciousness involving focused
attention and reduced peripheral awareness characterized by an enhanced
capacity for response to suggestion" (elkinset al., 2015, p. 6).
Misunderstandings about what hypnosis can and cannot do are common.
early research suggested that hypnotized people were more likely to
comply with requests to do dangerous things, such as pick up a poisonous
snake or throw a beaker of what they believed to be acid into an
experimenter's face (rowland, 1939; Young, 1952). however, later
experiments showed that equal compliance could be obtained with
participants who were not hypnotized (Orne & evans, 1965). in these
situations, the participants' strong belief that the experimenters would
be unwilling to harm them overrode any measurable influence of hypnosis.
Contrary to popular belief (and a number of television crime shows),
hypnosis does not sharpen memory and is instead likely to make it worse
(register & Kihlstrom, 1987). hypnosis does have legitimate uses in
therapy, however, including habit change (quitting smoking, etc.; Barnes
et al., 2019), relieving symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome (Slomski,
2019), and pain relief (Taylor & Genkov, 2019). One study that
illustrates both the power and the limitations of hypnosis used a task
known as the Stroop test (Stroop, 1935; raz et al., 2006). in the Stroop
test, participants are asked to respond to the color of the letters they
are shown (see ● Figure 6.22). when the ink color and the word are
congruent (e.g., the word red appears in red ink), reaction time is
significantly faster (100--200 milliseconds faster) than when the ink
color and the word are incongruent (e.g., the word red appears in green
ink). nearly everyone who can read shows a robust Stroop effect, and
extensive training does not make the effect go away. This effect is
typically explained in terms of a well-practiced skill (reading) taking
precedence over a less practiced skill (naming the colors of letters).
when instructed to ignore the practiced skill, attention is compromised,
and reaction time becomes slower. Using a posthypnotic suggestion, raz
et al. (2006) told their participants to respond to a cue by viewing the
stimuli as gibberish instead of real words. Participants were assessed
for their individual differences in suggestibility, or the ease with
which someone can be

Frustrated licensed psychotherapist Steve Eichel demonstrated the lack
of regulation of hypnotherapists by acquiring a number of
impressivelooking credentials for Zoe D. Katze, who happens to be
Eichel's cat. Zoe's name is a wordplay on the German die Katze, which
literally means "the cat." Only three states in the United States have
mandatory licensing and registration for hypnotherapists. Six others do
not have mandatory licensing but regulate the practice somewhat. Many
licensed psychotherapists like Eichel use hypnosis in their practices.

224

Chapter 6

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

hypnotized. Participants who were rated as having low suggestibility
performed in a typical manner on the Stroop test. in contrast,
participants rated as having high suggestibility demonstrated little
difference between the amount of time needed to identify the ink colors
in the congruent and the incongruent conditions. The ability of
posthypnotic suggestion to minimize the Stroop effect is remarkable
because other efforts to modulate the effect have all failed. Clearly,
hypnotic suggestion has the ability to reorganize cognitive processes,
at least in highly suggestible individuals.

Meditation Meditation techniques vary widely and may occur in either
religious or

nonreligious contexts. when experienced practitioners are asked to
describe the subjective experience produced by meditation, they describe
a conscious state without thought, accompanied by a blissful emotional
state (Travis, 2001). A variation on meditation known as mindfulness
meditation has been used more frequently over recent years to treat
substance abuse and a variety of psychological disorders (wielgosz et
al., 2019). Mindfulness refers to "nonjudgmental awareness of
experiences in the present moment" (hölzel et al., 2011, p. 537).
Meditation incorporating mindfulness also appears to produce benefits in
immune function, blood pressure, stress hormone levels, and cognitive
functioning. Brain activity correlates of meditation are challenging to
discover, due to the effects of experience with meditation on the
outcomes (Falcone & Jerram, 2018). however, eeG recordings during
meditation typically feature increased proportions of alpha waves, which
we described earlier as being characteristic of an awake but relaxed
state. recordings are slightly different depending on whether the
participant is engaged in focused or mindfulness types of meditation
(Travis, 2019). Studies using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMri) suggest that meditation represents a voluntary regulation of
attention and autonomic functions (Lazar et al., 2000). Brain imaging
studies have discovered that experienced meditators showed less activity
in the brain's dMn, which was described earlier in this chapter (Brewer
et al., 2011). Activity in the dMn is usually correlated not only with
mind wandering and thinking about the self but also with unhappiness.
relative inhibition of the activity of the dMn through meditation might
be responsible for the feelings of bliss associated with this practice
(see ● Figure 6.23). Meditation appears to result in physical changes in
the brain (Fox et al., 2014). it has been correlated with increased
cortical thickness (Lazar et al., 2005), improved connectivity involving
the anterior cingulate cortex (Posner, 2018), and increased gray matter
in the brainstem (Vestergaard-Poulsen et al., 2009). The increased
cortical thickness was more noticeable in older participants, suggesting
that meditation might offset typical age-related changes in the brain.

Other Methods for Altering Consciousness A variety of environmental
conditions initiate altered states of consciousness, including exposure
to high altitudes during mountain climbing, underwater conditions in
scuba diving, starvation, sleep deprivation, sensory deprivation,
twirling, and rhythm-induced trance. These conditions may lead to
hallucination and other consistent changes in cognition and emotion,
possibly due to their ability to reduce activation in the prefrontal
cortex (dietrich & Al-Shawaf, 2018). Several of these environmental
factors characterize vision quests, which typically take place within
religious contexts. in the traditional native American vision quest,
preparation typically involved 3 to 4 days of starvation and sleep loss.
The individual would travel to an isolated location where no shelter
could be built. The seeker would then be instructed to concentrate and
watch for the appearance of a "guardian." This combination of events
reliably led seekers to experience the following phenomena: a distorted
sense of time, a sensation of "oneness," the appearance of light, the
emotion of ecstasy or bliss, and a sense of improved insight (Steiger,
2000). we have all observed young children experiment with their bodies
by spinning. Although we do not know the precise reason for such
spinning behavior, other than that it is fun, spinning probably
represents the child's efforts to alter sensory and cognitive states.

(a) 
(b) 

Red Yellow Blue Green Green Yellow Blue

Blue Green Yellow Red Green Blue Red

FIGURE 6.22 Hypnosis and the Stroop Test. Under normal circumstances,
results of the Stroop test show that participants identify ink colors
faster when (a) the color of the letters matches the word being read
(the word red appears in a red font) than when (b) it doesn't match (the
word red appears in a yellow or green font). Highly suggestible
hypnotized participants who were told that they were reading nonsense
words instead of real words did not show this typical difference. Their
reaction time for naming the ink color was the same whether it matched
the color name or not.

meditation A voluntary alteration of consciousness characterized by
positive emotion and absence of thought.

hOw dO PeOPLe inTenTiOnALLY ALTer Their STATeS OF COnSCiOUSneSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

225

0.34

BOLD signal change (%)

BOLD signal change (%)

0.34

0.14

--0.06

--0.26

0.14

--0.06

--0.26

--0.46

--0.46 Meditators

Controls

(b) 

Meditators

Controls

iStock.com/DawnPoland

(a) 

FIGURE 6.23 Meditation Is Correlated With Decreased Activation of the
Brain's Default Mode Network (DMN). Meditation is associated with a
decrease in activation in the prefrontal cortex and posterior cingulate
gyrus, which are important parts of the DMN, of experienced meditators
compared to control participants who were introduced to the meditation
methods right before being scanned. The amount of decrease in signal
strength is shown (a) in the prefrontal cortex and (b) in the posterior
cingulate cortex. The colored bars represent three methods of
mindfulness meditation: choiceless awareness is shown in green, loving
kindness is shown in red, and concentration is shown in blue. Source: J.
A. Brewer et al. (2011). Meditation experience is associated with
differences in default mode network activity and connectivity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(50), 20254--20259.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1112029108

Spinning is also used as a meditation-inducing method by the Sufis, a
mystic Muslim sect. Sufis may whirl for an hour or more before falling
to the ground, where they seek a feeling of oneness with the earth. it
is likely that dancing has been a part of human cultures for thousands
of years, both for recreational and for religious purposes. Accompanied
by the equally ancient practice of drumming, dance is capable of
initiating trancelike states in the participants (Vaitl et al., 2005). A
trance state typically refers to an induced state of consciousness in
which a person is less

226

Chapter 6

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Both dancing and psychoactive drugs have the potential to alter
consciousness and are often combined in raves. Common themes of unity,
or oneness, and positive emotion are primary goals reported by the rave
participants.

iStock.com/ansonmiao

responsive to external stimuli (hove & Stelzer, 2018). The altered
states induced by drumming and dancing include distortion of time, vivid
imagery, and strong positive emotions such as ecstasy and bliss (Vaitl
et al., 2005). Participants listening to rhythmic drumming showed more
theta wave activity in their eeGs, normally associated with light n-reM
sleep, than did participants listening to unstructured beat sequences
(winkelman, 2003). Modern youth are fond of combining dance and
psychoactive drugs to alter consciousness, particularly in the context
of raves, which are large parties featuring electronic music, darkness,
and the use of hallucinogens or MdMA (redfield & Thouin-Savard, 2017).
The raves feature some themes common to the contexts we have described
previously. Unity, or oneness, and positive emotion are again primary
goals reported by the participants.

interpersonal Relationships The Consciousness Perspective How Does
Imitation Influence Liking?

Jose Luis Pelaez/Iconica/Getty Images

wE EngagE in a VariEtY of unconscious BEhaViors, and not just when we're
asleep. Among the unconscious behaviors that have been identified by
psychologists is one that is particularly relevant to
relationships---the effect of mimicry on liking and feeling close to
others (Lakin et al., 2008). A substantial body of research supports the
idea that we unconsciously copy the behavior of others and that when we
do copy another person's behavior, that person likes us better without
necessarily knowing why. Under what circumstances are we most likely to
copy the behavior of other people? One possible answer is that we mimic
others to avoid or repair social exclusion. Jessica Lakin and her
colleagues (2008) made their participants feel socially excluded
(temporarily) and then observed that these excluded participants were
more likely to mimic another person than were participants who had not
been socially excluded. This process extends to group membership as
well. Participants excluded by an in-group were subsequently more likely
to mimic an in-group member than an out-group member. These results
suggest that mimicry developed as an automatic behavior that we could
use to respond to threats to our social connectivity, which as we have
stated many times previously, could have been a matter of life or death
to our hunter-- gatherer ancestors. Because this mimicry is quite
automatic and unconscious, we are usually not aware that we are behaving
this way. Knowing now that this is an adaptive behavior, look more
closely at how you behave when encountering situations in which you feel
excluded. it could be a social situation, such as at a party or an
organizational event, where you are trying to mingle or initiate a
dialogue with others. Or perhaps you observe mimicry when you are around
someone you like romantically. do you feign interest in things you
wouldn't We often imitate the behavior of others without being
necessarily be interested in otherwise? Are you more apt to align
yourself consciously aware that we're doing so. Imitation seems with the
personality of the person you find interesting? do you see this kind to
enhance liking and social inclusion. of behavior in friends or family? ■
hOw dO PeOPLe inTenTiOnALLY ALTer Their STATeS OF COnSCiOUSneSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

227

Psychology Takes on Real-World Problems Sleep disruptions in response to
natural disasters, war, and other highly stressful events are common.
Compared to a pandemic, however, the sleep disruption associated with
such events tends to be somewhat localized in time and in geography. In
contrast, the COVID-19 pandemic is associated with widespread and
lasting changes in sleep habits (Morin & Carrier, 2020). In particular,
lasting problems with insomnia are likely outcomes of a pandemic. Lin et
al. (2020) reported a 37% increase in clinically significant insomnia
between the pre-COVID and peak COVID period in China. Not only does the
stress and anxiety related to the pandemic itself have the ability to
disrupt sleep, but many other factors are in play. Many people
experience additional stress due to social isolation, financial
concerns, employment conditions, and the need to combine family and work
obligations. These sources of stress might rob people of the restorative
actions of sleep so desperately needed during a pandemic for maintaining
a strong immune response and good general health.

Sergii Sobolevskyi/Shutterstock.com

Sleep During a Pandemic

In addition to the normal worry about health in a pandemic, sleep can
also be disrupted by stress related to juggling work and family
obligations and disruptions to normal daily routines. Potentially even
more harmful is the disruption to the daily routines that help us
maintain good circadian function. Working people typically are quite
regular in the times they rise, eat, leave for work, and schedule social
and leisure activities during the day. Without these habits, maintaining
regularity in sleep-waking cycles might be more difficult. Government
limits on outdoor activities might prevent people from obtaining the
daylight exposure they need for good circadian function.

Policy responses to the problem of pandemic-induced insomnia might take
the form of educating the public about good sleep hygiene, which is a
benefit regardless of whether a pandemic is occurring. Simple rules such
as keeping to a regular sleep schedule, monitoring the use of caffeine
and other stimulants, obtaining a daily dose of sunlight, limiting
screen time right before sleep, and getting regular exercise can go a
long way toward preventing problems with sleep quantity and quality. ■

summary 6.3 Commonly Used Psychoactive Drugs and Their Methods of Action

Drug class

acts on

LSD

Serotonin

Marijuana

Endogenous cannabinoids

Basal ganglia (movement)

Prefontal cortex (reasoning)

Hypothalamus (appetite) Hippocampus (memory)

Cerebellum (movement)

Medulla (nausea)

Spinal cord (pain)

Caffeine

Adenosine

Brewed coffee ---8 oz. *Instant coffee ---8 oz.* Decaffeinated coffee
---8 oz. *Tea ---8 oz.* Cola---12 oz. *Chocolate candy bar ---1 oz.*
No-Doz ® ---1 tablet Anacin ® ---1 tablet Starbucks Chai Latte---16 oz.
Jolt Cola---12 oz. Red Bull---8.3 oz. 20

40

60

80 100 120 140 Caffeine (in milligrams)

160

180

200

\*Amount of caffeine depends on type of product, brewing method, and
formulation.

228

Chapter 6

The AwAre Mind: eLeMenTS OF COnSCiOUSneSS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Drug class

acts on

Nicotine

Acetylcholine 20 Blood nicotine concentration (ng/ml)

Blood nicotine concentration (ng/ml)

20

15

10

5

0

0 Drug administered

30

60

90

120

Time (in minutes) Peak response

15

10

5

0

0 Drug administered

(a) 

30

60

90

120

Time (in minutes) Peak response (b) Chewing tobacco

(a) Smoking cigarettes

Cocaine, amphetamines, and methamphetamine

Dopamine

Methylphenidate

Dopamine

MDMA (Ecstasy)

Serotonin, oxytocin

Alcohol

GABA, dopamine

(b) 

Opioids

Endogenous endorphins 0.22

0.27

Release of reformulated OxyContin

0.20

0.18

0.13

0.09

0.13

0.07

Rate of OxyContin abuse per 100,000 population

Rate of heroin use per 100,000 population

0.33

0.04

0.00 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

0.00

Heroin OxyContin

Credits: Top row---Laguna Design/Science Photo Library/Corbis; Third
row---iStock.com/Studiocasper; Fifth row---Courtesy of the Minnesota
Department of Corrections. Sixth row---National Institute on Drug Abuse.

Key terms The Language of psychological Science Be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

addiction, p. 215 alpha wave, p. 202 beta wave, p. 202 biological clock,
p. 199 circadian rhythm, p. 199 coma, p. 212 consciousness, p. 194 delta
wave, p. 204 dreaming, p. 208 gamma wave, p. 202 hallucinogen, p. 216
hypnosis, p. 224 insomnia, p. 209

lucid dreaming, p. 208 major depressive disorder with seasonal pattern,
p. 201 meditation, p. 225 narcolepsy, p. 209 near-death experience,
p. 213 non--rapid eye movement (n-reM) sleep, p. 203 psychoactive drug,
p. 215 rapid eye movement (reM) sleep, p. 203 restless legs syndrome
(rLS), p. 210 seizure, p. 213

self-awareness, p. 194 sleep, p. 199 sleep apnea, p. 209 sleep terror,
p. 209 stimulant, p. 219 sudden infant death syndrome (SidS), p. 210
theta wave, p. 203 tolerance, p. 215 vegetative state (VS), p. 212
waking, p. 199 withdrawal, p. 215

hOw dO PeOPLe inTenTiOnALLY ALTer Their STATeS OF COnSCiOUSneSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

229

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Axons from the sympathetic nervous system form connections in the gut,
contributing to those butterflies we feel at times of excitement.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7

The Feeling Mind Emotion and motivation Learning Objectives 3. Explain
the biological, social, and cognitive correlates of emotional expression
and assessment.

2.  Differentiate the features and predictions of major theories of
    emotion.

3.  Explain the key attributes of homeostasis, drive, and incentive.

4.  Analyze the physiological and environmental factors that influence
    hunger and sexual behavior.

EMOTION AND MOTIVATION, THE TOPICS OF THIS CHAPTER, involve neural
circuits that often operate below the level of our conscious awareness.
We can zoom in to look at these neural circuits, like these sympathetic
axons (in blue in the large image on the previous page) forming
connections with the gut. We have all had the feeling of butterflies in
our stomach when we are excited, and these neural pathways are
responsible for such feelings. Zooming out, we can examine emotion and
motivation in the larger context of the individual using the example of
elite athletes at the Olympic Games. The 2016 Rio Games featured 11,544
athletes from 205 countries, a tiny fraction of the millions of people
who compete in athletics worldwide. To stand out among these elites
takes extreme motivation, not to mention talent and hard work. Many

6.  Describe motivations of affiliation and achievement in light of
    systems explaining the prioritization of motives.

Michael Steele/Staff/Getty Images Sport/Getty Images

1.  Distinguish between emotion, mood, and motivation.

athletes competing at this level have focused on their sport to the
exclusion of most other activities since they were in elementary school,
yet of the more than 11,000 participants, only 972 (or 8%) went home
with a medal. Given the odds of obtaining a medal, you would think that
any athlete winning one would be ecstatic, but that is not always the
case. As you can see in the photograph of Olympic swimmers on the medal
are holding their flower bouquets. The gold and bronze medalists are
holding their bouquets straight up, but the silver medalist is close to
dropping his bouquet. His entire demeanor says dejection and
disappointment. Why would a silver medalist be disappointed with such an
exceptional achievement? To answer this question, we must zoom out even
farther from the individual to consider the social context.
Psychologists have found that the reactions of these swimmers are quite
typical (Medvec et al., 1995 McGraw et al., 2005). Silver medalists are
more likely to compare themselves to gold medalists, which leads to
disappointment,

Emotions are spontaneous, automatic responses to our ongoing perceptions
and thoughts.

Alan Williams/Axiom Photographic Agency/Getty Images

stand, the athletes are showing a range of emotions. Look for a moment
at the way the three athletes

231 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

while bronze medalists compare themselves to the fourth-place finishers
who do not get a medal, which leads to joy. In this chapter, we will
explore the mechanisms responsible for our emotions and motivations,
beginning with the underlying physical mechanisms and zooming out to
look at individual and, ultimately, social influences on these
behaviors.

emotion A combination of arousal,

emotion and motivation share the experience of subjective feelings and
engage similar processes and structures in the brain. however,
psychologists find it useful to distinguish between these two concepts.
an emotion is a brief combination of physical sensations, such as a
rapid heartbeat, and conscious, subjective feelings, like feeling
afraid, that prepares an individual for action. emotions are
spontaneous, automatic responses to our ongoing perceptions and
thoughts. We communicate our emotions to others through behaviors such
as facial expression, body language, gestures, and tone of voice.
Psychologists have debated whether emotions should be viewed as discrete
stand-alone states or points on a continuum. The discrete approach views
emotional states such as happy, sad, or angry as being like primary
colors of red, yellow, or blue, while the continuous view sees emotions
like a rainbow, with particular emotions being located closer to some
than others and even blending together (Russell, 1980; see ● Figure
7.1). like many of the either/or discussions that we encounter in
psychology, a compromise might be the best strategy. if we think instead
of emotions as being stars, we can imagine a constellation containing
clusters of positive emotions such as happiness and pride and another
constellation containing clusters of negative emotions such as anger and
sadness. Steve Cole/Photodisc/Getty Images

physical sensations, and subjective feelings that occurs spontaneously
in response to environmental stimuli.

How Are Emotion and Motivation Related?

If we are thirsty following a tough workout, we are motivated to seek a
drink of water. It is unlikely that a thirsty person would be motivated
to find a hamburger instead.

high arousal

ALARMED

EXCITED ASTONISHED

AROUSED

AFRAID

DELIGHTED ANGRY HAPPY

FigurE 7.1 Continuous versus discrete views of Emotion. Russell (1980)
suggested that emotions could be viewed along dimensions of
pleasant/unpleasant and high arousal to low arousal instead of as
isolated states. This approach to emotion suggests that some emotions
are closer together than others.

232

Chapter 7

MISERABLE DEPRESSED SAD GLOOMY BORED

GLAD PLEASED pleasure

displeasure

TENSE DISTRESS ANNOYED FRUSTRATED

SERENE CALM AT EASE RELAXED DROOPY TIRED SLEEPY low arousal

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

carballo/Shutterstock.com

emotions can be distinguished from moods. a mood is a more general state
than an emotion. you can be in a good mood while feeling a variety of
specific emotions, such as happiness, pride, or relief. a mood generally
lasts longer than a single emotion. For example, when we discuss
psychological disorders in Chapter 14, we will see that criteria for
depression specify that depressed mood should characterize at least half
a day every day for 2 weeks (american Psychiatric association \[aPa\],
2013). Because emotions are responses to the ongoing and ever-changing
flow of environmental information, it is unlikely that any single
emotion would last this long. Motivation is defined as a process that
arouses, maintains, and guides behavior toward a goal. For example, we
are motivated to seek a drink of water in response to thirst. The
process of motivation is accompanied by distinct emotional states.
Thirst is generally quite distressing, and taking a drink of water can
produce positive emotions like relief and happiness. emotion and
motivation share the ability to arouse an organism and stimulate
behavior, but motivation does so more directly and precisely than
emotions do. People who feel motivated by thirst are likely to do one
thing: seek something to drink. in contrast, experiencing the emotion of
sadness stimulates behavior, but that behavior can take many forms. Some
people respond to sadness by crying in a room by themselves, while
others seek the company of friends.

Many animals are motivated to explore their surroundings even when they
have no immediate needs because being familiar with your neighborhood
saves time when a need does arise, whether that is food, water, shelter
from a storm, or a gas station. Today, many people rely on technology to
help them navigate in unfamiliar locations.

motivation A process that arouses, maintains, and guides behavior toward
a goal.

James--Lange theory A theory of emo-

Why Are We Emotional? Whether we're experiencing happiness or sadness,
anger or disgust, an emotion combines a physical sensation, such as a
rapid heartbeat, and a conscious, subjective feeling, like joy or
sadness. Psychologists have asked questions about how the physical
sensations and subjective feelings might relate to one another.

Theories of Emotion Several major theories of emotion describe the
relationship between the physical responses and subjective feelings
experienced during an emotion. in other words, what are the connections
between those butterflies in your stomach and the knowledge that you're
feeling afraid? These theories of emotion are similar in many ways to
efforts to explain perception in Chapter 5. Some attempt to work from
the bottom up (from physical sensation to cognitive appraisal), while
others work from the top down (from appraisal to physical sensation).

The James--Lange Theory of Emotion Working independently, William James
and danish physiologist Carl lange developed similar descriptions of the
relationship between physical sensations and subjective feelings in
emotion (James, 1890; lange, 1885/1912). Consequently, the James--Lange
theory bears the names of both men (see ● Figure 7.2). James believed
that emotions could arise from several sources, including the recall
from memory of events that were emotional.

(a) 

tion that proposes that physical sensations lead to subjective feelings.

(b) 

Perceived stimulus

Specific physical responses

Subjective feeling

(c) 

Perceived stimulus

Physical responses

Subjective feeling

Perceived stimulus

General arousal

Assessment of surroundings

Subjective feeling

FigurE 7.2 Three Classic Theories of Emotion. Each of these theories of
emotion---(a) the James--Lange theory, (b) the Cannon--Bard theory, and
(c) the Schachter--Singer two-factor theory---attempts to explain the
relationships between the physical responses and subjective feelings
that occur when we experience an emotion. Why aRe We eMoTional?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

233

Roger Fletcher/Alamy Stock Photo

Consistent with the James--Lange theory of emotion, the physical
expression of an emotion might lead to subjective feelings. Traditional
Maori warriors prepared for battle by performing a haka. The New Zealand
All Blacks rugby team also uses the haka before a game. The James--Lange
theory would predict that these men would feel more aggressive after
performing the haka.

234

Chapter 7

AP Images/Paul Thomas, File

catharsis A theory of emotion that views emotion as a reservoir that
fills up and spills over; it predicts that expressing an emotion will
reduce arousal.

however, his greatest interest was in emotions "that have a distinct
bodily expression" (James, 1884/1969, p. 189). at the core of the
James--lange theory is the idea that this type of emotion is the result
of a sequence of events. once the individual perceives a stimulus, such
as a grizzly bear, that person experiences a physiological response.
This physiological response is subsequently interpreted by the
individual, giving rise to a conscious awareness of a subjective
feeling. This theory reversed the ordering of events in the prevailing
view of James's time that we get sweaty palms and butterflies because we
are scared. The James--lange theory assumes that physical states related
to each type of feeling (sadness and happiness, for instance) are
distinct from one another. The theory also assumes that we are capable
of correctly labeling these distinct physical states as separate
feelings. as James wrote, "We feel sorry because we cry, angry because
we strike, afraid because we tremble" (1890, p. 1006). James's statement
may seem counterintuitive to you. Shouldn't a good cry make us feel less
sad, not more? Many people also believe that holding anger inside
instead of expressing it somehow makes feelings of anger build up and
become worse. These common sense notions support the concept of
catharsis. in catharsis, emotions are viewed as filling an emotional
reservoir. When the reservoir fills up, the emotion will spill over in
an uncontrolled manner. For example, we talk about a "buildup of
hostility or anger" that somehow overflows, producing a more extreme
response than is warranted by the situation. Catharsis theorists
recommend that we avoid this buildup by regularly expressing our
emotions. in other words, it might be better to express some anger
regularly than to repress your anger and "explode." Catharsis and the
implications of the James--lange theory are contradictory. one suggests
that expressing an emotion reduces that feeling, while the other argues
that expressing an emotion leads to the subjective feeling. Which is
correct? if we are feeling sad, does having a good cry make us feel
better or more aware of our sadness? The catharsis approach is
challenged by the phenomenon of "psyching up." Traditional Maori
warriors of new Zealand prepared for battle by performing a haka,
featuring ritual grimaces, vocalizations, and battle moves. a
contemporary rugby team, the new Zealand all Blacks, uses the
traditional haka of the players' homeland to prepare for games. not only
do these performances contribute to the athletes' physical and emotional
preparation for participation in a rather violent sport, but they no
doubt intimidate the opposing team as well. Consistent with the
James--lange theory, psyching up represents an ability to influence our
subjective feelings by changing our physical sensations. By appearing to
be happy, we might begin to feel happier. Further support comes from an
experiment in which participants were directed to make specific
movements of the face (levenson et al., 1990). For example, they might
be instructed to raise their eyebrows and form their mouth into the
shape of an o. They were not informed that they were to make any
particular facial expression, nor were they allowed to view their face
in a mirror. They did, however, report "feeling" the emotion they had
portrayed; you might have experienced a feeling of surprise if you
followed the same directions.

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Astrid Stawiarz/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images

however, there are apparent limits to this type of feedback loop.
although an initial study suggested that assuming a "power pose" would
lead to higher testosterone and willingness to take risks (Carney et
al., 2010), these results failed to replicate (Ranehill et al., 2015).
it does appear, however, that assuming a power pose makes people report
feeling more powerful (Cuddy et al., 2018), a more modest conclusion
that is more in line with the predictions of the James--lange theory.
Whether feeling more powerful leads to acting in more powerful ways
remains an open question. We might not be as good at reading our
physical states as the James--lange theory requires us to be. one
experiment that challenged our ability to distinguish correctly among
the physical states of different emotions was carried out in Capilano
Canyon, located in British Columbia (dutton & aron, 1974). Capilano
Canyon may be crossed at one of two locations. The first crossing
involves a 450-foot-long bridge with low handrails, suspended about 230
feet above rocks and rapids. Farther upstream, the canyon may be crossed
on a solid wooden bridge that is less frightening. in the study, an
attractive female experimenter approached single men crossing one of the
two bridges. after completing a short interview, the experimenter gave
each man her telephone number, in case he had further questions about
the experiment. not only did the men on the frightening bridge include
more sexual content in their interviews, but they were about four times
as likely to telephone the female researcher later. although the study
is flawed by a failure to randomly assign men to bridges (bolder men
might be both more likely to choose the scary bridge and to telephone a
stranger), it stimulated further thinking about the James--lange theory.
The results of this study suggest that its participants were not very
good at discriminating the physical sensations associated with fear and
sexual arousal. We can assume that the attractiveness of the female
would be constant, suggesting that the setting in which she was seen
largely accounted for the differences in sexual content in interviews
and the likelihood of seeking further contact with her. one might
speculate that similar mistakes underlie the popularity of horror films
and amusement parks with impossibly high roller coasters as dating
activities. Scare your dates to death, and they may interpret feelings
of fear as love. These results suggest that in some circumstances, we
might not be as good at interpreting our physical sensations as
predicted by the James--lange theory.

Cannon--Bard theory A theory of emotion featuring the simultaneous and
independent occurrence of physical sensations and subjective feelings
during an emotional experience.

AP Images/Matt Dunham

The Cannon--Bard Theory of Emotion Walter Cannon disagreed with the
James--lange theory and proposed his own theory, which was later
modified by Philip Bard, resulting in the Cannon--Bard theory (Bard,
1934; Cannon, 1927, 1932; Bard, 1934). The James--lange theory proposes
a sequence of events, from physical sensations to subjective feeling,
but the Cannon--Bard theory proposes that both factors occur
simultaneously and independently. how are these theories different?
let's assume that you are innocently reading your textbook in your room
when a bear walks in the door. according to the James--lange theory, the
sight of the bear would immediately set off physical sensations that you
would then cognitively interpret as fear. according to the CannonBard
theory, the sight of the bear would immediately and simultaneously
trigger a subjective feeling of fear ("whoa, there's a bear in my room")
and physical sensations (probably the autonomic nervous system's
fight-or-flight response in this example). Unlike the James--lange
theory, the Cannon--Bard theory does not assume that the experience of a
subjective feeling depends on physical sensations.

Although the original reports claiming that power posing could change
hormone levels and risk-taking failed to replicate, it does appear that
assuming a power pose makes people feel more powerful. This outcome is
consistent with implications of the James--Lange theory of emotion---
physical sensations inform feelings.

John Stibbard, son of the owner of the Capilano Suspension Bridge, poses
on the bridge with the Olympic torch after completing his leg of the
torch run in preparation for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver,
Canada. Why aRe We eMoTional?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

235

The Cannon--Bard theory fares somewhat better in explaining the Capilano
Canyon results. Cannon and Bard would be comfortable with the notion
that fear and sexual arousal would produce similar physical sensations
and that study participants may simply have erred in their cognitive
assessment of the situation. instead of saying, "i'm really scared
because i'm on this bridge," the participants would say, "i think this
interviewer is very attractive." according to this model, a person's
cognitive assessments of an emotional situation work independently of
any physical sensations that might occur.

Schachter--Singer two-factor theory A theory of emotion in which general
arousal leads to assessment, which in turn leads to subjective feelings.

The Schachter--Singer Two-Factor Theory Stanley Schachter and Jerome
Singer (1962) proposed a two-factor theory of emotion that adds an
intermediate step between physical sensations and subjective feelings.
emotional arousal signals us to make a conscious, cognitive appraisal of
our circumstances, which then allows us to identify the emotion we're
experiencing. The same physical sensations may lead to several
interpretations, based on the way an individual assesses a situation.
Returning to our example of the bear entering your room, we can see how
the Schachter-- Singer two-factor theory would explain your reaction.
For Schachter and Singer, the sight of the bear would initiate a general
state of arousal. To identify the source of your arousal, you would
assess your situation, attribute your arousal to the presence of a bear
in your room, and identify your feelings as fear (with considerable
accuracy, we would assume). like the James-- lange theory yet unlike the
Cannon Bard theory, physical sensations remain important for

CONNECTING TO RESEARCH BOTOX, A DEACTIVATED FORM of the same toxin that
causes botulism poisoning from spoiled food, helps people with migraine
headaches and neurological disorders of movement, but it is also used
for cosmetic purposes. Botox reduces wrinkling by paralyzing the small
muscles used in facial expressions. The ability of Botox to prevent
facial movement provides an interesting test for the James--Lange theory
(Neal & Chartrand, 2011). Without feedback from our facial expressions,
can we identify our own emotions? Without the ability to imitate the
facial expressions of others, can we still identify how they're feeling?
The Question: How would increasing and decreasing the ability to move
facial muscles affect participants' judgments of the emotions of others?

METHODS In a first experiment, 31 female participants were recruited
from cosmetic surgery clinics. Of those participants, 16 had been
treated with Botox, and the other 15 had been

236

Chapter 7

treated with a dermal filler material, which does not restrict the
movement of facial muscles. Participants viewed photographs of eyes and
the surrounding area and were asked to choose which of four emotional
adjectives (happy, sad, and so on) best fit the expression they saw (see
● Figure 7.3). In a second experiment, a gel that forced participants to
put more effort into their facial movements was placed on the faces of
half of a group of 95 participants and on the arms of the other half as
a control. Participants completed the same test of identification of
emotion as before, along with two control tests: identifying emotion in
voices, which is unlikely to be affected by facial expression, and a set
of arithmetic questions.

ETHICS Because the participants were voluntarily seeking the Botox or
dermal filler treatments, their participation in the experiment did not
increase their risk. Their confidentiality must be strictly maintained,
and a debriefing about the findings should be available.

Featureflash Photo Agency/Shutterstock.com

Botox and the Ability to Read the Emotions of Others

Actress Rachel Weisz, star of The Mummy, The Bourne Legacy, and Black
Widow, is not a fan of Botox. She told an interviewer, "Acting is all
about expression; why would you want to iron out a frown?"

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

identifying emotion in the two-factor theory. Unlike the James--lange
theory, physical sensations are more general rather than specific to
individual emotional states, thus requiring an intermediate assessment
stage. Schachter and Singer (1962) directly tested this approach by
injecting volunteers with epinephrine (adrenalin), which causes a high
level of arousal. The participants had been told that they were getting
an injection of a vitamin and that their vision would be tested as soon
as another volunteer arrived to participate in the experiment. The
second volunteer was actually an actor employed by the researchers. in
half of the trials, the actor behaved in a happy, silly manner; in the
other half, he acted angry and stomped out of the room. The results
supported a role for cognitive appraisal of the environment in the
identification of emotion. Participants who were exposed to the happy
actor rated themselves as feeling happy, while participants exposed to
the angry actor felt more negative. importantly, when the participants
were accurately informed that they were getting a drug that produced
arousal instead of a vitamin, the behavior of the actor did not
influence their assessment of the situation. instead, they attributed
their feelings to the drug. a later attempt to replicate Schachter and
Singer's study did not succeed (Marshall & Zimbardo, 1979). as we
discussed in Chapter 2, a failure to replicate a study casts serious
doubts on the results. nonetheless, the two-factor theory has provided
considerable insight into how we identify our subjective feelings. The
two-factor theory explains the Capilano Canyon bridge study easily. once
aroused by being on the scary bridge, the male subjects

RESULTS

CONCLUSIONS

In Experiment 1, the Botox group performed significantly more poorly on
the identification of emotions task than the control group. In
Experiment 2, participants with the facial gel performed better than
those with the gel on their arms.

Both experiments support the idea that feedback from facial expressions
of emotion influences the ability to identify emotional states in other
people. The participants in the first experiment who used Botox had less
facial mobility than the participants who used the dermal filler. The
lack of facial mobility caused by Botox interfered with the
participants' ability to accurately assess another person's facial
expression of emotion. In the second experiment, making the muscles

80

Accuracy of emotional expression identification

75

work harder to imitate a facial expression by applying a restrictive gel
actually improved the participants' ability to identify the facial
expressions of others. These results are quite consistent with the
James--Lange theory's emphasis on feedback from the body as important to
the subjective identification of emotion, not just in ourselves but also
in other people. These results suggest that an important side effect of
Botox might be a reduction in social competence and empathy because of
an inability to read the emotions of other people correctly. ■

70 65

FigurE 7.3

60 55 50 45 40

Botox group

Dermal filler group (control)

Treatment group

Botox Reduces the Ability to Identify Facial Expressions in Others.
Following treatment for wrinkles with either Botox or an injected dermal
filler (Restylane), study participants were asked to identify the
emotional expression of faces presented on a computer screen. The dermal
filler group was significantly better than the Botox group at correctly
identifying the emotions. This result suggests that by reducing the
ability to imitate another person's facial expressions, Botox limits a
person's perception of the emotions of other people. Source: Adapted
from D. T. Neal & T. L. Chartrand (2011). "Embodied Emotion Perception:
Amplifying and Dampening Facial Feedback Modulates Emotion Perception
Accuracy," Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2(6), 673--678,
doi:10.1177/1948550611406138

Why aRe We eMoTional?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

237

assessed their circumstances and attributed their feelings to sexual
attraction. additional support is provided by research that demonstrates
that arousal produced by one emotion can transfer to and intensify a
second emotion. People who have just exercised (producing physiological
arousal) are more likely to become angry or sexually aroused when
exposed to relevant stimuli (Reisenzein, 1983).

Contemporary Approaches to Emotion each of these classic theories offers

which a range of physical sensations from precise to general requires
varying degrees of cognitive processing prior to subjective feelings.

This ambiguous image (you should find yourself alternating between
seeing a young woman and seeing an old woman) can serve as a model for
how the mind processes a range of emotional situations, from simple to
complex. According to the somatovisceral afference model of emotion
(SAME), if we look at a simple image, we need little cognitive
assessment to respond appropriately. As images become more complex, we
require increasing amounts of cognitive assessment before we respond.
Processing the simple emotion of fear is similar to processing an
unambiguous image. Processing more complex, ambiguous emotions, like
pride, requires more cognitive assessment, just like viewing this
ambiguous image does.

238

Chapter 7

Ian Paterson/Alamy Stock Photo

somatovisceral afference model of emotion (SAME) A model of emotion in

important insights into our experience of emotion, yet none definitively
resolves our original question regarding the relationship between
physical sensations and subjective feelings. The same patterns of
physical activity occur during a variety of emotions, and a single
emotion may be associated with a variety of physical states. That
mistakes can and do happen is certain. nonetheless, we seem to manage
quite well at interpreting our emotions in most situations. a more
contemporary model reconciles the debate regarding the impact of
physical sensations on subjective feelings (Cacioppo et al., 1992). The
somatovisceral afference model of emotion (SAME) begins with a
recognition that physical responses to a stimulus can range from quite
specific to quite general. For example, the physical sensations
associated with disgust can be more precise than the physical sensations
associated with pride. The initial degree of specificity of the physical
response leads to different cognitive processing. a highly specific
physical response leads to unambiguous recognition of a subjective
feeling. This is the situation that appeared most interesting to James.
a bear walks in, you react physically, and you know you're scared. at
the other extreme, instead of specific physical responses, a situation
might produce general arousal, which requires significant cognitive
processing and evaluation. For example, a valedictorian giving a
graduation speech might not understand her arousal until she sees her
parents and other members of the audience clapping and realizes the
emotion she is feeling is pride. This scenario is closest to that
proposed by Schachter and Singer (1962). SaMe provides middle ground
between the James--lange and the Schachter and Singer theories. if a
physical response is only partially specific, an ambiguous message is
sent forward that is clarified by the presence of additional cues or
information. The model correctly predicts that emotional responses range
from immediate to delayed based on the amount of cognitive processing
that is required. emotions that are associated with a precise set of
physical responses, such as fear, occur quickly, but emotions that are
associated with more general arousal, such as pride, occur relatively
slowly.

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com

Asier Romero/Shutterstock.com

According to appraisal theory, a person who values wealth and a person
who values family might experience different emotions in response to the
same event.

affective neuroscience, or the neuroscience of emotion, supports the
sequential models featured in the James--lange, two-factor, and SaMe
theories. neuroscientists suggest that the physical sensations of
emotion represent an evolved ability to respond to recurring
environmental stimuli, such as recoiling at the sight of a snake or
spider (adolphs, 2016). What we know as feelings then emerge from the
experience of our physical states. Finally, the experience of an emotion
builds our concept of the emotion, or what it "feels like" to be happy,
sad, or fearful (see Chapter 10), which we can then use to identify
emotional states in others. Contemporary cognitive approaches to emotion
place little emphasis on the physical correlates that are featured so
prominently in the classic and neuroscience theories. instead, these
approaches emphasize the role of appraisals, or the detection and
assessment of stimuli with relevance for well-being, in eliciting
emotion (Moors et al., 2013). For example, ellsworth (1994, p. 223)
expresses some frustration with the approach taken by James when she
says, "Bears do not automatically cause us to run or tremble." instead,
the interpretation of the stimulus, the bear in this case, forms the
critical starting point for the emotional cascade. appraisal theory
further assumes that interpretation is a continuous process rather than
a single decision about a stimulus (Moors et al., 2013). For example,
attention may be aroused by some change in the environment. a
recognizable emotion has not yet occurred, and if the appraisal of the
stimulus determines it to be of no significance, arousal returns to
baseline. however, if the stimulus is found to have positive or negative
value to the individual making the appraisal (a source of food or a
predator, for instance), feelings and physiological responses change yet
again. an emphasis on appraisal as a starting point for emotion may help
us account for the vast range of emotional reactions that individuals
might have to the same event (Moors et al., 2013). one person may view
material wealth as essential to happiness, whereas another may view
successful relationships with others as a primary goal. These different
cognitive patterns should produce different emotional responses to the
same event. a letter to an advice columnist described a situation in
which a man's wife had wrecked his expensive antique automobile in a
serious accident (dear abby, January 14, 2006). our first person, who
values money, is likely to respond with dismay at the loss of the
expensive car. our second person, who values relationships, is likely to
be happy that his beloved wife survived the accident in one piece.

appraisal The detection and assessment of stimuli that are relevant to
personal well-being.

The Evolution of Emotion emotional behavior is not unique to humans.
Charles darwin (1872) made a careful study of the facial expressions
produced by humans and other primates. he concluded that all primates
form facial expressions using the same muscles, which in turn led him to
state that emotional facial expression must have evolved. although we
are frequently cautioned about anthropomorphism, or the attributing of
human qualities to other animals, it is easy Why aRe We eMoTional?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

239

Sergey Lavrentyev/123RF

Album/Alamy Stock Photo

Darwin discovered that humans and other primates use the same facial
muscles to produce emotional expressions, leading him to hypothesize
that emotions evolved. Can you figure out what emotion is being
expressed by both the chimpanzee and the man? Try imitating the
expression and think about how you feel. Still no luck? The emotion
being expressed is disappointment.

to identify with the anger of a mother bear defending her cubs or the
fear of a gazelle trying to outrun a cheetah. the relationships among
task complexity, To say a behavior evolves implies that it makes
survival more likely. how might the experience arousal, and performance.
of emotion benefit an animal? according to adolphs (2018), emotions
allow animals to respond to the environment with more flexibility than
reflexes provide (see Chapter 8) yet without requiring the expenditure
of resources required by conscious, planned beFigurE 7.4 havior. in
particular, emotions have the ability to produce arousal, which in turn
stimulates potentially life-saving actions. The word The Effects of
Arousal on Performance. The Yerkes--Dodson law emotion is derived from
the latin word meaning "to move." predicts that the complexity of a task
interacts with an organism's according to the classic Yerkes--Dodson
law, the ideal arousal level to determine the quality of performance.
For simple amount of arousal interacts with the complexity of a task
(yerkes tasks, such as running to escape a predator, greater arousal
leads to a & dodson, 1908). For simple tasks, such as outrunning a
predator, relatively steady improvement in performance. For difficult
tasks, such greater arousal leads to greater performance. For more
complex as completing an exam, moderate amounts of arousal lead to the
best tasks, such as taking a difficult exam, arousal levels that are too
performance, and high arousal can lead to weaker performance. Adapted
high can begin to interfere with performance (see ● Figure 7.4). from R.
M. Yerkes & J. D. Dodson (1908). "The Relation of Strength We have all
had the experience of "choking." or performing badly of Stimulus to
Rapidity of Habit-Formation," Journal of Comparative because of too much
arousal. in addition to providing general Neurology and Psychology,
18(5), 459--482. doi: 10.1002/cne.920180503 arousal, each emotion is
associated with a positive or negative quality or valence, which "moves"
us in the correct direction of either approach or avoidance (Russell &
Mehrabian, 1978). The negative emotion of disgust tells us to avoid
rotting food, and positive feelings of happiness cement our social
bonds. emotions might also enhance survival by providing an Simple task
important means of communication. nonverbal forms of comHigh munication
such as facial expression, calls, and body language were used to provide
information to others long before humans began using spoken words (see ●
Figure 7.5). if one person assumes a body posture indicating fear, the
emotion ripples through a crowd to its edges in a short amount of time
(de gelder et al., 2004). human infants communicate a range of needs to
their parents before developing the ability to speak. Without hearing
the words, you have no difficulty interpreting the facial expressions,
body language, and gestures of a driver behind you who doesn't approve
of your lane-change technique. Difficult task Low an additional and
welcome benefit of having emotions is Low High our ability to enjoy the
arts. evidence for a coordinated develArousal opment of language and
emotional communication remains in

Performance

Tetra Images/Alamy Stock Photo; Design Pics Inc/Alamy Stock Photo;
iStock.com/mocker_bat

Yerkes-Dodson law A description of

240

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FigurE 7.5 Body Language. One of the advantages of emotions is the
ability to communicate nonverbally. Even with these simple stick
figures, it is easy to interpret how each character feels.

Firma V/Shutterstock.com

our contemporary brain, which uses the same pathways for language and
for the perception and appreciation of music (Schön et al., 2010).
Without the capacity to feel, we would find it difficult to appreciate a
Picasso or the moving strains of "yesterday" by the Beatles. We wouldn't
enjoy a good cry at the end of Pride and Prejudice or be glued to the
edge of our seats while watching Jaws. The universal nature of human
responses to many poems, pieces of music, and other artistic
accomplishments points to shared underlying mechanisms, shaped through
our evolutionary past. Similar neural activity is observed across
performers and audiences during a musical performance (hou et al.,
2020). Shared enjoyment of the arts contributes greatly to social
bonding in human societies. When we dance together, sing together, or
watch plays and other visual displays of art, shared emotional responses
contribute to feelings of community and closeness. We can identify
further advantages of emotion by studying people whose emotional lives
have been affected by brain damage. in Chapter 4, we reviewed the case
of Phineas gage, whose frontal lobe damage changed him from a
responsible, well-liked member of the community to an impulsive,
indecisive, and emotionally volatile individual who had difficulty
keeping a job. antonio damasio (1994) described the case of a young man
named eliot, who had frontal lobe surgery to remove a tumor. like gage,
eliot maintained his intelligence and other skills after his surgery but
was unable to establish priorities. damasio hypothesized that emotions
provide a bridge to past experiences that can be used to set priorities
such as approach and avoidance. in the absence of normal feedback from
the body that can be used to identify emotional states ("my heart is
beating fast, so i must be scared"), eliot can no longer use these past
experiences to guide his current decisions.

Long before infants learn to speak, they can communicate with adults by
using facial expressions.

The Biology of Emotion in Chapter 4, we identified several nervous
system structures that participate in our emotional lives. emotional
responses combine bottom-up processing, in which lower parts of the
nervous system send "alerts" to the cerebral cortex, with top-down
processing, in which cortical executive functions such as attention and
appraisal modify the activity of the lower structures.

The Autonomic Nervous System The autonomic nervous system, which

controls many activities of our glands and organs, participates in the
general arousal associated with emotional states (norman et al., 2014).
in particular, activity of the

The mind's priority for processing negative events has been described in
earlier chapters. For example, in Chapters 1 and 5, we discussed how we
are far more sensitive to bitter tastes because these are often
associated with poisons than we are to sweet tastes, which are rarely
life threatening. Why aRe We eMoTional?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

241

sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system is correlated with
our fight-or-flight response to perceived danger. The autonomic nervous
system is under the immediate control of the hypothalamus, a structure
that also plays an important role in most motivated behavior.
Researchers have asked whether specific patterns of autonomic activity
occur during particular emotional states. in a large meta-analysis,
autonomic measures did not reliably predict particular emotional states,
such as happiness or sadness (Cacioppo et al., 2000). however, the
analysis indicated that the autonomic responses associated with negative
emotions are stronger than those associated with positive emotions.
Fear, with its rapid heartbeat and sweaty palms, provokes a more
dramatic set of physical reactions than feelings of happiness.

The Hypothalamus in its direct management role over the autonomic
nervous system, the hypothalamus participates in any of the emotional
states that also engage that system. is that the only role for the
hypothalamus in emotion? it is clear that electrical stimulation of the
hypothalamus in animals can elicit many behaviors, including sexual
behaviors, eating, drinking, and aggression, but it is unclear whether
these artificially induced behaviors are accompanied by the "feeling"
part of an emotion. Renewed interest in the hypothalamus and its role in
emotion has resulted from experiments using deep brain stimulation,
delivered through surgically implanted electrodes, to relieve various
conditions from obesity to depression. during stimulation of the
hypothalamus, one patient experienced both the physical and subjective
feelings normally associated with a panic attack (see Chapter 14; Wilent
et al., 2010). The physical responses, such as shortness of breath and
rapid heartbeat, were not surprising given our knowledge of hypothalamic
functions, but the patient's subjective feelings of overwhelming anxiety
were unexpected. Subsequently, researchers have linked activity of the
hypothalamus specifically to fear of predation (Silva et al., 2013;
Silva et al., 2016).

The Amygdala The amygdala identifies emotional stimuli, both positive
and negative, and

initiates responses to the perception of these stimuli. The amygdala's
role in the identification and classification of emotional stimuli is
carried out through its participation in a circuit that includes the
frontal lobes of the cortex, the cingulate cortex, and the insula. The
amygdala not only detects emotional stimuli, but it also forms a bridge
between these stimuli and appropriate responses. The amygdala initiates
responses through its tight connections with the hypothalamus, which in
turn affects autonomic, hormonal, and behavioral processes. For example,
when the amygdala perceives danger from environmental stimuli, it
initiates a hormonal cascade involving the pituitary gland and the
adrenal glands that produces an increased release of neurochemicals in
the brain, leading to an increase in overall arousal. We will discuss
this process in greater detail in Chapter 16. one of the first clues to
the importance of the amygdala to emotion resulted from an experiment
conducted in 1939 in which researchers removed both temporal lobes,
which include the amygdalae, from rhesus monkeys (Klüver & Bucy, 1939).
after recovery, the normally hard-to-handle adult rhesus monkeys became
tamer, and their emotions were less intense. They allowed themselves to
be picked up and stroked, and they appeared to be relatively oblivious
to stimuli that normally elicit intense fear, such as snakes. They made
fewer fear-related grimaces and vocalizations. We now understand that
whenever the amygdala is damaged, animals respond inappropriately to
danger. Rats with damaged amygdalae fail to learn to fear a tone or
other stimulus that reliably predicts the onset of electric shock
(ledoux et al., 1990). Rhesus monkeys with lesioned amygdalae show less
fear of rubber snakes and less restraint around unfamiliar monkeys, a
potentially dangerous way of behaving in a species that enforces strict
social hierarchies (emery et al., 2001; Mason et al., 2006). insight
into the role of the amygdala in humans has been provided by case
studies in which disease has damaged this structure. Patient S.M.
experienced damage to both amygdalae because of a rare disease (adolphs
et al., 1994). although Patient S.M. can recognize the emotions of
happiness, sadness, and disgust portrayed in photographs, she has
selective difficulty identifying fear correctly. as shown in ● Figure
7.6, Patient S.M. has particular difficulty using information from the
eye region of the face in judging emotion, although when she was
instructed to pay attention to eyes, her performance improved (adolphs
et

242

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cameron Whitman/Shutterstock.com

(a) 
(b) 

Proportion of eye fixations

0.6

FigurE 7.6

0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1

SM Controls

r Fe a

tra l eu N

ne

ss

st Sa d

is

gu

r D

ge An

e ris rp

Su

H

(c) 

ap

pi

ne

ss

0

Amygdala Damage and the Perception of Emotion. People with amygdala
damage, like Patient S.M., do not always use information about people's
eyes to judge their emotions. Eye tracking shows (a) how a healthy
control participant scans an emotional image and (b) how a person with
amygdala damage might scan the same face. (c) For all emotions studied,
Patient S.M. showed fewer eye fixations than normal controls (NC).
Source: R. Adolphs et al. (2005). "A Mechanism for Impaired Fear
Recognition after Amygdala Damage," Nature, 433, 68--72. doi:10.1038/
nature03086

al., 2005). individuals with autism spectrum disorder, discussed in
Chapter 14, share Patient S.M.'s reluctance to make eye contact and
difficulty identifying other people's emotions, especially fear. one of
the most consistent biological correlates of autism spectrum disorder is
abnormal development of the amygdala (amaral et al., 2008). These
findings suggest that the amygdala Frontal participates in both the
active exploration of the social lobe environment and the interpretation
of the results of that exploration (adolphs, 2007).

insula Regions of cortex located at the junction of the frontal and
temporal lobes. Central sulcus

The Insula The insula, found in the fold between

Gyri of insula Temporal lobe (pulled down)

The Cingulate Cortex The cingulate cortex, shown in ● Figure 7.8, serves
as a major gateway between the amygdala and other subcortical structures
and the frontal areas of the cortex. in particular, the cingulate cortex
participates in processing the emotional quality of physical pain.

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

the junction of the temporal lobes with the frontal and parietal lobes,
plays an important role in our subjective experiences, or feelings
(damasio, 2003; Wager & Barrett, 2017; see ● Figure 7.7). activity
toward the back of the insula is associated with many internal
sensations, including pain and itch, that can be localized as
originating from particular parts of the body. This area is also
associated with many of the physical sensations we associate with
emotional feelings, including changes in blood pressure, breathlessness,
and feelings of butterflies in the stomach. in contrast, activity in the
forward areas of the insula is associated with more global feelings,
including a particularly strong reaction to disgust (gasquoine, 2014;
Papagno et al., 2016).

FigurE 7.7 The Insula. Why aRe We eMoTional?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

243

Cingulate cortex

Frontal lobe

FigurE 7.8 The Cingulate Cortex and Basal Ganglia. The cingulate cortex
forms circuits with the frontal cortex, the amygdala, and other
subcortical structures involved with emotional processing. The basal
ganglia are part of the brain's voluntary movement systems and help
coordinate movement in response to assessments of emotion. The basal
ganglia show particularly strong activation that correlates with the
emotion of disgust.

We often dislike our own photographs even when other people seem to
think they look fine. Part of the problem is that we rarely see
ourselves the way others do---we usually see ourselves in a mirror,
which reverses our emotional expressions. Because our facial expressions
are not symmetrical, due to the stronger role of the right hemisphere in
emotion, that crooked smile looks wrong when we see it on the opposite
side of our face.

Hypothalamus Amygdala

Hippocampus

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Basal ganglia

The anterior cingulate cortex, along with the dorsomedial prefrontal
cortex, contributes to the more conscious appraisal of threat compared
to the less conscious signals arising from the amygdala (Kalisch &
gerlicher, 2014). as we will see in Chapter 14, some individuals are
unusually anxious. Worrying and catastrophizing (focusing on the worst
possible outcomes) by anxious people involves exaggerated appraisals of
threat. Unusually high levels of activation in the anterior cingulate
cortex have been observed during episodes of catastrophizing and worry.

The Basal Ganglia as we discussed in Chapter 4, the basal ganglia are
large, subcortical structures that participate in the generation of
voluntary movement. These structures coordinate movements in response to
emotional stimuli. Strokes that damage the basal ganglia result in an
overall reduction in the experience of emotional intensity (Paradiso et
al., 2013). along with the insula, the basal ganglia participate in the
experience of disgust (Phan et al., 2002; holtmann et al., 2020). This
finding is consistent with clinical observations of people with diseases
that damage the basal ganglia, such as huntington's disease. These
people have particular difficulty recognizing facial expressions of
disgust, although their recognition of other major emotional facial
expressions appears intact (hennenlotter et al., 2004). The nucleus
accumbens, which is part of the basal ganglia, is particularly
associated with pleasure and reward, and is implicated in addiction.
This structure performs key functions related to positive emotional
responses (Salgado & Kaplitt, 2015). The Cerebral Cortex and Emotion as
we observed in Chapter 4, damage to the

frontal lobes produces changes in emotional behavior. People with
frontal lobe damage often experience a reduction in fear and anxiety,
which may contribute to their engagement in impulsive, risky behaviors.
They seem unable to experience "gut feelings" that serve as warnings in
threatening situations (damasio, 1994). Without such warnings, these
individuals forge ahead impulsively where others would pause. We do not
appear to have "happy centers" or "sad centers" in the cerebral cortex.
instead, the experience of different emotions produces different
patterns of cortical activation. When people are asked to recall a
specific event from their past associated with the emotions of

244

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

anger, sadness, fear, and happiness, brain imaging scans identify
distinct patterns of activity for each emotion (damasio et al., 2000;
Saarimäki et al., 2015). however, the same brain regions usually
participate in more than one of these states.

Expressing Emotion

Courtesy Dr. Paul Ekman

humans express emotion with their entire bodies. People who are feeling
threatened or scared generally cross their arms and hunch forward.
angry, aggressive people typically lean forward, rise onto the balls of
their feet, and raise their shoulders to appear larger and more
intimidating. however, humans rely most heavily on the face for
expressing emotion. The smiles, frowns, and other facial expressions we
make are influenced by the way the brain controls the tiny muscles of
our faces. These muscles receive input from the motor areas of the
cerebral cortex, which conHaving a tumor in the right primary motor
cortex prevents patients from smiling trol voluntary movement, as well
as from subcortical on the left side of the face when asked to do so, as
shown on the left. In contrast, areas, including the basal ganglia. The
cortical input these patients can smile spontaneously and naturally in
response to a genuine, allows us to voluntarily "smile" for the camera.
The subinvoluntary emotion, as shown on the right. These observations
support the cortical input is responsible for more spontaneous
exhypothesis that voluntary and spontaneous emotional expressions are
managed pressions of emotion, such as laughing at a funny joke. by
different areas of the brain. it is possible to lose one type of input
without affecting the other. The young woman shown in the drawing on
this page has a tumor that affects the right motor cortex. When asked to
smile voluntarily, the smile appears quite crooked because of the
importance of the cortex in voluntary expression. When the patient
smiles spontaneously to a joke, the smile appears more natural because
the subcortical areas can still react normally. People with Parkinson's
disease, which damages the subcortical emotional pathways, show the
opposite pattern. They may be unable to smile spontaneously in response
to a joke, but they can smile voluntarily when asked to do so. do we
learn how to express emotions, or are these behaviors built in? darwin
(1872) believed that human emotional expression had been shaped through
evolution. if he is correct, we would expect humans in all parts of the
world to share common means of expression. Some major emotional
expressions appear to be universal across cultures (Keltner & ekman,
2000), although not all researchers agree (gendron et al., 2014). The
"primary colors" of emotional expression, including anger, sadness,
happiness, fear, disgust, surprise, contempt, and embarrassment, are
identified correctly by most people, regardless of the culture in which
they live. Further support for a view of emotional expression as being
innate comes from the predictable developmental course shown by young
children. infants' social smiles (as opposed to smiles resulting from
gas, etc.) emerge near the same age (around 3 months), regardless of
whether an infant can see faces or is born blind (Freedman, 1964).
Monozygotic (identical) twins are more similar than dizygotic
(fraternal) twins in the ages at which they first show fear of
strangers. as shown in ● Figure 7.9, children raised in diverse cultures
(african bush, urban guatemala, rural guatemala, and israeli kibbutz)
showed similar age-related distress at being separated from These photos
represent the possibly universal expressions of happiness, their mothers
(Kagan et al., 1978). anger, surprise, disgust, sadness, and fear. Why
aRe We eMoTional?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

245

FIGURE 7.9 Infants' Separation Protests Occur at the Same Point in
Development. Children in diverse cultures show the strongest emotional
reactions to separation from their mothers around the same stage in
development, suggesting that this emotional behavior has a biological
origin.

Percentage of children who cried following maternal departure

100

Source: J. Kagan et al. (1978). Infancy: Its place in human development.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

80 African Bushmen 60 Antigua, Guatemala

40

20

0

Guatemalan Indian 5

10

Israeli kibbutz

15 20 25 Age of child (months)

30

35

developmental timelines for emotional behavior are also characteristic
of nonhuman primate species. Rhesus monkeys raised in isolation
performed typical fear responses when shown pictures of other monkeys
engaging in threatening behaviors. The isolated monkeys demonstrated
these fear responses at the same stage in development as monkeys raised
in normal social conditions (Sackett, 1966). other researchers point to
the universality of words for different emotional states as evidence of
emotion's common biological source. Words for emotions have been found
to be quite similar in a sample of 60 of the world's languages (hupka et
al., 1999). The exceptions, however, are also intriguing. The Japanese
term ijirashi refers to a feeling that occurs when we see another person
overcoming an obstacle. no equivalent term exists in english. despite
the possibility of a shared biological basis for emotion, we can observe
significant individual differences in emotional expressiveness. When
young children are exposed to strong, novel stimuli, such as the odor of
alcohol on a swab, some react strongly to the stimuli, while others
appear to ignore them. Still others show a moderate response to the
stimuli (Kagan, 1997). as we will see in Chapters 11 and 12, children
who are highly responsive often develop into cautious, anxious adults.
in contrast, children who are relatively oblivious to stimulation may
develop into bold, fearless risk takers. if their insensitivity extends
to social signals produced by others, this lack of sensitivity to
stimuli may lead to antisocial behavior. Psychopaths incarcerated for
murder show significantly reduced reactions to slides of pleasant,
neutral, and unpleasant situations when compared to typical control
participants (herpertz et al., 2001). individuals also differ in their
ability to regulate emotions (gross, 1998). Two major strategies are
used in emotion regulation: suppression, or inhibiting expression, and
cognitive reappraisal, or modifying the meaningfulness of an event
(english & John, 2013). Reappraisal as a strategy

246

Chapter 7

Sighted athlete Cameron Spencer/Getty Images Sport/Getty Images

Source: D. Matsumoto & B. Willingham (2009). "Spontaneous Facial
Expressions of Emotion of Congenitally and Noncongenitally Blind
Individuals," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(1),
1--10. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014037

Blind athlete

dpa picture alliance archive/Alamy Stock Photo

David Matsumoto carefully compared thousands of photographs from the
2004 Olympic and Paralympic Games and found that all competitors,
sighted or blind, displayed the same expressions in response to winning
or losing. These results suggest that, as Darwin suggested, some
emotional expressions are innate to the human species.

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

China Hong Kong Italy Japan Switzerland United States 0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Average suppression of emotion score

FigurE 7.10 Cultures Vary in Suppression of Emotional Expression.
Although cultures worldwide are fairly similar in their emotional
expressiveness, variations occur. Switzerland, with a suppression score
of 3.05, shows emotion most freely of all these countries, and Hong
Kong, with a suppression score of 4.72, shows the least emotion. Source:
Adapted from D. Matsumoto et al. (2008). "Culture, Emotion Regulation,
and Adjustment," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(6),
925--937. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.94.6.925

Courtesy Staff Sergeant. J. L. Wright, Jr./U.S. Marine Corps

for regulating emotion involves thinking differently about the stimulus
that elicits an emotional response rather than attempting to hold in a
response. For example, we might be angry when another driver behaves
aggressively, perhaps putting us in danger. To manage our anger through
suppression, we might simply use willpower to avoid acting in angry ways
ourselves. To manage our anger using reappraisal, we focus instead on
the fact that the other driver might be having a tough day and that
nobody was actually hurt. People who use the reappraisal strategy more
than the suppression strategy experience less depression and higher life
satisfaction (gross, 2013). The ability to suppress emotional expression
can be learned. For example, medical personnel undergo training that
affects their expression of disgust. Most patients would not appreciate
a physician or nurse who said "oh, gross" during an examination.
Military personnel learn to maintain their composure when a superior is
yelling at them face to face, a skill that may be important when a
soldier is captured by enemy forces. Many cultures have display rules,
or norms that specify when, where, and how a person should suppress
emotion (see ● Figure 7.10). The reactions of Japanese and american
university students were recorded as they watched emotional movies
either alone or with a

display rule A cultural norm that specifies when, where, and how a
person should express an emotion.

Despite the strong evolutionary and biological heritage we have for
spontaneous emotional expression, we can learn to control our emotional
expressions to fit a situation. This Marine recruit is expected to
remain calm while his drill instructor applies a "correction." This
skill is believed to help military personnel maintain composure in
highly emotional situations. Why aRe We eMoTional?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

247

Psychologist Jerome Kagan described individual differences in
emotionality based on children's responsiveness to the environment,
ranging from the cautious child to the bold.

group of students they did not know (ekman et al., 1972). The Japanese
students showed more emotion when alone than when in the group of
strangers. in contrast, the american students were about as emotional in
either case. if anything, americans tend to show more emotion when in a
group than when alone. americans made more intense expressions of
disgust in response to an odor when in a group than when they were alone
(Jancke & Kaufmann, 1994).

Suzanne Tucker/Shutterstock.com

Liudmila P. Sundikova/Shutterstock.com

Interpreting Emotion human adults are quite accurate in their ability to
read emotions. When research participants watched only 10 seconds of a
videotaped interaction between a teacher and an off-camera student, they
were able to judge whether the teacher liked the student with
considerable accuracy (Babad et al., 1991). We might think we do a good
job of hiding our feelings, but the subtleties of emotional expression
often give us away. at the same time, our ability to distinguish between
genuine and fake expressions, while good, is far from perfect (ekman et
al., 1990; Frank & ekman, 1993). individual differences in the ability
to perceive the emotions of ourselves and others do occur. Twin studies
demonstrate that individual differences in the ability to read emotional
expression are heavily influenced by genetics (anokhin et al., 2010).
These differences form one of the key aspects of emotional intelligence
(Salovey & Mayer, 1990). emotional intelligence refers to our abilities
to perceive, use, understand, and manage emotions. individual
differences in emotional intelligence predict the success of both work
and personal relationships. in addition to providing display rules,
cultures influence interpretations of emotional expressions. Japanese
and american study participants were asked to correctly identify
emotional

EXPERIENCING PSYCHOLOGY Emotional Regulation THIS SHORT QUESTIONNAIRE
(Gross & John, 2003) will assess how much you use suppression and
reappraisal strategies to regulate emotion. For each item, select a
number on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
\_\_\_\_ 1. I control my emotions by changing the way I think about the
situation I'm in. \_\_\_\_ 2. When I want to feel less negative emotion,
I change the way I'm thinking about the situation. \_\_\_\_ 3. When I
want to feel more positive emotion, I change the way I'm thinking about
the situation. \_\_\_\_ 4. When I want to feel more positive emotion
(such as joy or amuse-

248

Chapter 7

ment), I change what I'm thinking about. \_\_\_\_ 5. When I want to feel
less negative emotion (such as sadness or anger), I change what I'm
thinking about. \_\_\_\_ 6. When I'm faced with a stressful situation, I
make myself think about it in a way that helps me stay calm. \_\_\_\_ 7.
I control my emotions by not expressing them. \_\_\_\_ 8. When I am
feeling negative emotions, I make sure not to express them. \_\_\_\_ 9.
I keep my emotions to myself. \_\_\_\_ 10. When I am feeling positive
emotions, I am careful not to express them.

Items 1 through 6 indicate your use of reappraisal, and items 7 through
10 indicate your use of suppression. It might surprise you to learn that
these scales are independent. In other words, a person who uses the
suppression strategy quite a bit is no more or less likely to use
reappraisal strategies than a person who rarely uses suppression (Gross
& John, 2003). Gross and John (2003) reported that men are more likely
than women and non-European-Americans are more likely than
European-Americans to use suppression. You might see evidence for these
general findings (or not!) among your classmates. Keep in mind that
college students are not a representative sample of the adult public. ■

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Diverse Voices in Psychology Emotional Expressivity, Smiling, and a
History of Immigration THIS CHAPTER ASKS whether emotional expression is
universal for the human species or more influenced by culture and
learning. Some aspects of emotional expression do seem to be
species-wide, while others are clearly influenced by environmental
factors. What types of processes might account for cultural differences
in emotional suppression? We noted that Western cultures are more
expressive than some Asian cultures, perhaps due to the contrast between
individualism and collectivism. However, another factor that might
explain variations in display rules is a culture's

history of immigration. In countries such as the United States, which
has a long history of people immigrating from many different places,
emotional expressivity appears to be higher than in countries with less
immigration from fewer sources (Rychlowska et al., 2015). In a
relatively unpredictable social situation lacking shared language and
norms, somewhat exaggerated emotional expression might help avoid
misunderstandings. Rychlowska et al. (2015) also found that cultural
heterogeneity was predictive of how people interpreted smiling

(see ● Figure 7.11). Smiling can be interpreted as a means of social
bonding or friendliness, or as a sign of dominance. People from cultures
with high levels of historical immigration from many places were more
likely to endorse the bonding interpretation of smiling, while people
from relatively homogeneous cultures rated dominance as the most likely
reason to smile. These results emphasize the importance of considering
not just present cultural environments, but also historical influences
on culture, when attempting to explain cultural differences in behavior.
■

100

\% of Respondents

80 60 40 20

Smiles as rewards or bonding Smiles as dominance

S U

Z N

Is ra e Ca l na da

m

an y

a di In

er G

si a Fr an ce

ne do

In

Ja p

an

0

FIGURE 7.11 Emotional Expressivity and a History of Immigration.
Psychologists have usually interpreted cultural differences in emotional
suppression as being the result of a culture's degree of individualism
or collectivism. This explanation might be too simple. The amount of
immigration experienced by a culture is related to the proportion of the
population that interprets smiling as an attempt to reward or bond as
opposed to an attempt to dominate. Adapted from M. Rychlowska et
al. (2015). "Heterogeneity of Long History-Migration Explains Cultural
Differences in Reports of Emotional Expressivity and the Functions of
Smiles," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(19),
E2429--E2436. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1413661112

expressions with varying levels of intensity (matsumoto, 2002).
individuals from both cultures identified the emotion being expressed
with considerable accuracy, even at low levels of intensity. however,
intensity was interpreted quite differently by the Japanese and the
Americans. When emotional expression occurred at low intensities,
Japanese participants assumed that people were feeling more than they
were willing to express. in contrast, when emotional expression was
highly intense, the American participants assumed that people were
exaggerating their feelings. Why Are We emotionAl?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

249

Photo Researchers/Science Source

Although fake and genuine smiles look similar, we usually do a good job
of distinguishing between them. Which of these smiles do you think is
real? Which is fake?

a person's ability to read others' emotional expressions can be reduced
by certain psychological disorders (see Chapter 14). individuals with
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder have normal abilities to process
facial features but perform worse than typical controls on tasks
requiring them to distinguish among facial expressions (Kohler et al.,
2009). People diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and those with
antisocial personality disorder have specific difficulties recognizing
expressions of fear (Marsh & Blair, 2008).

PSYCHOLOGY AS A HUB SCIENCE Lie Detection and the Law EVEN THOUGH
EMOTIONAL EXPRESSION is a major means of communication, our abilities to
read emotions are not perfect (Sternglanz et al., 2019). Juries are made
up of human beings, who detect deception in face-to-face encounters only
slightly better than chance (ekman & o'Sullivan, 1991). Polygraph
methods are rejected for use in court because of their poor record of
accuracy (Kleinmuntz & Szucko, 1984). Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRi) eventually might improve our ability to detect honesty,
and fMRi results are beginning to be admitted to U.S. courts of law (see
● Figure 7.12) (langleben & Moriarty, 2013). Some researchers consider
fMRi to have potential for detecting deception (langleben et al., 2016),
while others are less convinced (la Tona et al., 2020). Until better
technologies are available, what do psychologists know about lying that
can help the legal system identify deception? lying is difficult,
especially in high-stakes situations featuring high arousal. While
aroused, people betray their lying in predictable ways (ekman, 1996).
inappropriate smiling and nervous laughter might reflect the person's
high arousal. a deceptive person stiffens the upper body, nods the head
less frequently, and uses fewer hand gestures than normal. in contrast
to the reduced mobility of the upper body, the feet swing. an
unwillingness to make eye contact might indicate dishonesty. however, in
many cultures, making eye contact is considered impolite, and failure to
make eye contact should be interpreted cautiously.

250

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Source: Provided by K. Ruparel and D. Langleben, University of
Pennsylvania

liars experience more cognitive demand than truthful people as they must
multitask while assembling their deception (vrij, 2015). The liar may
stumble verbally, adding "um" and "uh" while seeking to construct a
plausible lie. liars must manage how credible they appear to others.
They may be distracted by their goals for lying, such as preventing
embarrassment, avoiding criminal charges, or making money. They must
actively suppress the truth to avoid slips. if the interviewer can add
to the liar's cognitive load by requesting continued eye contact and
asking unanticipated questions, the liar is more likely to slip. an
excellent signal that someone is lying is the use of "scripted" stories,
which are lacking in detail. People telling the truth add 20 to 30% more
detail to a story compared to liars (Colwell et al., 2007). another
reliable way to identify lying is to ask people to tell their story
backward in time (Fisher & geiselman, 2010). a person telling the truth
can simply move from one event to the next, but constructing a false
story backward quickly overwhelms a person's memory for details. ■

FigurE 7.12 Will fMRI Be Used to Detect Lies? During a standardized task
known as the modified Guilty Knowledge Test, which is used to assess
deception, participants' brains showed significantly different
activation when lying compared to when they told the truth. Red areas
represent brain regions that are more active when the participant is
lying, and blue areas represent brain regions that are more active when
the participant is telling the truth. So far, laboratory studies have
used small numbers of law-abiding participants rather than real
criminals and concrete tasks such as reporting which playing card is
being held (e.g., ace of spades). It is unknown whether this technology
will advance to the point where results will be admitted in a court of
law on a regular basis. Source: D. D. Langleben et al. (2002). "Brain
Activity During Simulated Deception: An Event-related Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study," NeuroImage, 15(3), 727--732.
https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2001.1003.

Why aRe We eMoTional?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

251

sUMMarY 7.1 Theories of Emotion name of theory

Major features

James--Lange theory (a)

(b) 

Perceived stimulus

Perceived stimulus

Specific physical responses

Physical responses

Perceived stimulus

Subjective feeling

Cannon--Bard theory (b)

Perceived stimulus

Subjective feeling

Physical responses

Subjective feeling

Physical

General arousal

Schachter--Singer two-factor theory Assessment of surroundings

General arousal, not specific physical states, leads to an appraisal of
our surroundings, which allows us to identify our subjective feelings.

Subjective feeling

Perceived stimulus

Subjective feeling

Physical sensations and subjective feelings occur simultaneously and
independently.

Perceived stimulus

(c) 

Perceived stimulus

Subjective feeling

(c) 

Perceived stimulus

Specific physical responses

General arousal

Assessment of surroundings

Subjective feeling

(a) 

Specific physical sensations lead to an identification of the subjective
feeling.

(c) 

General arousal

Assessment of surroundings

Subjective feeling

SAME

Different emotional states produce physical responses ranging from
specific to ambiguous. Ambiguous responses require more appraisal than
specific responses before a subjective feeling is identified.

Appraisal theory

Emotions begin with the detection and assessment of stimuli that are
relevant to personal well-being.

Credits: Fourth row---Ian Paterson/Alamy Stock Photo; Fifth row---Asier
Romero/Shutterstock.com, Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com

What Does It Mean to Be Motivated? animals, including humans, have
limited time and resources, and a state of arousal is expensive in terms
of the energy it requires. Motivational systems allow an animal to be
aroused only when necessary, such as when it needs food, and then reduce
arousal following the solution of a problem, such as after a meal.
Preventing the waste of precious energy resources provides a significant
survival advantage. Motivation also provides the benefit of helping an

252

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

animal prepare to meet future needs. Most animals are motivated to
explore their environments because familiarity with an environment
allows them to act more effectively when a need arises. We can think of
motivation as a process that maintains homeostasis, a term introduced by
psychologist Walter Cannon (1932) to describe a steady internal balance
or equilibrium. To achieve homeostasis, we carefully regulate such
variables as core body temperature, fluid levels, and body weight around
set points. deviations from these set points stimulate behavior by the
organism that is designed to reestablish the original values. you might
think about this process as analogous to your home's thermostat. if your
home's temperature drops below its set point, the furnace is activated
until the set point is again established. if your home's temperature
rises above the set point, the air-conditioning system is activated
until the set point is regained. Similarly, if your core body
temperature drops below 98.6 °F (37 °C), your body initiates several
processes designed to increase its temperature, such as producing heat
by the muscle contractions we know as shivering. if your core body
temperature rises above its set point, cooling mechanisms are activated.
you sweat, and the evaporating moisture cools your skin. Blood is
diverted to the outer parts of the body, leading to a flushed
appearance. Motivation begins with a stimulus, arising from either the
internal or the external environment of the organism, that serves as a
cue for motivated behavior. Stimuli that are important to survival, such
as the presence of a predator or a deficit in body fluids, generate
arousal and tension, a state frequently called drive (hull, 1943). Being
in a drive state propels the organism into some sort of action related
to the stimulus, whether that means running from the predator to safety
or pulling a bottle of water from a backpack to quench thirst. if
actions are successful in regaining equilibrium, we experience drive
reduction, accompanied by a rewarding feeling of relief. drive theories
of motivation are often described as push theories because drive is seen
as pushing an organism toward a goal. however, not all psychologists
agree that motivation requires the push of drive. instead, they suggest
that rewards or incentives have the capacity to pull an organism in a
particular direction. according to this view, animals are viewed as
naturally inclined to act on their environment rather than wait
passively for a need to arise (deci & Ryan, 2000). in incentive
theories, no reference to unpleasant internal drive states is required
to explain motivated behavior. incentives or rewards may be intrinsic or
extrinsic. Intrinsic rewards arise internally, such as feelings of
accomplishment when a goal is met. Extrinsic rewards come from outside
sources, such as grades in school, money for completing work, or praise
from a supervisor. These different types of reward can interact in
complex ways (see ● Figure 7.13). in some cases, extrinsic rewards can
have negative effects on intrinsic motivation. For example, if a child
who enjoys reading suddenly gets paid for each book completed, the
child's enjoyment of reading might decrease because the motivation
shifts from intrinsic, the love of reading, to extrinsic, the love of
reward money (deCharms, 1968). Psychologists have studied a range of
motives, from the mostly physical motives of temperature control and
thirst to the more cognitive and social motives to affiliate with others
and to achieve. We will explore this range by discussing some specific
motives in detail, including hunger, sexuality, affiliation, and
achievement. after discussing these examples, we will examine the ways
humans set priorities when faced with competing motives.

homeostasis A steady internal balance, or equilibrium.

set point A value that is defended to maintain homeostasis. drive A
state of tension and arousal triggered by cues important for survival.
drive reduction The state of relief and reward produced by removing the
tension and arousal of the drive state.

incentive A reward that pulls an organism's behavior in a particular
direction.

intrinsic reward A reward that arises internally.

extrinsic reward A reward from an outside source.

Humans consume a range of diets, from the nearly all-meat diet of the
traditional Inuit cultures to the vegan diet.

iStock.com/Elenathewise

hunger is a complex motive. in comparison to the regulation of body
temperature through processes such as sweating or shivering, the
reduction of hunger through eating is more heavily influenced by
emotion, learning, and culture. humans take in a remarkable variety of
nutrients. The traditional diet of the inuit people living in arctic
regions contains little plant material, whereas vegans adhere to a diet
that contains no animal material.

Yvette Cardozo/Alamy Stock Photo

Hunger and Eating

WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

253

Sonia Moskowitz-Globe Photos, Inc./Newscom

FigurE 7.13 Economist Roland Fryer Asks Whether Incentives Work. Harvard
University economist Roland Fryer overcame a tough childhood in Daytona,
Florida, to become the youngest tenured African American professor in
the history of the university. Drawing on his personal experiences,
Fryer experimented with different incentives for a variety of
school-related behaviors. His results suggest that the relationships
among intrinsic rewards, extrinsic rewards, and behavior can be quite
complex. Although previous research has shown that extrinsic rewards can
undermine intrinsic motivation, it is important to remember that this
result occurs only when behavior is intrinsically motivated in the first
place. If children do not intrinsically enjoy reading, Fryer suggests
paying them to read might work. Unfortunately, Fryer has been the target
of death threats for suggesting this simple solution to illiteracy.

Location

DALLAS

CHICAGO

WASHINGTON

NEW YORK CITY

What students were paid for

Reading

Grades

Various†

Test scores

Grade level participating

Second-graders

Ninth-graders

Sixth-, seventh-, and eighth-graders

Fourth- and seventh-graders

How much

\$2 per book

\$50 for A's \$35 for B's \$20 for C's

Up to \$100 every two weeks

\$25 (fourth-graders) to \$50 (seventh-graders) per test

Average student earned

\$13.81

\$695.61

\$532.85

\$139.43 (fourth-graders) \$231.55 (seventh-graders)

Study size\*

1,780 from 22 schools

4,396 from 20 schools

3,495 from 17 schools

8,320 from 63 schools

Results

Very Positive Paying children to read dramatically boosted
readingcomprehension scores.

Mixed Children cut fewer classes and got slightly better grades.
Standardized test scores did not change.

Positive Rewarding five different actions, including attendance and
behavior, seemed to improve reading skills.

No Effect Paying children for higher test scores did not lead to more
learning or better grades---or any measureable changes.

\*Not including control groups

† A combination of metrics that varied from school to school but always
included attendance and behavior

The Sensation of Hunger We respond to combinations of external and
internal cues that make us feel hungry. external cues for hunger include
time of day, the sights and smells of favorite foods, admonitions that
we should "clean our plates," or the social settings in which food is
presented. These external cues may encourage us to eat when our bodies
do not need nutrients or to eat more food than we require. individuals
who are very responsive to external cues might find maintaining a
healthy weight to be somewhat challenging. internal cues for hunger are
generated when our bodies are genuinely short on nutrients. "Short on
nutrients" applies to the maintenance of current, not necessarily ideal,
weight. a morbidly obese person is likely to feel as hungry as a thin
person when sufficient nutrients are not available to maintain the
status quo. Walter Cannon believed that stomach contractions were an
important component in the detection of hunger, and to prove his point,
he persuaded his colleague a. l. Washburn to 254

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FigurE 7.14

Bettmann/Contributor/Getty Images

Stomach Contractions and Hunger. Walter Cannon (1871--1945) and his
assistant, A. L. Washburn, performed one of the earliest experiments on
the relationship between stomach contractions and feelings of hunger.
The large waves at the top were Cannon's recordings of Washburn's
stomach contractions, and the smaller waves at the bottom represent
Washburn's key taps indicating hunger. Although these two events are
correlated, there is more to hunger than a growling stomach.

Plasma insulin \[mU/ml\]

swallow a balloon attached to an air pump (Cannon & Washburn, 1912). The
balloon allowed glucose A type of sugar that plays an Washburn's stomach
contractions to be monitored while Washburn indicated feelings of
hunimportant role in hunger levels. ger by pushing a telegraph key
(because he couldn't talk with a tube down his throat). although
Washburn's key presses correlated with his stomach contractions, these
signals do not tell the whole story. People who have had their stomachs
surgically removed still experience a sense of hunger in the general
region where the stomach used to be. Most of us start eating long before
our stomachs begin to growl, indicating that additional types of
signaling must be at work (see ● Figure 7.14). 120 an important hunger
cue is a low level of circulating sugars, particularly glucose. glucose
concentrations in 100 Healthy control the blood are highest just
following a meal. as glucose Type 2 diabetes levels drop over time, a
person begins to feel hungry 80 again. glucose levels are intimately
connected with levels of the hormone insulin. insulin, released by the
pancreas, 60 moves circulating glucose from the blood into cells
awaiting nutrients. Typically, glucose and insulin levels 40 are
positively correlated. Right after a meal, both are high. glucose levels
rise as glucose is extracted from the food that has been consumed, and
insulin is high because its 20 release is triggered by the anticipation
and consumption of food. as time goes by without more food, glucose 0
moves from the blood into other tissues, and insulin is no 60 90 120
--30 0 30 longer released, leading to lower levels of both substances
Time (min) in the blood. These lower levels of glucose and insulin
should signal the need for more food (see ● Figure 7.15). FigurE 7.15
This is an overly simplistic conclusion, however. high glucose levels
occur in poorly managed diabetes Insulin Release Is Reduced in Type 2
Diabetes. Following a meal (time 0), a healthy person experiences a
large spike in insulin levels. In contrast, a person because of either a
lack of insulin production (type 1 diabetes) or the body's resistance to
insulin (type 2 diabetes). with type 2 diabetes has a slower and less
dramatic release of insulin. The Without sufficient insulin activity,
circulating glucose is person with diabetes will not be able to move
glucose out of the blood into unable to move out of the blood into the
cells that need cells requiring nutrients. The appetite-suppressing
action of insulin will be less nutrients. if hunger results from low
levels of circulating effective, and the person with diabetes will
remain hungry. glucose, we would expect people with untreated diabetes
Source: M. A. Pfeifer et al. (1982). "Insulin Responses to Nonglucose
Stimuli in Nonto not feel very hungry, but this is not the case. Most
Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus during a Tolbutamide Infusion,"
Diabetes, 31(2), people with diabetes who have high blood sugar report
154--159, doi: 10.2337/diab.31.2.154 WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

255

feeling hungry all the time. This makes sense when you consider that
their cells are starving because of their inability to obtain glucose
from the blood. it is more accurate to say that the amount of glucose
that is available to cells is an indicator of hunger (Mayer, 1955;
Eating behavior abraham, 1974). hunger results whenever cells are unable
to obtain the glucose they require. Initiated hunger also occurs in
response to low levels of stored fats (Kennedy, 1953). if you maintain a
healthy weight, you are carrying Autonomic nervous system sufficient
body fat to survive 5 to 6 weeks of total starvation. The heavier the
person, the longer that individual can survive without food. one person
survived a medically supervised fast of 382 days, Parasympathetic
nervous system is activated: during which time his weight dropped from
455.4 pounds (207 kiloBody stores nutrients. grams) to 179.5 pounds
(81.6 kilograms) (Stewart & Fleming, 1973). The body monitors fat stores
by assessing levels of the hormone Lowered metabolic activity leptin.
leptin, from the greek word leptos, or "thin," is produced and secreted
by fat cells (Zhang et al., 1994). Because fat stores and leptin levels
are positively correlated, leptin levels provide a measure for
Hypothalamus the amount of fat that has been stored. as shown in ●
Figure 7.16, leptin levels and their associated fat stores initiate a
cascade of events Lateral hypothalamus that influence eating behavior.
stimulates eating behavior. When available glucose, fat stores, and
leptin levels are low, brain areas that include the lateral hypothalamus
(lh) initiate feeding. When the lh is lesioned, rats fail to eat and die
of starvation unless force-fed (anand & Brobeck, 1951). Stimulation of
the lh typically Result: Stored fat levels increase and feeding stops.
initiates immediate eating. low glucose availability, fat stores, and
leptin levels also activate the parasympathetic division of the
autoFigurE 7.16 nomic nervous system, enhancing the body's ability to
digest and store nutrients. Metabolism, or the chemical reactions
required by life, slows down, allowing nutrients to be stored rather
Mechanisms of Hunger. than used up right away. activation of the
parasympathetic nervous system, initiation of feeding behavior, and
reduction in metabolic rate allow the animal to find, eat, and store
nutrients. leptin A hormone secreted by fat cells as glucose, insulin,
and leptin levels increase and fat stores return to normal, the feeding
that helps the body maintain an appropricycle tapers off. Unfortunately
for the person trying to lose weight, this system does a good ate level
of stored fat. job of defending a set point. as the dieter successfully
decreases body fat levels, the associated satiety A sense of feeling
full and not low levels of leptin initiate a feeding cycle. The dieter
feels constantly hungry, making the requiring further food. maintenance
of weight loss often more difficult than the initial loss. Feeding is
stimulated by two additional hormones: ghrelin, which is released by the
pancreas and the lining of the stomach (howard et al., 1996), and
orexins, produced in the lh (de lecea et al., 1998; Sakurai et al.,
1998). ghrelin release increases with time since the last meal and
appears to contribute to the rewarding aspects of feeding. orexin
activity contributes to feeding because it is negatively correlated with
blood glucose levels (Cai et al., 1999). orexins also participate in
sleep (see Chapter 6), suggesting that they might link feeding, activity
levels, and sleep. AP Images/Gurinder Osan

iStock.com/Weekend images Inc.

When glucose availability, fat stores, and leptin levels are low and
ghrelin and orexins are active:

People of normal weight carry enough fat to survive 5 to 6 weeks of
total starvation, although this is obviously not a good thing to do for
one's health. Baba Ramdev, a yoga guru, was hospitalized after losing 12
pounds by the seventh day of a hunger strike against corruption. It is
likely that Ramdev was already quite thin at the beginning of his fast.

256

Chapter 7

The Sensation of Satiety We reach the point of satiety or fullness long
before the nutrients we have eaten can make their way to waiting cells.
Just as stomach contractions serve as signals for hunger, an obvious
sign of satiety is a feeling of stomach fullness. in extreme cases of
obesity, some people choose to have a portion of the stomach stapled or
banded to produce this feeling of fullness after less food has been
eaten. in the brain, the ventromedial hypothalamus (vMh) participates in
sensing satiety. as shown in ● Figure 7.17, lesions of the vMh produce a
syndrome of large weight gains

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130 120

100

FigurE 7.17

90 Voisin/Phanie/Science Source

Body weight (gm)

110

VMH lesioned

80 70 60

Control

50

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Days after lesion of the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH)

Lesions of the Ventromedial Hypothalamus (VMH) Lead to Obesity.
Following lesioning of the VMH, rats nearly tripled their normal weight,
suggesting that the VMH plays a significant role in satiety. However,
satiety is too complex to be explained as the function of a single part
of the brain. Source: Adapted from R. G. Kurtz, P. Rozin, P. and
Teitelbaum, (1972). "Ventromedial Hypothalamic Hyperphagia in the
Hypophysectomized Weanling Rat," Journal of Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 80(1), 19--25. doi: 10.1037/h0032820

Christopher Nash/Alamy Stock Photo

When glucose and leptin levels increase and fat stores are high: (hoebel
& Teitelbaum, 1966). although the vMh plays a significant role in
satiety, it is overly simplistic to assume that it works alone and
directly. among the many indirect effects of vMh lesions are boosts in
insulin production, which in turn produce low blood glucose levels
Eating behavior and hunger. Satiety also results from the release of the
gut hormone choleStops cystokinin (CCK) by the digestive system in
response to the arrival of food, especially fatty foods. CCK not only
acts in the digestive tract but Autonomic nervous system also serves as
a chemical messenger in the brain. CCK limits meals by activating
pathways that connect the hindbrain to the digestive system Sympathetic
nervous (Blevins et al., 2009). drugs that inhibit CCK's action in the
brain system is activated: Body expends nutrients. increase eating
behavior, further supporting the hypothesis that CCK normally acts to
inhibit further eating (Cooper & dourish, 1990). earlier we observed the
cascade of events initiated by low levels Higher metabolic activity of
available glucose, stored fat and leptin that led to feeding and the
storage of nutrients. What happens when glucose, fat, and leptin levels
Hypothalamus rise again? increased glucose, insulin, stored fat, and
leptin levels initiate a sequence of events that inhibit feeding (see ●
Figure 7.18). The Ventromedial sympathetic division of the autonomic
nervous system is activated, hypothalamus supresses leading to the
expenditure of energy, metabolic rate increases, and eating behavior.
inhibition of feeding. as time without food progresses, glucose, fat,
and leptin levels drop and the feeding sequence is reinitiated. Result:
Stored fat levels decrease and feeding stops. Because of leptin's role
in satiety, scientists initially believed it might be helpful as a
dieting aid. Mice genetically engineered to lack genes that produce
leptin become obese. injections of leptin allow them to lose weight
(halaas FigurE 7.18 et al., 1995). Unfortunately, people do not respond
like mice; obese humans have very high circulating leptin levels but
appear to become resistant to the satiety messages this state should
Mechanisms of Satiety. produce (Friedman & halaas, 1998). adding further
leptin is unlikely to lead to weight loss. our ancestors were much more
likely to starve than to be troubled by having too much food. Those who
lived and reproduced exhibited characteristics best suited for surviving
famine. as we will see in the next sections, the same motivational
mechanisms that evolved to prevent starvation among hunter-gatherers
might not work well in a society featuring cultural body mass index
(BMI) A heightinfluences on body image and an ample and calorie-rich
food supply. to-weight ratio used to identify healthy

Obesity What do we mean by obesity? one medical approach to body weight
is the body

mass index (BMI), shown in ● Figure 7.19. The BMi is a simple
height-to-weight ratio computed

weight, underweight, overweight, and obesity.

WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

257

Height (inches)

80 78 76 74 72 70 68 66 64 62 60 58 56 54 52 50 48

FigurE 7.19

11 12 12 12 14 14 15 16 17 18 20 21 22 24 26 28 31

12 13 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 22 23 25 27 29 31 34

13 14 15 15 16 17 18 19 21 22 23 25 27 29 31 34 37

14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 24 25 27 29 31 34 37 40

15 16 17 18 19 20 21 23 24 26 27 29 31 34 36 39 42

17 17 18 19 20 22 23 24 26 27 25 31 34 36 39 42 46

18 19 20 21 22 23 24 26 28 29 31 34 36 39 40 45 49

19 20 21 22 23 24 26 27 29 31 33 36 38 41 44 48 52

10 10 11 12 12 13 14 15 15 17 17 19 21 22 23 25 28

80

90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250
Weight (pounds)

BMI under 18.5: Underweight BMI between 18.5 and 24: Healthy weight BMI
between 25 and 29: Overweight

Body Mass Index (BMI).

20 21 22 23 24 26 27 29 31 33 35 38 40 43 47 51 55

21 22 23 24 26 27 29 31 33 35 37 40 43 46 49 53 58

22 23 24 26 27 29 30 32 34 37 39 42 45 48 52 56 61

23 24 26 27 28 30 32 34 36 38 41 44 47 51 55 59 64

24 25 27 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 43 46 49 53 57 62 67

25 27 28 30 31 33 35 37 40 42 45 48 52 56 60 65 70

26 28 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 44 47 50 54 58 62 68 73

28 29 30 32 34 36 38 40 43 46 49 52 56 60 65 70 76

9 9 10 10 11 12 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 21 23 24

BMI between 30 and 39: Obese BMI over 40: Severely/morbidly obese

by dividing weight in kilograms by the square of height in meters. We
have converted Figure 7.19 to inches and pounds for convenience. a BMi
score between 18.5 and 24.9 is considered healthy. a BMi score between
25 and 30 is considered overweight, and a BMi score above 30 is
considered obese. This system works well for most people, but it does
not account for those who have unusually heavy skeletons or musculature.
Many elite athletes would score in the overweight or even obese range
despite being quite fit. Using a BMi score of 30 or above as a
criterion, rates of obesity in the United States tripled from 12% of the
adult population in 1991 to 37% in 2014 (ogden, 2015). in 1990, no state
reported that more than 15% of its adult population was obese, but by
2018, no state reported fewer than 20% of its adult population was
obese, and nine states reported that over 35% of their adult population
was obese (see ● Figure 7.20). how can we account for this rapid

WA MT OR

ID

FigurE 7.20

Source: Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, CDC.

Chapter 7

MN

SD

WI

WY

U.S. Obesity Rates Have Risen Dramatically. In 1990, no state reported
that more than 15% of its population was obese, and the overall national
rate of obesity was 12%. By 2018, no state reported that less than 20%
of its adult population was obese, and nine states reported that more
than 35% of their adult population was obese.

258

VT

ND

UT CA

AZ

KS OK

NM

VA

CT NJ DE MD

NC

DC

OH

IN

WV

MO

KY TN

AR

NH MA RI

DC

SC MS

TX

MI PA

IL

CO

NY

IA

NE

NV

ME

AL

GA \<20% 20%--\<25%

LA FL

AK

25%--\<30% 30%--\<35% \$35%

HI

GU

PR

Insufficient data\*

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mark Avery/ZUMA Press/Irvine/California/USA/Newscom

increase in obesity over the last two and a half decades? it is unlikely
that current obesity levels are the result of a single cause. genetic
predispositions, lifestyle issues, and social comparisons all make
significant contributions to obesity. genes can influence factors such
as set point and rate of metabolism, and twin studies indicate that some
people are more likely than others to become obese (livshits et al.,
2007). although genes are unlikely to have changed dramatically over a
few decades, complex interactions between genes and environmental
factors, such as the bisphenol a in plastic products discussed in
Chapter 3, could affect current rates of obesity (dolinoy et al., 2007).
genes might also interact with the bacteria populations in the gut,
which differ considerably between obese and lean humans (Million et al.,
2013). Manipulations of bacteria through antibiotics and probiotics have
been used to promote weight gain in livestock for decades.
Transplantation of gut bacteria from obese to lean animals led to
obesity (Turnbaugh et al., 2006). The bacteria found in the obese
animals appears to be more efficient at harvesting energy from the
animal's diet. a cultural contribution to obesity is our contemporary,
sedentary lifestyle, with many people spending hours sitting in front of
televisions or computers. humans use energy efficiently. at rest, we use
only 12 kilocalories (usually described simply as calories) per pound
per day. This means that the average 150-pound couch potato needs only
about 1,800 calories of food per day. even the most demanding activities
require a reBeginning in the 1800s, in an effort to prevent markably
small investment in resources. Cyclists competing in the starvation,
initiatives leading to increased cheap challenging Tour de France use an
average of 5,900 calories per sources of high-calorie foods were adopted
worldwide. day (armstrong & Jenkins, 2000). Meals at many chain
restaurants contain more than 2,500 calories, the total daily
requirement for a Currently, global agriculture produces 2,600 calories
person who weighs 208 pounds and has a typical level of activity. per
person per day, which is expected to rise to 3,000 To avoid starvation,
our ancestors developed strong prefercalories per person per day by 2030
(Caballero, 2007). ences for calorie-rich foods containing sugars and
fats. When food With such a plentiful food supply, we can see why
supplies are limited, these preferences ensured that humans would
obesity is becoming a global problem even as starvation spend the
greatest amounts of time and energy seeking these rich remains a serious
concern in many parts of the world. sources of calories. Unfortunately,
we retain these preferences today and continue to gravitate to sugary,
fatty foods. Zooming out from individual factors to the larger social
context, we see that social factors also contribute to obesity. We
apparently "keep track" of how we are doing by comparing our size to
that of those in our social circles. having an obese spouse raises your
risk of obesity by 37%, and having obese friends raises your risk by 57%
(Christakis & Fowler, 2007). The path to a healthy weight can be
difficult. Unfortunately, weight loss for our ancestors usually meant
they were one step closer to death by starvation, and we are well
prepared to prevent that occurrence. once a person is obese, a new set
point is established and subsequently staunchly defended. even the
surgical removal of fat, or liposuction, does not result in permanent
weight loss because the fat removed by the process is replaced or
redistributed to other parts of the body within one year (hernandez et
al., 2011). Calorie-reducing and low-carb diets work, but dietary
changes cannot be viewed as something to The average adult weighing 150
do until a goal weight is reached. if the dieter returns pounds needs
only 1,800 calories per to previous eating habits, the lost weight is
quickly day. When a single dessert item such regained. Successful diets
should be viewed as lifeas cheesecake provides about 70% style changes
that are sustainable for an individual. of that daily requirement, it
becomes For example, removing one sugared soft drink per easy to see how
people eating out day should result in about a 10-pound weight loss
frequently could become overweight over the next year. it is essential
for the dieter to or obese. It is also likely that before avoid
triggering mechanisms designed to prevent eating the cheesecake a diner
might starvation, such as lowering metabolic rates. By keephave an
appetizer, salad, entrée, and ing activity levels up and restricting
weight loss to a beverage. This doesn't include meals pound or two per
week at most, it is possible to slide and snacks consumed at other times
weight loss under the radar of our vigilant weight throughout the day.
maintenance systems. WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

259

Drew D. Saur

efforts to use chemicals to control weight have been discouraging.
during the 1950s and 1960s, it was not uncommon for american doctors to
prescribe amphetamines for weight loss. although amphetamines suppress
appetite, their psychoactive and addictive properties make this approach
less than desirable. More recently, several new medications have been
approved for the treatment of obesity. one, orlistat (Xenical), reduces
the absorption of fats by the digestive tract. The remaining approved
medications target appetite mechanisms in the hypothalamus or prevent
reabsorption of glucose by the kidneys. Medications do not "work on
their own" but instead make it somewhat easier for obese individuals to
maintain lifestyles that are more consistent with a healthy weight
(apovian et al., 2015). Some individuals who become discouraged with
diets and medication turn instead to surgical interventions, including
stomach stapling and gastric bypass procedures, which literally reduce
the amount of nutrients that can be consumed or processed. While the
resulting weight loss can be dramatic (the average gastric bypass
patient loses 90 pounds within 3 months of surgery) (Maggard et al.,
2005), these procedures represent major surgery and often result in
complications. although it is feasible that current research into brain
mechanisms for hunger and satiety may eventually lead to better
treatments for obesity, lifestyle changes leading to healthier eating
and exercise habits remain the most reliable approach.

Contrary to popular opinion, many people lose weight by dieting and are
successful in maintaining their weight loss for years. The National
Weight Control Registry tracks more than 5,000 case studies of
successful maintainers, including Drew Saur. Saur lost more than 150
pounds and has maintained his loss since 2005. He began by counting the
calories he was consuming and was astonished to find that he was eating
about 5,000 calories per day, not surprising given his starting weight
of 325 pounds. By gradually reducing calories and waiting to eat until
he felt hungry, Saur lost about 2 to 3 pounds per week. He began
walking, and when his weight loss permitted more activity, he switched
to running. Successful dieters and maintainers such as Saur do not view
dieting as something drastic to do before a wedding or class reunion but
as a gradual lifestyle change that is livable. anorexia nervosa An
eating disorder characterized by the maintenance of unusually low body
weight and a distorted body image. bulimia nervosa An eating disorder
characterized by bingeing, purging, and having feelings of depression,
disgust, and lost control.

260

Chapter 7

Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia Nervosa, and Binge-Eating Disorder Coexisting

with our ongoing obesity epidemic are eating disorders characterized by
unusual patterns of eating and distortions of a person's body image.
normally, we have an accurate view of what we look like. People with
distorted body image can be convinced they are obese when they are in
danger of starvation. Traditionally, eating disorders have been viewed
as a problem for females and as less typical for males. however,
increasing numbers of males are experiencing eating disorders and body
dissatisfaction. The lifetime incidence of eating disorders in males is
approximately 0.17%, compared to about 3% in females (Pedersen et al.,
2014). Rates of eating disorders are about six times higher among
homosexual and bisexual males compared to heterosexual males, although
sexual orientation does not seem to be associated with additional risks
for eating disorders among females (Matthews-ewald, Zullig, & Ward,
2014). Anorexia nervosa is characterized by the maintenance of unusually
low body weight, an intense fear of gaining weight, and a distorted view
of the body as obese (aPa, 2013). Anorexia literally means "loss of
appetite." People with anorexia can show two patterns of behavior (aPa,
2013). in the restricting type, people simply eat little food. in the
bingeing-purging type, people combine restricted eating most of the time
with behaviors associated with bulimia nervosa, which we discuss later.
anorexia nervosa is dramatic but rare, affecting about 0.4% of females
and perhaps 0.04% of males (aPa, 2013). anorexia nervosa is one of the
few psychological disorders that can kill, with up to 5% of people with
the disorder dying per decade from causes related to the condition,
which includes an elevated risk for suicide (aPa, 2013). other symptoms
include interruption of normal menstruation in females, very dry and
yellow skin, fine downy hair (lanugo) on the face and other parts of the
body, increased sensitivity to cold, and cardiovascular and
gastrointestinal problems. Bulimia nervosa is characterized by cycles of
binge eating, in which unusually large amounts of food are consumed, and
purging through the use of vomiting or laxatives. Bingeing is often
followed by feelings of depression, disgust, and a sense of lost
control. Bulimia is more common than anorexia, affecting 1.5% of females
and between 0.15% and 0.5% of males (aPa, 2013; hudson et al., 2007).

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

AP Images/Diane Bondareff

Binge-eating disorder is similar to bulimia nervosa in We have defined
healthy weight as regard to eating abnormally large amounts of food at
one sita BMI score between 18.5 and 24.9, ting and feeling that eating
is out of control, but it does not yet the typical runway model held up
include compensatory behaviors such as induced vomiting as a cultural
standard for beauty has or the use of laxatives (aPa, 2013). People with
binge-eating an average BMI score of only 16.5. In disorder eat rapidly,
eat until they are uncomfortably full, response to several deaths of
ultrathin eat when they are not hungry, and often eat alone because
models, some European countries now of embarrassment about the
quantities they consume. Comrequire models to maintain a minimum pared
to other eating disorders, differences between males BMI score of 18.5.
The United States and females with binge-eating disorder are smaller.
approxihas not followed suit, and American mately 1.6% of adult females
and 0.8% of adult males meet designers have complained that this the
criteria for this disorder (aPa, 2013). standard would require a
6-foot-tall environmental factors, especially cultural attitudes tomodel
to "balloon" to 136 pounds. ward beauty, can play a significant role in
the development In contrast, a 6-foot-tall model of eating disorders.
anne Becker and her colleagues were with a BMI score of 16.5 would
observing eating patterns in the Fiji islands when american weigh a
scant 121 pounds. It television became available in 1995 (Becker et al.,
2002). is not surprising that young Prior to this time, Becker reported
that dieting was unknown women exposed to these in this culture, which
valued a "robust, well-muscled body" standards of beauty for both men
and women. The Fijian language has a term for occasionally develop
"going thin" that is used to express concern about someone distorted
images of who may be losing weight because of health problems. in the
their own bodies. United States, people may say, "have you lost weight?
you look great!" in Fiji, a person is more likely to say, "are you okay?
you look like you're going thin." These cultural norms underwent nearly
overnight change with the introduction of american television, with its
frequent images of glamorous, ultrathin actresses. Suddenly, 74% of the
adolescent girls in Becker et al.'s study reported themselves as being
"too big or too fat." Teens began to report dieting with the same
frequency as their american counterparts, a radical shift from the
researchers' observations since 1988. Because Becker et al.'s data are
correlational, we cannot conclude that watching television produced
disordered eating in Fiji. however, the results are suggestive of strong
cultural influences on patterns of disordered eating. binge-eating
disorder An eating it is likely that general personality characteristics
that increase a person's risk for eating disorder characterized by
eating abnordisorders may be heritable, not the disorders themselves
(Farstad et al., 2016). evidence from mally large amounts of food at one
sitting twin studies has been mixed, with some authors reporting
heritability of 48% to 88% for eating and feeling that eating is out of
control, without compensatory behaviors such as disorders and others
finding no evidence of genetic influences (hinney & volckmar, 2013).
induced vomiting or the use of laxatives. People might have a genetic
vulnerability to disordered eating in general but not toward a specific
type of eating disorder (Bulik et al., 2016). genetic studies have
focused primarily on anorexia nervosa, and further work on the other
types of eating disorders is needed (hübel et al., 2018). once an eating
disorder is established, biological factors contribute to maintaining
abnormal patterns of eating. even after people with anorexia nervosa
regain normal weight, some still show evidence of elevated levels of
hormones that typically raise metabolism and inhibit feeding (Stanley et
al., 2003). Bingeing has been discussed within a framework of food
addiction, which is similar to an addiction to psychoactive drugs
(leslie et al., 2018; Mestre-Bach et al., 2019). a questionnaire known
as the yale Food addiction Scale 2.0 shows that nearly all individuals
with bulimia act as though they have a food addiction (vries & Meule,
2016). Treating anorexia nervosa can be challenging because the
therapist is facing a person who is terrified of gaining weight. The
first priority is keeping the person alive, and this effort typically
involves hospitalization and careful monitoring of food intake.
Cognitive behavioral therapy may be used to address distortions of body
image (see Chapter 15), but no known medications are effective in
treating anorexia (dold et al., 2015). about 50% of people with anorexia
make a full recovery, but nearly 20% fail to respond. Treating bulimia
and binge-eating disorder is somewhat more encouraging. antidepressant
medications, particularly selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRis), are usually quite effective, especially when combined with
cognitive behavioral treatment (Kass et al., 2013). WhaT doeS iT Mean To
Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

261

Sexual Motivation Unlike eating, sexual behavior is not essential to the
survival of an individual organism. however, individuals' sexual
behavior appears to be maintained by processes similar to the
life-sustaining motivations we have already discussed. Sexuality is an
extremely complex aspect of human behavior. in this chapter, we will
focus on the more physical aspects of sexual motivation. in Chapter 11,
we will explore sexuality across the life span, and in Chapter 13, we
will discuss phenomena related to attraction and maintaining
relationships. Most of our discussion relies on research with
individuals who identify as heterosexual, simply due to the relatively
sparse amount of research to date about sexual minorities (Mark et al.,
2018). hopefully, more scientists will step up to fill this gap soon.

Michael DeFreitas/Photoshot

Biology and Sexual Motivation The females of most mammalian species
undergo estrus, a period of hours or days during which the female is
receptive or willing to have sex. in these species, hormone levels and
sexual behavior are tightly linked. in humans and old World primates,
menstrual cycles replace periods of estrus. The sexual behavior of
estrus and nonestrus species is quite different (Rushton et al., 2001).
human females show receptivity throughout the menstrual cycle. however,
females who are not using chemical contraception report feeling more
interest in sex around the time of ovulation (Cappelletti & Wallen,
2016). This situation has obvious advantages for the reproduction of the
species because this is when sexual behavior is most likely to lead to
pregnancy. Female sexual interest forms complex correlations with
hormones. Female sexual interest has a negative relationship with
progesterone levels and weaker positive associations with levels of
estradiol, the major female sex hormone (Jones et al., 2018). For
decades, female sexual interest was viewed as a function of testosterone
levels, and testosterone has been administered to women reporting low
sexual interest. however, more contemporary research has thrown some
doubt on this conclusion (Cappelletti & Wallen, 2016). Testosterone is
clearly correlated with sexual interest in males. however, as long as a
man's testosterone falls within a normal range, it does not provide a
strong predictor of an individual's sexual frequency (Mazur & Booth,
1998; gray et al.,). Below-normal levels of testosterone, as in
castration, are usually accompanied by very low sexual desire and
activity. Male testosterone levels fluctuate over the course of a day
and are influenced not only by a man's biology but also by several
environmental factors, notably situations perceived as competitive. Male
collegiate athletes experience increases in testosterone in anticipation
of upcoming competitive events. Following a competition, testosterone
continues to rise among the winners and temporarily decreases among the
losers (Booth et al., 1989). Simply observing a competition may
influence testosterone levels. Men cheering for the successful Brazilian
soccer team at the 1994 World Cup experienced increased testosterone
levels, whereas men supporting the losing italian team experienced a
decrease (Bernhardt et al., 1998). These fluctuations are more dramatic
when taking the location of the venue into account. losing at home
produces a more dramatic decrease in testosterone than losing a game as
the visiting team. This response to losing a competition at home may
represent a remnant of our ancestors' need to defend their territory. We
can assume that losing a battle is catastrophic in any circumstance, but
losing near your family and home makes them especially vulnerable to
destruction. Male testosterone levels are also influenced by
relationship status. Men in stable, longterm relationships have lower
testosterone levels than single men or men who are within a few years of
divorce (Mazur & Michalek, 1998). Men's testosterone levels also drop
significantly after the birth of a child (gettler et al., 2011). These
changes might reflect a feedback loop in which reproductive success
signals a decrease in testosterone (Puts et al., 2015). high
testosterone levels not only interfere with pair-bonding and parental
care by stimulating continued competition for mates, but also reduce
immune system functioning. it makes sense that the achievement of
reproductive goals would lead to a reduction in the competitive
behaviors and physical costs associated with high testosterone levels
(see ● Figure 7.21).

Before the introduction of American television programming to the
islands of Fiji in 1995, the cultural ideal for both men and women was a
"robust, well-muscled body," as evidenced by this traditional dancer.
Dieting and eating disorders were unknown. A short time after American
television was available, however, Fijian rates of dieting and eating
disorders grew to match American rates and ideal beauties became
slimmer.

estradiol An important type of estrogen, or female sex hormone.
testosterone A male hormone.

262

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

BananaStock/Getty Images Evgeny Atamanenko/Shutterstock.com

Testosterone

FIGURE 7.21

1

Psychology

2

Behavior

1

A Negative Feedback Loop of Male Testosterone and Sexual Behavior. In
males, higher testosterone levels are associated with psychological
factors including increased competitiveness and sexual desire, which
then lead to increased sexual behavior. As reproductive goals (e.g.,
mating and producing children) are achieved, male testosterone levels
drop again. High testosterone levels are not compatible with
pair-bonding and parenting and have detrimental effects on the immune
system, so this decrease represents an effective adaptation. Source:
Adapted from D. A. Puts et al. (2015). "Fulfilling Desire: Evidence for
Negative Feedback Between Men's Testosterone, Sociosexual Psychology,
and Sexual Partner Number," Hormones and Behavior, 70, 14--21, doi:
10.1016/j.yhbeh.2015.01.006

We have seen how sexual desire is correlated with testosterone for males
and estradiol and low progesterone for females, but romantic love is
associated with two other hormones, oxytocin and vasopressin (see ●
Figure 7.22). In humans, both hormones are active in the brain, but
vasopressin is expressed more by males, and oxytocin is expressed more
by females (van Londen et al., 1997; Ishunina & swaab, 1999). In all
cases, oxytocin enhances bonding. Females release oxytocin during
breastfeeding and even respond to a brief hug from their partners with a
spike in oxytocin release (Light et al., 2005). oxytocin is released at
orgasm. however, because of the greater overall expression of oxytocin
in the brains of females, along with the 10 times higher testosterone
levels in males than in females, females are more likely than males to
equate sexual desire with feelings of romantic love (Diamond, 2004). We
do not mean to imply that males do not bond, but high testosterone
levels are likely to make sexual activity highly salient for young men,
with or without the bonding associated with oxytocin release. although
cultural values often link sexual desire and romantic love, these two
functions represent distinct biological and emotional states. Romantic
love promotes the establishment of long-term relationships, whereas
sexual desire promotes mating (Cacioppo, 2016). Both romantic love and
sexual desire involve the insula. sexual desire is correlated with
activity toward the rear of the insula, consistent with other
observations that the back of the brain is more involved with current
and short-term sensory experiences. In contrast, romantic love is
associated with activity toward the front of the insula, consistent with

Mating

Separation

FIGURE 7.22

Source: H. P. Nair & L. J. Young (2006). "Vasopressin and Pair Bond
Formation: Genes to Brain to Behavior," Journal of Physiology, 21(2),
146--152. doi: 10.1152/physiol.00049.2005

Partner

Neutral

Stranger

120 Time spent in chamber (min)

Oxytocin, Vasopressin, and Two Species of Voles. The discovery of the
importance of oxytocin and vasopressin to bonding originated in the
study of two types of rodents: the prairie vole and the montane vole.
Although similar in many ways, the two types of vole differed in both
their bonding to a partner and their parenting behaviors. Prairie voles
are monogamous for life, but montane voles are not. Prairie voles share
parenting duties, but montane voles do not. Differences between the two
types of vole in oxytocin and vasopressin were closely associated with
the behavioral differences, with the prairie voles showing higher levels
of both hormones than the montane voles. In one type of study, voles are
allowed to mate, and then they are placed in a test box. On either side
of the male, who can move freely, are two females---a stranger and the
partner---who are tethered in their boxes and can't move. The chart
shows how much time the average male prairie vole and montane vole spend
with the partner, with the stranger, or alone. As you can see, the
prairie voles prefer to be with their partners, but the montane voles
prefer to be alone.

100 80 60 40 Partner

20 0

Neutral Stranger Prairie

Montane

Species of vole

What Does It Mean to Be MotIvateD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

263

future-thinking about more abstract concepts (Cacioppo & Cacioppo,
2013). Romantic love and sexual desire often occur along a time
continuum, with the pleasant sensorimotor experiences associated with
sexual desire leading to the more cognitive feelings of romantic love
(Cacioppo et al., 2012). a study of a rare patient with a lesion in the
insula suggests that activity in the insula does not simply correlate
with romantic love and sexual desire but actually contributes to
differences between these processes (Cacioppo et al., 2013).

iStock.com/jhorrocks

Sexual and Emotional Satisfaction humans show wide variations in sexual
and emotional satisfaction within relationships (see ● Figure 7.23).
Crosscultural studies show that subjective sexual satisfaction depends
on a number of factors, including relative equality between men and
women, mental and physical health, and the importance of sexual behavior
for an individual (laumann et al., 2006). in the United States, more
committed relationships produce the highest levels of both sexual and
emotional satisfaction (Mark et al., 2015). individuals who expect to
continue a relationship are more attentive to their partners, both
emotionally and sexually. in contrast, one-night stands receive the
lowest sexual and emotional satisfaction scores from participants and
promote the strongest feelings of regret (Fisher et al., 2012).
historically, research on sexual satisfaction has focused on
heterosexual couples. Relatively few studies have considered sexual
satisfaction across sexual orientations. Mark and her colleagues (2015)
found no differences in sexual and emotional satisfaction among
heterosexual, bisexual, and homosexual individuals in committed
relationships but did observe differences in casual sexual contexts.
individuals of all sexual orientations reported more emotional and
sexual satisfaction from committed relationships than from casual sex
situations. however, gay and bisexual men reported experiencing higher
amounts of sexual and emotional satisfaction from casual sex contexts
than heterosexual individuals, while lesbian women reported less,
although the size of these differences was relatively small. across a
similarly sexually diverse sample, attachment style (see Chapter 11) was
predictive of both relationship and sexual satisfaction (Mark et al.,
2018). sexual orientation A stable pattern of attraction to members of a
particular sex.

Sexual Orientation individual differences in human sexuality are
substantial and normal. one of the ways individuals vary is in their
sexual orientation, which refers to a stable pattern of attraction to
members of a particular sex. a person's sexual orientation can
incorporate behavior, attraction, and identity (Ward et al., 2014).
These three components are often congruent, but not necessarily so. Many
people engage in same-sex behavior and fantasy

Austria Spain USA Bulgaria Canada New Zealand Australia Mexico United
Kingdom Germany Cluster 1

70

A Cross-Cultural Comparison of Relational and Sexual Satisfaction. A
survey of nearly 30,000 people in 29 countries showed wide variations in
sexual satisfaction. In most countries, there was a strong correlation
between relational satisfaction (defined as a combination of physical
pleasure with a partner and emotional satisfaction with a partner) and
sexual satisfaction. Gender differences in satisfaction with sexual
function were the smallest in Cluster 1 countries. Source: Adapted from
E. O. Laumann et al. (2006). "A Cross-National Study of Subjective
Sexual Well-Being Among Older Women and Men: Findings from the Global
Study of Sexual Attitudes and Behaviors," Archives of Sexual Behavior,
35(2), 145--161. doi: 10.1007/s10508-0059005-3

264

Chapter 7

Relational satisfaction (%)

FigurE 7.23

Sweden South Africa France Israel Malaysia Brazil Korea Philippines
Morocco Singapore Turkey Cluster 2 Italy

50

30

Egypt Algeria Thailand China Cluster 3 Taiwan Indonesia Japan

10 50

60

70

80

90

Sexual satisfaction (%)

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100

Hemis/Alamy Stock Photo

while maintaining a strong heterosexual orientation. In the sambia
tribal culture of new Guinea, all adolescent males are expected to
engage in samesex behavior before marrying women (stoller & herdt,
1985). the adult sexual orientation of these men remained overwhelmingly
heterosexual. the U.s. national health Interview survey incorporated
carefully crafted questions about sexual orientation beginning with
"Which of the following best represents how you think about yourself?"
Choices for males included gay, straight (that is, not gay), bisexual,
something else, and I don't know the answer. Choices for females
included lesbian or gay, straight (that is, not lesbian or gay),
bisexual, something else, and I don't know the answer. Individuals who
chose something else or I don't know the answer were asked follow-up
questions but were not included in the overall report of the data.
Results showed that 97.7% of females and 97.8% of males identified
themselves as straight, 1.5% of females and 1.8% of males identified
themselves as homosexual, and 0.9% of females and 0.4% of males
identified themselves as bisexual (Ward et al., 2014). as shown in ●
Figure 7.24, people's self-reported sexual orientation tends to fall
along a continuum (savin-Williams & vrangalova, 2013). It is likely that
male and female sexual orientations emerge along different pathways
(Diamond, 2012). sexual orientation in males tends to be stable, acting
like a compass, whereas females experience more fluidity in their sexual
attractions over time. Females are more likely than males to experience
physical arousal and desire for both sexes and to report changes in
their degree of same-sex or other-sex attraction over time (Diamond,
2012). More females endorse a bisexual than homosexual orientation, but
the opposite is true of males (Bailey et al., 2016).

Sexual orientation is carefully defined as a stable pattern of
attraction to people based on gender. Homosexual behavior can occur with
or without a homosexual orientation. Among the Sambian people of New
Guinea, young males are separated from their mothers and expected to
engage in homosexual behavior with older males. The Sambian people
believe that obtaining semen in this manner transforms them into
powerful warriors (Herdt, 1987). After marriage, the now-adult man is no
longer expected to engage in homosexual behavior.

Females

98

Males

96 94

FIGURE 7.24

92 90

Sexual Orientation Falls Along a Continuum. Self-report is considered
one of the more reliable measures of sexual orientation. When asked to
identify their sexual orientation, people's responses demonstrated more
of a continuum than discrete categories.

Prevalence (%)

88 86 84 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 Completely heterosexual

Mostly heterosexual

Bisexual

Mostly homosexual

Completely homosexual

Source: Data from R. C. Savin-Williams & Z. Vrangalova (2013). "Mostly
Heterosexual as a Distinct Sexual Orientation Group: A Systematic Review
of the Empirical Evidence," Developmental Review, 33(1), 58--88. doi:
10.1016/j.dr.2013.01.001. Figure based on Savin-Williams data in J. M.
Bailey et al. (2016). "Sexual Orientation, Controversy, and Science,"
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 17(2), 45--101. doi:
10.1177/1529100616637616

What Does It Mean to Be MotIvateD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

265

genes appear to influence sexual orientation, although the exact
mechanisms with which they do so are not well understood and are likely
to be quite complex. like most human behaviors, sexual orientation is
probably the result of an interaction between genetic factors and other
aspects of the individual's experience, which can include prenatal
factors. To assess the genetic contribution to sexual orientation,
researchers have compared rates of homosexuality in twins. if one
identical male twin is homosexual, his twin has about a 50% chance of
also being homosexual (Kirk et al., 2000). analyses of twin reports of
the number of lifetime same-sex partners showed that sexual orientation
is somewhat heritable for both males (0.34--0.39) and females
(0.18--0.19) (långström et al., 2010). genome-wide association studies
(gWaS) compare complete sets of dna for individuals that differ in a
trait. a gWaS study of nearly 500,000 people found that genetics
explained about one-third of the variation in same-sex behavior, but it
was not possible to predict a person's sexual orientation on the basis
of dna (ganna et al., 2019). as genetic methods continue to improve, it
is likely that we will have a better understanding of the role of genes
in sexual orientation in the future. among the other possible biological
variables affecting sexual orientation are levels of prenatal, but not
adult, sex hormones. Prenatal hormones have the ability to "organize"
not just reproductive structures, but also the brain (Bailey et al.,
2016). Females with a condition known as congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(Cah) experience high prenatal levels of male hormones. Consequently,
they are often born with masculinized external genitalia, are more
likely to describe themselves as "tomboys," show greater interest in
"male" toys and activities, and are more likely to engage in lesbian or
bisexual behavior (Meyer-Bahlburg et al., 2008). however, most women
with Cah are heterosexual, just as most lesbian and bisexual women do
not have a history of Cah or similar conditions. an interesting clue to
the origin of sexual orientation arises from the observation that birth
order influences the odds that a male is homosexual. Males who have
older brothers from the same mother are more likely to be gay than males
who have no siblings, younger siblings only, or older sisters
(Blanchard, 1997; Balthazart, 2011). Theoretically, carrying a male
fetus could provoke a mother's immune response, which would become
stronger with each successive male fetus she carries. her immune
response could influence the development of her fetus by altering
significant hormonal processes. Several structures in the brain are
known to be different in males and females and also seem to differ
between homosexual and heterosexual males. among these is a small
cluster of neurons located in the hypothalamus known as the interstitial
nucleus of the anterior hypothalamus (inah; see ● Figure 7.25). There
are four separate nuclei in inah. Two of these, inah-2 and inah-3, are
notably larger in males than in females (allen et al., 1989). The exact
function of these nuclei in humans is unknown, although animal research
suggests that they participate in sexual behavior. Building on this
research about differences between the brains

FIGURE 7.25 Some Brain Differences May Correlate With Sexual
Orientation. Simon LeVay reported that an area of the hypothalamus known
as INAH-3 differs between heterosexual and homosexual men. If you
compare the samples in (b) and (c), you can see that INAH-3, indicated
by the four dark arrows, appears to be larger in the heterosexual male
sample than in the homosexual male sample. The impact of this size
difference on adult sexual behavior or sexual orientation remains
unknown, however, because these are correlational data. Source: Adapted
from S. LeVay (1991). "A Difference in Hypothalamic Structure Between
Heterosexual and Homosexual Men," Science, 253, 1034--1037. doi:
10.1126/science.1887219

266

Chapter 7

Lateral ventricles

(b) Heterosexual man INAH nuclei Hypothalamus Third ventricle

(c) Homosexual man

(d) Location of INAH-3

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of males and females, Simon levay asked whether inah-3 might be
different in heterosexual and homosexual males. after examining the
brains of more than 40 individuals, levay (1991) concluded that inah-3
in homosexual males was about two to three times smaller than in
heterosexual males, or about the same size as typically found in
females. levay was quite cautious in his interpretation of his results.
The homosexual individuals in his sample had all died from hiv/aidS.
otherwise, there would be little reason to note sexual orientation on a
person's medical records. although it is unlikely that hiv/aidS would
produce this type of change in the brain, levay could not rule out that
possibility based on his data. levay also raised the possibility that
engaging in homosexual behavior might influence inah-3, even in the
adult, although he gave little credence to that possibility.
nonetheless, levay's research had a profound effect on the way
psychologists and the public looked at sexual orientation. Before the
1990s, the medical and psychological research literatures used the term
sexual preference instead of today's sexual orientation. Because of the
difficulties arising from this type of research in humans, others have
investigated the correlations between brain structure and sexual
behavior in animals. among domestic sheep, 6% to 8% of rams (males) mate
exclusively with other males. The sheep equivalent of inah-3 is about
the same size in ewes (females) as in the rams that mated with other
rams. This structure is larger in rams that mated with ewes (Roselli et
al., 2004).

Cognitive and Social Motives So far, our discussion has focused on
motivational behavior that is central to maintaining life. in addition,
humans experience a range of complex cognitive and social motives. a
lengthy list of these types of complex motives published in 1938
included achievement, affiliation, autonomy, nurturance, dominance,
play, and order (Murray, 1938). More recent work focuses on needs for
competence and relatedness (deci & Ryan, 2000). although some
psychologists retain strong distinctions between biological and
psychological motives, the dividing line is surely blurred. When an
individual's need for affiliation is not met, the consequences of the
resulting loneliness include biological factors, such as increased rates
of illness and death (Cacioppo et al., 2015).

The Motivation to Affiliate humans are a social species. our need to
belong might not seem to be in the same category to you as our need for
nutrients and sexual behavior, but the results of many studies show that
affiliation works similarly to the other motivations we have discussed
so far (Baumeister & leary, 1995). When people are asked to identify
which pleasures are most important to their happiness, the overwhelming
majority rate love, intimacy, and social affiliation above wealth, fame,
and even physical health (Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). not only do people
value affiliation, but a perceived lack of connection with others can
have devastating effects. Solitary confinement is viewed as one of the
worst punishments humans inflict on one another. The effects of social
isolation can be as detrimental to good health as high blood pressure,
lack of exercise, obesity, or smoking (house et al., 1988). not all
behaviors associated with feeling isolated are self-destructive. in some
cases, feeling isolated can result in outwardly hostile behavior (see ●
Figure 7.26). Students told in an experiment that a personality test had
shown that they were "the type likely to end up alone later in life"
showed less empathy and more aggression toward other students than did
students told that they would enjoy "rewarding relationships throughout
life" (Twenge et al., 2001). it is probably not an accident that most
individuals responsible for mass shootings are described as outcasts or
loners. The experience of loneliness appears to serve as an aversive
signal that, like hunger, thirst, and pain, evolved to warn humans that
they are facing a threat to their survival and that their social
connections are in need of repair (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018). Social
connections are especially important to the survival of humans. Compared
to other species, humans require the greatest amount of parenting to
survive to adulthood and reproduce. in addition, as we discuss in
Chapter 13, humans are not well equipped to survive in isolation. our
ancestors formed hunter-gatherer groups because the cooperative sharing
of responsibilities enhanced the survival of all group members.

affiliation Being associated with other people.

WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

267

9

Effects of Social Exclusion on Helping Behaviors. People who were told
that a personality test indicated they were likely to spend their future
alone without significant relationships were far less helpful across
different types of tasks than participants who were told that they were
likely to have a future featuring acceptance and belongingness. Source:
Adapted from J. M. Twenge et al. (2007). "If You Can't Join Them, Beat
Them: Effects of Social Exclusion on Aggressive Behavior," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1058--1069. doi:
10.1037/00223514.81.6.1058

Mean prosocial response

8

FigurE 7.26

7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

Future alone Future belonging Dollars donated

Experiments Pencils volunteered helped with

Cooperative moves

Opportunities for prosocial behavior

individuals differ in the amount of social connection they desire. early
work on affiliation by henry Murray (1938) and david McClelland (1985)
viewed the need for others as similar to a personality trait, as we
discuss further in Chapter 12. Some people are relatively happy working
in a cubicle for hours on end, while this lack of social contact would
be intolerable for others. Still others might feel lonely even when
surrounded by large numbers of caring friends and family members. We
appear to have a set point for social activity that operates similarly
to the set points we mentioned in our discussion of hunger. When we
sense a gap between our actual social connectivity and what we desire,
we experience the unpleasant state of loneliness, which in turn
motivates us to seek more social experiences. Twin studies show that
this set point, like the others we have discussed, is influenced by our
genetics (Boomsma et al., 2005). Knowing one identical twin's need for
affiliation helps predict the other twin's need. individual
predispositions interact with people's situations to predict desire for
affiliation. We frequently join others to share good events, whether
that means a birthday, a wedding, a promotion, or simply the end of
another round of final exams. We have all enjoyed the camaraderie of
staying in the stands long after our team has won an important game,
celebrating with nearby fans and exchanging high fives. affiliation is
not just for good times, however. People often find that the company of
others helps to reduce stress. The social isolation resulting from
pandemic quarantines and lockdowns contributes to high stress levels by
removing a major source of comfort. in a classic series of experiments,
Stanley Schachter (1959) showed that people expecting to be given a
painful electric shock were more likely to seek the company of other
study participants than to wait for their shock alone. not all stressful
situations are equally likely to produce affiliation, however. in one
study, participants were told that they would be performing embarrassing
behaviors, such as sucking on large pacifiers (Sarnoff & Zimbardo,
1961). These participants made different choices than the participants
expecting shock in the previous study: They preferred to be alone.
exactly what does the company of other people contribute to reducing
stress? it appears that we appreciate the company of others when we
expect them to reduce our stress. in many cases, other people can reduce
our stress by providing information. hospital patients awaiting
dangerous surgeries preferred roommates who had already been through the
procedure to those who had not yet had surgery (Kulik et al., 1996).
achievement motivation A desire to excel or outperform others.

268

Chapter 7

Achievement Motivation Achievement motivation is the desire to excel or

outperform others on tasks at which a person could objectively succeed
or fail (Wigfield et al., 2015), and has been a topic of interest to
psychologists beginning with William James (1890).

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Justin Sullivan/Staff/Getty Images News/Getty Images

WPA Pool/Pool/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images

A person's trait level of achievement motivation interacts with the
opportunities to achieve available in the environment.

CHEN WS/Shutterstock.com

Using measures of individual achievement motivation, people who are high
in achievement motivation have been shown to seek and typically succeed
in competitive, entrepreneurial occupations (McClelland, 1985). The role
of individual achievement motivation in predicting performance has been
of great interest in the fields of education, management, and athletics.
Many psychologists have recognized that individual differences in
achievement motivation seem similar to personality traits, which we
discuss in Chapter 12 (elliot & Murayama, 2008). a trait is a stable
characteristic that shows relatively little variation over time.
however, traits also typically interact with situations. an introverted
person might seem more introverted at a big party than when out to
dinner with one friend. according to this more complex view, a person's
trait achievement motivation interacts with the opportunities present in
the environment (hart & albarracin, 2009). For example, achieving
excellence might be viewed as an alternative to having fun or enjoying
leisure time. highachieving people do not dislike fun but are prepared
to avoid or postpone some fun to meet their achievement goals.
low-achieving people may be perfectly capable of success but, for a
variety of reasons, have simply prioritized fun alternatives and
inhibited the achievement alternatives. Carol dweck (2012) argues that
achievement motivation is influenced by people's beliefs about their own
abilities. individuals with a growth mindset, or a belief that
capacities can be developed, outperform individuals with a fixed
mindset, or a belief that capacities do not change. in other words, a
person with a fixed mindset might say "i'm not good at math," while a
person with a growth mindset might say "math is hard, but i'm getting
better at it." individuals with a fixed mindset avoid challenges, become
defensive when criticized, and feel envious when they see someone
performing better. in contrast, individuals with a growth mindset focus
on the processes that lead to success, such as hard work and trying out
new strategies. instead of catastrophes, mistakes are viewed as
important sources of information eventually leading to a solution. The
development of achievement motivation is complex. according to Wigfield
et al. (2015), expectancies, or what people anticipate, and values, or
the weight people put on outcomes,

People affiliate not only to share happy occasions, such as the
introduction of a royal baby, but also to reduce stress in sad times,
such as when family members of victims of the September 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks gathered to throw flowers in the memorial pools at
Ground Zero.

WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

269

THINKING SCIENTIFICALLY Do Participation Trophies Affect Entitlement and
Competitiveness? In 2015, Pittsburgh Steeler James Harrison posted a
large photo of two participation trophies his young sons had received
and which he had returned. He stated that he didn't want his boys to
think that they deserved something because they tried hard, because
"sometimes your best is not enough" (Dator, 2015). Research comparing
the weight that should be put on effort in grades and pay for employment
showed that college students believed that effort should count for much
more in both situations than professors or employers believed it should
(Altman et al., 2019). The so-called trophy culture is a fairly recent
phenomenon, leading some to believe that it has influenced young adults
more than other age groups (Twenge, 2014). Has the participation trophy
phenomenon had an impact on people's attitudes toward performance and
achievement? In one study, endorsement of trophy culture was positively
associated with higher feelings of entitlement and negatively correlated
with competitiveness (Dickhaus et al., 2019).

2nd in that same competition" (Dickhaus et al., 2019, p. 49). They found
that students who had participated in middle school or high school
athletics had less positive attitudes toward participation trophies. The
level of acceptance of participation trophies predicted entitlement both
generally and in academic settings as well as lower levels of
competitiveness. However, acceptance of participation trophies was not
related to narcissism (see Chapter 14).

ARE THERE OTHER WAYS THIS EVIDENCE COULD BE INTERPRETED? This study
involved quite a bit of self-selection (e.g., to participate or not in
middle school or high school athletics) and correlational data, which do
not allow us to make conclusions about phenomena possibly "caused" by
trophy culture. In other words, we do not know if James Harrison was
right about the effects of participation trophies on his sons.

WHAT OTHER EVIDENCE WOULD I NEED TO EVALUATE THESE ALTERNATIVES? This
was a very small study involving selfreport. To truly identify the
causal outcomes of participation trophies, one might design a
longitudinal study in which children are randomly assigned to groups
exposed to participation trophies or not followed by measures of their
entitlement and competitiveness.

WHAT ARE THE MOST REASONABLE CONCLUSIONS? Participation trophies are one
small factor out of many unique social and historical influences on
young adults. People engage in youth sports for a variety of reasons,
only one of which is to prepare for more elite competition in college
and beyond. It is likely that the effects of participation trophies
would be different for different people. ■

WHAT AM I BEING ASkED TO BELIEVE OR ACCEPT?

WHAT EVIDENCE SUPPORTS THIS POSITION? The researchers conducted a survey
of 193 college students attending institutions located in the U.S.
Southeast or Midwest. Participants were asked to note the extent of
their agreement with statements such as "A kid that places 10th or 12th
in a competition should get a reward just like a kid that places 1st or

Sergey Nivens/Shutterstock.com

The main hypothesis of Dickhaus et al. (2019) is that endorsement of
trophy culture will have an impact on feelings of entitlement and levels
of competitiveness.

Messages in the popular culture regarding achievement might shape
expectations and values.

influence how they choose tasks, persist in finding a solution, and
perform. a person who expects to win a tennis match and thinks winning
the match is important is likely to play tennis often and be very
motivated to win. These expectancies and values are in turn influenced
by both personal and social beliefs. Personal beliefs, such as
perceptions of confidence and the difficulty

270

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of a task, interact with social factors, such as culture and the
expectations and values of significant other people. our tennis player's
motivation might reflect her high levels of confidence, her respect for
a difficult opponent, her concerns about disappointing a parent if she
loses, and her culture's esteem for excellent athletes.

Motivational Priorities We have discussed several different motivations,
from hunger to sex to affiliation to achievement. if faced
simultaneously with many drives and demands, how do we decide which
motivations to follow first?

Approach and Avoidance as we observed in the case of achievement
motivation,

situations often present us with multiple, overlapping opportunities and
goals (elliot, 1999). approach and avoidance differ in valence or
natural attractiveness, with approach involving positive and desirable
outcomes and avoidance involving negative and undesirable outcomes. a
particular situation might stimulate us to engage in a behavior to
approach an outcome, avoid one, or possibly do both simultaneously. When
you think about your motivation for studying this textbook right now,
you might think you are working to get a good grade in the course
(approach), avoid getting a poor grade (avoidance), or do some
combination of the two. in any case, you are motivated to study. This
example is only one of several forms conflicts among motives can take.
in the example mentioned previously of the student facing a choice
between doing well in school and enjoying fun and leisure time, the
conflict occurs between two positive choices, or approachapproach. The
individual must decide which goal has priority. in still other cases,
choices occur between two unpleasant alternatives (avoidance-avoidance).
if you don't stay late at work, your boss will think you're a lazy
employee, but if you do stay late at work, your partner will be angry.
in most real-world situations, choices typically have multiple,
overlapping approachavoidance aspects, making the prioritization of
goals essential.

Motivational Theories an early effort to provide a model for
prioritizing motives was contributed by abraham Maslow (1943). Maslow
viewed motivation as a hierarchy of needs, in which lower levels must be
satisfied before the individual can pursue higher-level needs. as shown
in ● Figure 7.27, Maslow's model is typically illustrated as a pyramid.

Self-actualization Esteem (respect)

Parenting Mate retention

Love (affection, belongingness)

Mate acquisition Status/esteem

Safety

Affiliation Self-protection

Immediate physiological needs

(a) 

Immediate physiological needs

(b) 

FigurE 7.27 Classic and Contemporary Hierarchies of Needs. Maslow's
classic pyramid depicting his hierarchy of needs is shown in (a).
Kenrick et al. (2010) have proposed an updated version of the pyramid
(b) that incorporates developmental and evolutionary perspectives.
Source: Adapted from D. T. Kenrick et al. (2010). "Renovating the
Pyramid of Needs: Contemporary Extensions Built Upon Ancient
Foundations," Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5(3), 292--314,
doi:10.1177/1745691610369469

WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

271

Vladimir Prusakov/Shutterstock.com

Miller (1944) shocked rats while they were eating a food reward they had
earned by running down a maze alley, setting up a conflict between
approach and avoidance toward the food box. Subsequently, the rat would
run down the alley but stop without entering the food box. Miller could
adjust where the rats stopped (a point of equilibrium between approach
and avoidance) by changing either the rats' hunger levels or the
intensity of the shock.

Schoolteachers often face students who come to school hungry or sick
because of poverty or neglect. According to Maslow, it is difficult for
teachers to interest these children, whose basic needs are unmet, in
learning about long division and other subjects.

at the lowest level of the pyramid, we find physiological needs,
including food, water, and shelter. These basic needs must be met daily;
otherwise, life will be threatened. Consequently, if meeting these needs
is a challenge for a person, Maslow predicted that the person will not
pursue needs at higher levels of the hierarchy. in one classic study,
young healthy men were given approximately 1,500 calories per day for 6
months, which resulted in a loss of about 25% of their normal body
weight (Keys et al., 1950). not only did the men become obsessed with
food, but their interest in sex declined dramatically.

AP Images

Abraham Maslow did not believe that everyone achieves selfactualization.
Among the select few he believed had reached this pinnacle of motivation
were Abraham Lincoln and Mahatma Gandhi---as well as U.S. First Lady
Eleanor Roosevelt, shown in this photograph with Madame Chiang Kai-shek.
Maslow's self-actualized people shared common attributes, including
independence and a good sense of humor. Who would you add to this list
of self-actualized people?

272

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

once physiological needs are met, Maslow suggests that we turn our
attention to safety and then to belongingness, represented by the love
and affection of others. We might question the ordering of these needs.
during the Covid-19 pandemic, it is not unusual to see people placing a
higher priority on belongingness (socializing) than on safety
(practicing social distancing). For Maslow, the three lower categories
(physiological, safety, and belongingness needs) are essential to human
life. Freed from the challenges of meeting basic needs, we begin to seek
esteem, or the respect we receive from other members of the community.
at the pinnacle of human striving, however, is the goal of
self-actualization. People seeking self-actualization desire to fully
meet their potential, as suggested by the 1980 U.S. army slogan "Be all
you can be." Cultures differ dramatically in their emphasis on
self-actualization, with individualistic nations like the United States
embracing this value more than collectivist nations in asia, where
harmony and belongingness are highly valued (hofstede, 1984). Maslow's
classic theory received an update that retained the overall hierarchical
organization but added three new perspectives: the evolutionary
functions of motives, the development of motives over the life span, and
the cognitive priorities assigned to motives in response to
environmental stimuli (Kenrick et al., 2010). This modified pyramid,
illustrated in Figure 7.28, replaces self-actualization with mate
acquisition, mate retention, and parenting. The authors of the revision
noted that self-actualization was interesting, but they could not find
an evolutionary explanation for why we would seek to reach this level.
Many of the activities described by Maslow as helping people to reach
self-actualization, such as art and poetry, might be better explained as
efforts to gain status, which in turn would attract mates.

self-actualization A state of having fulfilled your potential.

Interpersonal Relationships The Emotional Perspective

image100/Alamy Stock Photo

Research by John Gottman shows that happy couples do experience negative
emotions with each other. However, for every negative incident, they
tend to experience five times as many positive emotional interactions.

WHAT IS THE IMPACT OF POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE INTERACTIONS ON
RELATIONSHIPS? THE IDEA THAT GOOD RELATIONSHIPS are characterized by
positive emotions and that bad relationships feature many negative
emotions sounds obvious. however, it is unrealistic to think that happy
couples never experience conflict. They do, but the way they fight can
have a big influence on the likelihood that they will stay together.
John gottman uses a combination of heart rate, facial expression, and
analysis of the way people talk about their relationships to each other
and to others to make accurate predictions about whether a relationship
will last (gottman, 2011). a key observation is the ratio of positive to
negative comments in a couple's discussion of a problem. happy couples
make five times more positive comments about each other and their
relationship during these discussions (e.g., we laugh a lot versus we
never have fun). in several places in this textbook, we have emphasized
how the human mind is skewed toward the negative, such as noticing
bitter tastes over sweet. This slant suggests that it is easy to focus
on your partner's negative qualities, leading to negative emotions and
conflict. if we put our relationships on evolutionary cruise control,
the ratio of positive-to-negative comments might drop to a point where
the relationship is in danger. Maintaining a positive outlook on your
partner requires attention and work. Try observing how people talk about
their partners, or watch your own behavior, if you're brave enough. are
you achieving gottman's 5:1 ratio of positive to negative comments? ■
WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

273

Psychology Takes On Real-World Problems Prioritizing Motives During a
Pandemic by research testing people's choices of Things get a bit more
complicated safety versus affiliation. It is likely that when we look at
the relationship between such choices are in turn influenced by a safety
and affiliation in the priority models. number of variables, including
age. In terms Both assume that safety needs will be of informing policy,
it is important for prioritized ahead of affiliation. In this policy
makers to understand the power of regard, the models might be doing a
worse the affiliation motive relative to the safety job of predicting
actual behavior during a motive. Simple appeals to safety might
pandemic. Many people have expressed not be sufficient to gain
compliance with outrage when they are unable to attend restrictions that
require people to forego funerals, graduations, weddings, and social
contact. ■ religious services. These ritualistic sources of social
comfort are probably even more salient at times of extreme stress. In
spite of government policies and to the dismay of many older adults,
young adults continue to gather at parties and bars, often without masks
or social distancing. It is safe to assume that these choices represent
a higher value for affiliation than for safety. Having observed these
contradictions with motivational priority Models attempting to explain
how we prioritize motives usually models, we might suggest put safety
ahead of affiliation. However, during a pandemic, it that the models
need to appears that many people value affiliation even more than usual,
be revisited, accompanied possibly due to the ability of social contact
to reduce stress. Space_Cat/Shutterstock.com

During a pandemic, people experience a number of competing motives,
including the need to work to obtain food, concerns about safety, and
the need for social affiliation. How well does psychological science
help us understand the choices people make? Both Maslow's classic model
of motivational priorities and the newer model by Kenrick et al. (2010)
agree that attention to immediate physiological needs is a higher
priority than safety. This appears to be consistent with the behavior of
people who do and do not have the ability to perform their work during
lockdown. Small business owners and their employees, such as barbers,
restaurant owners, and nail salon and gym personnel, undergo immediate
hardship when their source of income is cut off by governments wishing
to avoid the spread of illness. In contrast, professionals who can work
safely at home are much less likely to experience financial disruption
during a pandemic. According to motivational models, these two groups
can be expected to view safety and the risk of illness very differently.
The small business owners and their employees are probably much more
comfortable risking illness than the professionals working at home
because their more immediate need to feed themselves and their families
is so strong.

sUMMarY 7.2 Important Concepts in Motivation term

Meaning

example

Motivation

A process that arouses, maintains, and guides behavior to a goal.

Being thirsty leads you to seek a drinking fountain and get a drink of
water.

Homeostasis

A steady internal balance or equilibrium.

We are motivated to maintain a constant internal temperature. If we feel
cold, we shiver and put on more clothing.

274

Chapter 7

The Feeling Mind: eMoTion and MoTivaTion

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

term

Meaning

example

Set point

A value actively defended to maintain homeostasis.

It is hard to lose weight because we actively defend our previous weight
by slowing our metabolism when fewer calories are consumed.

Drive

A state of arousal or tension resulting from stimuli that are important
to survival.

Being hungry is unpleasant.

Drive reduction

The feelings of relief and reward following a return to equilibrium.

Quenching your thirst on a hot day is rewarding.

Incentives

Rewards that motivate behavior without the experience of any unpleasant
drive state.

You enjoy throwing a great surprise party for a friend's birthday.

Credits: First row---Michael Steele/Staff/Getty Images Sport/Getty
Images; Second row---Steve Cole/Photodisc/Getty Images; Third row---Drew
D. Saur; Fourth row---AP Images/Gurinder Osan; Fifth row---Yvette
Cardozo/Alamy Stock Photo, Location DALLAS WASHINGTON NEW YORK CITY
CHICAGO iStock.com/Elenathewise; Sixth row---Sonia Moskowitz-Globe
Photos, Inc./Newscom. What students were paid for

Reading

Grades

Various†

Test scores

Grade level participating

Second-graders

Ninth-graders

Sixth-, seventh-, and eighth-graders

Fourth- and seventh-graders

How much

\$2 per book

\$50 for A's \$35 for B's \$20 for C's

Up to \$100 every two weeks

\$25 (fourth-graders) to \$50 (seventh-graders) per test

Average student earned

\$13.81

\$695.61

\$532.85

\$139.43 (fourth-graders) \$231.55 (seventh-graders)

Study size\*

1,780 from 22 schools

4,396 from 20 schools

3,495 from 17 schools

8,320 from 63 schools

Results

Very Positive Paying children to read dramatically boosted
readingcomprehension scores.

Mixed Children cut fewer classes and got slightly better grades.
Standardized test scores did not change.

Positive Rewarding five different actions, including attendance and
behavior, seemed to improve reading skills.

No Effect Paying children for higher test scores did not lead to more
learning or better grades---or any measureable changes.

KeY terMs The Language of Psychological Science \*Not including control
groups

† A combination of metrics that varied from school to school but always
included attendance and behavior

Be sure that you can define these terms and use them correctly.

achievement motivation, p. 268 affiliation, p. 267 anorexia nervosa,
p. 260 appraisal, p. 239 binge-eating disorder, p. 261 body mass index
(BMi), p. 257 bulimia nervosa, p. 260 Cannon--Bard theory, p. 235
catharsis, p. 234 display rule, p. 247 drive, p. 253

drive reduction, p. 253 emotion, p. 232 estradiol, p. 262 extrinsic
reward, p. 253 glucose, p. 255 homeostasis, p. 253 incentive, p. 253
insula, p. 243 intrinsic reward, p. 253 James--lange theory, p. 233
leptin, p. 256

motivation, p. 233 satiety, p. 256 Schachter--Singer two-factor theory,
p. 236 self-actualization, p. 273 set point, p. 253 sexual orientation,
p. 264 somatovisceral afference model of emotion (SaMe), p. 238
testosterone, p. 262 yerkes-dodson law, p. 240

WhaT doeS iT Mean To Be MoTivaTed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

275

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Learning something new produces structural changes in neurons.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Adaptive Mind

8

LEARNING Learning Objectives 1. Compare and contrast reflexes,
instincts, and learned behaviors. 2. Identify the components of a
classical conditioning experiment and discuss major phenomena and
applications related to classical conditioning.

3.  Describe the major components of operant conditioning and
    distinguish operant conditioning from classical conditioning.

4.  Discuss the interactions between learned processes and animals'
    preparation to learn in species-specific ways.

5.  Apply learning principles and terminology to everyday situations and
    problems.

6.  Analyze the processes that result in observational learning.

ALTHOUGH YOU MAY NOT HAVE HAD AN opportunity to learn to surf, we're
assuming that in your role as a student, you are familiar with the
process of learning. But knowing how to learn is different from
understanding how and why learning occurs. What is going on in the minds
of the people in the photo of surfers as they learn to do something new?
A behavior like learning to surf is complicated, so scientists
interested in learning often begin their examinations using animals that
are simpler than humans, observing as they learn to do behaviors simpler
than surfing. Scientists have zoomed in to observe changes that happen
in single neurons, like the large image at the beginning of this
section, found in simple animals like the Aplysia californica it is
touched, and it demonstrates this knowledge by protectively withdrawing
its body in response to touch before the shock is administered. Because
the slug has such a simple nervous system compared to ours, scientists
have been able to identify which neurons are involved in this learning
and to describe the changes in a neuron's functioning that make new
behaviors---like withdrawing prior to shock---possible. Is it possible
that human learning has anything in common with learning in slugs? The
answer to this question is "yes and no." Zooming out, we will see that
some types of learning are common across animals with vastly different
evolutionary histories and complexities, like humans and sea slugs. In
other cases, we see interactions between nature and nurture. Experience,
or nurture, frequently

Matt Cardy/Stringer/Getty Images News/Getty Images

sea slug. The sea slug is capable of learning to anticipate an electric
shock that happens every time

277 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

interacts with the nature of the organism exposed to the experience. You
can talk to your kitten and to an infant, but only the infant will
respond to this experience by learning to understand what you're saying
and how to reply. Each species brings unique and innate building blocks
of learning, accumulated over many

Jane Burton/Darling Kindersley/Getty Images

generations, to any given situation. Zooming out still more, we will see
how learning in groups can often be different from learning as an
individual. Even the lowly sea slug learns differently when alone than
when in a group of fellow slugs. Isolated slugs can't seem to stop
trying to eat food that is too tough to swallow (Schwarz & Susswein,
1992), but they learn this task easily when in the presence of other
slugs (Susswein et al.,1986). Apparently, slugs can communicate with one
another using pheromones, and the presence or absence of these chemicals
has a powerful effect on their ability to learn (Susswein et al., 1986).
The surfers, who are learning to surf in a group, might have had a
different experience if they were taking lessons individually. Students
working independently at home during a pandemic might very well have a
different learning experience than when they're in a face-to-face
learning environment. A further understanding of the processes

to stimuli.

instinct An inborn pattern of behavior elicited by environmental
stimuli; also known as a fixed action pattern.

learning A relatively permanent change in behavior or the capacity for
behavior due to experience.

Goosebumps are what is left of piloerection in humans. These signals of
arousal are remnants of a time when we had enough hair to make this an
easily noticeable response.

278

Chapter 8

How Do Animals Respond to Their Environment? Animals, including
ourselves, behave in response to their environments. Behavior can take
the form of either externally observable actions or internal processes,
such as emotions, thoughts, and physiological responses. These behaviors
fall into three broad categories: reflexes, instincts, and learned
behaviors. each type of behavior plays a role in helping us survive, but
each differs dramatically in its ability to adapt to a changing world.
Reflexes are inevitable, involuntary responses to stimuli. in casual
conversation, we sometimes attribute a baseball player's high batting
average or our ability to step on the brake in time to avoid an
automobile accident to great reflexes, but in fact, these examples
involve learned behaviors that have become fast and automatic as a
result of lots of practice. nobody is born knowing how to hit baseballs
or use the brakes of a car, so these behaviors do not meet this
definition of a reflex. in humans, most reflexes are controlled by
nervous system circuits located in the spinal cord and brainstem, as
described in Chapter 4. Your physician checks one of these reflexes by
tapping your knee with a hammer. The tap stretches your leg muscles, and
the stretch is sensed by neurons in the spinal cord. Motor neurons in
the spinal cord tell your thigh muscle to contract to compensate for the
stretching, and your foot kicks out. no experience with knee-tapping is
necessary to produce this behavior, nor can you voluntarily prevent it.
By the time your brain realizes your knee was Tyler
Olson/Shutterstock.com

reflex An inevitable, involuntary response

underlying learning should help us optimize these experiences.

David Trood/DigitalVision/Getty Images

Animals respond to the environment with reflexes, instinctive behaviors,
and learned behaviors. Animals, like this "ferocious" kitten, use a
reflex called piloerection to make themselves look bigger. The
evolutionary purpose of this behavior is to appear so menacing that they
can avoid conflict.

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

iStock.com/CWLawrence

tapped, you have already reacted. other reflexes pull our bodies away
from painful stimuli---such as when we step on a piece of glass or touch
a hot stove---turn our heads in the direction of loud sounds, and help
us stand upright and walk. Reflexes have the advantage of producing
fast, reliable responses that promote your welfare, but they also have
the disadvantage of being inflexible. For example, we respond to stress
or cold by forming goosebumps (bumps on the skin). this reflex appears
to be left over from when our species had more body hair. Goosebumps
raise each strand of hair, which in times of stress makes an individual
look larger, scaring off predators or competitors, and, in response to
cold, traps more insulating air near the skin. As humans lost most of
their body hair over time, the advantages of this reflex decreased, but
we still retain the behavior. Instincts, also called fixed action
patterns, are inborn patterns of behavior elicited or "released" by
specific environmental stimuli. once they begin, instinctive behaviors
run until completion. instincts share reflexes' reliability and lack of
dependence on experience, but the resulting behaviors are more complex,
requiring many more neurons than the number involved in a reflexive kick
of your foot. instinctive behaviors occur in the mating and parenting
behaviors of many species (tinbergen, 1951). For example, a male peacock
displays its magnificent tail as soon as an appropriate female is
noticed. An example of a human instinct is yawning. once a yawn is
initiated, it is difficult to stop. psychologists define learning as a
relatively permanent change in behavior (or in the capacity for
behavior) due to experience. the core of this definition is the phrase
change in behavior. After learning, we can do something new that we
couldn't do before, providing us with enormous advantages in surviving a
changing world. not all changes in behavior take place because of
learning, however. our behavior changes as we mature from infancy
through adulthood, as we will see in Chapter 11. Behavior can be changed
by brain damage or by having a psychological disorder. so our definition
of learning limits the changes we consider to be learned to those that
result from experience. the other qualification in this definition,
"relatively permanent," prevents the labeling of brief or unstable
changes---such as when we experience different moods or suffer from an
illness---as learning. the extent to which learning is really permanent
will be discussed in Chapter 9.

Mark Bridger/Shutterstock.com

Elena Rooraid/PhotoEdit

Although some scientists disagree, contagious yawning might represent an
instinct for a number of species, including our own. In one study,
puppies over the age of 7 months were susceptible to contagious yawning
in response to seeing humans yawn.

Imprinting, in which a young organism bonds with adults, provides an
example of how experience has different effects at different times in
the life span. These baby swans are following their parents because the
parents were the first things they saw when they hatched. After a delay
of a day or two, exposure to the parents would not lead to following. If
the baby swans saw a human experimenter instead of their parents upon
hatching, they would follow the human instead.

Organisms usually show imprinting by the time they are mobile, which for
swans means the first day of life, but for human children means closer
to 1 year. Because these children have imprinted on their primary
caregivers instead of their preschool teacher, the teacher needs a bit
of technological help to encourage his charges to follow him on a walk.
How Do AnimAls ResponD to tHeiR enviRonment?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

279

What Are the Three Main Types of Learning?

associative learning The formation of associations, or connections,
among stimuli and behaviors. classical conditioning A type of learning
in which associations are formed between two stimuli that occur
sequentially in time.

treasure dragon/Shutterstock.com

Learning can be divided into three categories: associative,
nonassociative, and observational. More than one type of learning can
operate simultaneously in the same situation. operant conditioning A
type of learnAssociative learning occurs when we form associations, or
connections, among stimuli, ing in which associations are formed
bebehaviors, or both. in other words, we learn that if A happens, then B
is likely to follow. This tween behaviors and their outcomes. type of
learning helps us to predict the future based on past experience. The
ability to anticinonassociative learning Learning that involves changes
in the magnitude of repate the future provides enormous survival
advantages because through it, animals gain time sponses to stimuli. to
prepare. Two important types of associative learning are classical
conditioning and operant habituation A simple form of learning
conditioning. in classical conditioning, we associate pairs of stimuli
that occur sequentially in which reactions to repeated stimuli that in
time. if a child sees a bee for the first time and then gets stung, the
child forms a connecare unchanging and harmless decrease. tion between
seeing bees and the pain of being stung. The next time a bee flies by,
the child sensitization An increased reaction to is likely to feel quite
frightened. in operant conditioning, we associate behaviors and their
many stimuli following exposure to one consequences. if you study hard,
you will get good grades. we will discuss these forms of asstrong
stimulus. sociative learning in more detail in later sections of this
chapter. observational learning Learning that Nonassociative learning
involves changes in the magnitude of responses to a single occurs when
one organism watches the stimulus rather than the formation of
connections between stimuli. Two important types of actions of another
organism; also known as social learning or modeling. nonassociative
learning are habituation and sensitization. Habituation reduces our
reactions to repeated experiences that have already been evaluated and
found to be unchanging and harmless. For example, you might sleep better
the second night than the first in the same hotel because you have
adjusted to the unfamiliar noises in that environment. sometimes we
habituate to things that we should, ideally, still be noticing. A major
concern about exposing children to violent media is the possibility that
their emotional responses to violent images will habituate, leading to
higher tolerance for violent behavior (Grizzard et al., 2015). in
contrast to habituation, sensitization increases our reactions to a
range of stimuli following exposure to one strong stimulus. Following an
earthquake, people experience exaggerated responses to movement, light,
or noise. if you are awakened by a loud crash, even if you figure out
it's just your roommate coming home late at night, it It is likely that
the first time this might be harder to get back to sleep because every
dog's owner attempted to dress it little sound now seems magnified. up,
the dog was a bit upset. After why would we show habituation to some
stimuli repeated experiences of being dressed and sensitization to
others? in general, habituation up, however, the dog probably has occurs
in response to milder stimuli, whereas sensitihabituated, which means
that it has zation occurs in response to stronger stimuli. habitulearned
that no harm results from the ation ensures that we do not waste
precious resources process. Now it remains calm. monitoring low-priority
stimuli. on the other hand, sensitization is useful in dangerous
situations. After deMany universities offer special programs for tecting
one harmful stimulus, raising our overall level of responsiveness should
improve reaction time should other dangers arise. students who are the
first in their extended Observational learning, also known as social
learning or modeling, ocfamilies to attend college in recognition of the
curs when one organism learns by watching the actions of another
organism. need to level the playing field with students who if your
knowledge of table manners does not extend to the many forks, knives,
enter college having already learned a great deal and spoons at a fancy
dinner, you might want to watch what others do before about college life
from observing their collegediving into your food. observational
learning provides the advantage of transmitting information across
generations within families and cultures. educated family members.

280

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Blend Images/Alamy Stock Photo

Vitalij Lang/Shutterstock.com

Following an earthquake, this little boy is likely to be extra jumpy for
a while in response to other stimuli, like loud noises, because of
sensitization.

Watching others is an efficient way to learn new skills, like dancing.
Imagine for a moment how difficult it would be to write a description of
how this dance should be performed. Watching others is also a useful way
to learn what is harmful to do.

Summary 8.1 Types of Learning Associative learning

Classical conditioning ● ●

Signal ➝ Important event Snakes ➝ Snakebite

Operant conditioning ● ●

Nonassociative learning

Behavior ➝ Consequences Practice ➝ Successfully riding a wave in surfing

Habituation ● ●

Responses to repeated, unchanging, irrelevant stimuli Reduced response
to neighbor's loud television every evening

Sensitization ● ●

Observational learning

Responses to many stimuli "Jumpiness" in response to many stimuli
following an earthquake

Watch ➝ Imitate ●

Copy new dance moves from your favorite music video

Watch ➝ Avoid imitating ●

Watch friend get sick from alcohol---don't drink as much

Credits: Top row---Matt Cardy/Stringer/Getty Images News/Getty Images;
Second row---Vitalij Lang/Shutterstock.com; Bottom row---Blend
Images/Alamy Stock Photo

What Is Classical Conditioning? Ivan Petrovich Pavlov (1849--1936) is so
tightly connected to the study of classical conditioning that the
phenomenon is frequently called Pavlovian conditioning. Pavlov switched
his interests from the study of digestion to the study of learning after
noticing that his dogs had What Is ClassICal CondItIonIng?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

281

1 Before conditioning

2 Before conditioning

42 46 50 54 58 63 69 76 84

40 44 48 52 56 60 66 72 80 88

92

96

100

104

108

112

116

120

126

132

138

144

152 160 168 176

response

184 192 200

42 46 50 54 58 63 69 76 84 92

Salivation

Metronome

No salivation

Unconditioned stimulus (UCS)

Unconditioned response (UCR)

Neutral stimulus

No conditioned response

42 46 50 54 58

80

63 69

88 96

76

104

84

112 120

126 138

4 After conditioning

40 44 48 52 56 60 66 72

108 116

response

Food

3 During conditioning

100

208

208

92 100

132 144

88 96 104 120

138

168 176

80

112

126

152 160

40 44 48 52 56 60 66 72

108 116

132 144

152 160

184

response

192 200 208

208

Metronome

168 176 184 192 200 208

Food

208

response

Salivation

Metronome

Salivation

Unconditioned response (UCR)

Conditioned stimulus (CS)

Conditioned response (CR)

FIGuRE 8.1 Classical Conditioning Terminology. (1) and (2) Before
conditioning, food (unconditioned stimulus, or UCS) reliably produces
salivation (unconditioned response, or UCR), and the sound of the
metronome produces no reliable responding. (3) During conditioning, the
sound of the metronome is followed by the food (UCS), which again
produces salivation (UCR). (4) After conditioning, the sound of the
metronome (conditioned stimulus, or CS) by itself is sufficient to
produce salivation (conditioned response, or CR). Learning has occurred.

learned to anticipate the arrival of food. instead of salivating when
presented with food, his dogs began to salivate as soon as the lab
assistant retrieved them from the kennel or strapped them into their
experimental harnesses in the laboratory. Most people would probably not
have noticed the differences in the dogs' behavior. pavlov not only
noticed but realized the importance of his observations: the dogs had
formed an association between the stimuli preceding the food and the
arrival of the food. in other words, the dogs had learned that certain
stimuli served as signals for the eventual appearance of food (see ●
Figure 8.1). if you are like most people reading about classical
conditioning for the first time, you are probably wondering why
psychologists spend so much time and effort discussing salivating dogs.
if classical conditioning were that limited in its scope, it probably
wouldn't warrant more than a small footnote in the history of
psychology. instead, classical conditioning explains many of our learned
emotional responses to our environment. it forms the basis for many
practical applications, from prepared childbirth methods to the
treatment of drug addiction and unrealistic fears.

Classical Conditioning Terminology in describing the process of
classical conditioning, pavlov distinguished between conditioned and
unconditioned stimuli and responses. Conditioned refers to something
that must be learned, while unconditioned refers to factors that are
reflexive or that occur without learning.

282

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Therefore, a conditioned stimulus (CS) refers to an environmental event
whose significance is learned, while an unconditioned stimulus (UCS) has
innate meaning to the organism. in a typical experiment by pavlov, dogs
heard the sound of a ticking metronome (pavlov never used bells,
contrary to popular mythology) just before food appeared through a small
door. dogs do not have an innate response to the sound of ticking
metronomes, but they generally are born knowing what to do with food. By
turning on the metronome before delivering food, pavlov established the
ticking sound as the Cs, while the food was the UCs. A UCs may be
pleasant, like food, but it may also be unpleasant, like an electric
shock. The important features of a UCs are its innate biological
significance and its reliable ability to elicit a response without prior
exposure. Just as dogs don't require training to salivate in response to
meat powder, few of us need experience with electric shock before we
respond with fear and other negative emotions. Conditioned responses
(CRs) are learned reactions, while unconditioned responses (UCRs) don't
need to be learned; they appear without prior experience with a
stimulus. salivating when food is put in your mouth is a UCR because we
do this reflexively, without prior experience, but salivating to ticking
metronomes occurs only as a result of experience. our definition of
learning requires behavior to change, so the appearance of a CR tells us
that learning has occurred. once learning has taken place, the organism
now responds to Css that reliably predict the arrival of the UCs. As
this section will show, understanding classical conditioning illuminates
a range of behaviors that you might have seen in yourself or
others---from the avoidance of foods that you associate with feeling
sick, to the butterflies you feel in your stomach before a big
performance, to the development of social prejudices.

conditioned stimulus (CS) An environmental event whose significance is
learned through classical conditioning.

Classical Conditioning Phenomena pavlov and those following in his
footsteps have extended the usefulness of classical conditioning by
exploring its features and development in more detail.

Acquisition Acquisition refers to the development of a CR. pavlov argued
that acquisition requires contiguity, or proximity in time between the
Cs and the UCs. if the Cs occurs long before the UCs, the organism may
not view the two stimuli as related. A Cs that occurs simultaneously
with a UCs or, worse yet, following a UCs, is not a useful signal. A
dinner bell sounded after food has been served is not helpful, and we're
unlikely to learn about it (see ● Figure 8.2).

unconditioned stimulus (UCS) A stimulus that elicits a response without
prior experience. conditioned response (CR) A response learned through
classical conditioning. unconditioned response (UCR) A response to an
unconditioned stimulus that requires no previous experience. acquisition
The development of a learned response.

5

Conditioned responding

4

Paired (tone CS followed by food UCS) Unpaired (tone and food
presentations separated by an average of 240 seconds)

3

2

1

FIGuRE 8.2

0

−1

1

2

3 Session

4

Acquisition of Conditioned Responses (CRs). With each pairing of the
conditioned stimulus and unconditioned stimulus, conditioned responses
become more likely. whAT is CLAssiCAL CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

283

Acquisition also requires contingency, or a correlation between the Cs
and the UCs. Learning about a reliable signal is easier than learning
about a signal that occurs only sometimes. To demonstrate the
contingency factor, Robert Rescorla (1968) exposed rats to sound
followed by a mild electric shock, which quickly produced fear of the
sound. For some rats, a shock was administered only after a sound, while
for other rats, shocks were administered following the sound on some
occasions and without any sound on others. All the rats had the same
number of contiguous sound--shock pairings. They differed in the
correlation between sound and shock. Learning was faster for rats
experiencing signaled shocks 100% of the time. As the percentage of
signaled shocks decreased, learning about the signal slowed. if your
migraine headaches are always preceded by exposure to bright light, you
are more likely to fear bright lights in the future than if your
headaches follow exposure to bright lights only once in a while (see ●
Figure 8.3). extinction The reduction of a learned response. In
classical conditioning, extinction occurs when the unconditioned
stimulus (UCS) no longer follows the conditioned stimulus (CS). In
operant conditioning, extinction occurs when the consequence no longer
follows the learned behavior. spontaneous recovery During extinction
training, the reappearance of conditioned responses (CRs) after periods
of rest.

Extinction and Spontaneous Recovery CRs disappear, or undergo
extinction, if

the association between the Cs and the UCs is broken. when pavlov
continued to expose his dogs to the ticking of the metronome without
providing food, the dogs eventually stopped salivating in response to
the sound of the metronome. pavlov believed that extinction is not the
same thing as forgetting; rather, it is actually new learning that
overrides old learning. As evidence for this belief, pavlov pointed to
the occurrence of spontaneous recovery, or the reappearance of CRs
following periods of rest between sessions of extinction training. even
if a dog has stopped salivating to the sound of the metronome by the end
of an extinction session, conditioned salivation reappears at the
beginning of the next session. in other words, the CR decreases during a
session of extinction training not because the dog is forgetting the
relationship between ticking and food, but because the dog is now
learning that ticking no longer predicts food, and it may take several
sessions for this new learning to replace the old (see ● Figure 8.4).
without the ability to extinguish CRs, adjusting to further changes in
the environment would be difficult, if not impossible. we would not be
able to learn to enjoy dogs again after being bitten by one. An addict
whose associations between needles and the effects of using heroin never
extinguished would have an even harder time overcoming addiction.

Contiguity + Contingency = Better Learning

Contiguity + Less Contingency = Reduced Learning

FIGuRE 8.3 Contingency Predicts Conditioning. Imagine the experience of
the two dogs in this experiment. Food (unconditioned stimulus) always
follows hearing the bell (conditioned stimulus) for both dogs, which
demonstrates contiguity. However, the first dog receives food only after
the bell, while the food is not always signaled by the bell for the
second dog. The dog in the first case would learn the association
between bell and food faster than the dog in the second one, because the
first dog's bell is a more reliable signal for food (better
contingency).

284

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Inhibition so far, we have

14

Conditioned responding

Corbis RF/Alamy Stock Photo

been discussing examples of 12 excitatory classical conditioning, in
which the organism 10 learns that a Cs predicts the occurrence of a UCs.
pavlov 8 was also quite interested in the classical conditioning of 6
inhibition, in which a Cs predicts the nonoccurrence 4 of a UCs (pavlov,
1927). To demonstrate inhibition, we can 2 begin by establishing
excitatory conditioning by pairing a 0 signal---a light---with shock.
After some experience with 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 this pairing,
a rat learns to fear Extinction Spontaneous recovery the light. now we
continue to present light--shock pairings, but we add other training
trials that include an inhibitory Cs---a sound---by presenting the light
and sound together, followed by no shock. even though the light is
present, the rat learns that it is not going to be shocked in the
presence of the sound, and it shows no fear. For a vulnerable animal in
the wild, it is important to know not only that a predator at a water
hole is in hunting mode (the sight of a prowling predator is an
excitatory Cs eliciting fear), but also that a predator relaxing after a
recent kill is unlikely to kill again soon (the sight of a predator
calmly drinking water is an inhibitory Cs that tells the animal that the
predator is unlikely to attack soon and therefore it is safe). For drug
addicts, establishing inhibitory Css associated with the lack of an
expected drug effect might provide a powerful method for rehabilitation
(Kearns et al., 2005). if an addict learns that drugs are never
available in the presence of a certain signal, turning the signal on
whenever the addict's resolve is weak might help prevent a relapse.

Generalization and Discrimination once a CR is successfully acquired,
organisms

FIGuRE 8.4 Extinction and Spontaneous Recovery. Addiction often involves
the association of conditioned stimuli (CSs), such as the syringe, with
the unconditioned stimulus (UCS) of a drug. Recovering addicts can be
exposed to extinction---viewing the syringe (CS) without receiving the
drug (UCS). This process reduces conditioned responses (CRs) that might
be contributing to cravings for the drug. However, extinction typically
requires multiple sessions. When the recovering addict returns for the
next extinction training session after a period of rest, that person is
likely to show CRs again. Eventually, with enough training, extinction
is complete, and no further spontaneous recovery is observed.

inhibition A feature of classical conditioning in which a conditioned
stimulus (CS) predicts the nonoccurrence of an unconditioned stimulus
(UCS). generalization The tendency to respond to stimuli that are
similar to an original conditioned stimulus (CS).

discrimination A learned ability to distinguish between stimuli.

Inhibition learning helps organisms behave adaptively when they've
learned that something important will not occur. These zebras may have
learned that when lions act a certain way, they are already full and
unlikely to hunt again. These inhibitory signals tell the zebras that
they can drink in safety---at least for a little while.

FRIEDRICHSMEIER/Alamy Stock Photo

often show a tendency to respond to stimuli that are similar to the Cs.
For example, the child who learned to be afraid of bees after being
stung might also begin to fear wasps and yellow jackets, a process that
pavlov called generalization. Generalization has obvious survival value.
if our ancestors had one bad experience with a lion, it would make sense
to avoid all lions, as well as other animals with lionlike
characteristics. Unfortunately, our tendency to generalize can also have
negative outcomes. For example, a soldier traumatized in combat might
react with unnecessary fear to sounds that are similar to gunfire on the
battlefield, such as the backfiring of a car back at home. Counteracting
our tendency to generalize is another learning process known as
discrimination, which allows us to make fine distinctions between the
implications of stimuli. in the laboratory, if you present food
following a high tone but never following a low tone, a dog initially
salivates following both tones because of

whAT is CLAssiCAL CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

285

generalization. As learning progresses, the dog eventually learns to
discriminate, or differentiate, between the abilities of the two stimuli
to predict food. As a result, salivation to the high tone continues, but
salivation to the low tone stops (see ● Figure 8.5). if generalization
had led the soldier to react with fear to the sound of a backfiring car,
further experience with the sound would help distinguish it from real
gunfire in combat. Because the sound of a backfiring car is not followed
by any fear-producing UCss, it eventually loses its ability to elicit
fear.

100 Generalization

Discrimination

60

Higher-Order Conditioning we have seen how CRs spread High tone (CS+)

40

20

Low tone (CS--)

0 0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 Blocks of trials

FIGuRE 8.5 Generalization and Discrimination. The dog is receiving food
after the high tone, but nothing after the low tone. Early in training,
the dog salivates after both tones because of generalization. Further
along in training, however, the dog learns to discriminate between the
abilities of the two tones to signal food and salivates only after the
high tone.

Helle/Shutterstock.com

Conditioned responding

80

to similar stimuli through generalization. in addition, CRs can occur in
response to stimuli that predict the Cs, a process known as higherorder
conditioning. higher-order conditioning allows us to make even more
distant predictions about the occurrence of significant events. A person
who was bitten by a dog might show fear the next time the dog is seen
because the sight of the dog (Cs) is now associated with the pain of the
bite (UCs). subsequently, the sight of the dog (Cs) might begin to act
more like a UCs, producing fear in response to other stimuli (seeing the
dog's yard or doghouse or hearing the dog bark) that might signal the
appearance of the dog.

Latent Inhibition pavlov's dogs had probably never heard a metronome
before participating in his experiments. what happens when you are
already familiar with a Cs? The answer is that you will take a longer
amount of time learning to respond to it. it takes more time to learn
about a familiar Cs than about an unfamiliar Cs, a phenomenon known as
latent inhibition (Lubow & Moore, 1959). The phenomenon is latent in the
sense that its effects are not seen right away (when the stimuli are
first presented), but emerge later when the rate of learning is
examined. The inhibition part of the term refers to the relatively poor
learning that occurs in response to familiar stimuli. if you have eaten
lots of pizzas over time (familiar Cs) but get sick after eating one,
you are unlikely to associate the pizza with feeling ill. in contrast,
if you get sick the first time you eat chocolate-covered ants (assuming
these are an unfamiliar Cs), you'll quickly associate eating ants with
feeling ill.

Cognitive and Biological Influences on Classical Conditioning
higher-order conditioning Learning in which stimuli associated with a
conditioned stimulus (CS) also elicit conditioned responses (CRs).
latent inhibition The slower learning that occurs when a conditioned
stimulus (CS) is already familiar compared to when the CS is unfamiliar.

286

Chapter 8

early behaviorists concentrated their study of learning on external
behaviors that they could observe directly. As new technologies became
available, such as brain imaging methods and more powerful computers
used to model thinking and reasoning, psychologists interested in
learning began to explore internal processes, leading to revolutionary
advances in our understanding of cognition and biology. early
behaviorists also limited most of their studies to simple animals rather
than humans. This restriction resulted from strong beliefs that behavior
followed the same rules in all organisms, which meant that it was safe
to apply experimental results from studies using rats to the behavior of
humans and that having more control over your experimental subjects
(food, housing, etc.) led to better science. Although the latter may be
true, psychologists discovered that treating the learning animal as some
kind of interchangeable black box was overly simplistic. some learning
processes have clearly been conserved over the course of evolution. we
can make conclusions relevant to humans about the changes at a synapse
that accompany classical conditioning in the Aplysia californica sea
slug (Carew & Kandel, 1973). in other cases, species bring their unique
biology into the learning situation, as we will see in a later section
on taste aversion learning. psychologists have learned to be cautious
about generalizing their conclusions across species.

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Steph and John Cacioppo

Tom Feiler/Masterfile

The Element of Surprise in our earlier discussion of the acquisition of
classical CRs, we talked about the contributions of contiguity
(closeness in time) and contingency (the correlation between the Cs and
the UCs). it should be easy to learn about a signal that both precedes
and is predictive of an important event. The bell on your microwave both
precedes and predicts the availability of food, and we would not be
surprised if your mouth starts watering a bit whenever you hear it. what
happens, however, if you already possess one good signal but add another
one that also precedes and predicts a UCs? Based on past experience, you
have learned that if your computer monitor suddenly goes blue (Cs),
something terrible (UCs) has happened to your computer. whenever you see
a blue screen, you feel extremely stressed (CR). Let's assume that the
next time a blue screen appears, the computer also emits a funny sound.
even though the sound both precedes and predicts a hard drive crash,
it's unlikely that you will learn much about the sound and its
relationship with hard drive crashes. we don't bother to learn much
about new signals that provide no additional information, even if they
meet our requirements for contiguity and contingency (Kamin, 1968,
1969). how can we account for this failure to learn under circumstances
that should produce strong learning? Rescorla and wagner (1972) proposed
a model of classical conditioning in which learning occurs as a function
of how surprising the association between the Cs and the UCs appears.
early in training, more learning takes place because the relationship
between the Cs and the UCs is relatively unexpected. Later in training,
less learning takes place with each exposure to the now-familiar
relationship between the Cs and the UCs (see ● Figure 8.6). we fail to
learn to associate the funny sound with a hard drive crash because the
crash is not a surprise any more---the blue screen has already alerted
us to the hard drive's inevitable demise. we can't imagine early
behaviorists using terms like expect, surprise, and predict, because
these represent internal states they believed were impossible to
investigate scientifically. But today, it seems reasonable to discuss
some aspects of learning using this vocabulary.

Higher-order conditioning occurs when stimuli associated with a
conditioned stimulus (CS) gain the ability to elicit conditioned
responses (CRs) on their own. If a child has learned to fear dogs (CS)
because of a previous bite (unconditioned stimulus, or UCS), anything
that signals "dog" might now produce fear too, including the sight of a
doghouse, a dog's feeding bowl, or a chew toy.

Because of latent inhibition, classical conditioning proceeds more
slowly when a new conditioned stimulus is familiar than when it is
unfamiliar. If you got sick after eating a familiar food (perhaps
pizza), you are less likely to associate your illness with the food than
if you got sick after eating an unfamiliar food, like this scorpion
lollipop that one of your textbook authors is about to try.

whAT is CLAssiCAL CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

287

100

80

4 units

FIGuRE 8.6 The Rescorla--Wagner Model. According to the Rescorla--
Wagner model, the rate of learning about a conditioned stimulus (CS)
depends on how new or surprising the association between the CS and the
unconditioned stimulus (UCS) appears to be. Early in training, learning
proceeds rapidly (25 units per block or set of trials) because the
association is new and surprising. Later in training, gains in
conditioning strength (measured by how often a conditioned response
occurs) level off because the association between the CS and the UCS is
now familiar and no longer surprising (4 units per block of trials).

Conditioning strength

9 units 12 units 60 16 units 40 20 units

20 25 units 0 1

2

3

4

5 6 7 Blocks of trials

8

9

10

Taste Aversion we have already used some examples of classical
conditioning involving

food that you dislike because you got sick after eating it. These
classically conditioned taste aversions result when the sight, smell, or
flavor of the food (Cs) has been paired in the past with illness (UCs).
Taste aversion, or dislike of the food, is the resulting CR. Taste
aversion isn't just another interesting example of classical
conditioning. its demonstration led to a substantial rethinking not only
of classical conditioning, but of behaviorism in general. pavlov
believed that stimuli that met the Cs or UCs criteria could be
successfully paired to produce classical conditioning. he made no
provisions in his theory for special interactions between particular
types of stimuli. John Garcia, who had a background not only in
psychology but also in biology, did not believe that stimuli were so
interchangeable. in what became known as a classic taste aversion study,
Garcia and Koelling (1966) demonstrated that the types of stimuli used
as Css and UCss matter, and that some combinations are learned faster
than others. As shown in ● Table 8.1, Garcia and Koelling presented
groups of rats with either saccharin-flavored water ("tasty water") or
plain water. when the rats consumed the plain water, their drinking
triggered a light and a clicking sound, which the researchers called
"bright-noisy water." After drinking either tasty or bright-noisy water,
half the rats were given an injection of lithium chloride, which
produces strong sensations of nausea, and the other half received an
electric shock. This type of experiment should look familiar to you by
now as an example of classical conditioning. Tasty water or bright-noisy
water served as Css, while shock or lithium chloride served as UCss.
Garcia and Koelling subsequently presented tasty and bright-noisy water
to see whether either would be avoided, with avoidance serving as an
indication of the CR of disgust with or dislike of the water. Rats
immediately learned associations between tasty water and subsequent
illness but had difficulty learning to use the bright-noisy water as a
signal for illness. Conversely, bright-noisy water, but not tasty water,
became an effective signal for shock. After all, if you feel sick, you
are more likely to decide that TAbLE your illness was a result of eating
mystery leftovers for breakfast Experimental Design Used by Garcia and
Koelling (1966) rather than the flickering of the fluorescent lights in
your classroom. however, if you receive an electric shock, you might be
conditioned stimulus unconditioned more suspicious of the flickering
lights than of your breakfast. stimulus bright-noisy water tasty water
This experiment had far-ranging implications. not only did these
findings challenge pavlov's views of the relative inStrong learning
Lithium chloride (LiCl) Weak learning terchangeability of stimuli, but
they also prompted a renewed Weak learning Shock Strong learning
interest in the biological predispositions of organisms, or their

8.1

●

●

288

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Applying Classical Conditioning

James H. Robinson/Science Source

preparedness to learn certain things. Although rats readily formed
associations between taste and illness, but not between visual stimuli
and illness, birds easily formed associations between visual stimuli and
illness, but not between taste and illness. Rats see poorly, so they
usually depend on taste and smell for identifying food. Birds have
excellent vision and typically identify food sources using visual cues,
such as the markings of particular species of butterfly. The willingness
of behaviorists to treat organisms as interchangeable black boxes with
irrelevant internal features was severely challenged by this work,
paving the way to an abandonment of the rigid behaviorism that had
dominated psychology for most of the 20th century. Many learning
theorists closed down their rat and pigeon labs and turned their
attention to emerging cognitive, biological, and evolutionary
approaches.

Although strict behaviorism no longer dominates research in psychology,
it still provides powerful explanations of human behavior and effective
therapeutic tools for producing change. The pervasiveness of classical
conditioning in everyday life is quite remarkable. when your palms get
sweaty and you feel butterflies in your stomach before a big exam,
awaken just before your alarm clock goes off, or feel more awake just
because you smell coffee brewing, you can blame your responses on
classical conditioning. if you are a clinician working with a
traumatized combat veteran who is frightened by the smell of diesel fuel
or a coach working with an athlete to overcome "choking" in big games,
classical conditioning gives you the means to produce positive change.

Overcoming Fear in 1920, John B. watson and Rosalie Raynor conducted an

John Garcia and Robert Koelling's work on taste aversion explains why
the monarch butterfly (on the top) is often rejected by birds as food.
The milkweed on which the monarch caterpillar feeds contains cardiac
glycosides, which are maintained in the mature insects' bodies. Ingested
glycosides make the birds ill, so they avoid feeding on monarchs, as
would be predicted by classical conditioning. Some scientists believe
that by looking similar to the monarch, the viceroy butterfly (on the
bottom) might escape being eaten too. Recall that visual stimuli
("bright---noisy" water) were not very effective signals for illness in
rats, but apparently, they work just fine for birds. The natural
capacities of a species prepare it to learn some things better than
others.

experiment with a 9-month-old infant named Albert (watson & Rayner,
1920). By today's standards, this experiment hardly appears well
designed or ethical, but the results of the experiment led to research
that shed a great deal of light onto human fear. while Albert played
with a tame, white laboratory rat (Cs), watson and Raynor made a loud
noise (UCs) by hitting a steel bar with a hammer. Albert was quite
frightened by this noise (UCR). A week later, Albert was again offered
the rat, but this time, he was afraid (CR). his fear generalized to
other white, furry objects, including a rabbit, a dog, a fur coat, and a
santa Claus mask. watson and Raynor had successfully demonstrated that
fears could result from classical conditioning. Although Albert left
watson and Raynor's laboratory without treatment for his fear, one of
watson's students, Mary Cover Jones, demonstrated how classical
conditioning procedures could be used to reduce learned fears. her
experiment featured a 3-year-old named peter, who had a serious phobia,
or intense, unrealistic fear, of rabbits (Jones, 1924). Could classical
conditioning provide a way to reduce peter's fears? one possible
approach would be to use extinction. As mentioned previously, CRs
extinguish if the Cs is presented alone, without the UCs. Treating
phobias by exposing people to fear-producing stimuli in a manner that is
safe until they no longer respond (i.e., extinction) is known as
exposure Psychologists have long been curious about what happened
therapy. exposure therapy can be applied with a full-strength to Albert
after he left Watson and Raynor's laboratory. One fear stimulus
(flooding) or more gradually, beginning with hypothesis suggests that
Albert was Douglas Merritte, the versions of the fear stimulus that
produce the least fear and child of one of the foster mothers living at
the Harriet Lane then building up to more scary stimuli. Although
exposure therapy works, it is potentially traumatic. Being exposed home
in 1920. Merritte died at age 6 of hydrocephalus. to a stimulus you find
frightening until you are no longer Another strong candidate is William
Albert Barger, whose afraid is not fun. imagine forcing a person afraid
of heights name and physical health appear to some to be a better match
to bungee jump until the fear of heights has gone. for the baby shown in
Watson's films of his experiment. Barger instead of using simple
exposure therapy, Jones treated died in 2007, at the age of 87. If
Barger is indeed the famous peter with counterconditioning, or the
substitution of one Albert, we hope that his strong dislike of animals
as an adult CR for another, opposite response. Jones associated food, a
new UCs, with the presence of a rabbit (Cs). eventually, was not a
remnant of Watson's experiment. whAT is CLAssiCAL CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

289

iStock.com/oleg66

peter was able to stroke the rabbit while eating. While not particularly
hygienic, this achievement represented a big improvement in peter's
life. Counterconditioning has many useful applications. Aversion therapy
can be used to replace inappropriate positive reactions to a stimulus
with negative reactions. For example, a compound containing silver
interacts with nicotine to make a tobacco cigarette taste terrible.
Substituting a negative outcome for a positive outcome of smoking helps
some smokers quit more easily (Rose et al., 2010). A variation of
counterconditioning used to treat fear is known as systematic
desensitization (Wolpe, 1958). Associations between a phobic stimulus
and fear are replaced by associations between the phobic stimulus and
relaxation. The person undergoing treatment is first trained to achieve
a state of physical and mental relaxation, usually by tensing and
relaxing muscle groups from head to toe. if you would like to try this
progressive relaxation technique yourself, we outline the procedure in
Chapter 15. Once relaxation is achieved, the fear stimulus is gradually
introduced, either in physical form, through guided imagery, in which
the person is asked to imagine the stimulus, or by using virtual
reality. if relaxation falters at any point, the person retreats to an
earlier stage of exposure to the fear stimulus until he or she can relax
again.

Understanding classical conditioning provides insight into many
situations where our emotional responses seem to be triggered by the
environment, as in the case of performance anxiety.

aversion therapy An application of counterconditioning in which a
conditioned stimulus (CS) formerly paired with a pleasurable
unconditioned stimulus (UCS) is instead paired with an unpleasant UCS.

systematic desensitization A type of counterconditioning in which people
relax while being exposed to stimuli that elicit fear.

Addiction in addition to the influences on addiction discussed in
Chapter 6, classical conditioning can contribute to dependence on a drug
or behavior. Stimuli associated with drug use often become CSs for the
effects of a drug. For example, peak caffeine levels occur about 45
minutes after drinking a cup of coffee (Liguori et al., 1997), yet most
coffee drinkers report feeling more awake as soon as they take that
first sip in the morning (or even smell the coffee brewing). One of the
challenges faced by people recovering from addiction to substances is
that environmental cues (i.e., CSs) associated with the effects of
substance use (i.e., UCSs) continue to elicit cravings (i.e., CRs) for
the drug of choice. Most treatments for substance abuse involve simply
abstaining from a drug, as opposed to extinction or counterconditioning.
There is nothing about avoiding the use of a drug that substantially
weakens the previously formed associations surrounding its use.
Consequently, being exposed to established CSs, including the people
with whom one did the drugs previously or the context in which one used
the drugs, often leads to a former addict's relapse (Chaudhri et al.,
2008). The sight, smell, or taste of a recovering alcoholic's favorite
drink, or even a visit to a favorite bar, is often enough to undermine
the person's abstinence from drinking. Reducing these associations
through extinction can help the addict continue to abstain. Attitudes
and Prejudice Classical conditioning contributes to the formation and
change

John B. Watson and Rosalie Raynor observe Little Albert's generalization
to a bunny mask worn by Watson. The mask is similar to the original
conditioned stimulus in their experiment---a white laboratory
rat---which stimulated Albert's conditioned fear.

290

Chapter 8

Courtesy of Professor Benjamin Harris

of attitudes (Cacioppo & Berntson, 2001). After all, following the lead
of behaviorist John Watson, advertisers have been using classical
conditioning for years to influence consumer

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

attitudes about products. By forming associations between the products
and other stimuli we value, like celebrities and influencers,
advertisers hope that our opinions of their product will improve.
Prejudice, which is discussed further in Chapter 13, is a negative
attitude about a group of people. Like other attitudes, it is influenced
by classical conditioning, although it has many other roots as well. in
particular, latent inhibition can contribute to the development of
negative attitudes (Cacioppo et al., 1992). Because of latent
inhibition, if children grow up with little exposure to people outside
their own race, people of their own race are more familiar, and learning
to associate their race with other attributes should be slow. in
contrast, the children have had less preexposure to people of other
races. Latent inhibition would predict that children exposed to news
reports about crime would form stronger associations between people of
unfamiliar races and crime than between people of their own race and
crime.

Creativity and Schizophrenia By reducing the amount of learning that

While still a graduate student, Mary Cover Jones used classical
conditioning principles to reduce a small child's fear of rabbits. As a
result, she is often called the "Mother of Behavior Therapy."

Paul Vasarhelyi/Shutterstock.com

AF archive/Alamy Stock Photo

Archives of the History of American Psychology, The Center for the
History of Psychology, The University of Akron.

occurs in response to familiar stimuli, latent inhibition helps us focus
our energy on novelty and change in our environments. Less latent
inhibition is seen in creative people and in people diagnosed with
schizophrenia than is seen in the general population (Baruch et
al. 1988a, 1988b; Lubow et al., 1992). This difference means that
creative people and people with schizophrenia form new associations with
familiar stimuli faster than most people do. They make connections under
circumstances in which most of us would not. Reduced latent inhibition
might account for the creative person's ability to see familiar things
in new ways, which is a positive outcome, but it also might lead to the
tendency of a person with schizophrenia to make odd, inappropriate
connections among ideas. Chapter 14 refers to this tendency as a
"loosening of associations." For example, a person with schizophrenia
might suggest that getting a job in a bakery will help him gain
admission to medical school. This is not the type of association between
stimuli that most people would make.

Product placement in movies is expensive, but marketers hope that
audiences will form associations between their products and the positive
brand of a character. If the hero drives an Audi, maybe driving an Audi
will make you feel heroic, too. whAT is CLAssiCAL CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

291

ConnECTIng to ReseaRch Classical Conditioning and Opioid Overdose

The Question: Are addicts at greater risk of overdose when they use
their drug in a novel location?

METHODS Three groups of rats were exposed to a lethal dose of heroin on
a test day. Prior to the test day, one group received a sub-lethal dose
of heroin in the same environment in which they received the test dose,
a second group received the same sub-lethal dose in a different
environment, and a third group, the control group, received no heroin
prior to the test.

ETHICS Many of the rats in this experiment died from the heroin. By
today's standards, researchers would be asked to justify the animals'
suffering in light of the outcomes gained. A smaller, less dangerous
dose that would still allow conclusions to be made might be recommended.
Smaller numbers of animals (this experiment used 107) might be possible
if appropriate statistical methods were used.

As shown in ● Figure 8.7, rats in

the control group, which had no prior

The Classical Conditioning of Opioid Overdose. Scientists were puzzled
by the fact that opioid addicts were dying from relatively moderate
doses. One clue to this puzzle was the observation that many of these
cases involved people using drugs in unfamiliar places. Their customary
locations provided powerful cues that allowed the body to compensate for
the effects of the drug. Taking the drug in a new place that did not
provide these cues and compensations caused problems. In this experiment
(Siegel et al., 1982) control rats had not received any previous dose of
heroin, and nearly all of them died when given a lethal test dose. Rats
that had received a previous dose of heroin were much more likely to
survive a lethal dose if both doses were administered in the same rather
than a different location. Source: S. Siegel (2016). "The Heroin
Overdose Mystery." Current Directions in Psychological Science, 25(6),
375--379. doi:10.1177/0963721416664404

Chapter 8

CONCLUSIONS This study supported the role of classical conditioning in
opioid overdose. Animals that could link compensatory behaviors to
contextual cues were more likely to survive a later potentially lethal
dose as long as it was administered in the same place. Understanding
that using a drug in an unfamiliar place is a significant risk might
save the lives of some addicts. ■

RESULTS

FIGuRE 8.7

292

exposure to heroin, were the most likely to die than the animals in the
two groups with prior exposure to a sub-lethal dose. However, animals
that received the high dose in a familiar place were less likely to die
than animals that received the high dose in a new place.

Krisana Antharith/Shutterstock.com

OVER 70,000 AMERICANS lost their lives in drug overdoses in 2017, and
deaths related to opioids account for about twothirds of that number
(Centers for Disease & Prevention, 2019). One of the curious findings,
however, is that people who die from opioid overdoses do not seem to
have unusual amounts of the drug in their bodies (Siegel, 2016).
Instead, it is likely that the context in which an addict uses a drug
has a very important influence on the outcome. The context provides
conditioned stimuli (CSs) that predict drug effects (UCSs), which in
turn stimulate compensating actions on the part of the body that will
offset the drug effects (CRs). As you learned in Chapter 7, our bodies
do a good job of defending homeostasis. When an addict uses a drug in a
novel context, however, the CSs that lead to compensating CRs might be
absent. Without compensation, an addict could die from a conventional
dose of a drug. It is ethically impossible to conduct a study to test
the classical conditioning of compensatory processes in humans, but a
classic study using rodents has been conducted (Siegel et al., 1982).

120 100 80 60 40 20 0

Same

Different

Control

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology as a hub science Classical Conditioning Informs Wildlife
Conservation

Cynthia Kidwell/Shutterstock.com

CraigRJD/iStock/Getty Images

Danita Delmont/Shutterstock.com

WHILE READING ABOUT ivan petrovich pavlov's experiments with salivating
dogs, it might be difficult to grasp the full significance of pavlov's
results, but there were some good reasons that his laboratory continued
to receive considerable resources during difficult times of war and
revolution (Gantt, 1928). As demonstrated in this chapter, the possible
applications of classical conditioning range widely, from treating
addictions and phobias to understanding prejudice and schizophrenia. one
of the less typical applications was the result of work by John Garcia
and one of his graduate students, Carl Gustavson (Gustavson et al.,
1976). Gustavson was a child of the rural west, and he had grown up
watching the ongoing battles among sheep ranchers, coyotes, and wolves.
he asked whether the taste aversion work pioneered by Garcia might
provide a useful solution. with encouragement from Garcia, Gustavson set
up an outdoor training facility with six coyotes and two wolves. The
coyotes were fed rabbit meat laced with lithium chloride (LiCl), while
the wolves were fed sheep meat with LiCl. he even experimented with a
caged cougar that refused to eat deer meat after a single meal of
venison laced with LiCl. some of the researchers' observations of the
captive animals were especially dramatic. when a lamb was tethered in
the wolves' pen, the wolves approached in a normally threatening manner.
The lamb froze, which is also species-typical behavior in this
situation. Then, something interesting happened. The wolves sniffed at
the lamb and then retreated, showing signs of defensive puppy play
(crouching with ears and tail down). in response to these submissive
displays, the lamb began to charge the wolves and even chased them
around the pen. would these observations transfer to the real outdoors?
The researchers distributed sheep-flavored bait and sheep carcasses
laced with LiCl across a 3,000-acre sheep ranch in washington state. A
comparison of the ranch's loss records demonstrated a 30% to 60%
reduction in sheep killed by coyotes following the treatment. A
larger-scale test of 10 herds over a 3-year-period in saskatchewan
demonstrated a reduction in predator control costs of between 86% and
90% per year. Gustavson's technique was used in an effort to save the
endangered Mexican wolf. when released in the wild, the wolves, like
Gustavson's coyotes, naturally run into conflict with ranchers and
farmers. professors Lowell nicolaus and dan Moriarty's initial results
using conditioned taste aversion with captive gray wolves convinced U.s.
government wildlife agencies to prepare to replicate the study with
captive Mexican wolves (U.s. Fish and wildlife service, 2014). A total
of 23 Mexican wolves were treated between 2011 and 2013. Two animals
treated in 2011 were retested in 2012, and both still showed a
conditioned aversion to cattle (U.s. Fish and wildlife service, 2014).
Taste aversion has also been used to boost populations of the endangered
marbled murrelet (Gabriel, halbert, & Golightly, 2014). Fake eggs
designed to look like murrelet eggs were laced with carbachol and
distributed in murrelet nesting areas in the santa Cruz mountains of
California. subsequently, the number of eggs preyed upon by a key
predator, steller's jays, were reduced between 44% and 80%. Australian
quolls, small carnivorous marsupials, are another species whose survival
can be enhanced through the use of taste aversion (o'donnell et al.,
2010). when quolls began feeding on an invasive species, the very toxic
cane Use of conditioned taste aversion to provide toad, they were
literally wiped out in several of their habitats. Quolls who a nonlethal
method of predator control is sampled treated cane toads were much more
likely to survive in the wild. The being explored in efforts to save a
number of authors advocated air drops of treated toads ahead of the
invading species in an endangered species, including the marbled effort
to save the quoll. murrelet, the Australian quoll, and the hopefully,
these promising results will encourage wildlife managers to apply
Mexican wolf. taste aversion as an important tool for conservation. ■
whAT is CLAssiCAL CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

293

summary 8.2 Classical Conditioning Phenomena classical conditioning
phenomenon

Description

example

Acquisition

Gradual development of conditioned responses (CRs)

A dog salivates on a higher percentage of trials as training progresses.

Reduction of CRs when a conditioned stimulus (CS) is presented without
being followed by an unconditioned stimulus (UCS)

If the metronome is no longer followed by food, the dog stops salivating
to the metronome.

Reappearance of CRs following periods of rest between extinction
training sessions

The dog shows no salivation at the end of the day's extinction training,
but after a night of rest in the kennel, the dog salivates at the
beginning of the next extinction session.

Inhibition

A CS's prediction of the nonoccurrence of a UCS

So long as a gauge is "in the green," your equipment will not explode.
You do not feel fear.

Generalization

Responses to stimuli that resemble the CS

Albert's fear of white rats generalized to a Santa Claus beard.

Responding to the CS, but not to similar stimuli that have not been
paired with the UCS

A combat veteran learns to distinguish between the sound of gunfire and
the backfire from a car.

Higher-order conditioning

CRs to stimuli that predict the occurrence of a CS

A child who has been bitten by a dog begins to fear the street where the
dog lives.

Latent inhibition

Slower development of CRs to a familiar CS than to an unfamiliar CS

An American forms a taste aversion faster to scorpion lollipops than to
hamburgers.

5 Paired (tone CS followed by food UCS) Unpaired (tone and food
presentations separated by an average of 240 seconds)

Conditioned responding

4

3

2

1

0

−1

1

2

3

4

Session

Extinction 14

Conditioned responding

12 10 8 6 4 2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Extinction

1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 Spontaneous recovery

Spontaneous recovery 14

10 8 6 4 2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Extinction

1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 Spontaneous recovery

100 Generalization

Discrimination

Conditioned responding

80

60

High tone (CS+)

40

20

Low tone (CS--)

0 0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 Blocks of trials

Discrimination 100 Generalization

Discrimination

80 Conditioned responding

Conditioned responding

12

60

High tone (CS+)

40

20

Low tone (CS--)

0 0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 Blocks of trials

Credits: Second row---Corbis RF/Alamy Stock Photo; Third row---Corbis
RF/Alamy Stock Photo; Fourth row---FRIEDRICHSMEIER/Alamy Stock Photo;
Sixth row---Helle/Shutterstock.com; Seventh row---Tom Feiler/Masterfile;
Bottom row---Steph and John Cacioppo.

294

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

What Is Operant Conditioning? the discussion of behaviorism in Chapter 1
introduced you to edward thorndike and his law of effect. to recap,
thorndike had observed the learning that took place when a cat tried to
escape one of his "puzzle boxes." according to thorndike, the cats
learned to escape by repeating actions that produced desirable outcomes
and by eliminating behaviors that produced what he called "annoying"
outcomes, or outcomes featuring either no useful effects or negative
effects (1913, p. 50). Consequently, the law of effect states that a
behavior will be "stamped into" an organism's repertoire depending on
the consequences of the behavior (thorndike, 1913, p. 129). the
association between a behavior and its consequences is called operant or
instrumental conditioning. In this type of learning, organisms operate
on their environment, and their behavior is often instrumental in
producing an outcome. B. F. skinner extended thorndike's findings using
an apparatus that bears his name---the skinner box, a modified cage
containing levers or buttons that can be pressed or pecked by animals
(see ● Figure 8.8). Operant conditioning differs from classical
conditioning along several dimensions. By definition, classical
conditioning is based on an association between two stimuli, whereas
operant conditioning occurs when a behavior is associated with its
consequences. Classical conditioning generally works best with
relatively involuntary behaviors, such as fear or salivation, whereas
operant conditioning involves voluntary behaviors, like walking to class
or waving to a friend. Speaker Signal lights Lever

Food from dispenser

Food pellet

Electric grid

From shock generator

Figure 8.8 The Skinner Box. A specially adapted cage called a Skinner
box, after behaviorist B. F. Skinner, allows researchers to investigate
the results of reinforcement and punishment on the likelihood that the
rat will press the bar. What Is Operant COndItIOnIng?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

295

table 8.2

Types of Consequences

Types of Consequences Add stimulus to environment Positive reinforcement

Decrease behavior

Positive punishment

Rusig/Alamy Stock Photo

Increase behavior

As we all know from experience, some types of consequences increase the
likelihood of behaviors, while others decrease the Remove stimulus
likelihood of behaviors. Skinner divided consequences into four from
environment classes: positive reinforcement, negative reinforcement,
positive Negative reinforcement punishment, and negative punishment.
Both types of reinforcement increase the frequency of their associated
behaviors, whereas both types of punishment decrease the frequency of
Negative punishment associated behaviors (see ● Table 8.2). We all have
unique sets of effective reinforcers and punishers. You might think that
getting an A in a course is reinforcing, making all those extra hours
spent studying worthwhile, but top grades may be less meaningful to the
student sitting next to you, who came to college for the social life. A
parent might spank a child, believing that spanking is an effective form
of punishment, only to find that the child's unwanted behavior is
becoming more rather than less frequent. For some children, the reward
of getting the parent's attention overrides the discomfort of the
spanking part of the interaction. in other words, the identity of a
reinforcer or punisher is defined by its effects on behavior, not by
some intrinsic quality of the consequence. The only accurate way to
determine the impact of a consequence is to check your results. if you
think you're reinforcing or punishing a behavior but the frequency of
the behavior is not changing in the direction you expect, try something
else.

Positive Reinforcement By definition, a positive reinforcement increases
the

frequency of its associated behavior by adding a stimulus, a desired
outcome, to the situation. Again, each person has a menu of effective
reinforcements. in a common If the consequences of a behavior
application of operant conditioning, children with autism spectrum
disorder are taught influence how likely a person is to language, with
candy serving as the positive reinforcement. Benjamin Lahey tells of his
repeat the behavior in the future, experience trying to teach a child
with autism spectrum disorder to say the syllable "ba" how can we
explain the prevalence to obtain an M&M candy (Lahey, 1995). After 4
hours without progress, Lahey turned to of self-injury? Why don't the
painful the child's mother in frustration, asking her what she thought
might be the problem. The consequences of the behavior make mother
calmly replied that her son didn't like M&Ms. Lahey switched to the
child's preferred people stop? In situations like this, treat, chopped
carrots, and the child quickly began saying "ba." Chopped carrots are
probably operant conditioning tells us that we not the first reinforcer
you would try with a 4-year-old boy, but in this case, they made all the
need to look for possible reinforcers difference. for the behavior that
override the if everyone has a different set of effective reinforcers,
how do we know which to use? A painful outcomes. In the case of
selfsimple technique for predicting what a particular animal or person
will find reinforcing is the injury, people report feeling calm premack
principle, which states that whatever behavior an organism spends the
most time and and relief. To treat such behaviors energy doing is likely
to be important to that organism (premack, 1965). if Lahey had been
effectively, psychologists need to able to observe his young client's
eating habits before starting training, it is unlikely that he
understand what advantages they would have made the mistake of offering
M&Ms as reinforcers. The opportunity to engage in provide from the
perspective of the a higher-priority activity is always capable of
rewarding a lower-priority activity. Your grandperson doing the
behavior. mother may never have heard of premack, but she knows that
telling you to eat your broccoli to get an ice cream generally works.
Both Thorndike and Skinner agreed that positive reinforcement is a
powerful tool for managing behavior. in our later discussion of
punishment, we will argue that the effects of positive reinforcement are
more powerful than the effects of punishment. Unfortunately, in Western
culture, we tend to provide relatively little positive reinforcement. We
are more likely to hear about our mistakes from our boss than all the
things we've done correctly. it is possible that we feel entitled to
good treatment from others, so we feel that we should not have to
provide any reward for reasonably expected behaviors. The problem with
this approach is that extinction occurs in operant, as well as in
classical, conditionThe Premack principle can help you maintain good
time ing. A behavior that is no longer reinforced drops in frequency.
management. If you prefer socializing to studying, use By ignoring other
people's desirable behaviors instead of reinthe opportunity to socialize
as a reward for meeting your forcing them, perhaps with a simple
thank-you, we risk reducevening's study goals. ing their frequency.

296

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THInkIng scientifically In this chapter, we mentioned that many people
fail to provide positive reinforcement because they already feel
entitled to good treatment. We encouraged you to consider ways to
increase the amount of positive feedback you give to others to prevent
putting desirable behaviors on extinction. But can we have too much of a
good thing? Can too much praise produce negative outcomes? Is there a
right way and a wrong way to provide positive feedback?

WHaT aM I BEINg aSkED TO BELIEvE OR aCCEpT? We're being asked to believe
that positive reinforcement has the potential to produce negative
outcomes under some circumstances.

WHaT EvIDENCE SUppORTS THIS pOSITION? We often hear adults providing
inflated praise to children, such as saying "that's the most beautiful
drawing ever!" Unfortunately, for some children, inflated praise can
reduce their willingness to take on challenging problems (Brummelman et
al., 2014). In another study, "overvaluation" of the child by the
parents was associated with the child's having a higher narcissism score
(Brummelman et al., 2015). Narcissism is characterized by feelings of
superiority and of deserving of special treatment. When this
characteristic is extreme, a person might be diagnosed with narcissistic
personality disorder, described

further in Chapter 14. "Overvaluation" by parents is evident in their
beliefs that their child is more special and more entitled than others.
This is distinct from parental warmth, which is characterized by
affection and more modest appreciation for the child.

aRE THERE OTHER WayS THaT THIS EvIDENCE COULD BE INTERpRETED?

Andrew Twort/Alamy Stock Photo

Is Too Much Praise Bad for Children?

Praise is not the only feedback children receive from adults. Children
are also on the receiving end of criticism, and often much of it.
Studies on the effects of praise on children have not considered any
background levels of criticism or negative feedback. What if the same
parents who said "great job" more frequently were the same ones who were
just as free with their critical comments when things go wrong?

WHaT OTHER EvIDENCE WOULD I NEED TO EvaLUaTE THESE aLTERNaTIvES? A more
global view of all of the feedback received by a child, positive and
negative, might provide us with a clearer picture of how praise affects
children.

WHaT aRE THE MOST REaSONaBLE CONCLUSIONS? Praise done well is likely to
have positive outcomes, but how do we know how to praise well? As we
mentioned frequently in this chapter, consequences must matter to the
individual receiving them before they impact behavior. If children hear
"good job" or "you're the best" all the time, especially when they
realize that they didn't do such a good job or are the best one, the
praise will have little reinforcing value. The best feedback is
specific---"I like how you put all your toys away in the right places."
Another important step is to evaluate your results. If your approach to
praise is not producing more of the behavior you want, then try another
approach. ■

some reinforcers, known as primary reinforcers, are effective because of
their natural roles in survival, such as food. others must be learned.
we are not born valuing money, grades, or gold medals. These are
examples of conditioned reinforcers, also called secondary reinforcers,
that gain their value and ability to influence behavior from being
associated with other things we value. here, we see an intersection
between classical and operant conditioning. if you always say "good dog"
before you provide your pet with a treat, saying "good dog" becomes a Cs
for food (the UCs) that can now be used to reinforce compliance with
commands to come, sit, or heel (operant behaviors). Classical
conditioning establishes the value of "good dog," and operant
conditioning describes the use of "good dog" to reinforce the dog's
voluntary behavior. humans are capable of generating long chains of
conditioned reinforcers extending far into the future. we might ask you
why you are studying this textbook right now, at this moment. A
psychologist might answer that you are studying now because studying
will be reinforced by a good grade at the end of the term, which in turn
will be reinforced by

conditioned reinforcer A reinforcer that gains value from being
associated with other things that are valued; also known as a secondary
reinforcer.

whAT is opeRAnT CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

297

Itani/Alamy Stock Photo

Carolyn Jenkins/Alamy Stock Photo

a diploma at the end of your college education, which in turn will be
reinforced by a good job after graduation, which in turn will be
reinforced by a good salary, which will allow you to live in a nice
house, drive a nice car, wear nice clothes, eat good food, and provide
the same for your family in the coming years.

Negative Reinforcement Negative reinforcement, which sounds
contradictory,

involves the removal of a stimulus, an unpleasant consequence, from a
situation to increase the frequency of an associated behavior. negative
reinforcement increases the frequency of behaviors that allow an
organism to avoid, turn off, or postpone an unpleasant consequence;
these are sometimes called escape and avoidance behaviors. Let's look at
a laboratory example of negative reinforcement before tackling
real-world examples. if a hungry rat in a skinner box learns that
pressing a bar produces food, a positive consequence, we would expect
the frequency of bar pressing to increase. This would be an instance of
positive reinforcement. however, if pressing the bar turns off or delays
the administration of an electric shock, we would still expect the
frequency of bar pressing to increase. This would be an instance of
negative reinforcement. Be careful to avoid confusing negative
reinforcement with punishment, which is covered in the next section. By
definition, a punishment decreases the frequency of the behaviors that
it follows, whereas both positive and negative reinforcers increase the
frequency of the behaviors that they follow. Returning to our skinner
box example, the rat's bar pressing innegative reinforcement A method
creases following both positive reinforcement for increasing behaviors
that allow an or(food) and negative reinforcement (turning off ganism to
escape or avoid an unpleasant a shock). if we shocked the rat every time
it consequence. pressed the bar (punishment), it would stop pressing the
bar quickly. Many everyday behaviors are maintained by negative
reinforcement. we buckle up in our cars to turn off annoying beeps or
bells, open umbrellas to avoid getting wet, scratch an insect bite to
relieve the itch, take Serena Williams "loves" her an aspirin to escape
a headache, apply sunWimbledon trophy not for its screen to avoid a
sunburn or skin cancer, and intrinsic value (you can't eat it, etc.),
apologize to avoid further misunderstandbut because trophies have become
ings with a friend. conditioned reinforcers. in many real-world cases,
positive and negative reinforcement act on behavior simultaneously. A
heroin addict uses the drug to obtain a state of euphoria (positive
reinMany superstitious behaviors, like wearing your "lucky socks," can
be forcer) but also to eliminate the unpleasant learned through operant
conditioning. Operant conditioning does not symptoms of withdrawal
(negative reinrequire a behavior to cause a positive outcome to be
strengthened. All that forcer). You might study hard to achieve high is
required is that a behavior be followed by a positive outcome. Unless
you grades (positive reinforcers) while also being suddenly have a
string of bad performances while wearing the lucky socks, motivated by
the need to avoid low grades you are unlikely to have an opportunity to
unlearn your superstition. (negative reinforcers). PA Images/Alamy Stock
Photo

According to the Premack principle, a preferred activity can be used to
reinforce a less preferred activity. Most children prefer candy over
carrots, so rewarding a child with candy for eating carrots often
increases carrot consumption. One little boy with autism spectrum
disorder, however, preferred carrots to M&Ms, and his training proceeded
more smoothly when carrot rewards were substituted for candy rewards.

298

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

punishment A consequence that eliminates or reduces the frequency of a
behavior. positive punishment A consequence that eliminates or reduces
the frequency of a behavior by applying an aversive stimulus. negative
punishment A method for reducing behavior by removing something
desirable whenever the target behavior occurs.

Greg McWilliams/Icon SMI 408/Greg McWilliams/Icon SMI/Newscom

Punishment A punishment is any consequence that reduces the frequency of
an associated behavior. Positive punishment refers to adding an aversive
consequence to a situation that reduces the frequency of or eliminates a
behavior. As described previously, we can demonstrate that a rat will
quickly stop pressing a bar if each press results in an electric shock.
Negative punishment involves the removal of something desirable from a
situation to reduce the frequency of an associated behavior. in the
skinner box, we can change the rules for a rat that has learned
previously to press a bar for food. now, food is made available unless
the rat presses the bar. Under these conditions, the rat will also
quickly stop pressing the bar. Thorndike and skinner were in agreement
about the relative weakness of punishment compared to reinforcement as a
means of controlling behavior. Three conditions must be met for
punishment to have observable effects on behavior: significance,
immediacy, and consistency (schwartz, 1984). These same variables also
influence reinforcement, but meeting these requirements while applying
punishments in real-world settings can be more challenging. Many parents
in the United states administer spankings to their young children, but
there is no evidence that spankings reduce unwanted behavior. instead,
the evidence points toward increases in unwanted behaviors in children
who are spanked (Gershoff et al., 2017). As we observed in the case of
the little boy willing to work for carrots but not for candy,
reinforcers have to matter to the person or animal receiving them (i.e.,
significance). The same is true of punishments. if we use a punishment
that is too mild for a particular individual, there is little incentive
for that person to change behavior. some students are willing to risk a
ticket for parking illegally at their campus. how high would a parking
fee have to be to gain complete compliance? what if you risked the death
penalty for parking illegally? we can be fairly certain that most people
would leave their cars at home rather than risk that particular
consequence. The point is that punishment works if a sufficiently severe
consequence is selected, but using the amount of force needed to produce
results can be impractical and unethical. Free societies have
long-standing social prohibitions against cruel and unusual punishments,
and these conventions are incompatible with using the force that is
needed to change the behavior of some individuals. immediate rewards and
punishments are more effective than delayed rewards and punishments
(i.e., immediacy). For the rat in the skinner box, delays of just 10
seconds can reduce the effectiveness of electric shock as a punisher.
humans are more capable than rats at bridging long intervals (Kamin,
1959). nonetheless, the same principle holds true. delayed punishment is
less effective than immediate punishment. we should not be surprised
that the months or years that are required to try and convict a serious
criminal may greatly reduce the impact of imprisonment on that person's
subsequent behavior. our final requirement for effective consequences is
consistency. we can see the effects of inconsistent punishment in the
behavior of people living in larger cities that feature high-occupancy
vehicle (hov) lanes. As many as 80% to 90% of the cars using the lanes
have single occupants instead of the required two The degree of
certainty of getting a or more (Boston Globe, 2019). some ticket
influences drivers' behavior. At cities are investigating the use of
caman intersection with cameras, drivers eras to enforce their hov
policies. are unlikely to run a red light, but at Although cameras raise
privacy conother intersections, behavior might cerns, the number of
people misusing be determined by whether a police the lanes should
decrease due to more officer is nearby. consistent punishment. Ernest R.
Prim/Shutterstock.com

Putting up an umbrella to avoid getting wet from the rain is an example
of a negatively reinforced behavior.

whAT is opeRAnT CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

299

Diverse Voices in Psychology

PSYCHOLOGISTS TYPICALLY RECOMMEND against the use of physical punishment
with children, largely due to research showing a relationship between
the use of physical punishment and increased aggressiveness on the part
of a child. In addition, as you have seen in this chapter, there are
many alternative ways to manage behavior successfully. As is the case
with many types of psychological research, however, the classic studies
on physical punishment and child aggression were conducted with
middle-class, white American families. How representative are these
samples of families in general? Some researchers believe that they are
not representative and that physical punishment effects depend very much
on cultural context (Deater-Deckard & Dodge, 1997). These researchers
believe that physical punishment in cultures in which it is considered
"normal" has a much less detrimental effect than in cultures where it is
considered less normal. Racial and ethnic groups vary in the frequency
with which they use physical

punishment (Gershoff et al., 2012). In a sample of over 11,000 U.S.
families with kindergarten-aged children, rates of spanking were
generally high (about 80%) across all groups, with 89% of African
Americans, 79% of whites, 80% of Hispanics, and 73% of Asians reporting
having spanked their child. When asked if they had spanked their child
in the previous week, 40% of African Americans, 28% of Hispanics, 24% of
whites, and 23% of Asians reported that they had done so. Does spanking
have different effects on children's behavior across the racial and
ethnic groups due to these different frequencies? Gershoff et al. (2012)
concluded that it does not. Across all racial and ethnic groups,
spanking was associated with higher levels of aggressive behaviors in
the child, which in turn leads to more spanking in a "coercive cycle" of
parenting. Expanding the diversity of participants even further,
researchers have reported negative relationships between spanking and
socioemotional development in children in 59 countries with no
correlations in another five (Pace

PhotoAlto/Sandro Di Carlo Darsa/Brand X Pictures/Getty Images

Does Physical Punishment Have Different Effects in Different Cultural
Contexts?

Psychologists have wondered if spanking had different effects within
different racial and ethnic contexts, but it does not. Spanking is
associated with higher levels of child aggression, regardless of racial
or ethnic context. et al., 2019). In no country was spanking associated
with improved socioemotional outcomes in children. While many lines of
research benefit from considerations of diversity, the message here is
not modified by racial or ethnic identity--- spanking children not only
fails to decrease negative behaviors, but it actually appears to
increase them. ■

if punishment is difficult to do correctly and ethically, how are we
supposed to reduce unwanted behaviors? To solve this problem, skinner
(1953) recommended extinction as an alternative to punishment. in the
discussion of classical conditioning earlier in this chapter, the term
extinction was used to refer to the disappearance of CRs that occurs
when the Cs no longer signals the arrival of a UCs. extinction in
operant conditioning has a similar meaning. Learned behaviors stop when
they are no longer followed by a reinforcing consequence. Attention is a
powerful reinforcer for humans, and ignoring negative behavior should
extinguish it. parents and teachers cannot look the other way when one
child is being physically aggressive toward another, but in many other
instances, skinner's approach is quite successful in reducing the
frequency of unwanted behaviors (Brown & elliot, 1965). Although
ignoring a child's tantrums in a supermarket can be embarrassing for
many parents, this can be an effective strategy for reducing their
frequency.

Schedules of Reinforcement Reinforcing a behavior every time it occurs
is known as continuous reinforcement. Although it is highly desirable to
use continuous reinforcement when a new behavior is being learned, it is
inconvenient to do so forever. dog owners want their dogs to walk with a
loose leash, but once this skill is learned, the owners don't want to
carry dog treats for reinforcement

300

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Fixed Ratio Schedules a fixed ratio (FR) schedule requires that a
behavior occur a set number of times for each reinforcer. Continuous
reinforcement, discussed earlier, is equivalent to an Fr of 1. If we now
raise our requirement to two behaviors per reinforcer, we have an Fr
schedule of 2, and so on. Using the skinner box, we can investigate the
influence of Fr schedules on the rate at which a rat will press a bar
for food. to do so, we track cumulative responses as a function of time.
Fr schedules produce a characteristic pattern of responding. In general,
responses are fairly steady, with a significant pause following each
reward. as the amount of work for each reward is increased, responding
becomes slower (see ● Figure 8.9). In early industrial settings, workers
were often paid by the piece, a real-world example of the use of an Fr
schedule. In other words, workers would be paid every time they produced
a fixed number of products or parts on an assembly line. Most workers
find this system less than ideal. If the equipment malfunctions, the
worker cannot earn money. Lunch breaks would also then be viewed as loss
of income rather than a helpful time of rest. some examples of piecework
remain today, including the work of most physicians, who get paid by the
procedure, and service workers like plumbers or hairstylists, who get
paid for finishing a specific task.

partial reinforcement The reinforcement of a desired behavior on some
occasions, but not others.

fixed ratio (FR) schedule A schedule of reinforcement in which
reinforcement occurs following a set number of behaviors.

SCPhotos/Alamy Stock Photo

whenever they walk their dogs. Once we deviate from continuous
reinforcement, however, the manner in which we do so may have a dramatic
impact on the target behavior. to obtain the results we want, it is
helpful to understand what happens when we use partial reinforcement, or
the reinforcement of the desired behavior on some occasions, but not
others. psychologists have identified many ways to apply partial
reinforcement, but we will concentrate on two variations: ratio
schedules and interval schedules. In a ratio schedule of partial
reinforcement, reinforcement depends on the number of times a behavior
occurs. In an interval schedule of partial reinforcement, reinforcement
depends on the passage of a certain amount of time. either type of
schedule, ratio or interval, can be fixed or variable. In fixed
schedules, the requirements for reinforcement never vary. In variable
schedules, the requirements for reinforcement are allowed to fluctuate
from trial to trial, averaging a certain amount over the course of a
learning session.

Workers in the garment industry are often paid by the piece, or with a
set amount of money for each finished garment. This compensation system
is an example of a fixed ratio (FR) schedule. Because workers cannot
make money when their equipment breaks down and they tend to view lunch
and other breaks as costing them money, this schedule is not considered
to be fair to workers.

Cumulative number of responses

Variable ratio (VR) Reinforcers

Figure 8.9 Variable interval (VI)

Fixed ratio (FR)

Fixed interval (FI)

Rapid responding near time for reinforcement

Time

Schedules of reinforcement. The schedule used to deliver reinforcement
has a big impact on the resulting behavior. In general, the variable
schedules produce higher rates of responding than do their fixed
counterparts. The fixed interval schedule produces a characteristic
pattern of low rates of responding at the beginning of the interval and
accelerated responding as the end of the interval approaches.

What Is Operant COndItIOnIng?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

301

Tetra Images/Photoshot

Most casinos feature a large number of slot machines, which are
essentially Skinner boxes for people. The slot machine is programmed on
a variable ratio (VR) schedule, which means that the player cannot
predict how many plays it will take to win. In response, players exhibit
the same high, steady rate of responding that we observe in rats working
on VR schedules in the laboratory.

variable ratio (vR) schedule A schedule of reinforcement in which
reinforcement occurs following some variable number of behaviors.

fixed interval (FI) schedule A schedule of reinforcement in which the
first response following a specified interval is reinforced.

variable interval (vI) schedule A schedule of reinforcement in which the
first response following a varying period is reinforced.

Variable Ratio Schedules As in FR schedules, variable ratio (VR)
schedules also involve counting the number of times that a behavior
occurs. however, this time the required number of behaviors is allowed
to fluctuate around some average amount. in the skinner box, we might
set our vR schedule to 10 for a 1-hour session. This means that over the
course of the session, the rat must press an average of 10 times to
receive each food pellet. however, this schedule may mean that only 1
press delivers food on one trial, but 30 presses are required on the
next trial. The rat is unable to predict when reinforcement is likely to
occur, leading to a high, steady rate of responding in our cumulative
record. we do not see the characteristic pausing observed following
reinforcement in the FR schedule because the rat cannot predict when the
next reward will occur. one of the most dramatic real-world examples of
the vR schedule is the programming of slot machines in casinos. slot
machines are human versions of skinner boxes that use vR schedules. The
casino sets the machine to pay off after some average number of plays,
but the player doesn't know whether a payoff will occur after one coin
or thousands are inserted. You don't have to observe the behavior of
people playing slot machines long to see a demonstration of the high,
steady responding that characterizes the vR schedule. The programming of
slot machines can be sophisticated. slot machines that are located in
places where people are unlikely to return (airports and bus stations)
pay off less frequently than those in places where people are more
likely to play regularly. Fixed Interval Schedules Unlike ratio
schedules, reinforcement in interval schedules depends on the passage of
time rather than the number of responses produced. in a fixed interval
(FI) schedule, the time that must pass before reinforcement becomes
available following a single response is set to a certain amount. in the
skinner box, a rat's first bar press starts a timer. Responses that
occur before the timer counts down are not reinforced. As soon as the
timer counts down to zero, the rat's next bar press is reinforced, and
the timer starts counting down again. in the Fi schedule, the interval
is the same from trial to trial. Animals and people have a good general
sense of the passage of time, leading to a characteristic pattern of
responding in Fi situations. Reinforcement is followed by a long pause.
As the end of the interval is anticipated, responding increases sharply.
A graph of the number of bills passed by the U.s. Congress as a function
of time looks similar to the rat's performance on an Fi schedule in the
skinner box (weisberg & waldrop, 1972). Few bills are passed at the
beginning of a session, but many are passed at the end (see ● Figure
8.10).

Concerns about the effects of piecework on worker well-being contributed
to the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, which included a provision for
a minimum hourly wage.

Variable Interval Schedules As you already may have guessed, the
variable interval

(VI) schedule is characterized by an interval that is allowed to
     fluctuate around some average amount over the course of a session.
     This time, our bar-pressing rat experiences intervals that range
     around some average amount (say, 2 minutes). on one trial, the rat
     may obtain reinforcement after only 30 seconds, whereas the next
     trial may involve an interval of 5 minutes. over the session, the
     average of all intervals is 2 minutes. As in the vR situation, we
     see a high, steady rate of responding. You are probably quite
     familiar with vi schedules in the form of pop quizzes administered
     by your professors. Your professor might tell you that there will
     be five quizzes given during the term, but the timing of the
     quizzes remains a surprise. You might have the first two only 1 day
     apart, followed by a 2-week interval before the next quiz. Your
     best strategy, like the rat in the skinner box on a vi schedule, is
     to emit a high, steady rate of behavior---studying, in this case.

302

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Congress and Fixed interval (Fi) Behavior. As the end of a congressional
session approaches, the U.S. Congress begins to pass more bills in
patterns that look similar to the behavior of rats on FI schedules in
Skinner boxes.

750

Source: T. S. Critchfield et al. (2003). "A Half Century of Scalloping
In the Work Habits of the United States Congress," Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis, 36(4), 465--486. doi: 10.1901/jaba.2003.36-465

0

250 Cumulative number of bills

Partial Reinforcement Effect in Extinction Many

500

750

1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

500 250

Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division, Reproduction number
LC-DIG-highsm-12649 (digital file from original) LC-HS503-1388 (color
film transparency)

Figure 8.10

parents have regretted the day that they unintentionally put 0 an
unwanted behavior on a partial reinforcement schedule 1981 1982 1983
1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 750 by uttering the words, "OK, just
this once." perhaps a parent is strongly opposed to buying candy for a
child at the supermarket 500 checkout counter (where, because of John
Watson and his 250 applications of psychology to advertising, candy is
displayed 0 conveniently at child's-eye height). then comes the fateful
day 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 when the parent is
late coming home from work, the child Year is hungry because dinner is
delayed, and unintentionally, the parent gives in "just this once,"
putting begging for candy behavior on a variable schedule. subsequently,
when the parent returns to the previous refusal to buy candy, a high,
steady rate of begging behavior occurs before it finally extinguishes.
In the laboratory once more, we compare the behavior of two rats in
separate skinner boxes. One is working on a continuous (or Fr 1)
schedule of reinforcement. the other is working on a partial schedule of
reinforcement (perhaps a Vr 3 schedule). after several sessions of
training, we stop reinforcement for both rats. It may surprise you to
learn that the rat working on the conpartial reinforcement effect in
tinuous schedule will stop pressing long before the rat accustomed to
the Vr 3 schedule. In other extinction The more rapid extinction words,
extinction occurs more rapidly following continuous reinforcement than
following partial observed following continuous reinforceschedules. this
outcome is known as the partial reinforcement effect in extinction. ment
compared to that following partial the partial reinforcement effect
probably occurs because of one of two factors, or a combireinforcement.
nation of both. First, the transition from continuous reinforcement to
extinction is more obvious than the transition from a partial schedule
to extinction. If you are accustomed to being paid for a babysitting job
every time you work, you will definitely notice any of your employer's
failures to pay. In contrast, if your neighbor typically pays you about
once a month for raking his yard each weekend, you might not notice
right away that he hasn't paid you for a while. second, partial
schedules teach organisms to persist in the face of nonreinforcement. In
a sense, partial schedules teach us to work through periods in which
reinforcement does not occur. Consequently, we might view extinction as
just another case where continuing to perform might eventually produce
reinforcement. When positive behavior is occurring, such as working on
your senior thesis regularly despite a much-delayed grade, persistence
is an enormous advantage. however, as shown in our earlier example of
begging for candy, placing an undesirable behavior on partial
reinforcement makes it more difficult to extinguish.

Comparing Schedules What happens if you are lunamarina/Shutterstock.com

exposed to two or more schedules of reinforcement at the

Fishing works according to a variable interval (VI) schedule of
reinforcement. Fish (the reinforcers) are caught after periods of
waiting for fish to bite that vary in length. As in laboratory
demonstrations of the VI schedule, fishing usually produces a steady
rate of responding. What Is Operant COndItIOnIng?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

303

same time? This scenario is realistic because we face these types of
choices every day. which is a more rewarding use of my time: studying
for my midterm or making some extra money by working overtime? in making
these types of choices, animals and people follow the matching law,
which states that the relative frequency of responding to one
alternative will match the relative reinforcement for responses on that
alternative (herrnstein & heyman, 1979). The law powerfully accounts for
the effects on behavior of frequency, magnitude, and delays in reward.
Time spent playing online video games provides an interesting example of
the effects of simultaneous schedules of reinforcement. The millions of
users of online games such as World of Warcraft spend an average of 22
hours per week on their games (Yee, 2006). what compels these people to
make a choice favoring online interactions over face-to-face social
experiences? one clue to this choice is that substantial numbers of
players report that "the most rewarding or satisfying experience" they
had over the last 7 or 30 days took place while gaming. we would assume
that if the frequency and magnitude of rewards available in gaming were
higher than those in face-to-face socializing, people would choose to
spend their time accordingly.

The Method of Successive Approximations (Shaping)

Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy Stock Photo

so far, this discussion of operant conditioning has centered on
increasing or decreasing the frequency of a particular behavior. what
happens if you want to increase the frequency of a behavior that rarely
or never occurs? Most parents would like to teach their children to use
good table manners, but you could wait a long time for the opportunity
to reward young children for using the correct utensil to eat their
food. Fortunately, we have a method for increasing the frequency of
behaviors that never or rarely occur. Using the method of successive
approximations, or shaping, we begin by reinmethod of successive
approximations A method for increasing the freforcing spontaneous
behaviors that are somewhat similar to the target behavior that we want
quency of behaviors that never or rarely to train. As training
continues, we use gradually more stringent requirements for
reinforceoccur; also known as shaping. ment until the exact behavior
that we want occurs. You can think of shaping as a funnel. Using the
table manners example, parents start out with generous criteria for
reinforcement ("Thank you for picking up the spoon") and gradually
narrow the criteria ("Thank you for putting the spoon in the food")
until they are reinforcing only the target behavior ("Thank you for
using the spoon to eat your applesauce"). one of the most positive
features about the shaping process is that behavior doesn't have to be
perfect to produce reinforcement. The rats in skinner boxes that have
been described in this chapter do not spontaneously start pressing
levers. we have to teach them to do so. we begin by making sure the
hungry rat understands that food is available in the skinner box. Using
a remote control, we activate the food dispenser a few times. Quickly,
the rat forms a classically conditioned association between the sound of
the food dispenser (Cs) and the arrival of food (UCs) in the cup.
however, if we continue to feed the rat in this manner, it is unlikely
that it will ever learn to press the bar. indeed, there is no reason for
it to do so because it already is obtaining the food it needs. so, we
narrow our criteria for obtaining food from simply existing in the box
to standing in the corner of the box that contains the bar. if we press
our remote control every time the rat is in the correct corner, it will
begin to stay there most of the time. now we want the rat to rear on its
back feet so that it is likely to hit the bar with its front feet on the
way down. if we begin to reinforce the rat less frequently for staying
in the corner, it will begin to explore. eventually, the rat is likely
to hit the bar with its front feet while exploring, pressing the bar.
now it will begin to press the bar on Whether training imaginary raptors
in Jurassic World or real animals, its own. in the hands of an
experienced trainer, this process takes using the method of successive
approximations (shaping) can lead to about half an hour. the reliable
performance of otherwise low-frequency behaviors. Like shaping involves
a delicate tightrope walk between too much Chris Pratt's character, most
trainers use a combination of classical and too little reinforcement. if
we reinforce too generously, learnconditioning (clicker sound leads to
food) and operant conditioning ing stops because there is no incentive
for change. if your piano (approximation of desired behavior leads to
clicker sound).

304

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

teacher always tells you that your performances are perfect, you will
stop trying to improve them. however, if we don't reinforce frequently
enough, the learner becomes discouraged. Reinforcement provides
important feedback to the learner, so insufficient reinforcement may
slow or stop the learning process. Teaching a complex behavior requires
chaining, or breaking down the behavior into manageable steps. Chaining
can be done in a forward direction, such as teaching the letters of the
alphabet from A to Z, or in a backward direction, such as teaching the
last step in a sequence, then the next to the last, and so on. Chaining
can be useful when teaching new skills, such as working independently on
academic projects, to children with special needs (pelios et al., 2003).
Backward chaining is used by most trainers of animals used in
entertainment. For example, dogs have been taught to perform complex
dances like the Macarena (Burch & Bailey, 1999). The trainer uses a
verbal, gestural, or clicker cue while shaping the last step in the
dance. when the dog performs this last step reliably, the trainer adds
the next-to-last step, and so on until the entire complex sequence is
mastered. You might have seen internet memes featuring squirrels that
perform a long sequence of tricks before reaching a bird feeder. it is
likely that they learned this sequence through backward chaining, as new
obstacles are added once the previous ones were mastered.

Cognitive, Biological, and Social Influences on Operant Conditioning
even the most radical behaviorists, including skinner, did not deny the
existence of cognitive, social, or biological influences on learning
(Jensen & Burgess, 1997). instead, behaviorists believed that internal
processes followed the same rules as externally observable behavior. As
skinner (1953) wrote, "we need not suppose that events which take place
within an organism's skin have special properties. . . . A private event
may be distinguished by its limited accessibility but not, so far as we
know, by any special nature or structure" (p. 257). however, as we saw
in the case of classical conditioning, the results of some operant
conditioning experiments stimulated greater interest in the cognitive,
social, and biological processes involved in learning.

Cognitive Influences on Operant Conditioning one of the important
principles of operant conditioning is that consequences are required in
order for learning to occur. edward Tolman (1948) challenged this notion
by allowing his rats to explore mazes without food reinforcement.
subsequently, when food was placed in the goal boxes of the mazes, the
previously unreinforced rats performed as well as the rats that had been
reinforced all along. Tolman referred to the rats' ability to learn in
the absence of reinforcement as latent learning. he argued that the rats
had learned while just exploring, but that they did not demonstrate
their learning until motivated by the food reward to do so. we usually
judge whether learning has occurred by observing outward behavior.
Tolman's rats remind us that there is a difference between what has been
learned and what is performed. students are all too familiar with the
experience of performing poorly on exams despite having learned a great
deal about the material. in addition to challenging the role of
reinforcement in learning, Tolman disputed traditional behaviorist
explanations of the nature of the learning that occurred in mazes. he
believed that instead of learning a simple operant "turn right for food"
association, rats learned "This is where i can find food" (Tolman, 1948,
1959). After training rats to follow a path in a maze to find food,
Tolman blocked the path but allowed the rats to choose from a number of
additional paths. if the rats had learned a simple turn left--get food
response, they should have chosen the paths that were most similar to
the training path. instead, they showed evidence of choosing paths that
required them to turn in a different direction from their previously
trained path, but one that led them directly to the goal (Tolman et al.,
1946; see ● Figure 8.11). To account for his results, Tolman suggested
that the rats had formed cognitive maps, or mental representations of
the mazes. Map formation was viewed as a unique, nonassociative

latent learning Learning that occurs in the absence of reinforcement.

whAT is opeRAnT CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

305

Trained path to food is now blocked

Food G

F

11

9

10

8

New path chosen by rat 7

12

Food 6 5

D

4

13

3

18 17 16

C

15 14

E

2 1

B

(a) 

A

FIGuRE 8.11 Tolman's Maze. Edward Tolman did not believe that rats
wandering around a maze learned "turn left for food" in the way that
early behaviorists believed that they did. Instead, Tolman believed that
the rats were learning a more cognitive map of where they could find
food. He provided evidence for his approach by blocking a learned
pathway to food. If the behaviorists were right, the rats should choose
the path most similar to the trained one (a). However, the rats did not
do that. They showed evidence of having formed cognitive maps and were
willing to turn in a different direction if that path led to food (b).

306

Chapter 8

(b) 

Start

Trained pathway Test pathway

learning process that didn't follow the previously established rules of
associative learning (o'Keefe & nadel, 1978). For example, in contrast
to the gradual acquisition of learning that usually occurs in classical
and operant conditioning, cognitive maps are instantly updated when new
information becomes available. Chimpanzees show considerable ability to
form cognitive maps (Menzel, 1978). After being carried around a
circuitous route in their one-acre compound as nine vegetables and nine
fruits were placed in 18 locations, chimpanzees were released in the
center of the compound. They not only navigated to each food location
using the shortest pathways, but, given their preference for fruit over
vegetables, they visited the spots containing fruit first. They showed
no indication that they were attempting to retrace the pathway over
which they were carried as the food was put in place.

Biological Influences on Operant Conditioning Just as the work of Garcia
and Koelling highlighted the need to consider biological limitations on
classical conditioning, biological boundaries in operant conditioning
were described by Keller and Marion Breland, two of skinner's former
students. in their 1961 article titled "The Misbehavior of organisms" (a
wordplay on skinner's classic book, The Behavior of Organisms), the
Brelands outlined some challenges they encountered while using operant
conditioning to train animals for entertainment. in one instance, the
researchers described how they sought to train a pig to pick up large
wooden coins and deposit the coins in a large, wooden "piggy bank."
initially, all went well. The pig would quickly learn to deposit four or
five coins (an example of an FR schedule) for each food reward.
eventually, however, the pig began to work slower and slower, to the
point where it couldn't obtain enough food for the day. instead of
taking the coins to the piggy bank, the pig would repeatedly toss them
in the air and sniff around to find them. Raccoons trained with the
coins ultimately tried to wash them instead of depositing them in the
bank. The animals' natural approach to food (the rooting by the pigs and
the washing by the raccoons) began to interfere with their handling of
the coins. You may already have suspected that the coins had become the
object of some higher-order classical conditioning because of their
relationship with food. The Brelands concluded "that these animals are
trapped by

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

strong instinctive behaviors, and clearly we have here a demonstration
of the prepotency of such behavior patterns over those which have been
conditioned. we have termed this phenomenon 'instinctive drift'"
(Breland & Breland, 1961, p. 683).

Hulton Deutsch/Corbis Historical/Getty Images

Social Influences on Operant Conditioning so far, our discussion of
classical and operant conditioning has focused on the individual in
isolation. Learning can take place when people or animals are alone, but
it often occurs in the presence of others, especially in a species as
social as ours. As we will see in a later section, people are
particularly likely to learn by observing others. what do we know about
the impact of others on our operant learning? The presence of others may
not just promote learning; it also may be necessary for learning. human
infants learn more about language when they are listening to another
person face to face than when they are watching a person speak on
television (Kuhl, 2007; Meltzoff et al., 2009). Although operant
conditioning alone cannot account for language learning, as discussed in
Chapters 10 and 11, these results emphasize the importance of social
interaction in producing the arousal, focus, and motivation that
contribute to effective learning. we are still in the process of
evaluating the impact of moving school instruction from face-to-face to
online formats. As mentioned previously in the discussion of cognitive
maps, learning and the performance of learned behavior are not always
identical. our performance of learned behaviors varies depending on an
interaction between the presence of others and the complexity of the
learned task. For simple tasks, like pedaling a bicycle or reeling in a
fishing line, the presence of others makes us perform faster, a
phenomenon known as social facilitation (Triplett, 1898; also see
Chapter 13). in complex tasks, such as taking a difficult college
entrance exam, the presence of others can make our performance slower
and poorer. Again, this effect is not restricted to complex organisms
like ourselves; the same results can be observed in the lowly cockroach
(Zajonc, 1965). in a straight maze leading to food, cockroaches with an
audience of other cockroaches ran quickly. in a more complex maze
involving several turns, the cockroaches responded to an audience by
running more slowly. Orlando Sentinel/Contributor/Tribune News
Service/Getty Images

Applying Operant Conditioning

Keller Breland observes the performance of one of the star pupils of the
I.Q. Zoo attraction he developed with his wife, Marian. Unfortunately,
the Brelands discovered that the animals' instinctive behaviors often
interfered with their training. The Brelands referred to this phenomenon
as "instinctive drift."

important applications of operant conditioning may be found in
contemporary approaches to psychotherapy, education, advertising,
politics, and many other domains. possibly one of the oddest
applications of operant conditioning was skinner's secret world war ii
defense project, code-named project pigeon. Lagging well behind the
nazis in the area of guided missile technology, the United states
invested \$25,000 (worth nearly \$500,000 in today's dollars) in
skinner's "organic homing device" (Capshew, 1993). skinner, who had
considerable experience training pigeons to peck at visual stimuli in
his laboratory, now trained them to peck at a projected image of a
missile's target. Riding in a chamber within the missile, the pigeon's
pecks would be translated into updated commands for correcting the path
of the bomb. Unfortunately for skinner (but fortunately for his
pigeons), project pigeon elicited laughter from military officers
instead of approval (skinner, 1960). Although never implemented, project
pigeon stimulated skinner and his intellectual descendants to look
outside the laboratory for useful extensions of their work on learning.

Experienced whale trainer Dawn Brancheau was killed by one of her
favorite killer whales during a 2010 show at Sea World in Orlando,
Florida. Animal experts believed that the whale did not intentionally
kill Brancheau. Instead, the whale had simply reverted to normal whale
behavior, similar to the instinctive drift observed by Keller and Marian
Breland.

whAT is opeRAnT CondiTioninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

307

Source: Division of Political and Military History, National Museum of
American History, Smithsonian Institution

B. F. Skinner's Project Pigeon was one of the more bizarre applications
of operant conditioning research. Pigeons enclosed in this capsule were
trained to peck at projected images of bomb targets. Even though
Skinner's device was superior to other World War II missile guidance
systems, it was never implemented.

token economy An application of operant conditioning in which tokens
that can be exchanged for other reinforcers are used to increase the
frequency of desirable behaviors.

Token Economies A widely used application of operant learning is the
token economy. Money, in the form of coins, bills, cryptocurrency, or
bank statements, is fairly useless. You can't eat it, wear it, or
shelter in it. nonetheless, people value it because it takes on
secondary reinforcing qualities due to its history of association with
other things that have intrinsic value. The use of money to buy things
of personal value is an example of a token economy. You earn money for
doing certain things, and then you have the opportunity to trade the
money you earned for items of value to you. This system meets the best
practices criteria that have been described in the context of positive
reinforcement. each person can obtain reinforcement that has unique
personal value. one friend may spend discretionary money on going out to
dinner, while another invests in the stock market. Both find money
reinforcing for doing work. An informed approach to compensating
employees should include consideration of learning principles. "Menu"
approaches to employee benefits provide an excellent example of this
application. historically, employers offered a set program of health,
retirement, and other benefits to their entire workforce regardless of
individual needs. we would expect this approach to be minimally
reinforcing because it does not match reinforcers to worker priorities.
Tailoring a benefits package to individual needs is more sensible. A
young worker in good health might be more motivated by a benefits
package that includes childcare, while a more mature worker may worry
about long-term care in the event of a disability. By allowing workers
to select their benefits from a menu, everybody can find something worth
earning. All of us respond positively to token economies, but they are
especially useful in educational and institutional settings. Teachers
provide frequent rewards in the form of checkmarks, stars, or tickets
that can be exchanged later for popcorn parties or a night without
homework. The key to an effective token economy is to offer ultimate
rewards that are truly valuable to the people you wish to motivate. if
students don't care about popcorn parties, offering them will have
little effect. Token economies are equally useful in prison settings and
in institutions serving people with an intellectual disability or mental
illness.

OJO Images/Photoshot

Behavior Therapies As we will discuss in Chapter 15, learning theories
have been applied successfully to the clinical setting in the form of
behavior therapies, also called applied behavior analysis (ABA). After
all, our formal definition of learning states that it involves a change
in behavior, and changing behavior is precisely what therapists usually
seek to do. in addition to the extinction and counterconditioning
applications of classical conditioning, behavior therapies use operant
conditioning concepts such as extinction, reward, and on rare occasions,
punishment.

308

Chapter 8

Token economies can be effective ways of managing behavior. Tokens,
including money, can be traded for a valued reinforcement of the
worker's choice. This woman's purchase might motivate her work, but
another worker might use the same paycheck to buy a motorcycle or go on
vacation.

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

iStock.com/ktaylorg

Coupled with cognitive methods designed to address the way that people
think about their circumstances, these methods comprise the most popular
and effective means for treating many types of disorder, from substance
abuse to depression. One of the most dramatic applications of behavior
therapy is the treatment for autism spectrum disorder pioneered by O.
Ivar Lovaas (Lovaas et al., 1966; Lovaas, 1996). autism spectrum
disorder is characterized by language and social deficits. although
behavior therapy doesn't cure autism spectrum disorder, behavioral
interventions, like the use of chaining described previously, typically
improve an individual's level of functioning.

An important application of operant conditioning principles is their use
in behavior therapies for conditions like autism spectrum disorder.
Operant conditioning can be used to increase the frequency of language
use and socially appropriate behaviors, like eye contact.

ExpEriEncing Psychology WE ALL HAVE BEHAVIORS that could use some
improvement. Maybe we eat poorly, drink too much, smoke, or lash out
angrily at others. An understanding of the processes of learning
provides us with powerful tools for changing behavior. Let's assume that
your eating habits, like those of many students, do not meet the "My mom
would approve" standard. Yet you are learning in your psychology course
that good health habits are essential tools for managing stress (see
Chapter 16). How do you bring about the necessary changes? Before doing
anything to produce change, you need to understand your current
behavior. Many people have a poor understanding of what they actually
eat during a day, so you could start by keeping a diary. What foods, and
how much of them, do you eat? What else is going on when you eat well or
poorly? What possible reinforcers or punishers are influencing your
eating patterns? For example, let's say that you observe a tendency to
eat high-calorie snacks late at night while studying, even when you are
not hungry. Your goal, then, is to eliminate

these late-night snacks. Your baseline shows that your snacking is a
social behavior. You consume these extra foods only when studying with a
group. The social camaraderie and good taste of the food serve as
powerful reinforcers for the behavior. Now that you have a better
understanding of your problem behavior, you are in a good position to
construct a plan. An important part of your plan is to choose
appropriate consequences for your behavior. Again, it is essential that
we design consequences that are meaningful to individuals. As we have
argued in this chapter, positive reinforcement has many advantages over
punishment. You might try placing the money you're saving on junk food
in a designated jar to buy a special (nonfood) treat at the end of a
successful week, or allow yourself an extra study break each night that
you meet your goals. If you are convinced that the only way that you
will change is through punishment, you could take an alternative
approach. Although some people have successfully stopped smoking through
the use of positive punishment, including electric shock (Law

iStock.com/catherine_jones

How Do I Break a Bad Habit?

& Tang, 1995), this sounds quite unpleasant. Instead, a negative
punishment, such as losing texting privileges for the day following a
failure to meet one's goals, might work. As you implement your program,
track your progress and make any modifications that seem necessary. In
addition to the improvement of your target behavior, a beneficial side
effect of applying learning methods to your behavior is the knowledge
that given the right tools, you can control your behavior. ■

What Is Operant COndItIOnIng?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

309

summary 8.3 Schedules of Reinforcement schedule

Features

in the lab

everyday example

Fixed ratio

Reinforcement occurs after a set number of responses.

A rat presses 3 times for each food pellet.

A garment worker is paid for finishing 10 shirts.

Variable ratio

Reinforcement occurs after a variable number of responses, which average
a set number for a session.

A rat is fed on average after three responses, but the number of
responses required for obtaining food varies between 1 and 15.

People play slot machines and win, sometimes on the first play and other
times after thousands of plays, on a schedule determined by the casino.

Fixed interval

Each response begins an interval during which no reinforcement is
available. The first response after the interval is reinforced.

A rat's first press after each 1-minute interval has timed out is
reinforced.

Students study more hours right before finals than at the beginning of
the term (although unlike in the rat's case, this behavior contributes
to reinforcement).

Each response begins an interval of varying length, with the average
length for the session set by the experimenter.

A rat's first press after an interval is reinforced. The interval
averages 1 minute over the session, but reinforcement could be obtained
after intervals ranging between 10 seconds and 3 minutes.

A fisherman trails his line behind the boat, and at various time
intervals, a fish is caught.

750 500

Cumulative number of bills

250 0 750

1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

500 250 0 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 750 500 250
0 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Year

Variable interval

Credits: Top row---SCPhotos/Alamy Stock Photo; Second row---Tetra
Images/Photoshot; Third row---Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs
Division, Reproduction number LC-DIG-highsm-12649 (digital file from
original) LC-HS503-1388 (color film
transparency)---lunamarina/Shutterstock.com

What Is observational Learning? The ability to learn by watching others,
known as observational learning, provides considerable advantages,
especially in a social species like our own. Learning occurs without
personally experiencing negative consequences. This ability to learn
from observing others greatly expands our learning capacity, especially
when we then generalize from these concrete examples (watching
successful students) to produce effective rules (good time management is
important to being a successful student). observational learning also
can have a dark side, as will be seen in our later discussion of the
pioneering work by Albert Bandura and his colleagues (Bandura, Ross, &
Ross, 1963; Bandura, 1965) on the modeling of aggression by children.
not only do we learn by observing others, but it appears that
observational learning can override other influences on behavior,
possibly because we are such a social species. parents learn (often the
hard way) that children are more likely to pattern behavior after what
they observe their parents doing than after what they hear their parents
say. various behaviors, both positive and negative, appear to be
influenced by observation, including aggression, achievement motivation,
language development, phobias, cognitive development, moral judgment,
and suicidal behavior. people benefit greatly from exposure to positive
role models, especially those with whom they can identify. we worry
about the

310

Chapter 8

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Both: From Patricia K. Kuhl, Brain Mechanisms in Early Language
Acquisition, Neuron 67, September 9, 2010, (c) Elsevier Inc.

relatively small number of women in university math and science
faculties, not only because of the possibility of discrimination, but
also because seeing women in these positions might inspire young girls
to follow in their footsteps. however, the use of performance-enhancing
drugs by sports heroes might lead to role modeling of a different sort
by young people. It is easy to find examples of observational learning
in our daily lives. students "shadow" members of their chosen
profession. We learn how to complete otherwise expensive household
repairs by watching Youtube. Young athletes pore over films of
superstars to perfect their technique. Popular cooking shows teach you
to prepare a special meal. Cross-generational cycles of domestic
violence persist as children continue the patterns of aggressive
behavior they observe in their parents and grandparents. the goal of
this section is to identify the circumstances in which this type of
learning occurs and the variables that affect its outcomes.

Babies learned more Chinese when listening to a person face to face than
while watching the same person speak on a television monitor.

imitation Copying behavior that is unlikely to occur naturally and
spontaneously.

Albert Bandura and Aggression

Charlie Neuman/San Diego Union-Tribune/ZUMA Press/Newscom

albert bandura's work on the observational learning of aggression
provides one of the strongest arguments against exposing children to
violent media (bandura et al., 1963; bandura, 1965). bandura was
interested in imitation, which is defined as the copying of behavior
that is unlikely to occur naturally and spontaneously (thorpe, 1963). In
a series of classic studies of the imitation of aggression in children,
bandura observed children's interactions with a bobo doll, an inflatable
toy clown with sand in the bottom, which allows it to rock back and
forth when pushed. a number of 3- to 5-year-olds watched an adult model
physically and verbally assault an unfortunate bobo doll (bandura et
al., 1963). the adult yelled, "Pow, right in the nose!" when punching
the doll in the face; "sockeroo, stay down!" when hitting the doll with
a mallet; "Fly away!" when kicking the doll around the room; and "bang!"
when throwing a ball at the doll. subsequently, when the children were
allowed an opportunity to play with a bobo doll, they displayed a
significant amount of aggression. In a later study, one group of
children saw the adult being rewarded for aggression with candy and soda
(bandura, 1965). a second group of children saw the adult being verbally
reprimanded, spanked, and threatened. the third group did not see any
positive or negative consequences for the adult's actions. the group
that witnessed the punishment of the adult model showed slightly less
aggression than children in the other groups did.

Observational learning can provide a quick and easy way to learn without
having to go through individual trial and error.

What Is ObservatIOnal learnIng?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

311

Albert Bandura/Stanford University

After watching an adult model assault the Bobo doll, young children
copied the adult's movements and verbalizations.

Bandura identified four necessary cognitive processes in the modeling of
others' behavior: attention, retention, reproduction, and motivation.
Models that get our attention are more likely to elicit imitation. A
person must retain a memory of what the model did. We must be able to
reproduce the behavior. Many of us enjoy watching elite athletes
perform, but no matter how long and often we watch Serena Williams or
LeBron James, few of us have the talent to duplicate their movements. if
you happen to play tennis or basketball, however, you can learn to
improve your game if you carefully observe these superstars. Finally, a
person must have a motivation for imitating the behavior. either past or
anticipated reinforcement encourages us to model another person's
behavior. in vicarious reinforcement, witnessing somebody else getting
reinforced for a behavior raises the likelihood that we will imitate the
behavior. At the same time, witnessing the other person getting punished
for the behavior should reduce the likelihood that you will copy it.

Cultural Transmission of Learning

Humans are not the only species to show evidence of imitation. Source:
P. F. Ferrari et al. (2006). "Neonatal Imitation in Rhesus Macaques,"
PLoS Biology, 4(9), e302. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0040302

312

Chapter 8

© Pier Francesco Ferrari, University of Parma, from PLoS Biology,
Sept. 2006, Vol. 4, Issue 9

An individual's learning may serve that person well throughout a
lifetime, but the invention of culture provides opportunities to pass
the benefits of experience along for many generations. A society is a
group of people living together. Culture, in contrast, consists of all
the socially transmitted information used by the group of people,
including ideas, concepts, and skills. Observational learning in
particular provides a powerful tool for transmitting this information
over time.

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Richard Dawkins defined meme as the basic unit of cultural transmission
passed to others by observational learning. Internet memes are often
unpredictable. "Chewbacca Mom" Candace Payne never imagined that her
short video made for friends would become a viral sensation.

Josiah Kamau/BuzzFoto/Getty Images

Richard dawkins (1976) envisioned a way to break culture down into
observable parts. he referred to the basic unit of cultural transmission
as a meme. Memes, he said, are transmitted by observational learning
from one person to another and can take the form of ideas, symbols, or
practices. Melodies, religious beliefs, catchphrases, and the technology
for building arches are examples of memes. dawkins viewed memes as the
cultural equivalents of genes---they replicate from one person to the
next and they respond to selection pressure. Memes that provide an
advantage, such as knowledge of the use of fire, are likely to continue.
Those that do not confer much advantage, such as some fads, are likely
to die out quickly. still others, such as pagers, are abandoned when
more effective replacements (cell phones) emerge. Among the most social
of memes are internet memes, which are "inside jokes" passed to others
using technologies such as social networking sites and e-mail. special
websites that chronicle internet memes allow viewers to provide updates
of their favorite memes, which contributes to their popularity.

interpersonal Relationships The Learning Perspective

prodakszyn/Shutterstock.com

CaN WE INFLUENCE THE Way OTHERS BEHavE TOWaRD US? KNOWLEDGE OF THE WAY
that people learn can improve your social life, and possibly even your
love life. operant conditioning can help you decrease unwanted behaviors
and increase desired behaviors toward you by people with whom you
interact. Your behavior influences the way that others behave toward
you. if you regularly find that you are treated poorly in relationships,
understanding the learning perspective provides powerful tools for
change. This chapter has recommended an emphasis on regularly noticing
and rewarding desired behaviors. it is easy to fall into the trap of
feeling entitled to good behavior from the people who are close to us,
which can lead to these behaviors being taken for granted and ignored.
without positive reinforcement, these good behaviors might be
extinguished. it takes little time and energy to thank people for the
nice things they do for us, and this simple courtesy can increase the
frequency of positive interactions in the future. when undesirable
behaviors inevitably occur, many people turn to punishment. skinner
believed that part of the love affair that we have with punishment is
because of the reinforcing properties of punishment to the punisher.
skinner (1971) stated, "we 'instinctively' attack anyone whose behavior
displeases us---perhaps not in physical assault, but with criticism,
disapproval, blame, or ridicule" (p. 190). punishing a partner for bad
behavior might make you feel better, but this comes at a significant
cost. These punishing behaviors are not endearing, and frequent use of
them is likely to end relationships.

Ignoring annoying behavior can be difficult, but you don't want to
reinforce it with attention.

whAT is oBseRvATionAL LeARninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

313

if punishment is off the table, what then do we recommend you do when
you experience negative behavior from a partner? if possible, try to
ignore negative behaviors, putting them on extinction. Unfortunately,
some people would rather have negative attention from you than no
attention and prefer punishment from you to being ignored. This is
particularly likely to be the case if you have forgotten to reinforce
positive behaviors. if you combine positive reinforcement of good
behavior and extinction of negative behavior, you should notice quite an
improvement. Some behaviors like aggression cannot be ignored and
require either a complete end to the relationship or professional
counseling. Thoughtfully observing the way that you treat other people
and their reactions to your behavior, using the learning principles
described in this chapter, should provide you with the understanding
that you need to improve your relationships. ■

Psychology Takes On Real-World Problems Many people experience
loneliness and social isolation during the quarantines and lockdowns
associated with a pandemic. Do we just have to suffer through this? Or
can we use our new knowledge about learning to feel more connected to
others? After all, we're defining learning as producing changes in
behavior. You might think that a person's loneliness is solely dependent
on interactions with closely related people, such as family or friends.
During a pandemic, these loved ones might be located far away. Our only
social interactions might take place virtually or in brief encounters
with staff at a grocery store. These latter interactions, handled well,
might be more beneficial than you think. Dr. Gillian Sandstrom, of the
University of Essex, conducts research on the benefits of talking to
strangers to decrease loneliness (Sandstrom & Dunn, 2014). In one study,
participants were told to enter a Starbucks and either conduct business
as efficiently as possible (having payment ready and so on) or to start
a short conversation with the barista. People in the latter group
reported feeling more cheerful and connected to others. A number of
barriers exist to prevent our taking advantage of these small bits of
socializing. Our social norms often prohibit us from connecting with
strangers. We carefully avoid eye contact and certainly are reluctant to
start up a conversation with a stranger. After all, our parents were
very firm about "stranger danger." During a pandemic, extended
interactions with others might also provoke fears of contagion. Assuming
that we do, in fact, need to interact with others for essential
services, how can we overcome these barriers and use these

314

Chapter 8

supportive communities online where people simple interactions to boost
our sense of social sharing your interests gather. A question asked
connectivity? Sandstrom describes a number or answered might result in a
new friend. ■ of steps we could take to get started. Initially, she
recommends starting small, perhaps with a smile and a "good morning."
Granted, you can't see a smile through a mask, but as we learned in
Chapter 7, emotions can be conveyed through the eyes, body language, and
tone of voice. Express empathy for the circumstances your essential
workers are experiencing by asking them how things are going. Being
recognized as a human, rather than just a function, is important to
workers, who then in turn appreciate you for asking. How is this related
to learning? Operant conditioning predicts that people who feel more
cheerful and connected after conversing with a stranger are more likely
to converse with strangers in the future. Having achieved this simple
goal, Sandstrom shapes more extensive interactions by suggesting the
goal of speaking with one new person each day. You might Hannah Thornton
left this note behind for two men who shared not be getting out of the
her table in a train compartment because she appreciated how house that
much, but there they had interacted on the trip. She had no idea that
the note and are other options. While we the follow-up email from one of
the men would go viral. These all know the pitfalls of social small
interactions among people who don't know one another media, it is
possible to find make people feel more cheerful and connected to others.

Hannah Thornton

Can People Learn to be Less Lonely?

The AdApTive Mind: LeARninG

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

summary 8.4 Features Promoting Observational Learning and Imitation
Feature

Description

example

Attention

We are more likely to model the behavior of people who get our
attention.

Children wear the jerseys of the best players in the sport.

Memory

We must retain a memory of the behavior to be imitated.

A student re-creates from memory a math proof demonstrated earlier that
day by a professor.

Reproduction

We must have the ability to reproduce the behavior.

An athlete works on her technique after watching films of an elite
athlete in her sport.

Motivation

Past or anticipated reinforcement for a behavior motivates us to perform
it too.

One student received extra credit for participating in an experiment, so
his friends also signed up to participate.

Credits: Top row---© Pier Francesco Ferrari, University of Parma, from
PLoS Biology, Sept. 2006, Vol. 4, Issue 9; Second row---Both: From
Patricia K. Kuhl, Brain Mechanisms in Early Language Acquisition, Neuron
67, September 9, 2010, (c) Elsevier Inc.; Third row---Charlie Neuman/San
Diego Union-Tribune/ZUMA Press/Newscom; Bottom row---Albert
Bandura/Stanford University.

Key terms The Language of psychological Science Be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

acquisition, p. 283 associative learning, p. 280 aversion therapy,
p. 290 classical conditioning, p. 280 conditioned reinforcer, p. 297
conditioned response (CR), p. 283 conditioned stimulus (Cs), p. 283
discrimination, p. 285 extinction, p. 284 fixed interval (Fi) schedule,
p. 302 fixed ratio (FR) schedule, p. 301 generalization, p. 285
habituation, p. 280

higher-order conditioning, p. 286 imitation, p. 311 inhibition, p. 285
instinct, p. 279 latent inhibition, p. 287 latent learning, p. 305
learning, p. 279 method of successive approximations, p. 304 negative
punishment, p. 299 negative reinforcement, p. 298 nonassociative
learning, p. 280 observational learning, p. 280 operant conditioning,
p. 280

partial reinforcement effect in extinction, p. 303 partial
reinforcement, p. 301 positive punishment, p. 299 punishment, p. 299
reflex, p. 278 sensitization, p. 280 spontaneous recovery, p. 284
systematic desensitization, p. 290 token economy, p. 308 unconditioned
response (UCR), p. 283 unconditioned stimulus (UCs), p. 283 variable
interval (vi) schedule, p. 302 variable ratio (vR) schedule, p. 302

whAT is oBseRvATionAL LeARninG?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

315

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The hippocampus plays an important role in memory. In the case of Henry
Molaison, discussed in this chapter, surgical removal of a large part of
the hippocampus reduced his seizures but left him with serious memory
deficits.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9

The Knowing Mind MEMORY Learning Objectives 1. Apply the concepts of
encoding, storage, and retrieval of memory to relevant examples.

3.  Explain the models describing the organization of longterm memories.

4.  Differentiate among sensory memory, short-term or working memory,
    and longterm memory, as well as the subtypes of long-term memory.

5.  Analyze the variables influencing retrieval from short- and longterm
    memory.

6.  Explain forgetting, decay, interference, motivated forgetting, and
    confabulation.

7.  Identify the biological correlates of memory.

IN CHAPTER 2, we introduced you to one of the most famous case studies
in psychology---the case of Henry Molaison (1926--2008), who is known in
the scientific literature as "the amnesic patient H.M." To reduce
Molaison's severe seizures, possibly resulting from a minor head injury
caused by a childhood accident, his neurosurgeons carried out an
experimental procedure that would be considered radical today but was
even more so in 1953. As shown in the large image to the left, they
removed most of Molaison's hippocampus in both hemispheres, along with
some of the surrounding neural tissue. As intellect remained intact.
Zooming in to consider the results of this type of surgery, we can ask
what scientists learned from their study of Molaison. Brenda Milner,
followed by her student Suzanne Corkin, studied Molaison for more than
four decades. His case produced a string of surprises, which we discuss
in more detail later in this chapter. For example, certain structures in
the brain are important for memory, but more so for some types of
memories than for others. We can perform some tasks automatically. In
other words, we can remember how to do something without remembering
that we know how to do it. Zooming out to Molaison the individual, shown
to the right, we can see that his story is more extensive than the study
of his brain. According to people who knew him, he was a nice man

Henry Molaison, aged 60, at MIT in 1986. Photograph by Jenni Ogden,
author of book Trouble in Mind: Stories from a Neuropsychologist's
Casebook.

a result, Molaison's memory functions declined dramatically, although
his personality and

who loved animals, watching trains, and doing crossword puzzles. Even
though Molaison was the subject of decades of study, many questions
about him remain. Why did he seem less

Henry Molaison.

317 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

affected by pain than other people? Why was he accurately able to rate
the intensity of an odor but unable to tell the difference between a
rose and something rotten? Although his ability to learn new facts
following his surgery was remarkably impaired, why did he know scattered
facts from the

Dr. Jacopo Annese, The Brain Observatory

following decade? Which of these observations shows the effects of his
surgery? Of his accident?

The careful slicing of Henry Molaison's preserved brain took more than
53 straight hours and was broadcast live on the Internet.

Of his seizures? Zooming out still farther, we ask ourselves how our
social interactions would be affected by being unable to remember new
people we have met. Molaison remembered people, such as his surgeon,
whom he had met before his surgery, but he never learned to recognize
Milner, Corkin, or the other scientists who met him later, even though
he saw them regularly for decades. He retained a genuine concern for
other people and took great pride in the fact that he was helping
science, but it is hard to imagine that his life was not somewhat lonely
and socially isolated.

We often think of memory as something we need to succeed on exams, but
in this chapter, you will learn that memory means much more to our human
experience. Our memories allow us to form new connections with people,
places, and things; to experience a new acquaintance, over time,
becoming an old friend; and to experience the continuity of time rather
than repeatedly living life as a single, isolated moment.

What Is Memory? Memory is defined as the ability to retain knowledge.
The problems encountered by Molaison provide us with a glimpse of how
our lives would be altered without certain memory abilities, but what
else do we know about how memory typically functions? Can we make more
general conclusions about how memory helps animals adapt and survive?

Memory and the Continuum of Information Processing Take a minute and
write down the five most important things you need to remember today.
How would your life be affected if you couldn't remember these things?

memory The ability to retain knowledge. information processing A
continuum including attention, sensation, perception, learning, memory,
and cognition.

encoding The transformation of information from one form to another.
storage The retention of information.

318

Chapter 9

Cognitive psychologists see memory as part of a continuum of information
processing that begins with attention, sensation, perception, and
learning, which we explored in previous chapters, and progresses to the
use of stored information in thinking, problem solving, language, and
intelligent behavior, which we discuss in Chapter 10 (see ● Figure 9.1).
information flows in both directions along this continuum, leading to
the bottom-up and top-down processing we observed in Chapter 5. Memories
of the characteristics of dalmatian dogs, for example, are gained by
learning about dalmatians through experience with them. These memories
helped you identify the photograph of one in Chapter 5 and should help
you interact with one appropriately (thinking and problem solving).
Memory can be divided into three steps: encoding, storage, and
retrieval. Encoding refers to the process of acquiring information and
transferring it into memory. in Chapter 5, we described how the sensory
systems translate or transduce electromagnetic energy, sound waves,
pressure, and chemical stimulation into action potentials that can be
processed by the nervous system. These transduced signals can then be
encoded in different forms in memory, such as visual codes, acoustic or
sound codes, or semantic or meaningful codes. For example, when you meet
your friend on the way to class, you encode her appearance visually, the
sound of her voice acoustically, and how much you value her friendship
semantically. encoded information needs to be retained, or stored. As we
will see later in this chapter, storage of memories in the brain can
last anywhere from fractions of a second (sensory memory) to several
seconds (short-term and working memory) to indefinitely (long-term
memory). Storage in the mind differs from storage of information in your
computer in one important respect. Computers store encoded information
in reliable and unvarying ways, like putting socks in a drawer or papers
in a file. what you retrieve is identical to what was stored. in
contrast, human memory does not generate exact records. instead, bits of
information are

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

stored that are later reconstructed into usable memories. Although this
process typically results in a useful memory, errors and distortions can
occur. The culmination of the memory process is the retrieval of stored
information. As you have no doubt experienced, storing information is no
guarantee that you can find the information again when you need it.
Later in this chapter, we will discuss in detail ways that memory
retrieval can fail. Two of the most common causes of retrieval failure
are interference and stress. For example, we seem to know all the
answers when watching a favorite game show in the safety of our homes,
but when put on the spot, we might be lucky to remember our names.
Fortunately, understanding the strengths and weaknesses of the brain's
memory functions may be one of the more practical topics for students
that we cover in psychology. once you understand how memory works, you
will have an easier time ensuring that your study habits maximize your
performance in school.

Memory Provides an Adaptive Advantage

Problem solving

Thinking

MEMORY

Learning

Perception

evolutionary psychologists view memory as "a component of a neural
machine Sensation designed to use information acquired in the past to
coordinate an organism's behavior in the present" (Klein, Cosmides, &
Tooby, 2002, p. 308). The evolution of memory allowed animals to use
information from the past to respond quickly to Attention immediate
challenges, a monumental advance in the ability to survive. instead of
reacting to each predator or source of food as a new experience, an
animal with the ability to remember past encounters with similar
situations would save precious reaction time. As we discussed in Chapter
3, useful adaptations often come with a price, such as the unwieldy
antlers of the male deer that require energy to build yet help FIGURE
9.1 the deer fight successfully for mates. The development of a memory
system is no exception to this rule. Forming memories requires energy.
For memory systems to The Information Processing flourish within the
animal kingdom, the survival advantages needed to outweigh the energy
Continuum. Memory is located on a costs. given the 81 years or so of
human life expectancy, it would be difficult to demonstrate continuum of
information processing the energy costs of memory in people, but we can
observe the costs in a simpler organism, that flows both from the bottom
the fruit fly (Drosophila), which has a life expectancy of only 10 to 18
days. Fruit flies are up and from the top down. We use capable of
learning classically conditioned associations between odors and electric
shock (see our memories of Dalmatian dogs Chapter 8). After experiencing
pairings of odor and shock, the flies fly away from the odor to
recognize one in an ambiguous 24 hours later (Mery & Kawecki, 2005).
however, to form memories about odor and shock, photograph and interact
with a new the flies must use more energy than they use for activities
that do not require memory. The one we happen to meet. flies that
remembered how to avoid shock died about 4 hours earlier than flies that
did not Illustration: top to bottom: From Richard L. Gregory, "The form
memories. nearly all animals have the capability of forming memories
despite the high Medawar Lecture 2001 Knowledge for vision: Vision for
knowledge," Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 2005 360, 1231--1251, by permission
energy costs, which is a testament to memory's benefits to survival. of
the Royal Society; anetapics/Shutterstock.com; Steve Smith/ The Image
Bank/Getty Images

How Are Memories Processed? Atkinson and Shiffrin (1968, 1971) proposed
one of the most influential models of memory (Malmberg et al., 2019).
According to this classic information processing model, data flow
through a series of separate stages of memory (see ● Figure 9.2).
Contemporary cognitive psychologists have continued to modify this
original model while retaining the basic ideas that memories can be
stored for different lengths of time and that executive control
processes influence the system. To illustrate the flow of information in
this model, let's consider what happens when you use your memory to
complete a specific task---remembering a phone number provided to you by
a new acquaintance.

retrieval The recovery of stored information.

how ARe MeMoRieS PRoCeSSed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

319

Sensory Memory

Encoding failure is one of the most common memory problems faced by
students. If we don't encode information because we're not paying
attention during a lecture, there will be no memory of the information
to retrieve later.

JONATHAN NACKSTRAND/AFP/Getty Images

Gorodenkoff/Shutterstock.com

while settling into your seat before class, you converse with a
classmate about studying together for an upcoming exam. Your classmate
gives you her cell phone number so that you can arrange a good time to
meet. This incoming information, the auditory signals of your
classmate's voice in this case, is processed in a first stage of the
information processing model, the sensory memory. This stage holds
enormous amounts of sensory data, possibly all information that affects
the sensory receptors at one time. however, the data remain for brief
periods, usually a second or less, that only last as long as the neural
activity produced by a sensation continues. The information held in
sensory memory has been compared to a rapidly fading "echo" of the real
input. You can demonstrate the duration and "fade" of sensory memory
information by rapidly flapping your hand back and forth in front of
your eyes. when you do this, you can "see" where your fingers were at a
previous point in time. Sensory input is translated into several types
of codes or representations. A representation of a memory refers to a
mental model of a bit of information that exists even when the
information is no longer available. Visual codes are used for the
temporary storage of information about visual images (Baddeley et al.,
2009). haptic codes are used to process touch and other body senses.
Acoustic codes represent sounds and words. input from different sensory
systems remains separate in sensory memory, and although these different
sensory streams are processed similarly, there are also some
differences. Acoustic codes, or echoic memories, last longer than visual
codes, or iconic memories, possibly to meet our needs to hear entire
words and phrases before we can understand spoken language.

sensory memory The first stage of the Atkinson--Shiffrin model that
holds large amounts of incoming data for brief amounts of time.

short-term memory (STM) The second stage of the Atkinson--Shiffrin model
that holds a small amount of information for a limited time.

320

Chapter 9

Both brains and computers feature the ability to store memories with one
critical difference: The computer stores exact copies of data, but the
brain does not. Instead, the brain stores bits of data that are
reconstructed later for use. This photo shows the high-security computer
memory storage at the Swedish Bahnhof, a facility located 100 feet
underground in a concrete bunker. The facility manages servers for many
secretive organizations, including WikiLeaks.

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

iStock.com/AlbanyPictures

george Sperling demonstrated the duration of iconic memories by testing
recall for matrices of 12 to 16 letters that were presented for as few
as 15 milliseconds. Participants were usually able to identify four or
five letters. however, the process of verbally instructing participants
to do this task takes time, during which the sensory memory for the
matrix fades rapidly. if different tones were used to signal a row of
the matrix to be recalled instead of verbally asking for a response,
participants demonstrated recall for as many as 12 of the original 16
items (Sperling, 1960; Averbach & Sperling, 1961; Sperling, 1960). if
the tone was sounded less than a quarter of a second after the
presentation of the matrix, participants could usually recall all four
letters in a row. After a quarter of a second delay or more, recall fell
to one letter (see ● Figure 9.3). why do we have a sensory memory? only
a small subset of this incoming data is processed by the next stage. it
is likely that we need to collect incoming data until they make enough
sense to process further. The first number in your classmate's phone
number might be simple (2), but it still contains two speech sounds ("t"
and "oo") that must be combined to make sense.

Encoding and storing memories do not guarantee that they can be
retrieved when you need them. Stress can make retrieving even the
simplest of memories surprisingly difficult.

A tiny amount of information in the sensory memory moves to the next
stage of the information processing model, short-term memory (STM), for
further processing. if you focus on your new friend's phone number, the
information moves from sensory memory to short-term memory. Consider all
the other information that might be processed by your sensory memory at
the same time. Perhaps your professor's first Microsoft PowerPoint slide
has appeared on the screen, the heater in the classroom cycled on, and
your stomach growled because you didn't have time for breakfast. none of
these bits of information are processed in short-term memory unless you
pay attention to them. if you are distracted by one of these, it is
likely that you will need to ask your friend to repeat her number.
Short-term memory, like the sensory memory that precedes it, appears to
have remarkable limitations in duration. without additional processing,
information in short-term memory lasts 30 seconds at most (ellis & hunt,
1983). in a classic experiment, participants were shown stimuli
consisting of three consonants, such as RBP (Peterson & Peterson, 1959).
After seeing one of these triplets, participants counted backward by 3s
for periods of 0 to 18 seconds to prevent further processing of the
consonant triplet. As shown in ● Figure 9.4, accuracy dropped rapidly.
it is likely that the Petersons' task overestimates the length of time
that

Stanislav Duben/Shutterstock.com

Short-Term Memory

Even though processing memory requires energy, the benefits to survival
far outweigh the costs. Without memory, this squirrel would be unable to
retrieve the acorns stored weeks ago.

Rehearsal

Sensory input

Sensory memory

Short-term memory

Forgetting

Forgetting

Long-term memory

FIGURE 9.2 The Atkinson--Shiffrin Model of Memory. According to this
classic model of memory, information flows through a series of stages.
If memory is not transferred to the next stage, it is permanently lost.
Source: Adapted from R. C. Atkinson, & R. M. Shiffrin (1971). "The
Control of Short-Term Memory," Scientific American, 225, 82--90. doi:
10.1038/scientificamerican0871-82

how ARe MeMoRieS PRoCeSSed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

321

rehearsal Repetition of information.

FIGURE 9.3

X

Sperling's Demonstration of the Duration of Sensory Memory. George
Sperling presented a matrix of letters to study participants for as few
as 15 milliseconds. When asked to recall the whole matrix (a), most
participants could remember about four or five letters. However, when
tones instead of verbal commands were used to signal which row to
remember (b), participants were able to recall whole rows at a time,
which implies they could remember more than four or five items. Sperling
concluded that they could "see" the entire matrix in sensory memory
briefly, which allowed them to respond correctly. Source: Adapted from
G. Sperling (1960). "The Information Available in Brief Visual
Presentations," Psychological Monographs, 74(11), 1--29. doi:
10.1037/h0093759

322

Chapter 9

F P

X M L T A F N B C D Z P

D

(a) 

X M L T A F N B C D Z P (b)

High Medium Low

X M A L T

iStock.com/Camrocker

Because our short-term memory holds limited amounts of information for
only a short time, smartphone apps that keep track of things we need to
remember to do are popular.

André Babiak/AGE Fotostock

moomsabuy/Shutterstock.com

Our ability to "see" what we have written with a sparkler results from
the remaining traces in our sensory memories. The actual light is long
gone.

material is stored in short-term memory. The study's participants were
aware in advance that they would be tested on the items, and despite the
distraction of counting backward, they may have made deliberate efforts
to retain the triplets in memory. You are probably thinking right now
that you know what to do to prevent this loss of information. if you
repeat the information over and over, a process known as rehearsal,
information stays in shortterm memory indefinitely, so long as you don't
think about anything else. while you are entering your classmate's
number into your phone, you can rehearse the number in your short-term
memory. however, if your attention is diverted from rehearsing the
number when the professor calls on you, the phone number will be gone.
The incoming information of the professor's question pushes the previous
data out of the system. data in short-term memory are easily displaced
by new, incoming bits of data. if rehearsing the information has been
insufficient for moving it into the next stage, long-term memory, the
data will be lost. in addition to limitations of duration, short-term
memory is characterized by severe limitations in capacity. george Miller
(1956) argued that we can process between five and nine items, or "bits"
(such as digits, letters, or words), in short-term memory
simultaneously, or in his words, "the magical number 7 plus or minus 2."
More recently, psychologists have set the limit as about four items
(Cowan, 2000). Memory capacities vary from individual to individual, and
memory tasks appear prominently in standardized tests of intelligence,
discussed in Chapter 10. People who enjoy larger than average short-term
memory capacity excel at a number of cognitive tasks, including reading
(Baddeley et al., 1985). You might be wondering how short-term memory
could be useful, given these limitations. These limitations actually
make shortterm memory an ideal solution for the tasks that we ask it to
complete. The brief duration of short-term memories ensures that room is
freed regularly for incoming information. Most tasks for which we use
short-term memory require us to search its contents to find the right
information. if short-term memory were capable of holding dozens of
pieces of information instead of nine or fewer, this search process
would be lengthy and difficult. it is also convenient to have

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100 90 Courtesy of the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation

Percent correct recall

80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 9 12 15 Retention interval (seconds)

18

21 Courtesy of the United States Internal Revenue Service

6

FIGURE 9.4 The Duration of Short-Term Memory. In a classic study by
Peterson and Peterson (1959), participants were given triplets of
letters, such as XPJ or BTP, to recall. Their ability to remember the
letters decreased as the time between presentation and recall increased.
These results led the Petersons to propose that short-term memory might
last up to 18 seconds, but more contemporary scientists using different
methods think that it lasts as little as 2 seconds. Source: Data from L.
R. Peterson & M. J. Peterson (1959). "Short-Term Retention of Individual
Verbal Items," Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 193--198. doi:
10.1037/ h0049234

a mechanism that allows you to use information and then discard it. You
may not wish to devote precious room in your memory to the telephone
number of a plumber you need only once or twice. short-term memory
allows us to use information without overburdening our storage
capacities. Nonetheless, it is often desirable to expand our capacity
for information in short-term memory. The best way to accomplish this is
to redefine what a "bit" of data is by chunking, or grouping, similar or
meaningful information together (Miller, 1956). if the last four digits
of your friend's phone number are "one," "five," "seven," and "nine,"
she could reduce these four bits to two by saying "fifteen
seventy-nine." Trying to remember the following sequence of
letters---FBiirsciAePA---appears to be an insurmountable task. After
all, remembering 12 letters lies outside the capacity of short-term
memory. The task is greatly simplified by chunking the letters into
meaningful batches of common abbreviations---FBi irs ciA ePA. Now you
have only four meaningful bits to remember rather than 12, which is
safely within the capacities of short-term memory. Failure to use
chunking spontaneously as a strategy occurs frequently in people with
verbal learning disabilities (Koeda et al., 2011). in the absence of
chunking, each item is processed as a single, unrelated bit of
information, which rapidly overwhelms the capacity of short-term memory.
The classic description of short-term memory viewed this stage as a
place to store information for immediate use. As investigations into
memory advanced, researchers proposed an adaptation of this model called
working memory, shown in ● Figure 9.5 (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974).
short-term memory and working memory differed in two ways. First,
shortterm memory involves the passive storage of information, while
working memory involves an active manipulation of information. second,
short-term memory was viewed as managing a single process at a time,
whereas working memory was more complex, allowing multiple processes to
occur simultaneously.

Courtesy of the United States Central Intelligence Agency

3

Courtesy of the United States Environmental Protection Agency

0

It is easier to remember FBI, IRS, CIA, and EPA in chunks than to
remember FBIIRSCIAEPA chunking The process of grouping similar or
meaningful information together.

working memory An extension of the concept of short-term memory that
includes the active manipulation of multiple types of information
simultaneously.

How Are MeMories Processed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

323

Central executive

Visuospatial sketch pad

Episodic buffer

Phonological loop

Long-term memory

FIGURE 9.5 Working Memory. Alan Baddeley's model of working memory
differs from short-term memory in two important ways: (1) information in
working memory can be actively manipulated, whereas short-term memory
passively stores memory, and (2) working memory can manage multiple
types of information simultaneously, whereas short-term memory cannot.
Source: A. D. Baddeley, & G. J. Hitch (1974). "Working Memory." In G.
Bower (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, (Vol. 8,
pp. 47--89). New York: Academic Press.

observations that people could manage two short-term memory tasks at the
same time led to modifications of this stage of memory (Baddeley &
hitch, 1974). For example, study participants could read a list of
numbers and then read a paragraph. This task should quickly overwhelm
the limited capacity of short-term memory because reading the paragraph
should displace the earlier list of numbers. however, this outcome was
not what the researchers observed. Participants had no difficulty
remembering the numbers, suggesting that the numbers were stored
separately from the words in the paragraph. After further exploration of
the types of information that could be maintained separately in
short-term memory, four components were proposed (Baddeley et al.,
2009): a phonological loop, a visuospatial sketch pad, a central
executive, and an episodic buffer. The phonological loop is the working
memory component responsible for verbal and auditory information. As you
repeat your friend's phone number while reaching for your phone, you are
using your phonological loop. The visuospatial sketch pad holds visual
and spatial information. when you describe the route from your friend's
dorm to your favorite coffee shop where you plan to hold your study
session, you use your visuospatial sketch pad to describe the way. The
central executive manages the work of the other components by directing
attention to particular tasks (Baddeley, 1996). divided attention, which
we discussed in Chapter 5, requires the skills of the central executive.
while discussing the route to the coffee shop with your friend
(phonological loop), you visualize the route (visuospatial sketch pad),
and your central executive parcels out the right amount of attention to
allow you to do both tasks well. The episodic buffer provides a
mechanism for combining information stored in longterm memory, which we
discuss in the next section, with the active processing taking place in
working memory. This component helps explain why chunking the string of
letters earlier (FBi iRS CiA ePA) is easier than remembering the letters
as individual bits

324

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of information---FBiiRSCiAePA. without information from long-term memory
about what FBi and the other abbreviations mean, making these chunks
would not provide any advantage.

The final stage of memory in the information processing model is
long-term memory. Unlike sensory, short-term, and working memory,
long-term memory has few limitations in capacity or duration. we do not
run out of room in long-term memory for new data, and information can
last a lifetime. The oldest person alive can still recall significant
childhood memories and learn new things. Although old memories may
become more difficult to retrieve, this process is different from losing
them simply because of the passage of time.

Andre Jenny/Alamy Stock Photo

Long-Term Memory

Moving Information into Long-Term Memory in most cases, information

moves from short-term or working memory to long-term memory through
rehearsal. After seeing your new friend's number several times as you
text her, you memorize it without trying to do so. Rehearsal can be
divided into maintenance rehearsal, which means simple repetition of the
material, and elaborative rehearsal, which involves linking the new
material to things you already know. of the two types of rehearsal,
elaborative rehearsal is a more effective way to move information into
more permanent storage. The benefits of elaborative rehearsal can be
explained using the levels of processing theory (Craik & Lockhart,
1972). when we look at written words we want to remember, we can attend
to many levels of detail: the visual appearance of the word (font, all
caps, and number of letters), the sound of the word, the meaning of the
word, and the personal relevance of the word. These characteristics can
be placed along a continuum of depth of processing from shallow to deep,
with the encoding of the appearance of a word requiring less processing
and effort than the encoding of the sound of a word, which in turn
requires less processing and effort than the encoding of the meaning or
personal relevance of a word. According to the levels of processing
theory, words encoded according to meaning would be easier to remember
than words encoded according to their visual appearance because encoding
meaningfulness produces a deeper level of attention and processing
(Craik & Tulving, 1975). in one study designed to test the levels of
processing theory, participants recalled more words when their
instructions elicited the encoding of word meanings than when they were
instructed to determine more surface features of each word, such as
whether it appeared in

Chase and Simon (1973) presented images of chess pieces on chessboards
for only 5 seconds to chess masters and people who didn't play chess.
When the images were from real games, the chess masters recalled the
placement of the pieces better than the nonplayers because they were
able to use their knowledge of chess to chunk the images of the pieces'
locations in short-term memory. When the pieces were placed randomly on
the boards, however, the chess masters were unable to use chunking and
performed no better than the nonplayers.

long-term memory The final stage of the Atkinson--Shiffrin model that is
the location of permanent memories. levels of processing theory The
depth (shallow to deep) of processing applied to information that
predicts its ease of retrieval.

Suzy Bennett/Alamy Stock Photo

The accumulated knowledge of a long life, such as this Australian
aborigine tribal elder's familiarity with his harsh surroundings,
probably meant the difference between life and death for many of our
ancestors. There is no evidence that older adults are unable to add new
information to their longterm memories or necessarily lose information
they have known a long time.

how ARe MeMoRieS PRoCeSSed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

325

Pakhnyushchy/Shutterstock.com

Our ATMs usually deliver our cash in \$20 bills, but handling these
regularly does not mean that we remember exactly what they look like.
Which president is pictured on the bill? Whose signature as Secretary of
the Treasury appears on the bill? Are the fonts used for all the 20s the
same or different? Most people can't answer these questions from memory.

capital letters (see ● Figure 9.6) (Craik & Tulving, 1975). in another
study, deeper levels of processing were accompanied by more subvocal
speech (reminiscent of "talking to yourself "), indicated by
measurements of tiny movements in the muscles of speech (Cacioppo &
Petty, 1981). however, the levels of processing theory is not very
specific about the meaning of deep or shallow processing. how would we
apply this approach to evaluate participants' recall for music, touch,
or visual images? Further work on this theory needs to identify what
determines depth of processing during encoding.

Differences Between Working and Long-Term Memory in addition to not

sharing the limitations of duration and capacity found with working
memory, long-term memory appears to be unique in other ways. differences
between working and long-term memories can be seen in classic
experiments demonstrating the serial position effect. This phenomenon
can be observed when people

Levels of Processing Theory. Craik and Tulving (1975) tested the levels
of processing theory by investigating their study participants'
recognition of words they had seen only briefly (about one-fifth of a
second) following one of three types of questions. The three types of
questions focused the participants' attention on aspects of the word
they were about to see. The questions pointed to surface features (Is
the word in capital letters?), acoustic features (Does the word rhyme
with another word?), or semantic features (Does the word make sense in
this sentence?). Theoretically, deciding whether a word is in capital
letters takes less processing than deciding whether it rhymes with
another word, which in turn takes less processing than thinking about
its meaning to answer the sentence question. The results supported the
levels of processing theory. Recognition of words preceded by a semantic
question was better than recognition of words preceded by a rhyme
question, which were recognized better than words preceded by a font
question. Source: Adapted from F. I. M. Craik & E. Tulving (1975).
"Depth of Processing and the Retention of Words in Episodic Memory,"
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 104(3), 268--294.
doi:10.1037/0096-3445.104.3.268

326

Chapter 9

Percentage of words recognized

FIGURE 9.6 80

60

40

20

Capitals

Rhyme

Sentence

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.0

FIGURE 9.7

0.9

The Serial Position Effect. When people are given a list of words to
remember and told they can recall the items in any order, the likelihood
that a word on the list will be remembered depends on its position in
the list. The primacy effect refers to the superior recall for the first
words on the list, and the recency effect refers to the superior recall
for the last words on the list. The primacy effect probably occurs
because people have had more time to place these items in long-term
memory. The recency effect probably occurs because these last words
still remain in working memory at the time of retrieval. A delay in
retrieval erases the recency effect but not the primacy effect.

0.8

Probability of recall

0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3

Primacy effect

Recency effect

0.2 0.1 0

2 4 Beginning

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20 End

Position in list

Source: Association for Psychological Science

are asked to learn a list of words and recall them in any order they
choose. As shown in ● Figure 9.7, recall of items takes on a U-shaped
appearance when retrieval is plotted as a function of an item's position
in a list during presentation (Murdoch, 1962). The superior recall for
the first items on a list is known as the primacy effect, which results
from the storage of these items in long-term memory. Using a list of 20
words, people would have the most rehearsal time for the first word,
less for the second, and so on through the list. Because rehearsal moves
information from working to long-term memory, the earlier words, with
their greater share of rehearsal, would be more likely to be stored in
long-term memory than the later words on the list, which probably were
not rehearsed much. The superior recall for the last words on the list
is known as the recency effect, which occurs because these items remain
in working memory at the time of recall. The recency effect, but not the
primacy effect, disappears if recall is delayed by 30 seconds (glanzer

According to research on primacy, recency, and website menus, we would
predict that more people would click on the first and last news articles
listed on the Association for Psychological Science's webpage. Which
articles are least likely to get attention? how ARe MeMoRieS PRoCeSSed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

327

& Cunitz, 1966). After 30 seconds, items in long-term memory are still
available for recall, but items in working memory are long gone. one of
the strongest arguments in favor of the separation of working and
long-term memory is the occurrence of clinical cases in which one
capacity is damaged while the other remains intact. henry Molaison (the
amnesic patient h.M.), whom we discussed at the beginning of this
chapter, was able to remember a small amount of information for a few
seconds but experienced enormous difficulties when trying to store new
information in his long-term memory. in another case study, a patient
with another type of brain damage appeared to have the opposite problem.
Patient K. F. had normal long-term memory, as indicated by his ability
to form new memories. however, his working memory was seriously impaired
(Shallice & warrington, 1970). when asked to recall a list of digits (a
typical working memory task), he could remember only one or two digits,
a big deviation from the typical ability to recall five to nine digits.
The fact that Patient K.F. could still form long-term memories in spite
of his STM deficits reminds us that the pathway between short- and
long-term memory is not a simple, linear one.

What Are the Different Types of Long-Term Memory?

declarative memory A consciously retrieved memory that is easy to
verbalize, including semantic, episodic, and autobiographical
information; also known as explicit memory.

Long-term memory can be divided into several categories (see ● Figure
9.8). These categories not only help us describe memory more precisely,
but also represent activity in different parts of the brain. Long-term
memory can be divided into declarative, or conscious, memories and
nondeclarative, or unconscious, memories. Declarative memories are easy
to "declare," or discuss verbally. declarative memories are also called
explicit memories because they are accessed in a conscious, direct, and
effortful manner. in contrast to declarative memories, nondeclarative
memories are difficult to discuss. For example, classical conditioning,
which we examined in Chapter 8, produces nondeclarative memories. we
might find it difficult to explain to another

nondeclarative memory An unconsciously and effortlessly retrieved memory
that is difficult to verbalize, such as a memory for classical
conditioning, procedural learning, and priming; also known as implicit
memory.

Long-term memory

Nondeclarative (implicit) memory

Declarative (explicit) memory

Semantic memory

Episodic memory

Procedural memory

Classical conditioning

Priming

Autobiographical memory

FIGURE 9.8 Types of Long-Term Memory. Long-term memory can be divided
into several categories, beginning with a distinction between
declarative (also known as explicit or conscious memories) and
nondeclarative (also known as implicit or unconscious memories).
Declarative memories are further divided into semantic and episodic
memories, which are combined when we use autobiographical memories.
Examples of nondeclarative memories are procedural memories, classical
conditioning, and priming.

328

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

person why we get nervous right before an exam or dislike a food we ate
once before becoming ill. nondeclarative memories are also called
implicit memories because they affect our behavior in subconscious,
indirect, and effortless ways. we are aware of their outcomes ("i don't
want to eat that food"), but we are usually unaware of the information
processing that led to that outcome.

Declarative Memories

semantic memory A general knowledge memory.

episodic memory A memory for personal experience.

Karina Wallton/Shutterstock.com

You might have semantic memories that tell you about the characteristics
of Labrador retrievers and episodic memories about the day you chose
your first puppy. Your autobiographical memories combine these two
elements to give you an account of your life. A semantic element of your
autobiographical memory might be that your dog's parents were champions.
The episodic elements of your autobiographical memory for the event
might include memories of your puppy's warmth and the happy way you felt
that day.

martin phelps/Alamy Stock Photo

declarative memories are further divided into semantic and episodic
memories (Tulving, 1972, 1985, 1995). Semantic memory contains your
store of general knowledge in the form of word meanings and facts. Using
your semantic memory, you can answer questions such as "which nFL team
won last year's Super Bowl?" or "what is a churro?" Episodic memory is a
more personal account of past experiences. we can distinguish between
semantic and episodic memories along four dimensions: the type of
information processed, the organization of the information in memory,
the source of the information, and the focus of the memory (williams et
al., 2008). Semantic memories contain general knowledge about the world,
whereas episodic memories include more specific information about
events, objects, and people. Semantic memory, as we will see later in
this chapter, is organized according to categories. For example, we have
a category for birds that contains our semantic knowledge of birds.
episodic memory, in contrast, is organized as a timeline. To answer a
question from episodic memory, we often use time as a cue: "when i was
in the eighth grade, my family took a vacation at the beach." Semantic
knowledge originates from others, such as your professors, or from
repeated experience: "The ocean is colder in California than in Florida
because every time i've gone to the beach in either location, this is
what i have observed." An episodic memory can result from a single,
personal experience. Finally, the two types of memories serve different
purposes. Semantic memory provides us with an objective understanding of
our world, whereas episodic memory provides a reference point for our
subjective experience of the self.

whAT ARe The diFFeRenT TYPeS oF Long-TeRM MeMoRY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

329

autobiographical memory Semantic or episodic memories that reference the
self. procedural memory A nondeclarative or implicit memory for how to
carry out skilled movement.

priming A change in a response to a stimulus as a result of exposure to
a previous stimulus.

despite the differences just outlined, semantic and episodic memories
often overlap. You could form an episodic memory of where you were when
you stored a specific semantic memory. A colleague was introduced to a
student's parents as follows: "Mom, dad, this is Professor Jones. he's
the one i told you about who taught us that rats can't barf." not only
did the student retain a semantic memory about rat behavior (which
incidentally is true and is relevant to understanding the classical
conditioning of taste aversion in rats), but the student correctly
retained an episodic memory of when and where the fact was learned. we
can see that semantic and episodic memories interact dynamically to
provide a complete picture of the past. our semantic knowledge of the
relative temperatures of the Pacific and Atlantic oceans depends on the
personal experiences of either hearing the fact in a geology classroom
or vacationing on both coasts of the United States. At the same time, we
use our semantic knowledge to interpret our episodic memories. without
semantic knowledge of the meanings of the words ocean, temperature,
Atlantic, and Pacific, we would be unable to organize our experience
into a coherent conclusion---the ocean is colder in California than in
Florida. This blending of semantic and episodic memories characterizes
autobiographical memories (williams et al., 2008). Autobiographical
memories can contain factual, semantic aspects of personal experience
without episodic aspects. You might know you were born in Pasadena,
California, but you would not have any memory of being born. however,
your autobiographical memories of Pasadena might also include episodic
memories of attending the Rose Parade on new Year's day as a child,
complete with images of the sights, sounds, and emotions of that
experience. A small number of people have been identified as having a
rare condition known as highly superior autobiographical memory (hSAM)
(Parker et al., 2006; LePort et al., 2012; Ally et al., 2013). one
individual with hSAM showed nearly perfect recollection of dates chosen
at random from the time he was 11 years old. his recall was corroborated
by entries in his grandmother's diary, interviews with family members,
his medical records, and historical facts about his hometown.
individuals with hSAM show superior recall for public events, as well as
personal experience, but otherwise perform about the same as typical
controls on other tests of memory. hSAM is associated with physical
differences in networks in the brain that are associated with
autobiographical memory (LePort et al., 2012).

Nondeclarative Memories

Aurelien Hayman can recall detail from random dates in his past. When
asked in 2012, Aurelien accurately recalled that October 1, 2006, was a
cloudy day, he listened to "When You Were Young" by the Killers, asked a
girl out and was turned down, wore a blue T-shirt, and experienced a
power outage at his home. This rare type of memory, known as highly
superior autobiographical memory (HSAM), has been the subject of only 20
published case studies.

Huw Evans/Shutterstock.com

earlier, we defined nondeclarative memories as unconscious or implicit
memories that are difficult to verbalize (Smith & grossman, 2008). in
other words, nondeclarative memories influence our behavior without our
conscious awareness of having used a memory. Using nondeclarative
memories, you are able to do something, such as using rollerblades for
the first time in years, without really knowing how you are doing it.
Three types of nondeclarative memories have been studied in detail:
classical conditioning, discussed in Chapter 8, procedural memories, and
priming. Procedural memories are also called skill memories because they
contain information about how to carry out a skilled movement, such as
driving a car. Priming occurs when exposure to a stimulus changes a
response to a subsequent stimulus.

330

Chapter 9

Procedural Memories Procedural memories tell us how to carry out motor
skills and procedures and are especially difficult to describe in words.
Consider the differences between showing somebody how to use scissors
and writing an essay about how to use scissors. which would be easier?
explaining in words how to use scissors, particularly for a person who
had never seen a pair of scissors, would be quite a challenge. in
contrast, few of us experience difficulties demonstrating procedures
(Squire, 1987). one great advantage of procedural memories is their
ability to automate our performance. when a novice driver first learns
to operate a car with a manual transmission, significant conscious
effort is required

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

to remember the correct sequence---clutch, gas, shift. once the skill is
well learned, the driver is far less aware of this sequence; the person
"just drives." when procedures become automatic, we are free to direct
our limited capacities for divided attention to other aspects of the
task. A musician who has mastered the notes in a difficult piece can
direct attention to the finer points of expression and phrasing.
Unfortunately, if a procedure is learned incorrectly, such as a bad golf
swing, considerable effort must be expended to fix the swing, which
slows performance. The golfer must put in sufficient practice time to
make the new, correct swing automatic.

It might have been years since this grandfather last put on a pair of
ice skates, but to help his granddaughter learn to skate, he's willing
to get back out on the ice. He might be a little wobbly at first, but
procedural memories for skilled movement are persistent. He'll quickly
be skating as if he'd done it every day.

age fotostock/Superstock

Priming Priming, or the change in our response to a stimulus because of
pre-exposure to related stimuli, explains many everyday effects of
familiarity. People rate advertisements they have seen previously, even
if they can't consciously remember seeing them, more positively than
those that they have not seen previously (Perfect & Askew, 1994). we
agree that the unconscious way our attitudes can be manipulated is
unsettling. Priming is often studied using a lexical decision task (see
● Figure 9.9). in this task, a participant views two strings of letters
and must decide whether the stimuli are both real words (such as
fork--roof) or not (such as mork--loof). Reaction time, in the form of
hitting one key for real words and another for nonwords, is the
dependent variable. when the two stimuli are related words (e.g.,
doctor--nurse), reaction time for deciding that nurse is a real word is
faster than when the stimuli are unrelated words (e.g., butter--nurse)
(Meyer & Schvanevelt, 1971).

The distinction between nondeclarative procedural memories and
declarative memories is one reason it is so challenging to be a computer
help desk technician who must talk people through a repair procedure
over the telephone. It would be easier to demonstrate how to fix the
computer, which is why some software companies prefer to have the
technician take over the computer remotely and apply the needed fixes as
opposed to verbalizing procedures for the caller to undertake. It also
explains why few star athletes go on to be good coaches. Performing a
task is not the same as talking about it. (b) 950

Stimuli

Correct response

Marb Lork

No

Plame Doctor

No

Nurse Butter (unrelated)

Yes

Bread Butter (related)

Reaction time (ms)

(a) 

850

750

Yes Related words

Unrelated words

FIGURE 9.9 Priming. Priming can be investigated within the lexical
decision task, in which participants are asked to judge whether two
words appearing together are both real words or not (a). Nonreal words
are made by switching one letter from a real word, like plame from flame
or lork from fork. Pairs of real words are either related to each other
by meaning or not. The participants' reaction time in this task (b)
demonstrates that participants respond faster to related word pairs
(bread--butter) than to unrelated word pairs (nurse--butter). These
results support the idea that we organize items in long-term memory
based on their meaning. Source: D. E. Meyer & R. W. Schvaneveldt (1971).
"Facilitation in Recognizing Pairs of Words: Evidence of a Dependence
Between Retrieval Operations," Journal of Experimental Psychology, 90,
227--234. doi: 10.1037/h0031564

whAT ARe The diFFeRenT TYPeS oF Long-TeRM MeMoRY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

331

summary 9.1 Types of Memory type of memory

major features

Sensory memory

●

Large capacity

●

Brief duration

●

Separate channels for different sensory types (acoustic, visual, etc.)

●

Limited capacity (5--9 bits)

●

Limited duration (30 sec maximum)

●

Expansion of capacity through chunking

●

Expansion of duration through rehearsal

●

Central executive, visuospatial scratchpad, episodic buffer,
phonological loop

●

Very large capacity

●

Very long duration

●

Declarative/explicit

●

General knowledge

●

Organized by category

●

Declarative/explicit

●

Personal history

●

Organized chronologically

●

Declarative/explicit

●

Combines semantic and episodic memories

●

References self

●

Nondeclarative/implicit

●

Difficult to verbalize

●

Easy to demonstrate

●

Automated skills

Short-term memory or working memory

Long-term memory

Semantic memory

Episodic memory

Autobiographical memory

Procedural memory

Credits: Top row---moomsabuy/Shutterstock.com; Second row---André
Babiak/AGE Fotostock; Third row---Suzy Bennett/Alamy Stock Photo; Fourth
row---martin phelps/Alamy Stock Photo; Fifth row---Karina
Wallton/Shutterstock.com; Sixth row---Huw Evans/Shutterstock.com; Bottom
row---age fotostock/age fotostock/Superstock

332

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

How Is Long-Term Memory Organized? Librarians use coding systems to
group books on the shelf. Can we identify the systems that we use to
organize our memories? Memories that share characteristics are more
closely linked in long-term memory than memories that show little
overlap among their various features.

Connectionist Theories Connectionism views the mind as a network made up
of simpler units or concepts. Connectionist models of memory suggest
that thinking about one concept automatically leads to thinking about
related concepts and their properties. A spreading activation model
(Collins & Loftus, 1975) recognizes that people form their own
organizations in memory based on their personal experiences (see ●
Figure 9.10). For example, if you ask people to report the first words
that come to mind when they see the word red, you will get many
different answers. The spreading activation model also suggests that
concepts differ in the strength of their connections. For example, even
though avocados and oranges are both examples of the concept "fruit,"
most people have a closer link in their memories between "orange" and
"fruit" than between "avocado" and "fruit." if asked whether an avocado
or an orange is a fruit, reaction time to the second statement would be
faster.

spreading activation model A connectionist theory proposing that people
organize general knowledge based on their individual experiences.

Street Vehicle

Car Bus Truck Ambulance

Fire engine

House Fire

Orange RED

Apples

Yellow Green

Pears Cherries

Violets

Roses Sunsets

Flowers Sunrises

Clouds

FIGURE 9.10 Spreading Activation. According to the spreading activation
theory, thinking about red will activate nearby concepts (orange, green,
and fire) faster than more distant concepts (sunsets and roses). This
network suggests that a person would answer the question "Is a bus a
vehicle?" faster than the question "Is an ambulance a vehicle?" Source:
Adapted from A. M. Collins, & E. Loftus (1975). "A Spreading Activation
Theory of Semantic Processing," Psychological Review, 82, 407--428. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.82.6.407

how iS Long-TeRM MeMoRY oRgAnized?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

333

keith morris/Alamy Stock Photo

We are more likely to remember details that are consistent with our
schemas than those that are not. We will remember books in the
professor's office and brushes and canvases in the artist's studio.

schema A set of expectations about objects and situations.

The spreading activation model does an excellent job of accounting for
the results of the lexical decision experiments described earlier. Using
the spreading activation model, the first word activates a concept. This
activation spreads to connected concepts and properties. For closely
related concepts such as "doctor" and "nurse," activating the "doctor"
concept would activate the "nurse" concept even before the person sees
the word nurse, allowing a quick decision to be made as soon as the word
appears. in contrast, with unrelated words like butter and nurse, the
"nurse" concept would not be activated until the word actually appears,
resulting in a relatively slower decision.

Inferences: Using Schemas

Frederic Bartlett (1932/1967) observed that memory does not work like a
video recording of events. he read long, involved stories to study
participants and then asked them to recall the stories 20 hours later.
not too surprisingly, the recalled stories were shorter and had less
detail than the original story. Somewhat more surprisingly, participants
added features to the recalled stories that had not appeared in the
original. These additions were not random. in most cases, the details
added by participants fit the theme or meaning of the story. Bartlett
concluded that memory storage does not occur in a vacuum. when we
encounter new information, we attempt to fit the new information into an
existing schema, or set of expectations about objects and situations.
details that are consistent with our schemas are more likely to be
retained, whereas inconsistent details are more likely to be left out.
details may be added in memory if they make a story more consistent and
coherent. For example, you are more likely to recall having seen books
in a photograph of a professor's office than in a photograph of a farmer
working in the fields. even if no books appeared in the professor's
office, you might recall seeing some, because most professors have
offices filled with books. in Chapter 11, we will explore the
development of schemas and the formation of concepts during childhood.

EXPERIENCING PSYCHOLOGY Schemas and False Memories FREDERIC BARTLETT
OBSERVED that using schemas to frame our memories can lead us to add
details that improve a memory's consistency and coherence. In other
words, we can "remember" things that did not occur because they fit our
schemas. We can demonstrate this "fill in the blank" tendency in memory
by asking you to memorize some word lists. 1. Read through both lists of
words in order, and try to remember as many words as you can. List 1
sheets, pillow, mattress, blanket, comfortable, room, dream, lay, chair,
rest, tired, night, dark, time

334

Chapter 9

List 2 door, tree, eye, song, pillow, juice, orange, radio, rain, car,
sleep, cat, dream, eat 2. Without looking back at the list, write down
as many words as possible from List 1 in any order.

words into your recalled list that are not related to the schema of
sleep. See whether you can construct some lists on your own that produce
other false memories. We return to the issue of false memories and
retrieval later in this chapter. ■

Analysis Check your list of recalled words for any that did not appear
in List 1. Pillow and dream appear in both lists, but sleep appears in
List 2 only. Many people insert sleep into their List 1 responses (a
false memory) because so many of the words on List 1 fit the sleep
schema. It is unlikely that you will insert

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

schemas play important roles in memory storage, as demon­ strated by a
clever experiment in which participants were asked to read the following
passage:

Alexander Image/Shutterstock.com

the procedure is actually quite simple. First you arrange things into
different groups depending on their makeup. of course, one pile may be
sufficient depending on how much there is to do. if you have to go
somewhere else due to lack of facilities that is the next step,
otherwise you are pretty well set. it is important not to overdo any
particular endeavor. that is, it is better to do too few things at once
than too many. in the short run this may not seem important, but
complications from doing too many can easily arise. A mistake can be ex­
pensive as well. the manipulation of the appropriate mecha­ nisms should
be self­explanatory, and we need not dwell on it here. At first the whole
procedure will seem complicated. soon, however, it will become just
another facet of life. it is difficult to foresee any end to the
necessity for this task in the immediate future, but then one never can
tell. (Bransford & Johnson, 1972, p. 722)

The self is one of the most important schemas we have for organizing our
thinking. If you can think about how the material you study is reflected
in your experience, it will be easier to remember.

At this point, you are probably scratching your head in confusion.
Reading this passage is bad enough, and remembering much of it later
seems impossible. However, what if we tell you that the passage is about
doing your laundry? with the laundry schema in mind, try rereading the
passage. it is likely to make a lot more sense than when you read it the
first time, and you will remember more of what you read. Cartoonist
Nathan Pyle delights in highlighting the importance of context and
schemas as his aliens navigate our world. His character's statement "if
i consume too much of this jitter liquid, it irritates my storage organ"
make little sense un­ less you understand a schema related to drinking
coffee.

How Do We Retrieve Memories? storing information does us little good
unless we can locate the information when we need it. without a system
of retrieval, our stored memories would be no more useful to us than a
library in which books were placed on shelves at random. You might get
lucky and find what you are looking for, but in most cases, the search
would take so long that the information would no longer be needed.

imagine that you were told to remember the following letters for a
subsequent test:

cafhk During the test, you are shown a series of letters one at a time.
if the letter you are shown matches one on your list, you pull the "yes"
lever as quickly as possible. if the letter is not on your list, you
pull the "no" lever. this procedure is used to investigate recall from
short­term memory (sternberg, 1966, 1967, 1969). Because of the small
number of items held in short­term memory, it is tempting to as­ sume that
we can retrieve them all simultaneously. However, this is not the way
memory works. when the number of letters on the list was increased, a
consistent 38 milliseconds of reaction time was added for each
additional item. in other words, if you were asked to say whether "h"
was on your list, you would first consider "c," then "a," then "f," and
so on until you reached the target letter. these results suggest that we
search through short­term memory one item at a time, rather than
retrieving its contents all at once.

Tom Grill/Spirit/Corbis

Retrieval From Short-Term Memory

Retrieval systems help us find the information we need, whether we are
searching online, looking for a book, or trying to remember something
important. Organized information is always easier to find than
disorganized information.

How Do we RetRieve MeMoRies?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

335

Retrieval from Long-Term Memory The popularity of games like Trivial
Pursuit, crossword puzzles, and television game shows highlights an
interesting aspect of memory retrieval. it feels good when you can
remember something. At the same time, most students are all too familiar
with the intense feelings of frustration that accompany the inability to
retrieve information. You know the answer, but it isn't coming to mind.

The Role of Cues A cue is any stimulus that helps you access target
information.

STOCK4B/Photoshot

Most students find recognition tasks such as true--false or matching
exam items relatively easy. These tasks provide complete cues (the
correct information is on the page in front of you). All you need to do
is make a judgment about how well the presented information matches what
is stored in memory. Compared to recognition tasks, recall tasks, such
as essay exams, require an additional step. information must be
retrieved from memory and then recognized as correct, a process known as
generate-- recognize (guynn et al., 2014). Recall tasks provide far
fewer cues than recognition tasks and are typically more difficult as a
result. in addition to the amount of information provided, what makes a
stimulus an effective cue? The most effective cues are those we generate
ourselves, a finding that students might find particularly useful. in
one experiment, one group of students wrote down 3 words of their
choosing for each of the 600 words they were expected to learn, while
another group studied the same 600 words accompanied by 3 words for each
term selected by another person (Mäntylä & nilsson, 1988). Although
recall in the second group was an excellent 55%, the students who
selected their own retrieval cues remembered a remarkable 90% of the
words. in a later section on improving your memory, we will emphasize
the benefits of incorporating your experience when forming new memories.
if you are able to put concepts to be learned in your own words and
associate them with personal experiences, they will be easier to
remember.

The popularity of memory games, such as Trivial Pursuit, probably
results from the rewarding feeling we get when we retrieve a
sought-after memory.

Diverse Voices in Psychology What Is the "Own-Race Bias" in Memory for
Faces? FOLLOWING THE MISIDENTIFICATION of five innocent African-American
men by a white eyewitness in 1971, William Haythorn was inspired to ask
whether cross-racial identifications were as accurate as same-race
identifications (Meissner & Brigham, 2001). This led to decades of
investigations into the own-race bias (ORB) in memory for human faces,
also known as the cross-race effect or other-race effect. Meta-analyses
have supported significant ORB effects that are consistent across a
number of racial and ethnic groups (Meissner & Brigham, 2001).
Researchers still differ, however, in how they explain the effect. One
school of thought suggests that the ORB results from perception (Rossion
& Michel, 2011). Because people are more familiar with their own race
than others, they might initiate different types of attention and
perceptual

336

Chapter 9

processes when encoding information about faces representing different
races (see Chapter 5). Other researchers focus on more social and
cognitive factors, such as perceived in-group versus out-group
membership (Hugenberg et al., 2010). According to this approach, a
member of your in-group might seem more important to encode, leading to
the use of different perceptual strategies. Most of the ORB studies make
use of an either-or approach to racial identity. What happens when the
stimuli are more ambiguous? Given the large number of people with
multiracial identities today, this seems like a logical and important
question. When ambiguous racial group faces are used as stimuli,
participants' memory for them depends on whether the ambiguous faces are
viewed as in-group members or not (Pauker et al., 2009). When perceivers
associated ambiguous faces

with their in-group, memory was better, but when the ambiguous faces
were not included in the in-group, memory was once again poor. What
happens if the perceiver is bicultural? Which faces would seem to fit
the "own-race" category for these individuals? Latino-Americans were
primed to focus on either their Latino or American cultural selves
(Marsh et al., 2016). When primed to focus on their Latino cultural
selves, the participants demonstrated better memory for Latino faces
than for white faces. However, when primed to focus on their American
cultural selves, memory for white faces was better than for Latino
faces. These results emphasize the importance of considering social and
cognitive factors in addition to perceptual and learned aspects in
efforts to understand the basis of the ownrace bias. ■

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cues might work because of a process known as encoding specificity
(Tulving, & Thomson, 1973; Flexser & Tulving, 1978; Tulving, 1983). each
time you form a long-term memory, target information is encoded along
with other important bits present at the same time. As a result, each
memory is processed in a unique and specific way because this exact
combination of bits is unlikely to occur again. Any stimulus that was
present and noticed during this encoding process could serve as a cue
for retrieving the target memory. Among the bits of information that get
encoded along with target memories are features of the surrounding
environment, leading to context-dependent memory. You have probably been
advised to study in a well-lit, quiet, professional environment to
perform your best on exams. duplicating your testing situation when you
study should provide the greatest number of retrieval cues. when study
participants were asked to learn lists of words in one of two
distinctive rooms while either standing or sitting, recall was best when
participants were tested in the same room and position as when they
learned the information (greenspoon & Ranyard, 1957). As shown in ●
Figure 9.11, scuba divers who learned words either on land or underwater
retrieved the most words when their encoding and testing circumstances
were the same (godden & Baddeley, 1975). Although these effects are
small, it is still a good idea to study in a quiet, classroom-like
environment, which might explain why studying in the library has
remained popular. Mood and other internal states can serve as encoding
cues. in one creative study, people with bipolar disorder (described in
Chapter 14), whose moods can swing from mania to depression, learned
words in one state (mania or depression) and tried to retrieve them in
either the same state, mania--mania or depression--depression, or the
opposite one, mania--depression or depression--mania (weingartner et
al., 1977). The participants were most successful when learning and
retrieving occurred in the same state, whether that was mania or
depression.

Black woman

Black man

White woman

Ambiguous woman

Ambiguous man

Participants typically show an improved memory for faces of people from
their own race, a phenomenon known as the own-race bias (ORB).
Researchers do not agree on the causes of the ORB, but some argue in
favor of the importance of an in-group versus out-group hypothesis. When
ambiguous faces are presented, participants' memories for the faces
depend on whether they are primed to think of the ambiguous faces as
members of their own in-group or not. Generated.Photos

It may be tempting to blame context-dependent memory for the experience
of alcohol-related blackouts, but these are more likely to result from
alcohol's active interference with the formation of long-term memories
(Lisman, 1974). There is no evidence that getting drunk again will make
it easier to recall what happened the last time a person got drunk.

Tip of the Tongue Retrieval is not an all-or-none phenomenon. instead,
retrieval

proceeds step by step, with each new step bringing you closer to the
target. This gradual retrieval is best illustrated by the
tip-of-the-tongue (ToT) phenomenon. ToT is probably a familiar
experience for you. while trying to remember a word or name, you might
retrieve the first letter of the item, but the complete item remains
elusive.

Number of words recalled

cue A stimulus that aids retrieval. encoding specificity A process in
which memories incorporate unique combinations of information when
encoded.

FIGURE 9.11

16

Ernest Manewal/Lonely Planet Images/Getty Images

White man

14

Our Surroundings Are Encoded in Context-Dependent Memories. Features of
our environment get encoded along with target memories. Study
participants learning lists of words either on land or while underwater
recalled more words when tested in the same context compared to when
they were tested in the opposite context. This diver might find it more
difficult to retrieve information about types of fish if tested on dry
land instead of underwater.

12 10 8 6 4 2

Tested on land

0

Tested underwater On land Underwater Learning condition

Source: Adapted from D. R. Godden, & A. D. Baddeley (1975).
"Context-Dependent Memory in Two Natural Environments: On Land and Under
Water," British Journal of Psychology, 66, 325--331. doi:
10.1111/j.2044-8295.1975.tb01468.x

how do we ReTRieVe MeMoRieS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

337

Odua Images/Shutterstock.com

in a classic series of experiments, more than 200 ToT experiences were
induced in research participants by presenting definitions of relatively
rare english words (Brown & Mcneill, 1966). For example, participants
were asked to supply a word for "a navigational instrument used in
measuring angular distances, especially the altitude of the sun, moon
and the stars at sea" (Brown & Mcneill, 1966, p. 333). You may be
picturing the object right now, or thinking about a movie of an old salt
using this instrument---it starts with an s---but most of you will have
difficulty retrieving the word sextant. Participants showed considerable
evidence of partial recall during their ToT experiences. They were able
to identify words that they recognized instantly, unlike words they did
not know. Many were able to identify the first letter and the number of
syllables in the target word. incorrect words that were retrieved
frequently sounded like the target, although their meanings were usually
quite different. in some cases, retrieving the incorrect word blocked
the retrieval of the correct item, but in other cases, the incorrect
word was an additional cue.

Reconstruction During Retrieval when retrieved, information to be used

andrey polivanov/Shutterstock.com

flows from long-term memory back into working memory. The mind engages
in reconstruction, or the building of a memory out of the stored bits by
blending retrieved information with new content present in working
memory (Bartlett, 1932/1967). when you retrieve the target information,
you are reconstructing something sensible to fit the occasion, as
opposed to simply reproducing some memory trace. Unfortunately, every
time you retrieve a memory, it is weakened and then requires
reconsolidation (haubrich & nader, 2016). if the memories are rather
fresh, such as when you are describing Drugs, including the caffeine in
an automobile accident to a police officer, this process might produce
updates in the original coffee, can produce strong contextmemory that
will then be reconsolidated into long-term memory. Changes you make in
the dependent effects on memory. If you original memory will be stored
as the new "truth." however, if you are recalling a memory study while
drinking coffee, taking a from a more remote time, less updating is
likely to occur (gräff et al., 2014). test without coffee is likely to
make Storytellers often discover that certain aspects of their stories
provoke more of a reaction retrieval more difficult. from the audience.
These aspects are emphasized and perhaps exaggerated for even greater
effect, and the new, more exciting story replaces the original version
in long-term memory. Fish become larger, vacations become more exciting,
and heroes become more heroic. when reconstruction Rebuilding a memory
participants in a study were asked to repeat a complicated story on
several occasions, they out of stored elements. tended to simplify the
story, highlight some aspects more than others, and adjust the story to
fit their worldviews (Bartlett, 1932/1967). Such alterations probably
form the basis of mythology. in the retelling of the adventures of
odysseus or King Arthur, accounts of the original true events are lost
or hopelessly distorted. Most of us believe that our memories,
especially for important life events, are relatively accurate. elizabeth
Loftus set out to evaluate the reliability of eyewitness testimony in
courtroom settings and discovered that memories are rather flexible. in
one experiment, participants watched a video of an automobile accident
and answered a number of questions about what they had seen (Loftus &
Palmer, 1974). one group heard the question "how fast was the white
sports car going while traveling along the country road?" while the
other group heard the same question with a slight addition---"how fast
was the white sports car going when it passed the barn while traveling
along the country road?" There was no barn in the video, but when
participants were asked one week later whether they had seen a barn, 20%
of those who had heard the barn question Tip-of-the-tongue experiences
were elicited in volunteers by describing answered "yes," while fewer
than 5% of the other participants rare words in English. One of the
items was the name of the weirddid so. one must assume that skilled
attorneys are quite aware looking instrument this naval cadet is
learning to use. Study participants of this feature of memory and could
use such leading questions were often able to retrieve the first letter
of the word (s) and the number to the advantage of their clients (see ●
Figure 9.12). of syllables (two) without necessarily retrieving the
whole word (sextant), if you began this psychology course believing,
like many which demonstrates retrieval is not all or none. people do,
that memory works like a video of life, it might

338

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 9.12 Memory Reconstruction. After study participants viewed a
short video of an automobile accident, Loftus and Palmer (1974) asked
one group, "About how fast were the cars going when they hit each
other?" while a second group was asked, "About how fast were the cars
going when they smashed each other?" One week later, both groups were
asked if they recalled seeing glass on the road after the accident.
There was no glass on the road in the video, so the correct answer was
"no." Hearing the word smashed instead of hit increased the likelihood
that a participant would "remember" glass on the road and answer "yes."

100

Percentage responding

Dmitry Kalinovsky/Shutterstock.com

90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

Smashed

Hit Group

Control

Source: Adapted from E. F. Loftus & J. C. Palmer (1974). "Reconstruction
of Automobile Destruction: An Example Yes, I saw glass on the road of
the Interaction Between Language and Memory," No, I did not see glass on
the road Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 585--589.
doi: 10.1016/S0022-5371(74)80011-3

surprise you to learn that this is not the case. it may be quite
unsettling to realize that memories are open to change and revision and
that those distinct and confident childhood memories we cherish may be
somewhat inaccurate or even flat out wrong. however, it also doesn't
make sense to think that we would evolve a system of memory that was
usually wrong. instead, fuzzy trace theory suggests that we use precious
resources to form different types of memories based on our needs,
ranging from verbatim, or exact accounts, to gist, which means we retain
the general idea of events (Reyna, 2008). we use gist when a relatively
vague level of information is sufficient because this is a more
efficient use of resources. we use the more energy-intensive verbatim
memories for situations that require detailed, accurate recall, such as
remembering the periodic table of the elements in your chemistry class.
This system works well for us most of the time, but later in this
chapter, we will see how relying on gist instead of retrieving verbatim
information can lead to false memories (see ● Figure 9.13).

Percentage of events accurately recalled

Lawrence Lucier/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images

50

FIGURE 9.13

45 40

The Use of Gist Increases With Age. Older children, with their improved
language skills, use gist more effectively than younger children
(Odegard et al., 2009). When children attended birthday parties with a
theme (e.g., Harry Potter or SpongeBob SquarePants), older children
appeared to be able to use the theme of the party to provide gist,
leading to their successful recall of more theme-related events, such as
having magic potions at Hermione's party. Younger children, however,
could not remember theme-related events better than generic birthday
party events such as blowing out candles on a cake, suggesting that
forming a theme gist was not helpful.

35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0

Thematic Generic 5 to 6

7 to 9

10 to 12

Age group (in years)

Source: Adapted from T. N. Odegard et al. (2009). "Children's Eyewitness
Memory for Multiple RealLife Events," Child Development, 80(6),
1877--1890. doi:10.1111/j.14678624.2009.01373.x

how do we ReTRieVe MeMoRieS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

339

SETH MCALLISTER/Stringer/AFP/Getty Images

People often report especially vivid episodic memories about where they
were and what they were doing when they first heard news that evoked a
strong emotional response, such as the 9/11 terrorist attacks or the
assassinations of President Kennedy and Dr. Martin Luther King. However,
research evidence suggests that these memories are not always as
accurate as we think they are.

A checkpoint for the accuracy of our memories results from source
monitoring (Johnson, hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993). Under normal
circumstances, we do a good job of distinguishing between external and
internal sources of information, as in "i said that" or "i thought about
saying that." Again, this system works well for us most of the time, but
it can produce false memories when we attribute a memory to the wrong
source. For example, you might think you told your roommate you would be
coming in late, but you may have only mentally reminded yourself to do
so. You have mistaken an internal source of information ("i thought
that") with an external source ("That happened").

Retrieval of Emotional Events Take a moment and write down the most
important

flashbulb memory An especially vivid and detailed memory of an emotional
event.

340

Chapter 9

five events in your life last year. do these events have anything in
common with one another? we're willing to guess that each of the events
on your list is associated with strong emotions. From an evolutionary
perspective, this makes good sense. in Chapter 7, we argued that
emotions provide quick guidance for approach-or-avoidance decisions.
Many of our emotional experiences, while not life threatening, have
significance for us, and forming strong memories of these events will
help us respond effectively to similar situations in the future. not too
surprisingly, direct electrical stimulation of the amygdala produces
stronger declarative memories (inman et al., 2018). in Chapter 4, we
identified the amygdala as being involved with a number of emotional
responses, and fear in particular. emotions, particularly negative
emotions, do not have a simple relationship with memory retrieval. in
some cases, we have difficulty remembering negative events, which we
discuss in a later section on motivated forgetting. For example, some
individuals report that they can recall few or no details of having been
sexually molested as children. in other cases, memories for negative
events seem even more vivid and intrusive than other types of memories.
Many adults in the United States formed a flashbulb memory of the
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, or an especially vivid memory
including details of where they were and what they were doing when they
first heard the news. individuals diagnosed with posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSd) often experience intrusive flashbacks of the events that
originally traumatized them. how do we reconcile these differences in
retrieval for emotional events? As information moves through the stages
described by the information processing model, it remains relatively
fragile and subject to modification. Stress and strong negative emotions
are accompanied by the release of hormones and by patterns of brain
activity that can either enhance or impair memory processing, depending
on the timing of the emotional response relative to target learning
(Joëls, 2006). if stress and learning happen at the same time, an
enhanced memory such as a flashbulb memory might be formed (diamond et
al., 2007). Stress occurring either before or after learning impairs
memory formation (Joëls, 2006). impairment of memory following an
important life event might protect the fragile memories of that event
from interference until they are fully consolidated.

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

so far, we have been considering isolated events that elicit strong
negative emotions and stress. As we will see in Chapter 16, chronic
stress produces its own set of challenges for memory by producing a
number of important changes in the parts of the brain associated with
memory formation. For example, chronic stress is associated with a loss
of volume in the hippocampus that is likely to have profound influences
on the formation of new memories (Roozendaal et al., 2009).

PSYCHOLOGY AS A HUB SCIENCE How Reliable Are Eyewitnesses?

Joel Gordon Photography

OUR LEGAL SYSTEM RELIES HEAVILY on the testimony of eyewitnesses,
especially those who have nothing to gain by telling a lie. Given the
flexible nature of human memory as discussed in this chapter, is the
trust we place in eyewitness accounts reasonable? Carefully controlled
research by elizabeth Loftus into the use of eyewitness testimony
(Loftus & Palmer, 1974; Loftus, 1979), along with the development of
forensic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) testing in the 1990s, seriously
compromised trust in eyewitness testimony. out of all cases in which an
innocent person has been cleared of a crime because of DNA evidence,
about 75% involved mistaken identification of the perpetrator by an
eyewitness (wells et al., 2006). Psychologists have used research on
eyewitness behavior to make scientifically based recommendations to law
enforcement officials. For example, the manner in which photograph
lineups of possible suspects are shown to witnesses affects the
likelihood of mistaken identification. in the typical procedure,
witnesses view lineup photographs simultaneously, which allows them to
compare all the people and choose the person who looks most similar to
their memories of the perpetrator. Unfortunately, this procedure makes
mistaken identification more likely if the real suspect does not appear
in the lineup. the witness simply chooses the person who looks most like
the remembered perpetrator. if a sequential procedure is used, in which
the witness must respond "yes" or "no" to a picture before moving to the
next one, mistaken identifications occur less frequently (steblay et
al., 2001). Perhaps juries could evaluate eyewitness testimony more
accurately if they took the witness's apparent confidence into account.
in other words, a person who seems confident about identifying a suspect
might be expected to be more accurate than a witness with less
confidence. Unfortunately, witnesses testifying in court who express a
95% confidence in their judgment (expecting to be wrong only 5% of the
time) are correct only 70% to 75% of the time (Brewer et al., 2002).
However, witness confidence at the time of identification appears to be
strongly related to accuracy (wixted et al., 2015). if courts paid more
attention to this early confidence rather than confidence in the
courtroom months or even years later, fewer innocent people should be
convicted. special consideration must be given to cases in which the
eyewitness is a child. An understanding of children's memory development
is critical for evaluating the child's ability to serve as a witness to
a crime. some data indicate that children's memories of significant
events, such as a trip to an emergency room, are quite reliable as long
as 4 to 5 years later (Peterson & whalen, 2001). However, young children
are accustomed to pleasing adults with their answers and are more
suggestible than adolescents and adults. Fortunately, understanding the
strengths and The traditional lineup used in the criminal justice
limitations of children's memory systems has allowed experts to develop
methods system is likely to produce a mistaken identification for
obtaining the most accurate reports possible from child witnesses (Bruck
& when the real perpetrator is not included. The Ceci, 2009). witness
simply picks the most similar person. Further improvements should
accompany the development of new, more Psychologists have shown that
giving "yes" or "no" reliable measures of recognition, such as brain
imaging, reaction time, rapid preanswers to one photo at a time reduces
the risk of a sentation of faces, and analyses of witness eye movements
(wells et al., 2006). ■ mistaken identification. How Do we RetRieve
MeMoRies?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

341

summary 9.2 Retrieval from Long-Term Memory retrieval phenomenon

major features

Cues

●

Recognition versus recall

●

Self-generated cues

●

Encoding specificity

●

Context-dependent memory

●

Retrieval is not all-or-none, but gradual

●

Incorrect retrievals can block correct retrievals or serve as cues

●

Newer memories are more susceptible to reconstruction

●

Implications for eyewitness testimony

●

Fuzzy trace theory

●

Source monitoring

●

Flashbulb memories

●

Importance of timing

●

Effects of chronic stress

Number of words recalled

16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0

Tested on land Tested underwater On land Underwater Learning condition

Tip-of-the-Tongue

Reconstruction 100

Percentage responding

90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

Yes, I saw glass on the road No, I did not see glass on the road Smashed

Hit Group

Control

Effect of Emotions

Credits: First row: Ernest Manewal/Lonely Planet Images/Getty Images;
Second row: andrey polivanov/Shutterstock.com; Third row: Dmitry
Kalinovsky/Shutterstock.com; Fourth row: SETH
MCALLISTER/Stringer/AFP/Getty Images

forgetting A decrease in the ability to

now that we understand the processes involved with the formation,
storage, and retrieval of memories, we can turn our attention to the
troublesome topic of forgetting. For students, whose job description
involves committing large amounts of information to memory, an
understanding of forgetting is the source of practical advice for
improving memory and avoiding memory failure. we define forgetting as a
decrease in the ability to remember a previously formed memory. The key
here is that to forget a memory, it has to have been formed in the first
place. This definition excludes a number of instances that we have
discussed previously. For example, many students maintain that they
"forgot" information needed for an exam but instead were daydreaming
during the lecture covering the material and never learned it. This
example is better understood in terms of lack of attention and encoding
failure than as an example of forgetting. when forgetting is the result
of brain injury or disease, we usually refer to the loss of information
as amnesia. Understanding forgetting is complicated because we measure
memory indirectly by looking at performance. As most students are all
too aware, actual memory for a topic can be quite Andy Reynolds/Getty
Images

remember a previously formed memory.

Why Do We Forget?

If this woman was never able to forget where she parked all the previous
times she used this lot, finding her car today would be extremely
difficult.

342

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

different from performance on an exam. it would be handy for both
students and instructors if some sort of modern imaging technology would
allow us to "see" whether introductory psychology had been adequately
stored in the brain, but alas, this is not currently possible. Stress,
illness, time pressure, and distractions can temporarily reduce our
ability to recall information. when we discuss true forgetting, we are
not considering the effects of these temporary difficulties. Although
forgetting can be frustrating, it also has its adaptive benefits.
Forgetting provides a way to prioritize the things we should remember.
For example, we are often asked to change our computer passwords to
maintain security. At first, this can lead to annoying competition in
memory between the old and the new passwords. over time, however, the
strength of an old password weakens. Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRi) studies have shown that prefrontal areas of the brain
actively suppress memories that are used less frequently (Kuhl et al.,
2007). By suppressing these lower priority memories, we can avoid
confusion and reduce the amount of work we have to do to recall higher
priority memories.

Decay Decay occurs when our ability to retrieve information that we do
not use fades over time. imagine taking last term's final exams today.
how would you do? You might think that the material you learned last
term is gone forever, but just because you can't retrieve something
doesn't mean that the memories are lost. A classic method of measuring
the retention of material in long-term memory over time is the method of
savings. This method compares the rate of learning material the first
time to the rate of learning the same material a second time. it might
take you 50 practice trials to learn the periodic table of elements for
your first chemistry class. in a subsequent course, you again need to
memorize the table. This time, it only takes you 20 trials. The greater
speed of learning the second time indicates that you retained or saved
some prior memories of the table. Using this technique, we can
demonstrate that people who studied high school Spanish but never used
it later in life retained most of their memories for Spanish vocabulary
words 50 years later (Bahrick, 1984). instead of a large amount of
forgetting because of the passage of time, most of the material we learn
is retained nearly indefinitely. Although the idea of decay fits our
everyday experience of forgetting quite well, most contemporary
psychologists believe that the simple passage of time does not do a good
job of predicting memories that are easy or difficult to retrieve
(Berman, 2009). it is likely that forgetting occurs because of a
combination of factors, which may or may not include decay.

Interference is the competition between newer and older information in
the memory system. The brain requires a measurable amount of time to
produce a physical representation of a memory. in the window of time in
which memories are being processed but are not yet fully consolidated,
they may be subject to distortion, loss, or replacement by interference
from other bits of information. how long is this window? The physical
changes related to memory that occur at the level of the synapse might
take minutes or hours. Memory loss usually occurs when this
consolidation is interrupted. individuals who experience unconsciousness
as a result of a head injury rarely remember much about the immediate
circumstances leading to the injury. Procedures such as general
anesthesia or electroconvulsive therapy (eCT), described in Chapter 15,

rarely used information over time.

interference Competition between newer and older information in memory.

People attending their 70th high school reunions might have forgotten
the names of some of their classmates whom they hadn't seen in decades.

ZUMA Press Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

Interference

decay A reduction in ability to retrieve

whY do we FoRgeT?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

343

Target learning

Learned first

Proactive interference

FIGURE 9.14 Proactive and Retroactive Interference. If we measure recall
of a target list of words, we find that it is worse both when preceded
by learning another list (proactive interference) and when followed by
learning another list (retroactive interference).

motivated forgetting Failure to retrieve negative memories.

Motivated Forgetting The internal Revenue Service reports that far more
people who owe money fail to sign their tax returns than do those who
are due a refund. Assuming that the failure to sign the return is not a
conscious act of defiance, how can we account for this lapse in memory?
Theories of motivated forgetting, or the failure to remember or retrieve
unpleasant or threatening information, suggest that the nonsigners are
protecting themselves from further unpleasantness by "forgetting" to
sign their tax forms. Memory is a servant to our overarching goals.
Retrieval, for better or worse, is often influenced by our motivations,
and our motivations can distort the memories we retrieve. while not
exactly forgetting in the sense of our earlier definition, motivated
distortions of memory can be so extreme that the original information is
essentially lost during the process. in one example of the influence of
motivation on recall, study participants were presented with a list of
choices, such as between two internships, roommates, or cars for sale,
with equal numbers of corresponding positive and negative features (high
resale value or some rust pasphotography/Shutterstock.com

Elizabeth Loftus (2003) demonstrated that it was relatively easy to
implant a false memory in study participants of having taken a hot air
balloon ride during childhood.

often produce slight memory deficits spanning a period of hours or
possibly a day or two before and after treatment. in Learned last
contrast, storage of memories in the cerebral cortex might take years,
during which time information can be lost or distorted (dudai, 2004).
interference can be demonstrated by comparing performance in a
list-learning task. The more lists someone must Retroactive learn, the
more difficult it becomes to remember words on interference the first
list (Tulving & Psotka, 1971). in other words, learning new lists of
words interfered with memory for the first list. does this mean that the
first list is erased from memory by the incoming information? To test
this hypothesis, researchers gave participants in one experiment a
little help in the form of memory cues. The lists all contained
categories of items, such as types of buildings (e.g., house, barn,
garage, and hut). if the experimenters provided their participants with
a cue in the form of the category (types of buildings), the effects of
having learned additional lists were quite small. it appears that the
words on the first list were maintained in memory, but learning
additional lists made them hard to retrieve. To make matters worse,
interference can work in two directions (Underwood, 1957) (see ● Figure
9.14). Let's assume that your foreign language class is assigned one
list of vocabulary words to study each night. You have procrastinated on
your homework, and to catch up for a quiz the next day, you now have
three lists of vocabulary words to study instead of the usual single
list. our interest will be in how well you can remember the second of
the three lists. if we compare your memories for the second list to
those of students who studied the first list when it was assigned, we
find that your performance is relatively poor. in other words, learning
the first list on the same night as the second list produces proactive
interference for the second list. Proactive interference refers to
reduced memory for target information as a result of earlier learning.
At the same time, we can compare your memories for the second list to
the performance of your classmates who studied the third list the night
after they studied the second list. Again, your performance is likely to
be worse. Reduced memory for target information because of subsequent
learning is known as retroactive interference. This type of interference
was demonstrated in the multiple lists study we discussed previously,
which you may recall unless too much retroactive interference has
occurred.

344

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

in the case of the cars). Subsequently, they remembered the positive
features associated with their ultimate choices better than the negative
features (henkel & Mather, 2007). when they were deceived into thinking
they had chosen the other option instead (because of a friendly
"reminder" from the experimenter), they continued to remember the false
choice more positively. in related research, participants conveniently
demonstrated less recall for ethical rules after they had been given an
opportunity to cheat (Shu et al., 2011). in Chapter 13, we will explore
how these types of discrepancies between behavior and attitudes can
change the attitudes, not just the memories for them. identifying the
presence of motivated forgetting can have serious practical
implications. Beginning in the 1970s, largely because of greater public
recognition that incest was more common than previously believed, many
adults began to report having been a victim of sexual abuse during
childhood. These cases represented a range of possible motivated
forgetting from suppression, in which the individual consciously
remembered the incidents but had not reported them to parents or other
authorities, to repression, in which the individual reported no
conscious memory of the incidents until the memories were suddenly
recovered during therapy or while reading a news report of a child
molestation case. A number of psychologists studying memory suspected
that not all reports of recovered memories of child abuse were true, and
some might represent confabulation or confusion between imagined and
true memories. As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, our source
monitoring abilities usually prevent us from mistaking false for true
memories, but the system does not perform perfectly. Under the right set
of circumstances, it is relatively easy for people to believe strongly
in a memory that is simply not true. we demonstrated in an earlier
section on schemas that false recall for verbal stimuli can be produced
by presenting words that are associated by meaningfulness (e.g., bed,
rest, and awake). in this case, most study participants formed a false
memory for the presentation of the word sleep (deese, 1959). Perhaps you
are thinking that memorizing strings of words in a laboratory has little
relevance to the experience of traumatized victims of child abuse.
Loftus, whom we met earlier in our discussion of memory reconstruction,
addressed that concern by demonstrating that more complex false memories
were rather easy to implant in study participants. Loftus (2003)
described how imagining an event had happened or even reading the
testimonials of witnesses could increase a person's confidence that a
false event had occurred. Most persuasive is the use of photographs.
when a real family photo was superimposed on a hot air balloon, 50% of
participants "remembered" taking a ride, including details about how old
they had been at the time and that the photo was taken by a particular
person. Until we understand more about the nature of confabulation, a
cautious approach to repressed memories is probably the best course of
action. we can neither prove nor disprove these memories without
additional evidence, so any therapy should be aimed at relieving
distressing symptoms without reference to their source (American
Psychological Association \[APA\], 2014).

What Is the Biology of Memory? Cognitive neuroscientists have made
considerable progress in discovering the biological correlates of memory
processing. in this section, we first zoom in for a look at how memory
is managed at the cellular and biochemical levels. next, we zoom out
again to explore patterns of brain activation that are associated with
certain types of memory processing.

Memory at the Level of the Synapse Forming new memories requires changes
in the connections neurons make with one another at the synapse, or
synaptic consolidation. You might find it strange to think that such a
process is going on in your brain as you read this chapter. whAT iS The
BioLogY oF MeMoRY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

345

Number of axon terminals per sensory neuron

3000

Axon terminal of sensory neuron

2500

2000

1500

1000 Dendrite of motor neuron 500 Normal 0

Control (typical)

Long-term habituation

Long-term sensitization

Habituated Sensitized

FIGURE 9.15 Learning Changes Neural Structure. Neurons have smaller
numbers of axon terminals following habituation but larger numbers
following sensitization. Source: C. H. Bailey & M. C. Chen (1983).
"Morphological Basis of LongTerm Habituation and Sensitization in
Aplysia," Science, 220, 91--93. doi: 10.1126/science.6828885

long-term potentiation (LTP) The enhancement of communication between
two neurons resulting from their synchronous activation.

nobel Laureate eric Kandel and his colleagues have demonstrated
persistent changes in the strength of synapses responsible for several
types of learning in the sea slug, including classical conditioning
(Carew & Kandel, 1973; Brunelli et al., 1976; Antonov et al., 2003). in
addition to changes in synaptic strength, it appears that learning
stimulates a cascade of gene expression, which in turn produces the
long-term structural changes in neurons that represent memories. The
number of axon terminals increases following sensitization and decreases
following habituation (Bailey & Chen, 1983; see Chapter 8). These
observations are consistent with the behavior observed in each
case---lower levels of responses to stimuli in habituation and higher
levels of responses to stimuli in sensitization (see ● Figure 9.15). one
of the major processes responsible for change at the synaptic level
during learning is long-term potentiation (LTP), which enhances
communication between two neurons. This phenomenon can be demonstrated
experimentally by applying a rapid series of electric pulses to one area
of the nervous system and observing the increased reactions of cells
receiving input from that area (Bliss & Lømo, 1973; see ● Figure 9.16).
Results from demonstrations of LTP suggest that the relatively
simultaneous activation of a neuron sending information and the neuron
receiving this information produces changes that make the synapse
between them more efficient. LTP shares many features with memory, which
makes it an attractive candidate for being one of the processes
underlying memory phenomena. LTP lasts a long time, possibly

Baseline

Stimulation

1 week later

Long-Term Potentiation (LTP). LTP can be demonstrated by applying a
series of electrical pulses (center) and observing the increased
reactions of cells receiving input (right) compared to their previous
baseline (left). LTP shares many features with memory, such as being
long-lasting and formed after a brief exposure to stimuli.

346

Chapter 9

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

FIGURE 9.16

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

indefinitely, which is similar to our thinking about long-term memories.
Second, both memories and LTP can be formed after only brief exposure to
stimuli.

Working Memory and the Brain Scientists have also made progress in their
search for brain activity that correlates with working memory, although
they continue to debate how the executive processes of working memory
are organized (nee et al., 2013). Studies of people with brain damage
suggest that several executive functions are managed by different parts
of the frontal lobes but that a single central executive probably does
not exist (Stuss, 2011). working memory does not occur in a separate,
isolated part of the brain. instead, the phonological loop and
visuospatial sketch pad use the same posterior parts of the brain that
are used in verbal and visual perception (Bledowski et al., 2010).
Top-down influences originating in the prefrontal and parietal cortex
provide the attention necessary to maintain stimulus information in
working memory (nee et al., 2013).

Long-Term Memories and the Brain Through the careful observation of
people with brain damage, along with brain imaging studies in healthy
participants, scientists have discovered correlations between activity
in parts of the brain and specific components of long-term memory. These
discoveries support the distinctions made by cognitive psychologists
between declarative and nondeclarative memories based on observations of
behavior.

Declarative Memories and the Hippocampus in Chapter 4, we described

the important role played by the hippocampus in memory. The hippocampus
clearly participates in the consolidation of semantic and location
information into long-term memory. The hippocampus might also be
involved with the re-experiencing of episodic memories throughout the
lifespan (Moscovitch et al., 2006). now that we are familiar with some
distinctions between declarative and nondeclarative memories, we can
examine the case study of henry Molaison (the amnesic patient h.M.) in
more detail. in follow-up observations of Molaison, Brenda Milner (1966,
2005) discovered that not all of his memories were equally affected by
the surgery that damaged his hippocampus. Molaison retained most of his
memory for events leading up to his surgery, but his ability to form new
memories was profoundly reduced. The inability to form new memories is
known as anterograde amnesia. Much to Milner's surprise, Molaison
learned a new procedural task, mirror tracing, as well as typical
control participants did. in one of these tasks, Molaison was asked to
draw the shape of a star while looking at a sample star and his hand in
a mirror. After 3 days, Molaison mastered the task. however, if asked,
he would deny ever having performed the task. his procedural memories
were intact, but his declarative memories for the details of the task
were nonexistent (see ● Figure 9.17).

Declarative Memories and the Cerebral Cortex Semantic memories appear to
be widely distributed across the cerebral cortex (see ● Figure 9.18).
Using brain imaging, researchers can observe which parts of the cerebral
cortex are active when a person is thinking about particular types of
memories (Binder et al., 2009). different areas are activated when a
person is accessing knowledge of actions, items that can be manipulated,
concrete concepts, and abstract concepts. For example, listing types of
animals is associated with activity in the occipital lobes, suggesting
that visualizing an animal's appearance might be helpful in this task
(Martin et al., 1996). Listing types of tools activates areas of the
frontal and parietal lobes normally associated with movements and action
words. To name a hammer, for example, we might consider the hand
movements associated with using hammers and words such as pound or hit.
in spite of the overlapping characteristics of semantic and episodic
memory, they involve distinctive processing in the brain. Patients in
the early stages of Alzheimer's disease showed much more dramatic
episodic memory deficits than semantic memory deficits (Perry et al.,
2000). The default mode network (dMn; see Chapter 6) is associated with
thinking about the whAT iS The BioLogY oF MeMoRY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

347

Day 1 Errors per trial

30 20 10 0 Day 2 Errors per trial

30 20 10 0 Day 3

(a) Mirror-tracing task

Errors per trial

30 20 10 0

2

5

6 8 Trials

10

(b) Performance of Henry Molaison

FIGURE 9.17 Separating Declarative and Nondeclarative Memories. The
mirror-tracing task requires a participant to trace a fivepointed star,
which is mounted on a wooden board that blocks the participant's view of
the star and his or her hand. The participant must view the star and his
or her hand in a mirror. This task is especially challenging because the
mirror reverses the image, so if you want the pencil to trace around the
star away from your body, you have to move your pencil toward your body
instead. Brenda Milner was surprised to observe that Henry Molaison
learned the mirror-tracing task at a normal rate, even though he didn't
remember the details of the task. This outcome suggested to Milner that
nondeclarative, procedural memories such as the mirror-tracing task were
not managed by the brain the same way as declarative memories. Source:
B. Milner (1965). "Memory Disturbance after Bilateral Hippocampal
Lesions," in P. M. Milner & S. E. Glickman (Eds.), Cognitive processes
and the brain (pp. 97--111). Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.

self, so it is not surprising to note that structures in this network
are also implicated in episodic memory processing (greicius et al.,
2004). Areas of the temporal lobe and insula seem particularly important
for remembering emotional personal experiences (Fink et al., 1996;
Sheldon et al., 2016). episodic memories are also affected by damage to
the prefrontal cortex. damage in this area can produce a condition known
as source amnesia. People with source amnesia maintain their semantic
knowledge but do not recall how they acquired it. A man who experienced
damage to his prefrontal cortex as the result of a traffic accident
retained his semantic and procedural knowledge of the game of chess, but
he could not remember how old he was when he learned or who taught him
to play the game (Tulving, 1989).

Procedural Memories and the Basal Ganglia Procedural memories are
correlated with activation of the basal ganglia, forebrain structures
that are part of the brain's motor systems (see Chapter 4). People with
huntington's disease and Parkinson's disease, both of which 348

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Occipital lobe

FIGURE 9.18

Motor cortex

Semantic Memories Are Widely Distributed in the Brain. Different
patterns of activity in the cerebral cortex are correlated with various
types of semantic memories. Naming animals (a) is associated with
activity in the visual cortex of the occipital lobe, suggesting that we
think about what an animal looks like to name it. Naming tools (b)
activates areas associated with hand movements, suggesting that we think
about how we would use a hammer or saw to name one. (a) Naming animals,
but not tools

(b) Naming tools, but not animals

Source: Adapted from A. Martin et al. (1996). "Neural Correlates of
Categoryspecific Knowledge." Nature, 379, 649---652.
doi:10.1038/379649a0

produce degeneration in the basal ganglia, typically have trouble
learning new procedures (Knowlton et al., 1996; Krebs et al., 2001). In
contrast, their declarative memories remain relatively intact. recall
that henry Molaison experienced the opposite outcome. his procedural
memory abilities were intact, but his declarative memory abilities were
severely impaired.

Biochemistry and Memory Pressmaster/Shutterstock.com

throughout this chapter, we have emphasized that memory is not a single
thing but rather a flexible, multistage process. It should not be
surprising, therefore, that we do not have a simple biochemical account
for memory. acetylcholine (aCh), discussed in Chapter 4, affects the
encoding of new information (see ● figure 9.19). Drugs that inhibit
systems using aCh as a major neurotransmitter interfere with memory
formation (atri et al., 2004). People with alzheimer's disease, which is
characterized by severe memory deficits, show degeneration of neural
circuits that use aCh. Medications prescribed to reduce the symptoms of
alzheimer's disease boost aCh activity (holzgrabe et al., 2007). at the
same time, high aCh levels might impair memory consolidation and
retrieval (Micheau & Marighetto, 2011). relatively low levels of aCh,
characteristic of sleep, improve the transfer of information from
temporary to more permanent storage (Diekelmann & Born, 2010).
researchers are also interested in the role of the neurotransmitter
glutamate in memory formation. one type of glutamate receptor, known as
the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDa) receptor, is a prime candidate for
learning-related changes such as those observed in ltP (Qiu & Knopfel,
2007). Not too surprisingly, chemicals that enhance the activity of
glutamate receptors have been shown to boost memory formation in rats
(Balschuna et al., 2006). similar compounds are being tested for
possible use in treating alzheimer's disease. students are familiar with
the use of caffeine to stay awake to study, but caffeine also has the
ability to enhance memory directly through its ability to block
adenosine, a by-product of the energy atP molecule. adenosine activity
is implicated in the reduction of memory function in healthy aging and
in alzheimer's disease (orr et al., 2015). Individual differences in
working memory capacity are correlated with activity in systems using
gaBa, the major inhibitory neurochemical in the brain, especially in a
part of

Procedural memories quickly become automatic. When you learn to drive,
you must attend to each step, but after learning the process, you "just
drive."

What Is the BIology of MeMory?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

349

Daniel Prudek/Shutterstock.com

Acetylcholine

FIGURE 9.19 Acetylcholine (ACh), Caffeine, and Memory. Not only do drugs
promoting ACh initiate changes in neural structure in honeybees
(Weinberger, 2006), but so does caffeine. Bees rewarded with caffeine
were 3 times as likely to remember a floral scent as bees rewarded with
sucrose (Wright et al., 2013).

the frontal lobes known as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (Yoon et
al., 2016). individual differences in working memory play important
roles in overall intelligence (see Chapter 10). At the same time,
impairments in working memory are characteristic of conditions from
schizophrenia to dementia.

How Can We Improve Memory? Most college students by definition have good
memory skills---this is an essential component of academic success, and
those who lack these skills generally do not end up in higher education.
however, we can always improve, and the observations made by
psychologists studying memory provide many practical suggestions. we
have already discussed several lines of research that have practical
implications for improved memory. The structure of long-term memory
implies that organized material is easier to remember than disorganized
material. elaborative rehearsal, especially when you connect material to
personal experience, anchors new material in your existing memory stores
and makes it easier to retrieve. The effects of state, mood, and context
on retrieval suggest that studying in circumstances that are most
similar to those in which you will retrieve your memories will give you
the best outcome. in addition to these basic suggestions, we would like
to offer a few additional tips.

Distribute Practice over Time Psychology professors will never give up
trying to convince students that cramming is a terrible memory strategy.
Persistent faith in cramming is surprising, given that we all know
concert pianists and basketball players are better off practicing one
hour a day each day for a week than practicing six hours straight the
night before a performance. The mind works in similar ways whether it
learns to play basketball or it learns the periodic table of elements,
so the same learning strategies should work in either case.

350

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THINKING SCIENTIFICALLY Does Using a Laptop or Longhand to Take Notes
Make a Difference?

What am I BeIng asked to BelIeve or accept? We are being asked to
believe that taking notes by longhand produces better memory than taking
notes using a laptop.

What evIdence supports thIs posItIon? Mueller and Oppenheimer (2014)
conducted three separate experiments comparing performance on factual
and conceptual questions based on a lecture following notetaking using
either a laptop or longhand. In each case, performance on factual
questions did not differ according to notetaking method, but students
taking notes using longhand performed better on conceptual questions
than students taking notes using a laptop.

are there other Ways thIs evIdence could Be Interpreted? You might be
thinking that other factors, such as typing skill or choice of
notetaking method might account for these results. However, the
researchers tested typing skill and found no effects. They also randomly

assigned students to notetaking conditions, which would control for many
individual factors that might otherwise influence the results, such as
prior experience taking notes using technology.

What other evIdence Would I need to evaluate these alternatIves? The
study was published in 2014, and it is possible that familiarity with
using technology has continued to increase in the intervening years. An
update with a current cohort of students could be useful. In addition,
technologies that allow you to Laptop write on a tablet Longhand using
longhand would provide an interesting 0.4 comparison.

strategy, so this aspect might account for much of the observed
differences in performance. It is interesting that the two groups
performed similarly on factual questions. It was only on the conceptual
questions that notetaking method had strong effects. Students in the
laptop condition were advised to NOT take wordfor-word notes in one of
the experiments, but they did anyway. It's possible, however, that with
more practice, students using technology could nonetheless learn to take
effective notes that promoted good conceptual performance. ■

- 

0.3

What are the most reasonaBle conclusIons? Mueller and Oppenheimer (2014)
reported that notetaking behavior between their two groups was
different. Students using laptops tended to write down as much of the
lecture word-for-word as they could, while students using longhand were
more likely to put the information in their own words. We know that
putting information in your own words is an excellent memory

Performance (z score)

FOR STUDENTS GROWING up surrounded by the wonders of technology, taking
notes on a laptop or tablet seems natural. In comparison, writing notes
by hand can seem slow, messy, and inconvenient. But is there a price to
pay for using technology to take notes? Initial research on technology
and notetaking focused on potential distractions. While working on a
laptop or tablet, a student might be more tempted to wander away to look
at social media. However, as shown in ● Figure 9.20, research has
demonstrated that even when technology is used solely for notetaking, it
produces worse memory outcomes than taking notes by longhand (Mueller &
Oppenheimer, 2014).

0.2 0.1 0.0 --0.1 --0.2 --0.3 --0.4

Factual

Conceptual

FIGURE 9.20 taking longhand notes Is superior to typing notes. Students
taking notes on laptops performed as well as students taking longhand
notes on factual questions, but performed relatively poorly on
conceptual questions. Students taking notes on laptops tended to write
down lectures word-for-word, whereas students taking longhand notes put
the information into their own words. Source: P. A. Mueller & D. M.
Oppenheimer (2014). "The Pen Is Mightier Than the Keyboard: Advantages
of Longhand Over Laptop Note Taking," Psychological Science, 25(6),
1159--1168. doi:10.1177/0956797614524581

How Can we Improve memory?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

351

samuel wordley/Alamy Stock Photo

Simon Winnall/The Image Bank/Getty Images

Most of us realize that the best way to improve our music or athletic
skills is to practice every day (distributed practice). We would think
it odd if an athlete or musician crammed practice in the night before a
game or performance (massed practice). The same advantage of distributed
over massed practice holds for academic work, but unfortunately, that
fact does not deter some students from cramming for exams.

nearly all forms of learning show evidence of an advantage of
distributed practice (practice spread out over time) as opposed to
massed practice (practice condensed to a short period; Russo &
Mammarella, 2002). in other words, spacing the input of information to
the brain over time produces better memory than cramming. whether we are
discussing the learning of classically conditioned responses by sea
slugs or the learning of complex semantic information by college
students, the advantage of distributing learning over time is a
constant. By giving the brain more time to consolidate each memory, less
is likely to be lost to interference.

Take Tests we usually think about tests as measuring a student's ability
to retrieve memories, but test taking is a powerful tool for forming
memories, too (Roediger & Butler, 2011). Research demonstrates that
taking a test produces superior long-term memory when compared with
repeated studying of material. in addition, taking tests improved
participants' ability to think about learned material with greater
flexibility and to apply material to new situations. we are not
advocating that you abandon reviewing your textbook and lecture notes,
but we hope you will take advantage of the online testing opportunities
that accompany this textbook.

Interleaving is it better to study different topics in blocks (AABBCC)
or by interleaving (ABCABC)? Research indicates that interleaving, or
mixing up your topics and skills, is a better strategy than blocking, or
studying one thing at a time (Rohrer & Pashler, 2010). why would
interleaving work better than blocking? one hypothesis suggests that
interleaving improves our ability to discriminate between similar
concepts. if you study one thing at a time, it's harder to see the
contrasts. A second hypothesis suggests that interleaving has a direct
effect on memory. Switching among topics requires more focus and
attention, and these in turn promote better memory formation.

352

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CONNECTING TO RESEARCH How Can We Protect Memory Retrieval from Stress?
IT COMES AS NO SURPRISE to students to learn that stress impairs memory
retrieval. All of us have had the experience of leaving a classroom
after a test only to remember all the things we forgot as we make our
way home. How can we avoid such frustrating experiences? The way we
study might have an effect on how well our memories hold up under
stress. Many of us study by going over material multiple times, or
"restudying." Research suggests that a more efficient method of studying
includes "retrieval practice," or the taking of practice tests. These
two methods were compared to each other in their ability to withstand
stress (Smith et al., 2016). The Question: Which study method
(restudying versus retrieval practice) results in better retrieval
during a stressful situation?

METhODS Two groups of 60 participants were given the task of learning
either 30 concrete nouns or 30 images of nouns, presented one at a time.
Following this first presentation, the restudying group restudied the
items, while the retrieval practice group recalled as many of the items
as they could remember. No

Number of items recalled

EThICS The method of stressing participants used in this study has
appeared in many other experiments without report of adverse effects.
However, the possibility of being assigned to the stressful condition
should be noted in the informed consent form, along with referrals to
appropriate professionals who can help manage stress.

RESULTS The groups showed no differences in recall during the first
test, which occurred five minutes into their stress or no-stress control
experience, but their performance was significantly different at the
second, delayed test. For the restudying group,

stress produced a significant decline in the items recalled. However,
for the retrieval practice group, stress made no difference in the
number of items recalled. Regardless of stress levels and time of
testing, the retrieval practice groups outperformed the restudying
groups (see ● Figure 9.21).

CONCLUSIONS If you have been in the habit of relying on restudying as
your major or only strategy for succeeding in your classes, you might
want to rethink your methods in light of this experiment. Retrieval
practice appears to buffer performance from stress effects much better
than restudying. It is likely that retrieval practice accomplishes this
feat by producing multiple routes for accessing a memory. Each time you
attempt to retrieve information, you also think about associations and
the context of the information in slightly different ways. This provides
you with multiple pathways back to the information you seek. When you
are stressed, physiological correlates of stress (see Chapter 16) might
interfere with your use of some but not all of these pathways. The more
pathways you have, the more likely you are to find the information in
memory. ■

FIGURE 9.21

12 10

Retrieval Practice Protects Memory From Stress. A restudying group went
over the material to be learned four times, while a retrieval group was
asked to recall the items. The following day, half of both groups were
stressed while the other half was given a nonstressful task to complete.
When asked again to recall the items, stress had a significant, negative
effect on the restudying participants. The retrieval group not only
remembered more items than even the nonstressed restudying participants,
but they were also unaffected by stress. Students prone to test anxiety
might wish to incorporate the retrieval method of preparation Stress No
stress into their study regimen.

8 6 4 2 0

feedback was given to the retrieval practice group. On the next day,
half of each group was stressed by being asked to give an unprepared
speech and solve math problems in front of judges and peers. While they
were doing these activities, the other half was given a comparable but
not stressful task. Five minutes into their respective tasks (stressful
or not), and again 20 minutes later, the participants were asked to
recall the items they studied the previous day.

Restudying

Retrieval

Source: Data from A. M. Smith et al. (2016). "Retrieval Practice
Protects Memory Against Acute Stress," Science, 354(6315), 1046--1048.
doi: 10.1126/science.aah5067

how CAn we iMPRoVe MeMoRY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

353

Exercise Physical exercise, especially vigorous exercise such as
running, increases adult neurogenesis, or the birth of new neurons, in
the hippocampus, at least in mice (Bolz et al., 2015; Moon et al.,
2016). not only did exercising mice experience more neurogenesis, but
their memory performance improved compared to mice who did not exercise.
we will not guarantee that taking up jogging will improve your grades,
but it will certainly benefit your health and mood (Chen et al., 2017).

Sleep initially, many psychologists believed that the positive role of
sleep in memory formation resulted from a lack of interference. if you
learned something right before going to sleep, no further information
would enter the system to cause interference. More sophisticated
research, however, has demonstrated that sleep plays an active role in
the consolidation of memories. during sleep, the hippocampus reactivates
and shows activity that is similar to what it does during waking
(Todorova & zugaro, 2019). This reactivation of the hippocampus
activates particular groups of cortical cells that make the changes
necessary to stabilize a memory. Most types of memories appear stronger
after a period of sleep (genzel et al., 2014; Boyce et al., 2016). we
can also say with confidence that students who pull all-nighters are not
doing their memory systems a favor (havekes et al., 2016). in one
experiment, staying up all night produced poor memory for a previous
task, and two additional nights of adequate sleep did not compensate for
the original deprivation (Stickgold et al., 2000).

Recite

Alexander Raths/Shutterstock.com

Putting information you need to remember in your own words is an
effective memory strategy. Recitation takes advantage of our tendency to
remember things better when they're associated with the self. If they
are your words, you will remember them.

Most students recognize that a certain number of rehearsals of reading
and lecture notes are required for success on exams. however, we can
mistake the ease with which we cover familiar material for actually
knowing the material. Just because you can read something easily doesn't
mean that you know it. A somewhat more efficient method is recitation,
or the verbalizing of the material to be learned in your own words.
Recitation takes advantage of a general superiority for selfreferential
information. People who processed words in reference to themselves
(e.g., "does the word 'honest' describe you?") are more likely to
remember the word honest than are people who processed the definition of
the words (e.g., "does 'honest' mean the same thing as 'trustworthy'?";
Rogers et al., 1977). This result has obvious relevance for students
wishing to improve their memories. if you can think about the
information you are trying to learn in self-referential ways ("This
example of episodic memories in my textbook reminds me of something that
happened to me the other day"), your memory for the information will be
enhanced. By putting information in your own words, you make it more
relevant to yourself. Recitation is still used as a classroom technique
in small classes, but you can duplicate this process on your own. After
you have a reasonable grasp of the material, try talking about it. A
significant benefit of recitation is that you quickly realize what you
do not understand when you try to explain the material to someone else.
You can think that you understand something, but when you try to explain
it, it doesn't come out right. This is a signal that more work on the
topic is needed.

354

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Use Mnemonics

mnemonics Memory aids that link new information to well-known
information.

Blend Images/Shutterstock.com

The early greeks devised a number of methods, known as mnemonics, for
improving memory. Mnemonic devices expand memory capacity by linking the
material to be remembered to information that is relatively effortless
to retrieve. The first-letter approach takes advantage of chunking. You
condense a large amount of information into an acronym. For example, in
Chapter 12, we'll use the acronym oCeAn to help remember the five major
personality traits: openness, conscientiousness, extraversion,
agreeableness, and neuroticism. one of the classic greek techniques was
the method of loci, or places. This technique is particularly handy when
you are trying to memorize a list of items in order, such as the planets
in our solar system or the cranial nerves. The method takes advantage of
the fact that we form excellent representations of visual images in
memory. You begin by imagining a familiar place, perhaps your childhood
home. As you imagine yourself walking through your home, you visualize
each item in a particular location. if you wish to remember your grocery
list (although writing the items down is probably easier), you might
imagine a carton of eggs on the little table in your entry, a loaf of
bread on the sofa, a box of cereal on the television, and so on. To
recall your list, all you need to do is to take another imaginary walk
through your house, recalling the items you placed as you go. if all
goes well, you should remember all your items in the correct order. This
technique may sound like a lot of work, but it can be effective. one of
the authors of this textbook had a colleague in graduate school who
performed so perfectly on her neuroanatomy exams that her professors
accused her of cheating. She related to them how she had been taught the
method of loci as a childhood game and had practiced the technique
throughout her academic career. After they posed several difficult lists
to her, all of which she recalled perfectly, they were convinced of her
honesty.

The ancient Greek mnemonic device, the method of loci, takes advantage
of our superior memory for visual images of familiar places. Although
the method involves consciously imagining things in a particular place,
we often use location as a memory aid less consciously. You are probably
familiar with the layout of your favorite grocery store and use that
mental image to guide your memories for the food you need to purchase.
If the store reorganizes its layout between trips, you might forget
something.

how CAn we iMPRoVe MeMoRY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

355

Interpersonal Relationships The Memory Perspective

Bellurget Jean Louis/Getty Images

WhAT IS TRANSACTIvE MEMORy? SHARED MEMORIES ARE a characteristic of
close relationships. You may know people in close relationships who seem
to know intuitively what the other is thinking, perhaps even finishing
the partner's sentences. According to a theory of transactive memory,
couples in long-term relationships also develop a division of labor in
regard to memory, in which each partner knows certain things but also
knows what information can be retrieved from the partner if needed
(wegner et al., 1985; wegner, 1986). For example, one partner might not
keep track of where candles are stored in the house but knows that the
other partner knows where the candles are and can be called upon to
provide that knowledge in the event of an emergency. how do couples
develop systems like this? Three major strategies have been identified
(wegner et al., 1991). First, one partner can explicitly agree to take
on an area of expertise, such as managing the household finances.
Second, as people get to know each other better through self-disclosure,
they also learn about each other's relative areas of knowledge and
expertise. one partner might have an interest in computer science, while
the other thinks that computers work by magic. if something goes wrong
with a household computer, the second person will turn to the first.
Finally, couples learn about their partner's access to information. if
you know that your partner discussed holiday plans with your families,
you are likely to assume that your partner knows more about your holiday
options than you do. From an evolutionary standpoint, what are the
advantages of working out this division of memory labor? one major
advantage of this type of transactive memory is that a couple working
well together has access to far more knowledge than either individual
could manage separately. The convenience of these systems, in contrast
to managing knowledge individually, would contribute to further bonding.
Transactive memory is negotiated over long periods between each couple
in ways that are unique and not interchangeable with others. The concept
of transactive memory has been extended from intimate couples to larger
groups (Peltokorpi, 2008; Peltokorpi & hood, 2019). in the context of
larger groups, transactive memory contributes to group cognition or
information processing that differs from individual cognition.
Transactive memory is critical to understanding the behavior of teams in
organizations (Lee et al., 2014; Argote & guo, 2016). As in the case of
intimate couples, transactive memory contributes to the group's ability
to manage more information than any individual could be expected to do
in an efficient manner based on the relevant specialties of the
individuals making up the group. Transactive memory contributes to the
establishment, maintenance, and adaptation of organizational routines,
or ways to solve familiar problems (Miller et al., 2014). whether
transactive memory takes place at the couple or the organizational
level, it takes time to develop. People beginning a new relationship can
expect some miscommunications and misunderstandings (and overdue bills
and lost candles) until their transactive memory system begins to take
shape. ■

People in close relationships form transactive memories, or a division
of labor for remembering certain things. This woman might remember how
to do certain home repair tasks, and her partner might remember others.
Together, they have access to far more information than either
individual could manage separately.

356

Chapter 9

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology Takes On Real-World Problems Compliance with Social
Distancing and Working Memory with social distancing recommendations?
Xie et al. anticipated this concern, and found instead that working
memory differences were important predictors of compliance even after
they used statistics to control for differences in mood, personality,
education, and income. Our focus in each of these chapter features is on
using psychological science to inform policy. We can't exactly wave a
magic wand and give every person the working memory capacity they need
to manage large volumes of information effectively. However, Xie et
al. provide

one additional cue. Working memory capacity also predicted performance
on a computerized game that measured a person's sense of fair play.
Perhaps we can't manipulate working memory capacity, but if we appeal to
the public's sense of fair play, this might make the choices easier to
comprehend. Please note that Xie et al. conducted their research at a
time when social distancing was not mandated, but merely recommended. It
is likely that many additional variables would play roles in determining
compliance with authority, which we discuss in Chapter 13. ■

Travelerpix/Shutterstock.com

Have you felt overwhelmed by all of the information coming at you about
COVID-19 from social media and other sources? Have you found it
difficult under these circumstances to make logical, rational decisions?
If so, you are probably not alone. What mental processes give us this
sense of overload? A clue to the answer rests in the relative capacities
of the different components of memory. In particular, we learned in this
chapter that short-term or working memory features severe limitations on
capacity. When we are trying to juggle many different pieces of
information during this stage of processing, it is very likely that some
will get lost. Working memory capacity varies from one person to the
next. Do we have any evidence that individual differences in working
memory capacity influence real-life decision making? A study by Xie et
al. (2020) suggests that this is true. During the early stages of the
COVID-19 pandemic, Xie et al. found that individual differences in
working memory function predicted compliance with social distancing
recommendations, possibly due to a better ability to weigh the benefits
and costs of the practices. Working memory, however, predicts academic
achievement, even more so than IQ, which we discuss in Chapter 10
(Alloway & Alloway, 2010). If academic achievement predicts more
education and higher socioeconomic status, isn't it likely that these
factors are more likely than working memory capacity itself to explain
compliance

Why are some people more likely to voluntarily comply with social
distancing recommendations during a pandemic? Researchers found that
individual working memory capacity predicted both compliance with social
distancing and fairness norms, even after other factors like mood,
personality, education, and income were controlled.

How Can we Improve memory?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

357

summary 9.3 Types of Forgetting type of forgetting

major feature

assessment

Decay

Reduced ability to retrieve infrequently used material over time.

Savings technique.

Competition between newer and older information in the memory system.

Comparison of performance in a listlearning task.

Failure to retrieve negative information.

Comparison of recall for memories associated with positive or negative
emotions.

Interference Target learning

Learned first

Proactive interference

Learned last

Retroactive interference

Motivated forgetting

Credits: Top row---ZUMA Press Inc/Alamy Stock Photo; Bottom row---
pasphotography/Shutterstock.com.

Key terms The Language of Psychological Science Be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

autobiographical memory, p. 330 chunking, p. 323 cue, p. 336 decay,
p. 343 declarative memory, p. 328 encoding, p. 318 encoding specificity,
p. 337 episodic memory, p. 329 flashbulb memory, p. 340 forgetting,
p. 342 information processing, p. 318

358

Chapter 9

interference, p. 343 levels of processing theory, p. 325 long-term
memory, p. 325 long-term potentiation (LTP), p. 346 memory, p. 318
mnemonics, p. 355 motivated forgetting, p. 344 nondeclarative memory,
p. 328 priming, p. 330 procedural memory, p. 330 reconstruction, p. 338

rehearsal, p. 322 retrieval, p. 319 schema, p. 334 semantic memory,
p. 329 sensory memory, p. 320 short-term memory (STM), p. 321 spreading
activation model, p. 333 storage, p. 318 working memory, p. 323

The Knowing Mind: MeMoRY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Observing brain activity while a person watches a movie is helping
filmmakers produce more effective movie trailers.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10

The Thinking Mind THINKING, LANGUAGE, AND INTELLIGENCE Learning
Objectives 1. Explain the role of mental representations in thinking,
and compare and contrast models of concept formation.

2.  Summarize the four steps of problem solving, incorporating existing
    research on how to approach each step successfully, and apply to a
    problem.

3.  Analyze the building blocks and biological correlates of language.

4.  Define general intelligence, and evaluate the evidence for multiple
    intelligence subtypes.

5.  Analyze the interactions between nature and nurture in explaining
    individual differences in intelligence.

DAILY LIFE IS FULL OF DECISIONS---SOME BIG AND SOME SMALL. How does the
mind reach a decision? Psychologists have learned a great deal about the
processes involved in reaching a decision and have identified many steps
we can take to improve our decision making. Zooming in, we can use
imaging technologies to observe how the brain reacts to a number of
choices. For example, do you really want to see that movie based on its
trailer? Neurophysiological methods are being used to both craft movie
trailers and predict audience responses to films. Film producers are
using brain imaging when editing movie trailers to elicit the reactions
they want from an audience (Randall, 2011; Boksem & Smidts, 2015). They
have only a few seconds to convince the audience to see their film.
Assuming that the film's ability to elicit emotion drives the decision
to see it, filmmakers remove the parts of a trailer that produce neutral
emotional responses and splice together the most dramatic parts. Using
other neuroscience measures of responses to trailers, including EEG and
eyegaze activity, researchers were able to predict the popularity of
films 23 times more accurately than more traditional methods, such as
screenings, questionnaires, and focus groups (Christoforou et al.,
2017). These methods have been criticized appropriately by the
scientific community as being overly simplistic applications of
neuroscience, and very little peer-reviewed evidence to support their
use is available. In spite of these concerns, commercial applications of
neuromarketing are expanding rapidly. Nielsen, best known for their
ratings of television shows, proudly proclaims "our foundation is in
science," and offers an entire suite of "consumer neuroscience" tools,
including EEG, biometrics like heart rate, coding of facial expressions
of emotion, and eye tracking. Using EEG and eye tracking, Nielsen edited
an ad for the Shelter Pet Project (Nielsen Neuroscience, 2017). The
company claims that modifying the ad in response to their neuroscience
findings boosted traffic to the non-profit's website. After exploring
research

361 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Percent of in-store sales variance explained\*

100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

Facial coding

Survey

Biometrics

EEG

Neuroscience combined

Neuroscience + survey

methods in Chapter 2, you know that it would be important to compare the
results of showing the unrevised ad versus the revised ad before making
this claim about the benefits of their neuroscience approach.

FIGURE 10.1

Zooming out, what factors aside from seeing an emotional trailer or ad
might

Source: https://www.nielsen.com/us/en
/insights/case-study/2014/the-brains
-behind-better-ads-optimizing-the-cute -and-cuddly-2/

influence people's decisions to see a particular film? With all of the
trauma in real life, we might ask why people choose to see horror films?
Individual

otsphoto/Shutterstock.com

Consumer research giant Nielsen claims that using "consumer
neuroscience" tools, including EEG, heart rate, coding of facial
expressions of emotion, and eye tracking, allow the firm to recommend
improvements to clients' advertising, such as an ad for the Shelter Pet
Project.

differences play key roles in this decision. People who are low in
fearfulness and empathy enjoy horror films more than people with higher
empathy and fearfulness (Martin, 2019). Using the social perspective to
zoom out still farther, we can see that people respond to horror films
based on their beliefs about the expectations of others, particularly in
regards to gender roles (Mundorf et al., 1989). In this chapter, we will
explore how we use the tools of language and intelligence to think,
which in turn guides our behavior. Beginning with the parts of the brain
that process information, we will zoom out to the individual differences
of personality and experience and farther still to the social and larger
cultural contexts that shape the way we think.

cognition Internal mental processes

362

Chapter 10

tanuha2001/Shutterstock.com

Brilliantist Studio/Shutterstock.com

The word cognition, as in the term cognitive psychology, is derived from
the Latin cogito, which literally means "to think." Thinking allows us
to manipulate information internally to construct models of the world,
plan our interactions with that world, and regulate ourselves to meet
our goals. As you will see, cognitive psychology covers a broad area of
topics. in addition to perception, learning, and memory, which we
discussed in previous chapters, cognitive psychology addresses questions
of thinking, language, and intelligence.

Michele Ursi/Alamy Stock Photo

solomon7/Shutterstock.com

The mind uses symbols or mental representations to signify information,
just as icons represent some of your favorite social networks, such as
Facebook, Twitter, TikTok, Instagram, and Snapchat.

What Do We Think About?

solomon7/Shutterstock.com

including information processing, thinking, reasoning, and problem
solving.

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

We think about what we know. in the broadest sense of the word,
knowledge is the entire body of information acquired through study,
investigation, observation, and experience. To manage this large
collection of knowledge, the mind uses symbols, or mental
representations, to signify information. Using mental representations is
similar to having an icon on your computer desktop that represents
Microsoft Word and a profile photograph on Facebook that represents your
best friend. The most familiar uses of mental representations are found
in language, both written and spoken. depending on the language you
choose, you could represent the animal coming toward you on the sidewalk
as a hund (german), chien (French), gau (Chinese), perro (Spanish), or
dog (english). Representations can be visual too. For example, you could
snap a photo or sketch a picture of the dog. despite the differences in
these two visual representations, the dog that each portrays is the
same. We can view the representation of the dog (the sound or the
appearance of the word used, the patterns of light in your photo or
drawing) as a vehicle for carrying information about the content of our
knowledge of this dog (it seems to be a friendly, young golden
retriever). in this chapter, we explore the ability of minds to form
mental representations and manipulate them to make sense of the world.
What forms can representations take? What are the relationships between
the representations and the content they symbolize?

Thoughts as Images concept An organizing principle derived from
experience.

Kevin Mazur/WireImage/Getty Images

Temple grandin, a college professor with autism spectrum disorder,
describes her way of thinking as "thinking in pictures" (grandin, 2010).
Albert einstein is also widely quoted as relying on mental visualization
in the early stages of his thinking and only later putting his ideas
into words (einstein, 1945). To what extent do the rest of us think in
mental images? by mental image, we are referring to a representation of
any sensory experience that is stored in memory and can be retrieved for
use later. For example, you can call up a visual image of your first
car, picture the letters of your name, or silently hum the first bars of
"happy birthday" to yourself quite easily. People treat mental images
much like they would a real object (kosslyn, 1978, 1980). We can turn
visual mental images around in our minds, zoom in or out, and identify
their features (see ● Figure 10.2). if you were to think about a map of
the United States (assuming you have a good grasp of geography), it
would take you longer to mentally count the major cities between Los
Angeles and new York than those between Chicago and new York, just as it
would if you were looking at a real map. Children are particularly
likely to use visual images in their thinking. in one study, between 2%
and 15% of elementary school children experienced long-lasting and
detailed visual images of a complex picture they viewed for a short
interval (haber & haber, 1964). The children described the scene using
the present tense, suggesting that they were scanning a mental replica.
except for rare cases like grandin, few adults can do this. it is
possible that language becomes an increasingly important way to organize
thinking during childhood and might begin to overwrite or interfere with
the ability to directly access visual images. Regardless of the exact
form taken by mental representations, our knowledge would be useless
unless we imposed some type of organization on all the bits we know. To
supply this organization, we extract special, organizing ideas known as
concepts from the specific instances and occurrences we experience.

Temple Grandin, a college professor with autism spectrum disorder, is
shown here with actress Claire Danes, who portrayed her in a 2010
madefor-television movie. Grandin has described her cognitive experience
as "thinking in pictures." It is likely that young children depend on a
similar approach to thinking, but learning language provides new
dimension to our ability to think.

Thoughts as Concepts Concept formation is not unique to humans. nonhuman
animals as diverse as pigeons and monkeys demonstrate concept formation
(herrnstein, 1979). in one study, pigeons learned to peck at projected
images of water with fish to obtain food rewards but to withhold pecking
at images of water without fish (herrnstein & de Villiers, 1980).
Subsequently, a new set of slides was presented. The pigeons
successfully distinguished between the fish and the nonfish slides, even
though they had not seen these particular images during their prior
training. The WhAT do We Think AboUT?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

363

Satellite

FIGURE 10.2

Chip East (United States Society Entertainment)/Reuters

Forming Mental Maps. A person familiar with New York City could follow a
mental route among these buildings, zoom in or out, and identify
important features like landmarks and a favorite place to have coffee.

London-based artist Stephen Wiltshire, who like Temple Grandin has
autism spectrum disorder, has been described as a "human camera."
Wiltshire can fly over a major city such as New York in a helicopter for
about 1 hour and then recreate highly accurate and detailed drawings of
the city. His talent is an extreme and unusual form of the use of visual
imagery.

364

Chapter 10

Martin Shields/Alamy Stock Photo; Justin Green/Alamy Stock Photo;
Patrick Batchelder/Alamy Stock Photo

Map

Hybrid

Empire State Building

Starbucks Coffee shop

B

A

pigeons appeared to have extracted a "fish" concept from their
experience. What does it mean to have a "fish" or any other type of
concept? how are we (and pigeons) able to construct a new concept?
because of the memory processes discussed in Chapter 9, you already
"know" what a dog is. if you were asked to feed your neighbor's dog
while your neighbor goes on vacation, you could locate the correct
animal, provide dog food instead of cat food, and exercise appropriate
caution if your neighbor's dog is unfriendly. This activity sounds
simple, but what if you recruited an alien from another planet to help
you with your task? What information about dogs would the alien need to
know to succeed? essentially, what you must convey to your alien friend
is the concept of "dog" (see ● Table 10.1). You might start the
discussion with a dictionary definition of dog. in the dictionary, you
find that a dog is "a domesticated carnivorous mammal (Canis familiaris)
related to the foxes and wolves and raised in a wide variety of breeds."
This definition seems rather remote from what we know to be a dog. You
don't need to know what dogs eat and who their nearest relatives are to
identify one correctly. Perhaps you could find some common features of
dogs that would allow you to distinguish between dogs and nondogs. You
could tell your alien friend that dogs are furry animals with four legs
that bark and wag their tails. Unfortunately, this system has a logical
flaw (Wittgenstein, 1953). no matter how careful your definition, even
for the simplest concepts, somebody will think of an exception. Although
we can agree that all dogs are animals, this feature alone is
insufficient for distinguishing dogs from cats and raccoons. having fur
does not describe some chihuahuas, and basenjis don't bark. A dog that
has lost a leg in an accident no longer has four legs. Most dogs we know
wag their tails, but there may be an abused dog that keeps its tail
perpetually between its legs, as well as dogs that have tails too stubby
to wag. To resolve this dilemma, you can make your definition more
flexible. instead of being rigidly defined by a checklist of features, a
concept could describe a group of instances that share overlapping
features. This approach is similar to a feature detection model (Smith
et al., 1974). According to this type of model, people determine the
truthfulness of statements like "a canary is a bird" by considering
overlapping features (wings, beak, flies, and chirps). Using this
approach, the alien could compare the features of an animal suspected of
being a dog with a checklist of dog features. This approach has
problems, too. Some categories are clear, such as triangles, but others
do not have precise enough boundaries for the checklist approach to
work. People in some cultures would list "tastes good" as a feature of
dogs, but Americans probably would not. in addition, the feature
checklist approach doesn't seem to

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TABLE 10.1 Approaches to Concept Formation application to dog category

Disadvantages

Dictionary definition

Describe a dog as "a domesticated carnivorous mammal (Canis familiaris)
related to the foxes and wolves and raised in a wide variety of breeds."

Gives more information than needed to classify a dog correctly.

Common features

Describe dogs as furry animals with four legs that bark and wag their
tails.

Results in too many exceptions (e.g., Chihuahuas are not furry).

Overlapping features

Compare features of a suspected dog with features of the "dog" concept.

Lacks precise boundaries for most categories (e.g., "tastes good" might
be a category feature for dogs in some cultures but not in others).

Prototype

Average all members of the dog category.

Does not provide a good way to think about a category's variability.

Exemplar

Use a specific instance of a category a model.

Excludes some category members that are too dissimilar to model.

Pigeons appear to be able to form concepts, such as "people" and
"nonpeople." If their pecking is reinforced with food in the presence of
an image containing people but not in the presence of images without
people, they will learn to peck only when the people images are present.
The experimenters used hundreds of images that showed people but varied
in number, distance from the camera, age, ethnicity, and other features,
but the pigeons still responded appropriately.

Courtesy of Will Vaughan

Omikron/Science Source

Photo courtesy of Will Vaughan

approach

match personal experience with thinking. When you think about a dog, do
you access a mental checklist of dog features?

Prototypes and Exemplars An alternate approach to thinking about
concepts is to

consider some type of "standard" dog, or a prototype that represents
your entire category (Rosch, 1973, 1983). A prototype results from an
averaging of all members of your category, and it may not even resemble
a real instance (Posner & keele, 1970). For example, the prototypical
dog has an average size, an average tail, average ears, average
coloring, and so on. When thinking about a category, you might also
retrieve a specific instance of a concept or an exemplar. This could be
the dog that you raised during your childhood or a dog featured in your
favorite movie. The processes in which prototypes and exemplars are used
are quite similar. Whichever standard you choose, you compare new
instances to it to get a sense of "fit." The more similar

prototype A representation of a category formed by averaging all members
of the category.

exemplar A specific member of a category used to represent the category.
WhAT do We Think AboUT?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

365

the new objects are to the standard, the more likely you are to include
them in your concept. both approaches are also able to account for the
tendency of people to rate apples as more typical fruits than avocados
or robins as more typical birds than penguins (Malt & Smith, 1984).
Apples are not only closer to the "average" fruit than avocados are, but
they are also more likely to be chosen as an exemplar fruit because of
the extensive experience most people have with apples, at least in the
United States. despite the similarities between the prototype and the
exemplar approaches, exemplars have dog some advantages. Compared to
\[dawg, dog\] prototypes, exemplars provide noun, verb, dogged,
dog-ging. a better way of thinking about the -noun variability of a
category (Rips & Collins, 1993). Averages, which characterA domesticated
carnivorous mammal ize prototypes, do not provide much (Canis
familiaris) related to the foxes information about the range of feaand
wolves and raised in a wide tures found in a category. For example,
imagine that you just met Joe kovacs, who variety of breeds. tells you
that he is an athlete. Judging from kovac's imposing physical appearance
(he weighs 295 pounds), he seems more similar to your prototypical nFL
football player than what he is---a star track-and-field athlete. in
contrast, while your personal exemplar for a track-and-field athlete
might be a sprinter or Using common features to distance runner instead
of a shot-putter like kovacs, the inidentify dogs, such as "has dividual
instances that you know can help you comprehend hair" or "has four
legs," would the variability found within the concept. exclude these
two: a dog with Just when you are feeling comfortable about using
prothree legs and an American totypes and exemplars to solve your
alien's dog problem, hairless terrier. you run into an additional
dilemma. The use of prototypes and exemplars rests on similarity.
Similar objects will be included in a concept, and dissimilar objects
will be excluded. What if your new alien friend comes across a lifelike
dog robot? in many ways, the robot looks and acts like your prototype
and exemplar dogs, yet you know it is not a dog. What if you find an
unfortunate dog that has been killed on the highway? it hardly retains
much similarity to the prototype and exemplar dogs, yet nobody, except
perhaps the alien, would question its identity as a dog. Clearly, you
need more than prototypes and exemplars to solve your problem.

366

Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com

Susan Schmitz/Shutterstock.com

Dmitry Kalinovsky/Shutterstock.com

Although correct, this dictionary definition of a dog might not help you
figure out whether an animal standing in front of you is a dog or not.

Chapter 10

Concepts as Theories Concept formation can be a type of theory building.
in Chapter 2, we defined theories as "sets of facts and relationships
between facts that can be used to explain and predict phenomena." This
definition can also apply to a concept. Like theories, concepts can
guide our thinking and be continually tested for accuracy against new,
incoming information. Also like theories, concepts do not exist in
isolation. As we mentioned in Chapter 9, concepts can be viewed as part
of a vast, interconnected network of memories. Thinking about concepts
as theories provides insight into the problem of judging category
membership, such as deciding whether an avocado is a fruit. Prototypes
and exemplars provide a useful starting place for judging category
membership. We test our theory that the new item (avocado) fits the
category by comparing it to the prototypes (average fruit) and exemplars
(apple) of a concept (fruit). We might make the occasional mistake, such
as including bats or excluding ostriches in a concept of "bird," but
most of the time, we will be successful and fast. This approach also has
the advantage of being consistent with observations of how children
acquire new concepts, which we explore in

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 11. a child might start with a prototype or exemplar dog based
on the family pet, possibly overapplying the concept to other
four-legged animals at the zoo and failing to apply it to dogs of
different breeds. With the help of feedback from others ("no, that's a
tiger, not a dog" or "Yes, a Chihuahua is a dog"), the concept becomes
more refined. Your alien friend is likely to need the same type of
feedback from you when attempting to apply the newly learned concept of
dog to a variety of animals.

Apples are more likely than avocados to be a person's exemplar fruit
because of the extensive experience we have with apples in the United
States.

Concepts and Schemas our "dog" concept is embedded in a

Juice Team/Shutterstock.com

rich, complex set of beliefs and expectations about dogs, animals,
nature, and personal experience known as a schema, which we discussed in
Chapter 9. this type of schema not only shapes memory storage and
retrieval of information relevant to dogs but also allows us to predict
new facts about them. if our schema includes "likes to play ball," we
know that playing ball with a friend's new dog is likely to be
successful. under what circumstances do people apply a schema to new
information? again, comparisons to typical members of a category appear
to play a role. People who are told a new fact about a typical instance
of a category are more willing to extend the new fact to all members of
a category, whereas a new fact about an atypical category member is less
likely to be widely applied (Rips, 1975). For example, if you learn
about a new fruit disease found in apples (an exemplar fruit for many
people), you are more likely to think other fruits are vulnerable than
if you learn that the disease targets a less typical member of the fruit
category, such as olives or avocados.

Harry How/Getty Images Sport/Getty Images

Concepts and the Brain Can we find brain activity that correlates with
thinking about a particular concept? in Chapter 9, we described imaging
studies that identified different patterns of brain activity when people
thought about animals or tools (Martin et al., 1996). When asked to name
animals, the participants showed activation in the visual cortex,
suggesting that they would need to think about what a zebra looks like
to name it correctly. naming tools, in contrast, was accompanied by
activation in frontal and parietal lobe areas associated with movement,
implying that it is helpful to think about what to do with a screwdriver
when attempting to name it correctly. this specialization in the brain
for processing different types of concepts is supported by observations
of patients with brain damage. Some patients have specific difficulties
naming pictures of animals, although they can successfully name other
living things, such as fruits and vegetables, and nonliving things, such
as tools and furniture (Mahon & Caramazza, 2009). not only do these
people have difficulty naming animals, but they also struggle to You
might mistakenly put Olympic answer questions about animals, such as
"Does a whale have legs?" Similar questions about shot-putter Joe Kovacs
in your category nonliving things do not cause difficulty. others
demonstrate the opposite pattern. they are of NFL football player
because of his able to name living things but struggle to name nonliving
things (Mahon & Caramazza, 2011; appearance, which is closer to the see
● Figure 10.3). these observations suggest that our brains are
predisposed to distinguish prototypical football player than it is to
between living and nonliving things. if forming concepts helps to
organize appropriate rethe prototypical track-and-field athlete.
sponses, our ancestors' ability to form some concepts quickly might have
conferred a signifiUsing exemplars instead of prototypes cant survival
advantage. to guide the use of concepts helps us amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (aLS, or Lou Gehrig's disease) is primarily a movement think
about the variability of a category. disorder, but the condition also
affects a person's ability to form new concepts. Performance by aLS
patients on a concept formation task was correlated with the extent of
gray matter loss they had experienced in the left prefrontal and
parietal cortices (Libon et al., 2012). although individual cases vary
widely, current diagnostic criteria for aLS have been updated to
incorporate Even when a prototype is well understood, such as the signs
and features of frontotemporal dementia, a collection of symptoms of a
disease, evidence suggests that exemplars might work symptoms associated
with neural loss in the frontal better. Physicians diagnosing cancer who
had recently seen similar and temporal lobes that includes deficits in
cogni- cases (exemplars) made more accurate diagnoses than those who had
tion, language, and memory (abramzon et al., 2020). not (Brooks, 1990;
Brooks, Norman, & Allen, 1991). What Do We think about?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

367

CBW/Alamy Stock Photo

ton koene/Alamy Stock Photo

It is unlikely that young children have vocabulary words for many of the
animals seen for the first time, like this walrus. Theories of what kind
of animal this is will be shaped with the help of the child's parents.

Prototypes and exemplars depend on similarity, which can result in
similar items, such as this robotic dog, being included in our dog
category.

Percentage correct

100 80 60 40 Living things

20 0

Nonliving things RC

EW CW Patients

PL

FIGURE 10.3 Some Categories Might Be Hardwired in the Brain. Some
individuals with brain damage have difficulty processing certain types
of semantic information. The pattern of these deficits varies depending
on the location of the damage. For example, patient CW can name living
things better than nonliving things, while patient RC names nonliving
things better than living things. However, the categories that are
affected in this way are relatively few: animals, fruits and vegetables,
nonliving things, and members of our own species. This suggests that our
brains have been shaped through natural selection to form certain types
of categories. Source: Adapted from B. Z. Mahon & A. Caramazza (2011).
"What Drives the Organization of Object Knowledge in the Brain?" Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 15(3), 97--103. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2011.01.004

How Do We Solve Problems? problem A situation in which a current state
is separated from an ideal state by obstacles.

368

Chapter 10

Thinking helps us deal with the many types of problems we face daily.
Whether you are figuring out how to manage a busy schedule, help a
friend who is feeling blue, or complete your calculus homework, a
problem exists whenever there is a difference between where you are and
where you would like to be (newell & Simon, 1972). For example, when you
step on the bathroom scale after the holidays, the weight shown on the
scale might be different from the

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1. Understand the problem.

2.  Make a plan.

Hemera Technologies/Photos.com; Jacob Wackerhausen/Photos.com

ideal weight for your health and appearance; you now have a problem. in
addition, referring to a situation as a problem implies that obstacles
exist. Returning to your preholiday weight can be challenging. Problems
can be well defined or ill defined. Well-defined problems have a
solution that can be verified as correct or incorrect, like an algebra
problem, whereas ill-defined problems have solutions that are evaluated
subjectively (Le et al., 2013). our weight-loss problem is well defined
because it is easy to verify whether you lose the newly gained weight or
not, but many problems in everyday life are ill defined. Thinking that
you need to improve your appearance would be an example of an
ill-defined problem. People might not agree about what makes another
person more attractive. Problem solving is defined as the use of
information to meet a specific goal (Lovett, 2002). As shown in ● Figure
10.4, problem solving begins with recognizing a problem exists (you now
weigh too much) followed by the development and use of strategies that
solve it (you go on a diet) and the evaluation of the success of those
strategies (you have either lost the holiday weight or not). ill-defined
problems require additional thought about what constitutes an acceptable
solution and how the solution should be justified. Reconfiguring an
ill-defined problem into a set of well-defined problems can be helpful.
if your ill-defined problem is to improve your appearance, you could
divide this into well-defined problems like returning to your preholiday
weight, eating five servings of fruits and vegetables per day, and
exercising at least 30 minutes each day. because good problem-solving
skills are important to psychological wellbeing, we will examine the
process in detail using four steps (Polya, 1957): 1. Understand the
problem. 2. Make a plan. 3. Carry out the plan. 4. Look back.

No, then try again. 3. Carry out the plan.

4.  Look back: problem solved? Yes, then exit.

FIGURE 10.4

given the close relationship between cognitive psychology and computer
science that we described in Chapter 1, we should not be too surprised
to see problem-solving as a type of looping computer program. if we
reach step 4 and our solution has taken us to where we want to go, we
stop. if we reach step 4 and our problem still exists, we return to
earlier steps to try another solution or generate new solutions. This
looping of steps, reminiscent of loops in computer programs, continues
until the problem is resolved. Problems that are more complex than our
weight-loss example might require a systems engineer. Systems
engineering is a gestalt type of process for problem solving that
considers the whole problem to be distinct from the parts (Ramo, 2005).
Systems engineers use a looping program that differs from our four-step
process in that evaluation takes place each step of the way (see ●
Figure 10.5).

Problem-Solving Flow Chart. Effective problem solving can be achieved by
following a system proposed by Polya (1957). If you reach step 4 and the
problem is solved, you can exit the system. If the problem is not
solved, you return to step 1 and try again.

problem solving The use of information to meet a specific goal.

Verification and validation Operations and maintenance

Concept of operations Project definition

System verification and validation

Requirements and architecture

Integration, test, and verification

Detailed design

Implementation

Time

Project test and integration

FIGURE 10.5 Systems Engineering Process. Unlike our simple four-step
problem-solving model, systems engineering evaluates progress along
every step of the way, not just at the end of one attempted solution.
Source: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons /2/22
/Systems_Engineering_Process_II.gif.

hoW do We SoLVe PRobLeMS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

369

Understand the Problem Although carefully formulating a problem takes
time, this is generally time well spent. All relevant data should be
collected, analyzed, and organized. What do we know? What information do
we need that is missing? how does all this information fit together? An
important part of this step is to represent or frame the problem in a
useful way (Lovett, 2002). earlier in this chapter, we talked about
forming mental representations of experiences that subsequently can be
manipulated by the mind. in the case of problem solving, the mental
representations we form relate to how we see the problem. For example,
you might represent your weight problem as the result of your holiday
splurge or as the result of a broken bathroom scale. These two
representations clearly lead to different solutions, and in many cases,
your representation will determine how successful you will be at solving
the problem. Psychologists have identified several helpful suggestions
for making the most useful representations of problems and for avoiding
some common mistakes that frequently lead to failure. For example, big,
long-term problems are easier to solve if they are approached through
components or intermediate goals. Your primary goal in college is to
obtain a degree, but it is useful to consider how you plan to meet
intermediate goals such as completing your general education courses,
your major courses, and electives. Personal biases can interfere with
good problem solving. in our weight example, a reluctance to reduce
treats might lead you to conclude that the bathroom scale is at fault
instead of your behavior. Your amount of self-efficacy or belief in your
abilities to Like ill-defined problems, big complex problems, succeed
might also influence your approach to a problem (bandura, 2001). such as
world hunger, can be tackled best by You might believe that dieting
doesn't work, so there is no point in even trying. by recognizing these
biases, you can approach your problem and its breaking the problem into
smaller, intermediate potential solutions with a more open mind.
problems. Another barrier to forming useful representations of a problem
is functional fixedness, or a person's tendency to think about a concept
in its most typical form and no others. in an emergency, a belt or a
computer cord can be used to tie a door shut, and functional fixedness A
possible barrier a pot of hot coffee can be a weapon. to successful
problem solving in which a in keeping with our computer program analogy,
it is important to know when you unconcept is considered only in its
most typiderstand a problem sufficiently to move to the next step,
planning a solution. it is possible cal form. to get "stuck" in the
understanding step through a process known as rumination. Rumination is
a repetitive focus on one's problems, and is a known correlate of
depressed mood (nolen-hoeksema & Morrow, 1993). Rumination can be
separated, however, into brooding and reflection (Treynor et al., 2003).
brooding, a judgmental process in which we compare our current situation
with the ideal situation, not only predicts negative mood, but actually
interferes with problem solving. While brooding, people tend to avoid
addressing their problems. in contrast, reflection, in which we look
inward while actively engaging in problem-solving, is weakly associated
with depressed mood and can actually promote problem solving. how do we
know when our efforts to understand a problem are adaptive or
maladaptive? When faced with your next negative experience, consciously
attempt to observe whether you are focused on questions of "why?"
(brooding---"Why oh why am i so overweight?) or "how?"
(reflection---"how did i manage to gain these extra pounds?"). if you
find yourself brooding, seek to distance yourself from the problem by
trying to see the situation the way others might view it (kross et al.,
2012). In an emergency, people need to use whatever they have in hand to
solve problems. Functional fixedness might lead you to believe that a
belt can only hold up your pants, but it can also make it harder for
someone to come through a door.

370

Chapter 10

Make a Plan A plan to solve your problem involves generating possible
solutions and then choosing the best one to implement.

Generating Solutions generating possible solutions involves creativity,
but most

importantly, it requires time. People who spend the most time on a
problem typically generate the most diverse solutions. generating the
most solutions raises your chances of finding one that will work.

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Daxiao Productions/Shutterstock.com

Several factors can interfere with finding appropriate solutions. You
might be so upset about the numbers on the bathroom scale that you
refuse to consider efforts to lose weight. Some people dislike risk so
intensely that they fail to consider a full range of alternative
solutions. To escape the chaos and the ambiguity involved with facing a
problem, people can rush to find a solution, overlooking more
appropriate courses of action. Judging and discarding solutions too
early in the process also leads to failure. generating impractical
solutions requiring resources we don't have is not useful. An expensive
stay at a weight reduction spa might work, but it probably doesn't fit a
student budget. Understanding that we have these weaknesses in our
approach to problem solving should help us avoid them in the future.
Some types of problems lend themselves to precise, step-by-step rules
for reaching a particular solution, known as algorithms. Algorithms have
the advantage of producing an accurate solution reliably. Let's assume
you have a three-number combination lock on your bicycle, but you have
forgotten the combination. You can start with using 001 for the first
input, then 002, and so on, until you reach the correct solution for
unlocking your bike. Algorithms are efficient when run by a computer,
but their cost when used by the human brain can be high. You could be
very late to your next class by the time you unlock your bike. because
of the time needed to use algorithms, we often substitute rules of
thumb, or shortcuts to problem solving, known as heuristics. because
heuristics do not go through the exhaustive evaluation of solutions
required by algorithms, they are faster. Another advantage of heuristics
is that they typically require far less information than algorithms do.
however, unlike algorithms, heuristics do not guarantee a solution.
heuristics allow us to make quick, effective, and efficient decisions,
but these systems are not perfect. in Chapter 5, we explored the use of
visual illusions to identify the limitations of our visual system.
Similarly, seeing the flaws in our heuristics helps us understand how
they work. Just as our visual system returns data that we need to
survive, our minds have been shaped over the millennia to think in ways
that usually result in good decisions (haselton et al., 2009). however,
heuristics that served our hunter-gatherer ancestors well might not
always be up to the task of managing the massive amounts of complex
information to which modern human minds are exposed. heuristics are most
likely to fail when a correct solution requires a sophisticated
understanding of probability (Fenton & neil, 2012). The recognition
heuristic (see ● Figure 10.6) predicts that people will place a higher
value on the more easily recognized alternative (gigerenzer, 2008). in
one study, American college students were asked which of two cities was
larger. in making size decisions about german cities, such as hamburg
and Munich, students tended to choose the city they recognized

When aggressive children are asked how to solve social problems, such as
persuading another child to share a desirable toy, they generate fewer
solutions than do more prosocial children. Eventually, most children
will generate an aggressive solution (grab the doll and run), but
perceiving additional options (trading a piece of candy for the toy or
arguing that "sharing is nice") might make it less likely that the
prosocial child will use the aggressive solution.

algorithm A precise, step-by-step set of rules that will reliably
generate a solution to a problem. heuristic A shortcut to problem
solving; also known as a rule of thumb. recognition heuristic A rule of
thumb in which a higher value is placed on the more easily recognized
alternative. hoW do We SoLVe PRobLeMS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

371

Gulcin Ragiboglu/Shutterstock.com

Digital Vision/Getty Images

Recipes are examples of algorithms. If you follow the recipe step by
step, you should be able to produce the cookies you want every time.

availability heuristic A rule of thumb in which the frequency of an
event's occurrence is predicted by the ease with which the event is
brought to mind.

most (goldstein & gigerenzer, 2002). They were correct about 73% of the
time (hamburg has about 1.8 million residents compared to Munich's 1.3
million). People typically restrict the use of the recognition heuristic
to situations in which recognition actually makes sense. For example,
people are more likely to use recognition to decide which of two cities
is larger than when deciding which of two cities is located closer to
the center of a country (Pohl et al., 2017). Amos Tversky and daniel
kahneman (1973, 1974) identified several heuristics that are more likely
to produce faulty decisions. The first type, the availability heuristic,
is used when people predict that events that are easy to think about
will be more frequent. What makes an idea "easy to think about"? Why
would it ever be adaptive to think this way? As we learned in Chapter 9,
repetition influences memory. events that are experienced more
frequently come to mind more easily than rare events, and we often
predict future frequency based on the past. People living in the middle
parts of the United States known as "Tornado Alley" are more likely to
expect a tornado in the near future than people living in California.
The opposite might be true when considering major earthquakes.
Unfortunately, ideas that are "easy to think about" might be front of
mind for reasons having nothing to do with their future likelihood. For
example, sensational media reports of kidnapped children might be easy
to think about because they elicit strong negative emotions

FIGURE 10.6

Source: boxofficemojo.com/year/world/2019/

Angel has Fallen

The LEGO Movie 2: The Second Part

\$68,788,413

\$105,806,508

John Wick Chapter 3: Parabellum

Avengers: Endgame 0.00

372

Chapter 10

BFA/Alamy Stock Photo

The Recognition Heuristic. The recognition heuristic predicts that if
you think the film Avengers: Endgame sounds more familiar than the film
Captive State, you will correctly judge Avengers: Endgame as generating
more international revenue for the producers than Captive State.

BFA/Alamy Stock Photo

Captive State \$5,958,315

\$171,015,687

\$858,373,000.00 400,000,000.00

800,000,000.00

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Number of deaths for each death by shark attack

4,000 3,409.09

3,500 3,000 2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000

666.67

500 0

30

54.55

157.89

Airplane parts

Bee sting

Lightning

Tornado

Bicycle accident

FIGURE 10.7

Jeff Rotman/Photolibrary/Getty Images

STRINGER BRAZIL/Reuters

Cause of death

The Availability Heuristic. Which is more likely? Being hit by an
airplane part or being attacked by a shark? The availability heuristic
leads us to believe that events that are easy to think about are more
frequent. Because of the frequent media coverage of shark attacks, such
as Rodney Fox's close call with a great white in Australia, people think
shark attacks are common. You might be surprised to learn that you are
30 times more likely to be killed by falling airplane parts, like this
turbine engine that fell from the sky onto a car in Brazil, than by a
shark. Source: Adapted from S. Plous (1993). The psychology of judgment
and decision making. New York: McGraw-Hill.

like fear. Parents often respond with dire warnings to children about
"stranger danger." in reality, abductions of children by strangers in
the United States are fortunately quite rare, accounting each year for
only about 100 out of the hundreds of thousands of missing children
reported to law enforcement (office of Juvenile Justice and deliquency
Prevention, 2016). The vast majority of missing children run away from
home or are involved in a custody dispute, and nearly all are eventually
returned to their homes. ● Figure 10.7 illustrates other mistakes due to
the availability heuristic. Most people are surprised to learn that they
are about 30 times more likely to be killed by falling airplane parts
than by a shark (Plous, 1993). We are frequently exposed to news reports
and movies featuring shark attacks, but when was the last time you heard
about a person being killed by falling airplane parts? As we mentioned
earlier in this chapter, people often form prototypes or average
examples when thinking about a category. These prototypes then represent
the category when we are deciding which new examples might also fit the
category. Recall that one of the weaknesses of using prototypes is their
reduced ability to capture the full range of a category, such as a shot
putter relative to the "average" track and field athlete. This weakness
influences accuracy when using Tversky and kahneman's second type of
heuristic, the representativeness heuristic, which leads people to
estimate that stimuli similar to a prototype are more likely to fit the
category than are stimuli different from the prototype. if the instance
you are considering is very "average" for its category, the strategy
works. but when presented with an outlier, accuracy will suffer. To
illustrate the limitations of this heuristic, Tversky and kahneman asked
research participants whether Thomas, who is short, slim, and loves
poetry, is more likely to be an ivy League classics professor or a truck
driver. Most people assumed that Thomas would be a classics professor
because his description is closer to that of a prototypical professor
than a prototypical truck driver. however, this conclusion is
statistically quite unlikely. There are few ivy League classics
professors, and even if most fit Thomas's description, the numbers would
still be quite low. in contrast, there are thousands of truck drivers in
the United States. even if a

representativeness heuristic A rule of thumb in which stimuli similar to
a prototype are believed to be more likely than stimuli that are
dissimilar to a prototype. hoW do We SoLVe PRobLeMS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

373

small proportion of them shared Thomas's characteristics, the numbers
would be large. Consequently, the odds are that Thomas is a truck
driver.

Decide on a Solution once we have generated a set of solutions, we must
decide which one to try first. how is this decision reached? Just as we
warned you in Chapter 2 about signs that you are not using good critical
thinking skills, we can also share some signs that you are about to make
a poorly considered decision: Thinking that a decision is "obviously
right" or "obviously wrong" might result from confirmation bias, which
we discussed in Chapter 2. ● being influenced by what "everyone thinks"
you should do is more about conformity than good decision making.
"everyone" might be wrong. ● doing something "because we've always done
it that way" can work, of course, but this shouldn't be the only reason
to choose a solution. ● Choosing a simple solution instead of a more
complex one because you understand it better is more about ease of
processing than good decision making.

AP Images/Matt Dunham/Adrian Harlen

●

The representativeness heuristic makes us believe that stimuli similar
to a prototype are more likely than stimuli that are dissimilar. Katrina
Hodge, 2009 Miss England, may not fit your prototype of a Lance Corporal
and Iraq War veteran. However, there are many more soldiers than beauty
queens, so the likelihood that a beautiful woman is a soldier is higher
than the likelihood that she is a beauty queen.

Psychologists have studied the conditions that promote good decision
making. When participants' performance on skills related to decision
making in the lab were compared with real-life decision making, such as
buying new clothes or shoes they never wore, strong correlations were
observed between their abilities on the identified decision making
skills and the quality of their real-world decision making (bruine de
bruin et al., 2007). Using your very best critical thinking skills is
very important while making decisions, but there are other
considerations as well: Understand probability. Yes, we know coursework
about decks of cards and throwing dice might seem far removed from
everyday decision making, but this basic skill provides an essential
foundation for making the right choices. After all, a decision is
essentially a bet on the future. ● be mindful of relevant social norms
and encourage dissenting opinions from others. Ask what concerns they
see in the decisions you are contemplating. others might bring up a
concern that has escaped your notice. ● Make an accurate assessment of
your own knowledge about the issues involved with your decision. Avoid
both under- and overconfidence. ● Time is an important variable. often
we are called upon to make very fast decisions. however, if time
permits, do not rush important decisions. Rest your mind by taking
breaks to do less cognitively demanding tasks. Then return to your
decision to see if it looks the same as before. ●

affect heuristic A rule of thumb in which we choose between alternatives
based on emotional or "gut" reactions to stimuli.

374

Chapter 10

A good understanding of probability explains the vast majority of
individual differences in decision making skills (Cokely et al., 2018).
Surprisingly, many highly educated people are just not very good with
numbers and probability. nearly 50% of physicians were unable to answer
the following correctly: if Patient A has a 1% risk of getting a disease
in ten years and Patient b's risk is double that of A's, what is Patient
b's risk? (no, this is not a trick. The answer is 2 3 .01 5 .02 or 2%.)
Mistakes on problems like this are far less likely when the data are
appropriately visualized (see ● Figure 10.8). Although a good
understanding of probability often distinguishes between high- and
lowquality decision making, many people still make emotional, intuitive
decisions rather than logical, rational decisions. The affect heuristic
is particularly relevant to the way people make

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

How projected Covid-19 deaths in the U.S. compare to those from leading
causes

Cancer (2019) 252,500

Covid-19 (2020) 60,000 - 240,000 Drug overdose (2017) 29,265

Suicide (2017) 19,583

Alzheimer's disease (2017) 50,417

Stroke (2017) 60,833 Heart disease (2017) 269,583

FIGURE 10.8 important choices (Slovic et al., 2005). This heuristic uses
emotional responses to guide our decisions. Through our past experiences
with similar choices, we develop an implicit "gut" reaction to our
options, pushing us toward alternatives we expect to produce desirable
outcomes and away from alternatives we expect to produce undesirable
outcomes. our decision making is also affected by the need to avoid the
emotion of regret (Connolly & Zeelenberg, 2002). by considering ways to
justify the reasons for their decisions in advance, people can live more
comfortably with the decisions they have made. An alternate and less
emotional approach to decision making, utility theory, suggests that we
compute the expected outcomes of our choices and select the best one.
expected outcomes are computed by multiplying measures of the usefulness
of the outcomes by their expected probability. For example, to choose an
elective course for your next term, you might consider a course that
provides positive outcomes, such as being interesting and satisfying a
graduation requirement. At the same time, you wish to avoid negative
outcomes, such as getting a poor grade or spending a lot of money on
materials. if you multiply the assigned value of each outcome by its
probability of occurrence and add up the results for each course, you
can see which one is most likely to fit your needs. You might find that
applying utility theory is useful when faced with an important decision,
such as whether to accept a job offer with modest pay in your hometown
or one with higher pay in another state. it is clear, however, that we
rarely make decisions by solving equations.

Data Visualization. Even highly educated people benefit from properly
visualized data. A discussion of potential deaths due to COVID-19
doesn't always make sense from looking at the numbers alone. This image,
showing the lower and higher boundaries of 2020 estimates, enhances
understanding of the risk of COVID-19 relative to other leading causes
of death. Source: https://www.statnews.com/2020
/04/09/its-difficult-to-grasp-theprojected-deaths-from-covid-19-hereshow-they-compare-to-other-causes-ofdeath/.

Igor Kardasov/Shutterstock.com

Even though we might carefully weigh the pros and cons of buying one
cell phone over another, the affect heuristic suggests that we use our
emotional or "gut" responses to make decisions, too.

hoW do We SoLVe PRobLeMS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

375

Framing Effects. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman's classic 1987 Asian
disease problem asks people to choose one of two solutions to the
following problem: "If a disease was coming to the United States, and
600 people were expected to die, what should the president do?" Both
solutions resulted in the deaths of the same number of people (400), but
one was phrased positively (200 will be saved) and the other was phrased
negatively (400 will die). When the question was framed negatively,
people were more likely to choose the riskier alternative. Source: A.
Tversky & D. Kahneman (1987). "Rational Choice and the Framing of
Decisions." In R. M. Hogarth & M. W. Reder (Eds.), Rational choice: The
contrast between economics and psychology (pp. 67--94). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

even when utility is held constant, people show a preference for one 90
solution or the other based on how 80 the solutions are framed. People
rate basketball players who are 70 described as making 75% of their 60
free throws higher than those who 50 are described as missing 25% of the
time, even though the math 40 is identical in both cases. Medi30 cal
treatments that are described as effective 80% of the time are 20 viewed
more positively than those 10 Secure that fail 20% of the time. Risky 0
Tversky and kahneman (1987) Positively phrased Negatively phrased
illustrated the importance of (200 people will be saved) (400 people
will die) framing in decision making using Framing an "Asian disease
problem." even though the outcome for each of two possible solutions is
that 400 out of 600 people with the disease will die, 72% of respondents
preferred a more secure solution when the problem was framed using the
word saved. in contrast, when the problem was framed using the word die,
the secure solution was preferred by only 22% (see ● Figure 10.9). As we
mentioned earlier, the way a problem is represented or framed can have a
large effect on whether it will be solved. Framing can affect the choice
of a solution through its interaction with a person's tolerance for
risk. When a problem is framed in terms of losses, as in the will die
framing of the Asian disease problem, people are more comfortable
choosing a risky solution. in contrast, when a problem is framed in
terms of gains, as in the saved frame of the Asian disease problem,
people generally become more cautious. if we have already "saved" 200
people, we don't want to risk saving fewer.

Percentage choosing solution

FIGURE 10.9

Carry Out the Plan Your belief that you can implement a particular
solution will determine whether you decide to pursue that solution or
look for another solution. once you have decided on a solution, it is
time to try it out. At this point, one of the most critical elements in
successfully implementing your solution is planning. Solutions that
might otherwise succeed can fail when people do not anticipate the time
and the resources needed for implementation. it is one thing to decide
that you

Corbis RF/Alamy Stock Photo

Measures of decision making skills, such as a person's understanding of
probability, are negatively correlated with poor real-world decision
making, such as the number of times you buy things you never use.

376

Chapter 10

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Look Back

Courtesy of Laura A. Freberg

need to exercise more to lose your holiday weight, but without further
planning, this solution might not work. how much exercise will you need?
What activities should you do? When? Where? is your solution practical?
if you are a couch potato, thinking you will implement your exercise
solution by training for next month's marathon might not be realistic.
if time management is not your strongest skill, you might consider tools
like an online calendar or a bullet journal.

As you implement your solution, you need to know whether it is bringing
you closer to your goal, which usually means that you need some
measurement of success. in the example of holiday weight gain, the
logical way to assess progress is to get back on the scale at regular
intervals. At the same time, solutions usually require time to work, and
a failure to make immediate progress should not be the basis for
discarding a promising solution. evaluation is an ongoing process, but
it is especially important once a solution has been fully implemented.
You might have predicted that 6 months of exercise should return you to
your goal weight. At the 6-month point, we return to the original
problem. does it still exist? if not, the problem has been solved, and
you can move on to other issues, although keeping up your exercise
program is always a good idea. if the problem still exists, you return
to the make-a-plan step and try again. Maybe this time you need to
combine exercise with counting calories. People have a reasonably
effective commonsense approach to making decisions, but again, careful
psychological research can point out where we are vulnerable to poor
decision making. if you find yourself unhappy with outcomes of some of
your previous decisions, following the steps in this section on future
occasions might help you find better solutions.

Many techniques for helping you manage your time are available,
including online calendaring and bullet journals, such as the one shown
in this image.

Computer Models of Decision Making An epic battle between world chess
champion garry kasparov and ibM's deep blue ended in defeat for kasparov
in 1997. More recently, Alphago defeated several champion go players
(Silver et al., 2016). What makes this a remarkable achievement for
Alphago's programmers is the 10360 possible moves in the typical game of
go, dwarfing the already huge number of options (10123) in the typical
game of chess. This remarkable achievement parallels the four
problem-solving steps we reviewed in this section. The programmers began
by helping their Alphago neural network to (1) understand the problem by
training it on 30 million board positions taken from real-life games on
a go database. The neural network (2) made plans by estimating the
likelihood that a particular move will lead to a win. in the next step,
these plans were (3) carried out repeatedly. Most importantly, the
program contained a (4) "look back" strategy the programmers refer to as
"deep reinforcement learning" while playing itself (see ● Figure 10.10).
now, instead of evaluating moves from the real-life games, Alphago
generates its own moves and estimates the likelihood that each move will
lead to a win, leading to an ongoing tsunami of improvement in the
program's capability. does this mean that our brains are destined to be
outmatched by the machines? not quite yet. Recall that even Alphago
needed input from real-life games played by real-life people to get
started.

The Biological Psychology of Decision Making What processes can we
observe in the brain during decision making? As we have seen on previous
occasions in this textbook, observing the effects of brain damage on a
behavior can illuminate the contributions of particular parts of the
brain to that behavior. damage to the hoW do We SoLVe PRobLeMS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

377

Value network

Xinhua/Alamy Stock Photo

Policy network

FIGURE 10.10 AlphaGo Versus the Go Masters. The AlphaGo program recently
beat one of the world's best human Go players, a feat considered nearly
impossible with current technology due to the number of possible moves
that characterize the game. The neural network program combined
"policies," or the selection of moves, with "values," which predict
whether a move will produce a win.

WR Publishing/Alamy Stock Photo

Source: D. Silver et al. (2016). "Mastering the Game of Go with Deep
Neural Networks and Tree Search," Nature, 529(7587), 484--489.
doi:10.1038/nature16961

Making simple decisions about what to keep and what to throw away can be
difficult for some individuals. Hoarding behavior is correlated with
unusual levels of activity in the anterior cingulate cortex and insula
(Stevens et al., 2020).

378

Chapter 10

frontal lobes of the brain, as in the case of the unfortunate Phineas
gage described in Chapter 4, reliably produces impulsivity and poor
judgment. Patients with this type of damage often begin to gamble
obsessively, turn their personal lives upside down, and become
unemployable. Sometimes we need to make fast decisions, perhaps at the
expense of accuracy. different levels of activity in the subthalamic
nucleus, part of the basal ganglia (see Chapter 4), are associated with
fast and more cautious decision making (herz et al., 2017). At other
times, you might feel like you are "of two minds" when faced with a
decision, and this is not so far from the truth. in reality, three major
brain circuits interact during decision making (goschke, 2014). one
circuit assigns value to situations along the lines of pleasure or pain
and involves the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, the orbitofrontal
cortex, the nucleus accumbens, and the amygdala. A second circuit is an
impulse control network that controls unwanted responses and includes
the lateral prefrontal cortex and the parietal cortex. Finally, an
attentional circuit monitors significant stimuli and involves the
insula, the anterior cingulate cortex, and the amygdala. This circuit
also seems to be involved with more complex social decision making, such
as deciding whom to trust (Rilling & Sanfey, 2011). The value circuit,
which is impulsive, gradually comes under the control of the impulse
control circuit as we mature and are exposed to the social rules of our
community (bechara, 2005). As college students, you are a prime example
of this maturity. Spending long hours studying and writing papers
produces immediate "pain" but also promises the future pleasure of
obtaining an interesting job and making enough money to support yourself
and perhaps a family. drug addiction provides an interesting example of
what happens when these normal decision making circuits are disrupted.
in many ways, drug addicts behave similarly to people who have brain
damage in circuits related to decision making. Through their experience
with drugs and possibly because of some biochemical consequences of
addictive substances, the impulsive value system gains control over the
impulse control system. The immediate pleasure promised by the drug
experience overwhelms the impact of negative future events such as lost
jobs,

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

disrupted family life, and even prison. Addicts begin to experience
exaggerated responses to the potential reward of drug cues while
becoming less responsive to other types of reward (bechara, 2005).
hyperactivity in this impulsive reward system seems to progressively
weaken impulse control. As you will see in Chapter 11, the prefrontal
cortex is one of the last parts of the brain to mature (development
continues into the early 20s), which might account for some of the
impulsive, risky decisions made by adolescents (blakemore & Robbins,
2012). At the same time that their impulse control system is relatively
weak, adolescents might be hypersensitive to reward. developmental
changes in brain structure and function also account for the effects of
peers on adolescent risk taking. Teens and young adults make about the
same number of risky decisions while alone, but teens are more likely
than young adults to make risky decisions in the presence of their
peers. As shown in ● Figure 10.11, parts of the reward circuit were
especially active in adolescents making a risky decision in the presence
of peers.

Alone With peer

Risky decisions (%)

70 65 60 55 50 45 40 (a)

(b) 

Adolescents Young adults Adults (age 14--18) (age 19--22) (age 24--29)

FMRI signal change (%)

0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 −0.1 −0.2 (c)

(d) 

Adolescents Young adults Adults (age 14--18) (age 19--22) (age 24--29)

FIGURE 10.11 Adolescents Make Risky Decisions in the Presence of Peers.
(a) The stoplight driving game is a simulation in which participants are
told to reach the end of a track as quickly as possible. (b) Adolescents
driving alone do not make more risky decisions than young adults or
older adults, but they make many more risky decisions in the presence of
a peer. (c) The ventral striatum, in orange, is part of the brain's
reward pathways. It is also crucial to addiction. (d) This graph shows
the amount of change in the ventral striatum for the three age groups in
the alone and peer-present conditions. Source: S. -J. Blakemore & T. W.
Robbins (2012). "Decision-making In the Adolescent Brain." Nature
Neuroscience, 15, 1184--1191. doi:10.1038/nn.3177

hoW do We SoLVe PRobLeMS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

379

EXPERIENCING PSYCHOLOGY What Is Your Decision Style? MANY VARIABLES
INFLUENCE an individual's approach to decision making. The instrument in
Table 10.2 was designed to identify which type of style you use (Scott &
Bruce, 1995). For each item, you will choose a score between 1 (strongly
disagree) and 5 (strongly

The question groups are relevant to the decision styles in this order:
Rational, intuitive, dependent, avoidant, and spontaneous. While you may
have a dominant style, these scores are not mutually exclusive. People
use multiple styles depending on the amount of information they have at
hand

agree). When you're done, add up your scores for the following
groupings: Group R: 1, 6, 11, 16, 21 Group I: 2, 7, 12, 17, 22 Group D:
3, 8, 13, 18, 23 Group A: 4, 9, 14, 19, 24 Group S: 5, 10, 15, 20, 25

TABLE 10.2 Decision Styles Questionnaire Listed below are statements
describing how individuals go about making important decisions. Please
indicate whether you agree or disagree with each statement. strongly
Disagree

somewhat Disagree

neither agree nor Disagree

somewhat agree

strongly agree

1.  I double-check my information sources to be sure I have the right
    facts before making a decision.

1

2

3

4

5

2.  When making a decision, I rely upon my instincts.

1

2

3

4

5

3.  I often need the assistance of other people when making important
    decisions.

1

2

3

4

5

4.  I avoid making important decisions until the pressure is on.

1

2

3

4

5

5.  I generally make snap decisions.

1

2

3

4

5

6.  I make decisions in a logical and systematic way.

1

2

3

4

5

7.  When I make decisions, I tend to rely on my intuition.

1

2

3

4

5

8.  I rarely make important decisions without consulting other people.

1

2

3

4

5

9.  I postpone decision making whenever possible.

1

2

3

4

5

10. I often make decisions on the spur of the moment.

1

2

3

4

5

11. My decision making requires careful thought.

1

2

3

4

5

12. I generally make decisions that feel right to me.

1

2

3

4

5

13. If I have the support of others, it is easier for me to make
    important decisions.

1

2

3

4

5

380

Chapter 10

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Do your results fit with your experience? Are you generally satisfied
with the decisions you make? In this chapter, we argue that
decision-making ability is something you can learn to improve, so if you
are not pleased with many of your past decisions, it is possible to
change.

Elizaveta Smirnova/Alamy Stock Photo

and the timing of the decision. Rational decision-makers use reasoning
and logic to arrive at solutions, while intuitive decisionmakers rely on
emotion and feelings. Dependent decision-makers rely on other people to
point them in the right direction. Avoidant decision-makers postpone
making any decision while hoping a situation will resolve without any
actions on their part. Finally, spontaneous decision-makers focus on the
immediate needs of a situation.

strongly Disagree

somewhat Disagree

neither agree nor Disagree

somewhat agree

strongly agree

14. I often procrastinate when it comes to making important decisions.

1

2

3

4

5

15. I make quick decisions.

1

2

3

4

5

16. When making a decision, I consider various options in terms of a
    specific goal.

1

2

3

4

5

17. When I make a decision, it is more important for me to feel the
    decision is right than to have a rational reason for it.

1

2

3

4

5

18. I use the advice of other people in making my important decisions.

1

2

3

4

5

19. I generally make important decisions at the last minute.

1

2

3

4

5

20. I often make impulsive decisions.

1

2

3

4

5

21. I explore all my options before making a decision.

1

2

3

4

5

22. When I make a decision, I trust my inner feelings and reactions.

1

2

3

4

5

23. I like to have someone to steer me in the right direction when I am
    faced with important decisions.

1

2

3

4

5

24. I put off making many decisions because thinking about them makes me
    uneasy.

1

2

3

4

5

25. When making decisions, I do what seems natural at the moment.

1

2

3

4

5

hoW do We SoLVe PRobLeMS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

381

Summary 10.1 Heuristics Type of heuristic

Definition

Example

Recognition

A more recognizable stimulus has a higher value.

Wine from California is rated higher than wine from North Dakota.

Availability

Events that are easy to think about are more likely.

Despite news and missing child reports that make kidnappings appear to
be common, fewer than 100 children per year are abducted by strangers in
the United States.

Representativeness

Stimuli that are similar to a prototype are more likely to fit a
category than stimuli that are different from the prototype.

A big, muscular student at Ohio State University is probably a football
player rather than an engineering student (even though fewer than 100 of
Ohio State's 60,000-plus students are on the football team but there are
about 8,000 undergraduate engineering majors).

Affect

We use an emotional response ("gut" feeling) to choose one alternative
over another.

Preferring Pepsi over Coca Cola when most people think they taste pretty
much the same (McClure et al., 2004).

3,409.09

666.67 54.55 Bee sting

157.89 Lightning

Tornado

Bicycle accident

Cause of death

Credits: Top row---BFA/Alamy Stock Photo; Second row---Jeff
Rotman/Photolibrary/Getty Images; Third row---AP Images/Matt
Dunham/Adrian Harlen; Bottom row---Igor Kardasov/Shutterstock.com.

How Does Language Influence Behavior?

language A system for communicating thoughts and feelings using
arbitrary signals.

382

Chapter 10

Language is a system for communicating thoughts and feelings using
arbitrary signals, such as voice sounds, gestures, or written symbols.
As we discussed previously, language provides us with powerful tools for
organizing and manipulating our thinking, problem solving, and decision
making. Although thoughts can be represented visually as well as
verbally, language extends our thinking abilities to abstract concepts
such as truth and beauty that would be difficult to visualize. Above
all, language connects us with others. not only can we communicate with
people in our immediate vicinity, but language spans time and distance,
allowing us to share the thoughts of people living long ago and in
distant places. Because of language, the thoughts we record today might
reach into the future to influence the thinking of people not yet born.
Language both reflects and shapes thought. Benjamin Lee Whorf 's
hypothesis of linguistic relativity examines the effect of having a rich
vocabulary on a person's ability to think about a topic (Whorf, 1956).
According to Whorf, a skier who can name and identify powder, slush, and
other variations of snow thinks differently about snow than does a
person born and raised in a tropical climate. Whorf 's theory correctly
predicted that the use of gender-free words such as server instead of
waiter or waitress or flight attendant instead of stewardess would
reduce gender stereotyping and discrimination (Sczesny et al., 2016).
Further efforts to address the

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Electron and Confocal Microscopy Laboratory, Agricultural Research
Service, USDA/Science Source; iofoto/Shutterstock.com

According to Benjamin Lee Whorf, a skier who knows what early sintering
means is able to think differently about snow than a person who is
unfamiliar with the term. Sintering occurs when snow crystals break down
and fuse into larger crystals.

binary nature of english personal pronouns (he or she) to better reflect
a continuum of gender identity have led to the use of completely
gender-neutral pronouns (Lindqvist et al., 2019).

The Origins of Human Language To fix the emergence of human languages in
time, we can assume that certain complex social behaviors would be
difficult to conduct without the ability to speak. elaborate tool use
and cooperation would be easier to accomplish using language. because
our version of the human species, Homo sapiens, appeared between 100,000
and 200,000 years ago, most anthropologists are convinced that human
language existed at that time, if not earlier. A critical gene mutation
in the FOXP-2 gene occurring around 100,000 years ago possibly marked
the start of modern language (Corballis, 2004). Regardless of timing,
the enormous advantages of language to human culture and cooperation
would ensure its continuity. Much evidence points to Africa as the
source of the first human languages. Some anthropologists suggest that
it would be difficult for early humans to migrate successfully to other
continents without the cooperation provided by language. Taking a
different approach, an analysis of more than 500 contemporary languages
has demonstrated that the number of speech sounds in a language
decreases systematically with the culture's distance from Africa along
migration routes (Atkinson, 2011). Many African languages feature more
than 100 speech sounds, compared to 45 in english and 13 in hawaiian
Language is intimately connected to cultural values. For example, the
English language (see ● Figure 10.12). Languages are living entities,
under constant pressure to change. nearly contains many words that
signify the passage of half the world's spoken languages may soon be
lost. Following assimilation time. In contrast, the Hopi Native American
tribes into larger cultures, speakers stop using their native languages
or fail to have only two words relevant to time, loosely transmit them
to their children. With each language lost goes an opportunity for
scientists to understand the unique local knowledge of a culture,
translated as "sooner" and "later" (Le Lionnais, along with the
historical and cognitive implications of the language (Roche, 1960).
What does this difference tell you about the two cultures? 2020). hoW
doeS LAngUAge inFLUenCe behAVioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

383

FIGURE 10.12 Phoneme Diversity Shows the Path of Language. The number of
phonemes or speech sounds per language decreases with the distance of
the culture using the language (indicated by shades of red) along
migration routes from the western coast of Africa. Many African
languages feature more than 100 speech sounds, compared to 45 in English
and 13 in Hawaiian. Source: Adapted from Q. D. Atkinson (2011).
"Phonemic Diversity Supports a Serial Founder Effect Model of Language
Expansion from Africa," Science, 332(6027), 346--349. doi:
10.1126/science.1199295 © 2011 The American Association for the
Advancement of Science

phoneme A speech sound. morpheme The smallest component of

Language works like a set of building blocks, beginning with basic
speech sounds (phonemes), which are combined into meaningful units
(morphemes) and then combined in meaningful strings according to the
rules of grammar. humans produce more than 500 phonemes or speech
sounds, such as the c in cat. The number and types of phonemes are
limited only by the physical features of the human vocal apparatus. not
all phonemes appear in all languages. individual world languages vary
from as few as 11 phonemes to more than 140 (holt et al., 1998). english
features about 45 phonemes, which we represent visually using the 26
letters of the alphabet either singly (s) or in combination (sh). Most
written languages attempt to match visual symbols to phonemes, although
many new readers of english struggle with the different pronunciations
represented by the same letters, as in the ough in through, rough,
trough, slough, or thought. Phonemes are combined into morphemes, which
are the smallest components of speech that carry meaning. Most morphemes
are words, but word prefixes (as in preschool and suburban) and word
endings (as in dogs and walked) also qualify as morphemes because they
change the meaning of the root word. english contains approximately
100,000 morphemes, which can be used to produce more than a million
words. The average 20-year-old native english speaker knows about 42,000
words, in addition to thousands of proper nouns (names) and other
versions of the main words (Brysbaert et al., 2016). education and age
increase this number to a high of nearly 60,000 words (see ● Figure
10.13). Morphemes are combined into phrases and sentences according to
rules of grammar. For example, different languages have their own rules
about the meaningful ordering of nouns and adjectives. in english, you
say "the brown dog" but not "the dog brown," while the reverse is true
in Spanish. This type of natural grammar is usually learned early in
childhood by interacting with other speakers, in contrast to the formal
grammar instruction featured in schools. Boyd E. Norton/Science Source

speech that carries meaning.

The Basic Building Blocks of Language

Click languages include sounds made by clicking the tongue and are still
used by groups in southern Africa like the Hazda of Tanzania. These
might be among the earliest forms of language used by humans.

384

Chapter 10

The Biological Psychology of Language As we discussed in Chapter 4,
language is typically managed by the left hemisphere of the brain.
Further insights into the localization of language processing result
from investigations of brain damage and efforts to teach language to
nonhuman animals.

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Percentages

100

FIGURE 10.13

75

Age and Education Correlate with Vocabulary. Two trends characterize the
growth of vocabulary: age and education. A gradual increase in
vocabulary takes place over the adult lifespan. People's level of
education is also predictive of the number of words they know.

50 Education PhD Master's Bachelor's High school

25

0

20

40

60

Source: M. Brysbaert et al. (2016). "How Many Words Do We Know?
Practical Estimates of Vocabulary Size Dependent on Word Definition, the
Degree of Language Input, and the Participant's Age," Frontiers in
Psychology, 7(1116). doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01116

Age

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Lessons From Language Disorders we can learn Motor control of mouth and
lips Motor cortex about the biology of language by surveying problems
that arise because of brain damage resulting from head injury or Broca's
area stroke. Aphasia is the loss of the ability to speak or understand
language. The closely related processes of reading and writing are
often, but not always affected by aphasia. In 1861, Paul Broca conducted
a case study of a 51-yearold man named Louis Leborgne, who had been
institutionalized for more than 20 years (Domanski, 2013). Leborgne came
to be called "Tan," because when questioned, "tan" was one of a few
syllables he could produce. Leborgne entered the hospital after several
months of being unable to speak. He apparently understood much of what
was said to him and retained his ability to answer numerical questions
by raising an appropriate number of fingers on his left hand (Herrnstein
& Boring, 1965). after Leborgne died, Broca performed an Primary
auditory cortex autopsy on his patient's brain and found significant
damage to the patient's left frontal lobe, possibly because of
Leborgne's long history of epilepsy. The damaged area is now called
Wernicke's area Broca's area in honor of Broca's discovery (see ● figure
10.14). Today, Leborgne would be diagnosed with Broca's aphasia. This
condition is characterized by difficulty producing speech. The speech
that the patient manages to produce is slow and effortful, but it
generally FIGURE 10.14 makes sense. In some cases, patients retain the
ability to curse, as in one of Broca's other patient's "sacre nom de
Dieu!" ("In the name of god!"), which he uttered in frustration when
unThe Major Brain Structures able to make himself understood with
gestures. a contemporary patient with Broca's aphasia Participating in
Language. described his condition by saying, "speech . . . can't say . .
. talk, you see" (gardner, 1976, p. 61). about 13 years after Broca
presented his revolutionary work on Leborgne, carl wernicke (1874)
published his observations on another type of language deficit. In honor
of his contriaphasia The loss of the ability to speak or butions, this
syndrome is now called wernicke's aphasia, and the affected area of the
brain is understand language. known as wernicke's area. wernicke's area
is located in the temporal lobe near the primary auditory cortex. The
symptoms of wernicke's aphasia could hardly be more different from those
of Broca's aphasia. where Broca's aphasia affects the production of
speech, wernicke's aphasia affects its comprehension. In Broca's
aphasia, speech is slow and laborious but generally meaningful. In
wernicke's aphasia, the opposite is true. speech is rapid and fluent but
virtually meaningless. a contemporary patient with wernicke's aphasia
said, oh sure, go ahead, any old think you want. If I could I would. oh,
I'm taking the word the wrong way to say, all of the barbers here
whenever they stop you it's going around and around, if you known what I
mean, that is typing and tying for repucer, repuceration, well we were
trying the best that we could while another time it was with the beds
over the same thing. (gardner, 1976, p. 68) How Does Language InfLuence
BeHavIor?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

385

Pictorial Press Ltd/Alamy Stock Photo

The soundtracks of horror films, adventure films, dramas, and war films
use sound features that characterize animal distress calls to heighten
viewer arousal. It is likely that these sounds add to the fear produced
by the visual images (Blumstein et al., 2010).

386

Chapter 10

if you don't pay attention to the meaning, the speech of patients with
Wernicke's aphasia sounds normal, if slightly fast. grammar is generally
correct. on further examination, we find that meaningfulness is lacking.
These patients are locked into a world without social connection, yet
they do not seem aware of their circumstances or in apparent distress.
it is simplistic to assume that the brain has only two main language
"centers:" broca's and Wernicke's areas. instead, contemporary research
has identified complex networks for processing language that connect
cortical and subcortical areas related to language and cognition
(dronkers et al., 2017).

Are Nonhuman Animals Capable of Real Language?

Later in this chapter, we discuss several approaches to learning
language. The evolutionary approach suggests that language results from
some innate capacity shaped by natural selection. Animals and human
infants demonstrate similar perceptual grouping, or the linking together
of sounds with certain characteristics like the "tick-tock" of a clock
(Toro, 2016). This evolutionary view implies that we should find
precursors of human language in the behavior of other animals. Many
animals communicate with each other, often in complex ways. All forms of
communication, however, do not involve the flexibility and the
creativity of language. We can identify three major patterns of animal
communication (dronkers et al., 2000). one is an inflexible group of
calls for signaling danger and identifying territories. A second
contains signals that communicate magnitude, as in the case of bee
dances. Finally, animals communicate through sequences of behavior, as
in the case of birdsong. We don't know to what extent these animal forms
of communication may have served as precursors for human language. The
most logical place to look for precursors to human language is the great
apes. Chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorillas have a part of the brain
analogous to the human broca's area. in both humans and apes, this area
shows a difference in size between the right and the left hemispheres
that might be correlated with language ability (Cantalupo & hopkins,
2001). Many researchers have attempted to teach human languages to apes.
in 1931, Winthrop n. and Luella kellogg "adopted" a baby chimpanzee,
gua. because of the limitations of the chimpanzee vocal apparatus,
efforts to teach gua to talk were doomed to failure (kellogg & kellogg,
1933). Allen and beatrice gardner (1969) taught sign language to a chimp
named Washoe. After 4 years of work, Washoe had mastered 132 signs. The
gardners' efforts were followed by Francine Patterson (1978), who
trained a gorilla named koko to use signs. Sue Savage-Rumbaugh and her
colleagues (1998) have successfully taught a bonobo chimpanzee named
kanzi to associate geometric symbols with words. even before his
training began, kanzi learned 10 symbols simply by observing his
mother's training sessions, although his mother never quite mastered the
task. kanzi also seems to be able to understand some human speech. When
given 660 verbal requests, such as "Put the collar in the water," kanzi
behaved correctly 72% of the time. in addition to investigations of
language behavior in apes and monkeys, irene Pepperberg (2014) makes a
strong case for her African grey parrots. While we use the phrase "to
parrot" to indicate mindless mimicry, Pepperberg argues that her parrots
demonstrate complex cognitions related to language. others have proposed
that dolphins, whales, dogs, and prairie dogs possess language
capabilities (Caldwell & Caldwell, 1976; bloom, 2004; Janik et al.,
2006; Slobodchikoff et al., 2009). Whether animals demonstrate real
language abilities is the subject of ongoing debate. Although children
build vocabularies spontaneously, critics point out that ape language
must be taught laboriously (Terrace, 1979). Word order does not seem to
matter to apes, although it has an essential role in human language.
Trainers of the apes might be making biased observations. When Washoe
signed "waterbird" while observing a swan, the gardners concluded that
she was making a new, creative observation, but Washoe may simply have
noticed a "bird" sitting on the "water." human infants use cognitive
strategies for language learning that are not found in other animals
(Toro, 2016). For example, infants pay more attention to consonants than
to vowels by the end of their first year. Consonants are often more
important sources of

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

How Do We Learn Language? Learning language occurs differently than many
types of learning. no specific instruction is needed, as it is for the
related skills of reading and writing. A typical child exposed to
language will learn language. Language learning begins very early.
korean children adopted by dutch parents showed evidence of having
retained information about the korean language from prenatal exposure
(Choi et al., 2017). early in life, between 6 and 12 months of age,
children make an important perceptual shift that impacts their
subsequent language learning. They become less successful in perceiving
the differences between sounds that are not characteristic of their
native language while becoming more successful at perceiving differences
between sounds that do occur regularly in their native language (kuhl,
2011). Underlying this transition is a type of computational or
statistical learning, in which the infant pays attention to the
frequencies of each type of sound they hear (see ● Figure 10.15). not
just any type of exposure to language will engage the infant's
computational learning. Social interaction is an essential component of
this process, and two-way interaction in the form of conversation
produces maximum results. because language evolved to allow
communication with others, social interaction may serve as a "gate" for
initiating the infant's computational learning system (kuhl, 2011).
Conversing with children produces greater language competence than
reading to them (Zimmerman et al., 2009). even when exposure is one-way,
such as when a child is listening to a speaker, more language learning
occurs when

FIGURE 10.15

PhotoAlto/Alamy Stock Photo

Japanese /r/

Sound type

English /I/

English /r/

Japanese /r/

English /I/

Sound type

Infants Make Computational Assessments of Language. In the second half
of their first year, infants use social interaction as a "gate" for
conducting computational evaluations of how often they hear certain
speech sounds. As a result, they become less sensitive to sounds that
are not in their native languages and more sensitive to those that are.
These graphs show an idealized distribution of the frequencies of the
/r/ and /l/ sounds in English and the Japanese /r/.

Rick Friedman/Corbis Historical/Getty Images

Number of sounds

English /r/

Efforts to teach sign language to chimpanzees have been more successful
than efforts to teach them to speak. Here, the human instructor is
teaching the chimpanzee to sign "eye."

Japanese speaker

Luis Molinero/Shutterstock.com

English speaker

Terrace, H.S./Animals Animals

information for identifying words than vowels, as you probably already
know from the ease with which you interpret "txt mssgs." Whether we
believe that animals have true language or not, we retain an enormous
respect for both the complexity and the intelligence of animal behavior
and the remarkable sophistication of human language.

Irene Pepperberg's African grey parrots have demonstrated sophisticated
languagelike behaviors. For example, when shown an object, Alex could
correctly state its color, shape, and material. After only six
repetitions, he correctly referred to himself as "gray" when asked his
color.

Source: P. K. Kuhl (2011). "Early Language Learning and Literacy:
Neuroscience Implications for Education," Mind, Brain, and Education,
5(3), 128--142. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-228X.2011.01121.x

hoW doeS LAngUAge inFLUenCe behAVioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

387

Flashon Studio/Shutterstock.com

Two-way interaction in the form of conversation produces the fastest
language learning, reinforcing the social nature of this behavior.

a real person is speaking with the child face to face than when a child
is listening to the same speaker on television (kuhl & Meltzoff, 1982;
kuhl, 2007). This finding implies that passive screen time is unlikely
to improve a child's language learning. observations of the speed and
ease with which very young infants can learn complicated language tasks
have led to the assumption by many, including linguists noam Chomsky
(1957) and Steven Pinker (1994), that humans have an inborn capacity for
learning language. no human culture on earth exists without language.
Language acquisition follows a common course regardless of the native
language being learned. Whether a child is exposed to english or
Cantonese, similar language structures appear around the same point in
development. For example, children all over the world go through a stage
in which they overapply language rules, as in the case of a child saying
"goed" instead of "went." eventually, the child switches to the correct
forms, long before formal instruction. in addition, human brain
structure is correlated with language. As we discussed in Chapter 4,
most people process language in the left hemisphere of the brain. damage
to these left hemisphere language areas because of a stroke or other
brain injury produces specific types of language deficits. it is not
necessary to assume, however, that we have a unique "language module" in
the brain to account for the development of human language. Many
linguists believe that spoken language was built on existing structures
that allow primates to produce gestures (Corballis, 2020). Simultaneous
vocalizations and gestures (pointing and saying "look") could have been
followed by a greater reliance on vocalizations, which is the same
progression we see in children. Vocalization requires less energy than
gesturing, as any sign language interpreter can tell you. it also allows
communication to occur at night or when hidden, and it frees the hands
for tool use and hand-to-hand combat. Assuming an inborn capacity for
learning language further implies that language has a genetic basis.
Several genetic conditions selectively affect individuals'
language-learning abilities. A family known as the ke family has members
who have severe difficulties with the production of language accompanied
by a mutation in the FOXP2 gene (Lai et al., 2001). This is the same
gene suspected of mutating about 100,000 years ago, making modern human
language possible. The FOXP-2 gene appears to be critical for learning
to produce vocalizations (kohn et al., 2019).

Diverse Voices in Psychology Is the "Language Gap" Real? SOCIOECONOMIC
DIFFERENCES impact language acquisition. By the age of 2 years,
English-learning children from lowsocioeconomic status Caucasian
families were already 6 months behind children from wealthier homes in
both vocabulary and language understanding (Fernald & Weisleder, 2015).
Hart and Risley (1995) proposed a "language gap," characterized by the
exposure to as many as 30 million more words to children in wealthier
families than in poor families by the age of 3 years. This report,
widely cited in the popular press, was consistent with a cultural
deficit model, in which the poor performance of children from

388

Chapter 10

disadvantaged families resulted from low levels of cognitive
stimulation. The cultural deficit model has been widely criticized as
blaming parents for their children's poor school performance and being
insensitive to cultural differences in the ways parents interact with
children. Quantity and quality of speech directed at young children are
highly correlated, and Hart and Risley noted that quantity of words was
just one indicator of possible quality of language exposure. However,
the importance of the quantity of exposure remains hotly debated (Baugh,
2017). Many researchers argue that specific aspects

related to the quality of the language input to the child, more so than
its quantity, predicts later language skills (RamírezEsparza et al.,
2014). For example, using "parentese," or language deliberately
simplified for use in communicating with children, was associated with
better child language outcomes. The use of rich vocabulary, complex
ideas, and back-andforth conversation promotes language growth in
children (Fernald & Weisleder, 2015). Efforts to build parents' skills
in nourishing their children's language development can bring benefits
to all, regardless of socioeconomic status. ■

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

in most cases, individuals with intellectual disability experience
difficulties with language, but individuals with Williams syndrome are
fluent speakers with large vocabularies. Williams syndrome and another
genetic disorder, down syndrome, produce a similar level of intellectual
disability, but language use in these two groups is quite different
(bellugi et al., 1994). When asked to name all the animals he knew, a
child with down syndrome replied, "horsie, dog, ice cream." A child with
Williams syndrome of the same age and with the same iQ score answered,
"Weasel, newt, salamander, ibex, yak." At the same time, it is not
unusual for a person of normal to high intelligence to have significant
difficulties learning language (Tallal et al., 1989). Accomplished
people who have been diagnosed with verbal learning disabilities or are
suspected of having learning disabilities include such notables as
einstein, Sir Winston Churchill, Leonardo da Vinci, Thomas edison, and
psychology's own William James.

Variations in Language Processing Language learning and use can vary
widely, and these variations provide us with a richer understanding of
how humans communicate. We examine three variations of particular
interest here. Why do some children have such a hard time learning to
read? What happens when people learn more than one language? how does
American Sign Language (ASL), which uses movement instead of sound,
compare with more conventional spoken languages?

Relying on Broca's area while reading, as people with dyslexia do, is
like reading out loud to yourself, which slows reading speed. If you
have ever read a bedtime story to a child, you are aware of how much
slower reading out loud is compared to reading silently.

UPI/Newscom

Dyslexia individuals with dyslexia experience difficulties in learning
to read despite typical intelligence and exposure to adequate teaching
methods (Shaywitz et al., 1998). The first description of a dyslexic
patient, Percy F., was published by W. Pringle Morgan in 1896 (Shaywitz,
1996). Percy F. was described by Morgan as "quick at games, and in no
way inferior to others of his age. his great difficulty has been---and
is now---his inability to learn to read" (Shaywitz, 1996, p. 98).

Carol Greider, a Nobel Prize--winning professor of molecular biology and
genetics, struggled with dyslexia from elementary school through
graduate school. Although the condition was challenging, Greider states,
"Perhaps my ability to pull more information out of context and to put
together different ideas may have been affected by what I learned to do
from dyslexia." hoW doeS LAngUAge inFLUenCe behAVioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

389

Activity in the right prefrontal cortex during a rhyming task, which
requires the ability to discriminate among phonemes, accurately
predicted gains in reading skills over the next few years by children
with dyslexia. Source: From F. Hoeft et al. (2011). "Neural Systems
Predicting Long-Term Outcome in Dyslexia," Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 108(1), 361--366, Fig. 2. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1008950108

bilingual Proficient in two languages.

Reading skill in both typical readers and readers with dyslexia is
highly predicted by phonological awareness, or the ability to
distinguish between similar speech sounds like m and n, and short-term
memory for speech sounds (Raschle et al., 2011). dyslexia is strongly
influenced by genetic factors (gialluisi et al., 2019), and brain
differences associated with dyslexia appear before children are exposed
to formal reading instruction (kuhl et al., 2020). These brain
differences, which include both gray matter volume and white matter
connectivity, are found in circuits known to support language
processing. in addition, individuals with dyslexia show atypical brain
lateralization (Paracchini et al., 2016). in the typical human brain,
language processing strongly activates networks in the left hemisphere.
in the individual with dyslexia, these left hemisphere circuits are less
active than in the typical brain, while at the same time, areas in the
right hemisphere show greater activity. in other words, the brain of the
person with dyslexia processes language more symmetrically than typical
brains do. because reading in most languages depends on matching
phonemes to the letters that represent them, people with dyslexia show
evidence of using a workaround when they read. brain activity has been
recorded while university students with and without dyslexia were
reading (Shaywitz et al., 1998). Compared to typical readers, readers
with dyslexia showed less activity in two language pathways toward the
back of the brain. instead, the readers with dyslexia showed greater
activation near broca's area, which participates in speech production
(Shaywitz & Shaywitz, 2005; d'Mello & gabrieli, 2018).

Multilingualism More than half the world's population is bilingual or
proficient in at least two languages (Chertkow et al., 2010; see ●
Figure 10.16). The 19th-century italian cardinal giuseppe Caspar
Mezzofanti allegedly spoke 50 languages (della Rosa et al., 2013).
Speaking multiple languages has obvious advantages in a diverse world,
but additional claims for cognitive benefits of multilingualism are the
subject of debate (Antoniou, 2019). initial research suggested that
children who learn two languages also experienced an

FIGURE 10.16 Many People Speak Multiple Languages. Eleven languages are
recognized in South Africa, and each province recognizes at least two
languages. The most commonly spoken language in homes (23.8%) is Zulu.
Many South Africans speak two or more languages.

Gauteng

Limpopo

English, Afrikaans, Zulu, Sepedi

English, Sepedi, Tsonga, Venda

Mpumalanga North West English, Tswana, Afrikaans

Free State English, Afrikaans, Sesotho

English, Zulu, Ndebele. Swazi

KwaZuluNatal English, Zulu

Northern Cape English, Afrikaans, Tswana

Eastern Cape English, Xhosa, Afrikaans

Western Cape English, Afrikaans, Xhosa

390

Chapter 10

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

advantage in executive function, which includes the inhibition of
inappropriate behavior, attention and task switching, and cognitive
flexibility. More recent research has been unable to replicate these
early findings (dick et al., 2019). Some researchers have reported that
older adults who were bilingual experienced a delayed onset of symptoms
of Alzheimer's disease compared to monolingual older adults (bialystok
et al., 2012). being bilingual possibly contributes to "cognitive
reserve" or protection against cognitive decline. however, a
country-bycountry analysis of multilingualism and cognitive decline
yielded mixed results (klein et al., 2016), and the topic remains
controversial (Anderson et al., 2020). The processing of speech sounds,
meaning, and grammar in multiple languages recruits the same set of
brain areas and networks (del Maschio & Abutalebi, 2020). if one
language is less proficient, activation radiates out from these areas
and networks. This reflects the need to compensate for the difficulties
associated with using a less proficient language. used by people with
hearing impairments and people who wish to communicate with them. Signed
languages meet all of the criteria for language, although they use
spatial cues of sight and movement instead of sound (klima & bellugi,
1979). Signed languages provide an interesting contrast between language
functions, generally found in the left hemisphere of the brain, and
spatial functions, generally managed by the right hemisphere. Signed
languages also provide insight into the relationships between the
sensory and cognitive aspects of a language. both clinical observation
and imaging studies support the notion that the brain manages signed
languages in the same way it manages other languages despite their
obvious spatial characteristics (Cardin et al., 2016). Prior to brain
surgery, surgeons can identify which functions are processed by each
hemisphere in an individual patient's brain by anesthetizing one
hemisphere at a time. When the left hemisphere of an english-speaking
patient proficient in ASL was anesthetized, she made errors in both
spoken english and ASL signing. neither anesthetizing the right
hemisphere nor performing subsequent surgery on her right hemisphere
produced deficits in either language (damasio et al., 1986). despite the
spatial nature of ASL, this case suggests that a language is still a
language, and the left hemisphere is the likely place for that language
to be processed. These clinical observations have been confirmed by
imaging studies. The same areas of the brain are activated during
language tasks regardless of whether the subject uses spoken english or
ASL (neville et al., 1998).

AP Images/Tery Gilliam

Signed Languages Signed languages, such as American Sign Language (ASL),
are

American Sign Language (ASL) is a distinct language based on sight and
movement rather than sound.

summary 10.2 Aphasia type of aphasia

Location of damage

symptoms

Broca's aphasia

Broca's area (left frontal lobe in most people).

Slow, effortful speaking combined with good comprehension.

Wernicke's aphasia

Wernicke's area (left temporal lobe in most people).

Fluent, meaningless speech without comprehension.

hoW doeS LAngUAge inFLUenCe behAVioR?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

391

What Is Intelligence? GL Archive/Alamy Stock Photo

Intelligence is an individual's "ability to understand complex ideas, to
adapt effectively to the environment, to learn from experience, to
engage in various forms of reasoning, and to overcome obstacles"
(neisser et al., 1996, p. 77).

Along with Théodore Simon, Alfred Binet devised a test aimed at
identifying schoolchildren with intellectual disability. Binet and
Simon's test laid the groundwork for today's intelligence testing.

intelligence The ability to understand complex ideas, adapt effectively
to the environment, learn from experience, engage in reasoning, and
overcome obstacles. intelligence quotient (IQ) A measure of individual
intelligence relative to a statistically normal curve.

general intelligence (g) A measure of an individual's overall
intelligence as opposed to specific abilities.

Assessing Intelligence The assessment, or testing, of intelligence
represents an attempt to assign a number to an individual's abilities,
allowing that person to be compared with others. Formal intelligence
testing began in 1904, when Alfred binet was instructed by the French
government to devise an objective assessment of schoolchildren. binet
and his colleague, Théodore Simon, assumed that relatively bright
children behaved cognitively like older children, while less intelligent
children behaved like younger children. They devised items that they
believed would indicate children's mental age relative to their peers.
in this system, children who successfully completed an item at an
earlier age than most of their peers would have a higher mental age,
while those who were not able to complete an item until they were older
would have a lower mental age. Stanford University professor Lewis
Terman (1916) adapted binet's test for use in the United States and
named his revised version the Stanford--binet intelligence Scales.
Terman began using the intelligence quotient (IQ), which is computed by
dividing children's mental age by their chronological age and, for
convenience, multiplying by 100. For example, a bright child with a
mental age of 15 and a chronological age of 12 would have an iQ score of
125 (15/12 = 1.25; 1.25 × 100 = 125). The most frequently used
intelligence tests today include the Stanford--binet intelligence Scales
and the Wechsler Adult intelligence Scale (WAiS). These tests no longer
use the concept of mental age. instead, contemporary tests place
individual performance on a statistically normal curve, described in
Chapter 2. Contemporary tests also incorporate new features designed to
assess more accurately people of extremely low or high intellect, the
elderly, and individuals with language difficulties. As we discuss in
Chapters 2 and 12, constructing a good test can be challenging. A good
test must demonstrate both reliability and validity. in short, the test
should provide consistent results (reliability) that correlate with
other measures of the same construct (validity). Although no test is
perfect, most iQ tests show excellent reliability (kaufman, 2009). The
validity of iQ tests is the subject of ongoing debate. if your goal is
to predict school performance, their validity seems quite good. if your
goal is to predict individual differences in the complex construct of
intelligence described at the beginning of this section, the tests might
not appear to be as successful. Consequently, it is not surprising to
find that correlations between iQ score and performance in mathematics
and verbal skills, which are essential for success in contemporary
education, are relatively high but correlations between iQ score and
performance in art and design are lower (deary et al., 2007).
Performance on the verbal components of many commonly used iQ tests are
influenced by socioeconomic status, which further complicates the
interpretations of the scores (Chapman et al., 2014). improvements in
scores over the last 60 years on tests that are supposedly culture fair
suggest that it may be impossible to separate test performance from
environmental factors (Fox & Mitchum, 2013; Flynn, 2016; see ● Figure
10.17).

General and Specific Abilities in discussions of intelligence, some
psychologists focus on an individual's overall abilities, while others
focus on particular types of abilities. Using the statistical technique
of factor analysis, which he helped develop, Charles Spearman (1904,
1961) distinguished between a general intelligence (g) factor and
specific factors that apply to single tasks. For example, Spearman
argued that g was important for learning Latin but not for
distinguishing between two musical tones.

392

Chapter 10

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 10.17 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Culture-Fair IQ Testing. Matrix reasoning tests are believed to be
examples of culture-fair and nonverbal intelligence tests. This category
of testing is showing the largest increases in performance worldwide,
suggesting that our modern experience is making us better at extracting
abstract concepts. Which of the items labeled 1 through 8 fits in the
lower right corner of the matrix? The correct answer to this item is 4.
Source: M. C. Fox & A. L. Mitchum (2013). "A Knowledge-Based Theory of
Rising Scores on Culture Free Tests," Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 142(3), 979--1000. doi: 10.1037/ a0030155

Raymond Cattell (1963) divided general intelligence into fluid
intelligence and crystallized intelligence. Fluid intelligence refers to
the ability to think logically without needing previously learned
knowledge, such as seeing patterns in a visual stimulus, while
crystallized intelligence requires specific, learned knowledge, such as
vocabulary or the multiplication tables. A person needs pattern
recognition, a type of fluid intelligence, to play chess or Sudoku well,
but understanding the rules of the game requires crystallized
intelligence. Fluid intelligence peaks in young adulthood and then
declines, although it declines more slowly in individuals who continue
to use fluid intelligence regularly, while crystallized intelligence
remains more stable through adulthood (see ● Figure 10.18). general
intelligence theories do not provide explanations for splinter skills or
islands of ability that occur against an overall background of lower
functioning. gloria Lenhoff, who has Williams syndrome and an iQ of
about 55, cannot make change for a dollar or subtract 3 from 5, but she
has performed as a lyric soprano with the San diego Master Chorale and
as an accordionist with Aerosmith (Maher, 2001). Leslie Lemke, who is
both intellectually disabled and blind, listened one time to Pyotr
ilyich Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto no. 1. hours later, Lemke sat down
at the piano, which he had never studied, and played the entire
composition without error (Treffert & Wallace, 2002). Professional
musicians are unlikely to be able to duplicate this feat. The
separability of "intelligences" in these exceptional cases suggests that
intelligence is a combination of factors rather than a single thing,
such as the processing speed of your computer. howard gardner (1983,
1999) interprets these and similar findings to mean that we have
multiple, independent types of intelligence. Robert Sternberg proposed a
triarchic theory of intelligence, in which a combination of analytical,
creative, and practical abilities allows people to achieve success
(Sternberg & Salter, 1982; Sternberg, 1985). he argues that it is
possible to be gifted in one aspect without being gifted in others. both
general and specific approaches to intelligence can be useful. We can
assume that people have separate strengths and abilities, such as those
outlined by gardner and Sternberg. Among these diverse abilities, purely
cognitive abilities, such as verbal, mathematical, spatial, and logical
skills, show strong positive correlations with one another, supporting
an argument for general intelligence, or g. At the same time, abilities
involving sensory, motor,

fluid intelligence The ability to think logically without the need to
use learned knowledge. crystallized intelligence The ability to think
logically using specific learned knowledge.

WhAT iS inTeLLigenCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

393

70

60 55

T score

50 45 40 35 30 25

Crystallized intelligence Fluid intelligence 0

10

20

30

40

Age

50

60

70

80

90

Carlo Allegri/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images; iStock.com/acilo

65

FIGURE 10.18 Fluid and Crystallized Intelligence Across the Life Span.
Fluid intelligence, like a reaction time measured with a stopwatch,
includes abilities that do not require acquired knowledge. Fluid
intelligence peaks in young adulthood and then gradually declines over
the remaining life span. In contrast, crystallized intelligence, which
does require acquired knowledge, remains fairly stable throughout
adulthood. Composer John Williams has used his crystallized intelligence
of music theory to contribute memorable soundtracks (for films including
Jaws, Star Wars, and the Harry Potter series) in a career spanning more
than six decades. Source: Adapted from S. C. Li et al. (2004).
"Transformations in the Couplings Among Intellectual Abilities and
Constituent Cognitive Processes Across the Lifespan," Psychological
Science, 15(3), 155--163. doi: 10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.01503003.x

and personality factors are less likely to show strong correlations,
supporting an argument for multiple intelligences in these domains
(Visser et al., 2006).

Emotional and Social Intelligence Traditional views of intelligence
focused on education-related skills, but emotional and social skills are
important to successful adaptation too. david Wechsler (1943), whose iQ
tests remain widely used, suggested that iQ tests were not wrong, but
merely incomplete. Pointing out that psychopaths, whose iQs tend to be
modest, do a brilliant job of manipulating their environments, and that
much more intelligent yet neurotic people often struggle to manage their
lives, Wechsler recognized the gap between the academic focus of iQ
testing and daily outcomes. he predicted that when tests were able to
measure emotional and motivational factors as well as they do general
abilities, "they will more nearly measure what in actual life
corresponds to intelligent behavior" (p. 103). Lewis Terman, the
controversial author of the Stanford-binet intelligence test, argued
that even his own test could "never serve as a detailed chart for the
vocational guidance of children" (1916, p. 49).

394

Chapter 10

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

building on arguments in favor of multiple intelligences, and in
recognition that previous work on intelligence seemed to neglect social
skills, models of emotional and social intelligence were proposed (Mayer
& Salovey, 1993; goleman, 2006). Social and emotional intelligence
allows people to manage emotions and reason about the mental states of
others. Clinical cases involving individuals with brain damage,
psychological disorders, and intellectual disability provide evidence
for social and emotional abilities that are separate from cognitive
abilities. in Chapter 7, we discussed roles for the prefrontal cortex,
amygdala, and insula in emotion. Patients with damage to connections
between these structures performed very poorly on a standard measure of
emotional and social intelligence, even though they have a normal iQ
score and show no evidence of other psychological disorders (bar-on et
al., 2003). individuals with autism spectrum disorder often display
cognitive abilities that are superior to their social abilities.
individuals with down syndrome, which produces moderate intellectual
disability, display relatively strong social skills (Fidler et al.,
2008). even if emotional and social intelligence can be separated from
traditional measures of intelligence, these factors can still exert a
strong influence on a person's academic and professional outcomes. in
global assessments of math and science proficiency, students from east
Asian countries (China, South korea, and Japan) consistently outscore
students from the United States and the european Union, who score around
the mean (guglielmi & brekke, 2017). Further analysis suggests that the
advantage shown by east Asian students is largely predicted by
environmental factors, including parents' educational goals for their
children and students' own educational goals, work ethic, and
self-perception. Student self-perception includes a sense of academic
efficacy (i can do this) and self-concept (i'm good at this). A not very
intuitive finding is that self-concept related to math and science
achievement is lowest in the very nations where performance is best!
overestimating one's abilities and achievements can result in poorer
performance. As described in more detail in the hub Science feature in
this chapter, a student's mindset regarding improvement can also
influence performance. The east Asian cultural norms of viewing the self
as worthy of improvement increases students' willingness to accept
negative feedback and make corrections (guglielmi & brekke, 2017).

Biological Influences on Intelligence because the mind is the outcome of
the brain, associations between its structure and activity and an
individual's intelligence have been investigated. For the purposes of
this type of research, standardized tests are used as the measure of
intelligence.

Brain Structure, Brain Activity, and Intelligence intelligence remains a
very

RBlaser Photos/Alamy Stock Photo

DAVE YODER KRT/Newscom

Individuals with Williams syndrome provide examples of how general
intellect can diverge from other abilities and talents. Gloria Lenhoff
(right), has a tested IQ score of 55 but has performed as a lyric
soprano and has played the accordion with Aerosmith.

Some psychologists view social and emotional intelligence as different
from "school-based" intelligence and equally if not more important for
success. In a classic study, children were given a single marshmallow
with instructions to not eat it when an experimenter left the room. They
were told that if they did not eat it, they would receive two
marshmallows when the experimenter returned. When the children were
tracked down 12 years later, the two-thirds who had been able to delay
gratification (they didn't eat the marshmallow) were less stressed and
more confident than the one-third who had not been able to delay
gratification (Mischel et al., 1972). A later update attributed much of
the differences observed by Mischel et al. to socioeconomic status
rather than self-control (Watts et al., 2018). If you are poor, a "bird
in the hand" approach is probably more adaptive than delayed
gratification.

stable trait over the lifespan, which in turn implies that it is the
outcome of relatively stable

WhAT iS inTeLLigenCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

395

Source:
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2578693/Chinese-teachersimprove-pupils-maths-Sixty-fly-Shanghai-promote-methods-bid-halt-slidestandards.html

Blue Jean Images/Alamy Stock Photo

In response to research showing that students from the poorest schools
in Shanghai outscored the children of doctors and lawyers in the United
Kingdom on math tests, the British government flew 60 English-speaking
Chinese teachers to London to provide advice about how to improve
British math achievement. Chinese teachers recommended teaching to the
brightest students in the class, while also ensuring the children with
moderate or lower abilities were also served. Chinese teachers and
students commonly express a belief that hard work is more important than
natural ability in math achievement.

PSYCHOLOGY AS A HUB SCIENCE How Beliefs About Intelligence Impact
Education ACCoRding To Carol dweck (2000), people believe one of two
theories about their own intelligence. Some people believe in an entity
theory that states that people have a certain fixed, unmodifiable amount
of intelligence. others believe in an incremental theory that states
that intelligence is something you can improve through learning. This
second approach does not deny that learning is easier for some people
than for others but simply suggests that everyone can improve through
effort. Students who believe in entity theory feel best when they
complete easy, low-effort tasks and outperform other students.
Challenges in the form of difficult tasks or higher performing peers
threaten the self-esteem of the entity theorists. dweck believes that
the lavish praise heaped on today's students promotes belief in the
entity theory, resulting in anxiety about looking smart, avoidance of
challenges, and an inability to cope with the inevitable educational
setbacks. in contrast, incremental theorists like to stretch their
skills and put their knowledge to use. They view easy tasks as a waste
of time. These students are not as affected by setbacks and worries
about looking smart as their entity theorist peers. dweck's two theories
about intelligence parallel cultural differences regarding proficiency
in math. in the United States, we tend to hold an entity theory of math
ability---you have it or you don't. People feel comfortable admitting
that they are "bad at math" and view this as a good reason to stop
taking math courses or working to improve. in east Asia, the incremental
theory is dominant. Math is viewed as a difficult subject for most
people that you must work to master. When Japanese and American students
were randomly assigned to succeed or fail on a task by giving them
either an easy or difficult task, the two groups responded very
differently (guglielmi & brekke, 2017). The Americans who succeeded were
more likely to persist on a follow-up task, view the tests as accurate,
and rate the skills assessed by the task as important. This pattern was
reversed for the Japanese students. The students who failed initially
showed the same response as the Americans who had succeeded. As
mentioned previously in this chapter, this difference in self-concept
probably contributes to the superior achievement in math and science
seen in east Asian students relative to their peers with different
ethnicities. According to dweck, educators who view self-esteem (see
Chapter 12) as something you "give" to a student through the application
of easy tasks, lavish praise, and avoidance of failure are making a big
mistake. instead, self-esteem could be viewed as something students give
themselves. educators can better promote student self-esteem by teaching
students to value learning over the appearance of being smart, promoting
the love of challenge and effort, and helping students view mistakes as
stepping stones to mastery. ■

396

Chapter 10

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Gray matter volume

Person 1 Average of 100-person group Person 2

Person 3

LBA47

LBA18

LBA21

LBA10

LBA19

RBA39

RBA9

RBA10

Left and right Brodmann areas (areas of cortex)

FIGURE 10.19 Correlations Between Brain Structure and IQ Scores Show
Multiple Patterns. The relationships between brain structure and IQ
scores are complex. The individual depicted with the blue line had the
highest IQ score out of 100 participants, and in each area of the brain
believed to correlate with IQ results, he showed much higher than
average gray matter volume. Person 2 and Person 3 had identical scores
on an IQ test, but their patterns of gray matter volume were quite
different from each other. Further research might help psychologists
better understand the relationships between observed differences in
brain structure and intelligence.

brain structure and function (dubois et al., 2018). because intelligence
is such a broad concept, it is unlikely that we have "intelligence
centers" in the brain. dubois et al. (2018) liken the search for
intelligence in the brain to a search for "physical fitness." both
intelligence and physical fitness do not represent a single thing, but
rather the end results of multiple factors. Complicating the situation
further is the fact that people with identical iQ scores do not have
identical brain structure (see ● Figure 10.19). evidence for brain
correlates for intelligence emerges from studies of individual
differences in brain structure and networking efficiency. brain imaging
studies demonstrate that standard measures of intelligence positively
correlate with overall brain volume (deary et al., 2010; nave et al.,
2019). The frontal and parietal lobes and their connections are
particularly implicated in individual differences in intelligence (Yoon
et al., 2017). intelligent brains enjoy quick, efficient communication
of information from one area to another along axon pathways (see Chapter
4). This is particularly true of people with high levels of verbal
intelligence, which is more closely related to the crystallized
intelligence discussed earlier (khundrakpam et al., 2017). Studies of
people with brain damage indicate that fluid intelligence, but not
crystallized intelligence, is negatively affected by damage to the
frontal lobes. These observations are consistent with studies showing
high levels of frontal lobe activity during diverse tests believed to
demonstrate fluid intelligence (gray et al., 2003). Fluid intelligence
abilities are highly correlated to working memory capacities
(khundrakpam et al., 2017). intelligence also seems to be related to the
timing of brain development. As children approach puberty, the gray
matter of the brain experiences a period of growth that slows down again
later in adolescence. Children with average iQ scores showed a peak
thickening of cortical gray matter around the age of 8, but children
with superior iQ scores experienced a later peak, thickening around age
13 (Shaw et al., 2006).

Genetics and Intelligence As we observed in Chapter 3, simple either--or
thinking

about nature and nurture is rarely correct when considering human
behavior, including intelligence. The influences of heredity (nature)
interact intimately with experience and other environmental factors
(nurture) to produce a result.

Courtesy of Paul Thompson/ UCLA Lab of Neuro Imaging

Source: Adapted from R. J. Haier (2009). "What Does a Smart Brain Look
Like?" November/ December 2009, Scientific American Mind, 26--33.

A comparison of the amount of gray matter in the brains of identical and
fraternal twins showed that the identical twins were more like each
other than were fraternal twins, as indicated by red and yellow
coloring, especially in areas where gray matter volume is correlated
with IQ test results. ("F" is for frontal lobe and "W" indicates
Wernicke's area.) Source: P. M. Thompson et al. (2001). "Genetic
Influences on Brain Structure," Nature Neuroscience, 4(12), 1253--1258.
doi: 10.1038/nn758

WhAT iS inTeLLigenCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

397

To recap the discussion in Chapter 3, heritability estimates how much of
the variability in a characteristic observed in a population, such as
variations in adult height, is because of genes. if genes play no role
in this variation, such as the likelihood that people have tattoos,
heritability is 0. When a condition is completely genetic, such as
huntington's disease, heritability is 1.0. The heritability of adult
intelligence as measured by iQ tests is usually reported to be about .75
(neisser et al., 1996). When we say that the heritability of
intelligence is .75, we are saying that 75% of the variance in
intelligence observed in the population can be attributed to genetics,
not that 75% of an individual's intelligence is because of that person's
genes. As we observed in an earlier section, both overall brain size and
proportion of gray matter are correlated with intelligence, and both are
approximately 85% heritable, based on comparisons of identical and
fraternal twins (gray & Thompson, 2004). This high heritability does not
mean that we have "a gene" for intelligence. As many as 1,041 different
genes influence intelligence (goriounova & Mansvelder, 2019). each of
these genes has a small impact, possibly at different times of
development. Most of these seem especially important during prenatal
brain development. The fact that a trait demonstrates high heritability
does not imply that change or improvement is impossible. A case in point
is the highly heritable condition of phenylketonuria (PkU), in which a
person cannot properly metabolize a particular amino acid found in many
foods. Left unchecked, the condition leads to intellectual disability,
discussed in a later section of this chapter. however, if a person with
PkU is given an appropriate diet in which problem foods are avoided,
intellectual development proceeds normally. The presence of data showing
that iQ results are heritable does not mean we "give up" on anybody's
intellectual development. Worldwide increases in iQ scores of about 3
points per decade over the last 100 years illustrate the potential for
change (dickens & Flynn, 2001, 2006). This increase in iQ scores, known
as the Flynn effect, has occurred far too quickly to represent genetic
changes

CONNECTING TO RESEARCH What Is Collective Intelligence?

METHODS

that varied in the amount of coordinated activity required for success,
including solving visual puzzles, brainstorming, making collective moral
judgments, and negotiating the allocation of limited resources. Some
groups finished their session by playing checkers against a computerized
opponent, while others completed an architectural design task.
Additional measures were taken of factors believed to be related to
group performance, including motivation, satisfaction, group cohesion,
social sensitivity, and distribution of speaking turns.

Nearly 700 people completed individual intelligence tests and then were
randomly assigned to work groups of two to five individuals (Woolley et
al., 2010). Each group was assigned several tasks to complete

This research does not pose any unusual ethical dilemmas. Routine
protections of informed consent and confidentiality should be
sufficient.

WE HAVE BEEN DISCUSSING the concept of a general intelligence that
characterizes an individual, but is it possible for the same sort of
measure to describe the abilities of groups of people? Such a measure
might be quite useful to organizations using teams. The Question: Do
groups of people have a "collective intelligence" that predicts their
performance, and if so, what factors contribute to a group's collective
intelligence?

398

Chapter 10

ETHICS

RESULTS Evidence for a group or collective intelligence did emerge. For
each group, performance across the different tasks was highly and
positively correlated. Further statistical analyses ruled out the
average individual intelligence of the group or the maximum individual
intelligence of individuals in the group as significant predictors of
group performance, leaving collective intelligence as a single, strong
predictor of group performance (see ● Figure 10.21). Surprisingly,
typical group features such as motivation, satisfaction, or group
cohesion failed to predict group performance. Individual features, such
as the individual intelligence of the members, also failed to predict
group performance. Instead, the

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Change trajectories Fullscale IQ

40

Crystallized IQ

35

Fluid IQ Spatial IQ

30 Change in IQ points

25 20 15 10 5 0 --5 1900 1905 1910 1915 1920 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945
1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
2020

(see ● Figure 10.20). some researchers have argued that the increase has
now slowed or even reversed, with IQ scores in some populations showing
a drop in those born after 1975 (Bratsberg & Rogeberg, 2018). these data
emphasize that environmental variables can have a substantial impact on
intelligence scores. Psychologists have produced long lists of
environmental factors that influence intellectual development, including
nutrition and exposure to mentally stimulating activities. Most of these
environmental advantages are not cheap. consequently, it is not
surprising to find that socioeconomic status, a measure of family
income, education, and other class factors, is positively correlated
with IQ score (turkheimer et al., 2003). this correlation does not tell
us whether more intelligent people enjoy higher socioeconomic status,
whether higher socioeconomic status provides means to optimize
intelligence, whether some unknown third factor produces both high
intelligence and high socioeconomic status, or whether some combination
of these factors occurs. nonetheless, poverty continues to be a
significant risk for a low IQ score.

Year

Extremes of Intelligence assuming that IQ scores are normally
distributed, with an average of 100 and a standard deviation of 15,
about 68% of the population should fall within one standard deviation
(85--115), and 95% of the population should fall within two standard
deviations (70--130). the remaining 5% is divided between the two tails
of the distribution, either above 130 or below 70 (see ● Figure 10.22).

FIGURE 10.20 The Flynn Effect. Data from a meta-analysis featuring
nearly 4 million participants from 31 countries show that IQ test
results have been gradually increasing worldwide over the past 100
years, although the exact causes for these changes are not completely
understood. Source: J. Pietschnig & M. Voracek (2015). "One Century of
Global IQ Gains: A Formal Meta-analysis of the Flynn Effect
(1909--2013)," Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10(3), 282--306.
doi:10.1177/1745691615577701

members' scores on the social sensitivity instrument, called the Reading
the Mind in the Eyes test, and how evenly speaking turns were
distributed had a large impact on the group's collective intelligence.

CONCLUSIONS You might have had opportunities to observe collective
intelligence while working on group projects. This research shows that
bringing together the most

FIGURE 10.21

Ability to predict performance

0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 Collective intelligence 0.1 0

intelligent people might not guarantee the best results. Instead, groups
of people who are more empathic and do not dominate the conversation
might have the greatest success. ■

Average member intelligence Maximum member intelligence Study 1: Video
game

Study 2: Architectural design

Collective Intelligence. A group's performance on a variety of tasks,
from playing video games to constructing a complex architectural design,
was predicted better by the group's collective intelligence than by the
average intelligence of the group's members or by the highest IQ score
among the group's members. Source: Adapted from A. W. Woolley et
al. (2010). "Evidence for a Collective Intelligence Factor in the
Performance of Human Groups," Science, 330, 686--688. doi: 10.1126/
science.1193147

What Is IntellIgence?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

399

Intellectual Disability According to the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5; APA, 2013; see Chapter 14),
intellectual disability or intellectual developmental disorder is
diagnosed in individuals 34% 34% who show deficits in intellectual
functioning beginning early in childhood, accompanied by deficits in
independent living skills. 2.0% 0.5% 0.5% 2.0% 13.5% 13.5% Approximately
1% to 3% of the population will score 70 6 5 or below on 55 70 85 100
115 130 145 a standardized iQ test (Szymanski & king, 1999). in addition
to an iQ score Wechsler IQ scores in this range, individuals with
intellectual disability demonstrate problems with adaptive behaviors or
life skills. These behaviors might include the ability FIGURE 10.22 to
balance a bank account, receive correct change from a cashier, read a
bus schedule, buy groceries, maintain personal hygiene, and other skills
required IQ Distribution. IQ test results form an approximately for
independent living. normal distribution, which means that about 68% of
the intellectual disability is divided into categories of mild,
moderate, severe, population falls between IQ scores of 85 and 115.
Ninetyand profound based on iQ scores and level of adaptive functioning
(APA, five percent of the population falls between IQ scores of 2013).
Mild intellectual disability is typically accompanied by iQ scores of 55
to 70 and 130, with the remaining 5% divided between the 70, or between
two and three standard deviations from the mean of 100. With two tails.
proper intervention, individuals in this group are able to master a
sixth-grade curriculum, although it will take them until age 18 to do
so. Most individuals in this group can live independently, and many
work, marry, and have families. intellectual disability A condition Mild
intellectual disability is typically not the result of genetic or
medical problems diagnosed in individuals with IQ scores below 70 and
poor adaptive behaviors; also (Zigler, 1967). As a result, mild
intellectual disability is frequently called familial retardaknown as
mental retardation. tion, recognizing that it usually results from
preventable, environmental causes. Poverty is an obvious risk factor for
this condition because poor parents may be unable to obtain the health
care, diet, and other environmental benefits needed to produce healthy
children (see ● Figure 10.23). iQ scores between 40 and 55, or between
three and four standard deviations from the mean, indicate moderate
intellectual disability. Unlike mild cases, moderate intellectual
disability typically results from genetic or medical conditions rather
than familial factors. genetic conditions such as down syndrome are
likely to produce disability in this range. The academic attainment of
most individuals in this category is limited to the second-grade
curriculum, and again, most do not achieve this level until about the
age of 18 years. Most of these individuals need some type of assisted
living, although the type and extent of needed services vary widely
among affected individuals. Severe intellectual disability is diagnosed
in individuals with iQ scores between 25 and 40, or four to five
standard deviations below the mean, while profound intellectual
disability is diagnosed in individuals with iQ scores below 25. both
severe and profound intellectual disabilities generally result from
serious medical conditions and are identified at birth or early in
infancy. individuals with severe intellectual disability can learn a few
high-priority words, such as "stop" or "hot." individuals with profound
intellectual disability can learn some basic self-care skills, such as
feeding themselves or washing their hands. depending on the nature of
the medical problems, these individuals can require significant
assistance and supervision.

Poverty Is a Risk Factor for Intellectual Disability. Mild forms of
intellectual disability, leading to IQ scores between 55 and 70, are
also known as familial retardation because these cases are not due to
medical or genetic problems. Poverty is a large risk factor for this
level of intellectual disability. A little more than 5 in 1,000 children
living above the poverty line have intellectual disability, but this
number jumps to 9 in 1,000 among children living below the poverty line.
Adapted from http://www.epa.gov/opeedweb/children
/images/D7_2010hires.jpg

400

Chapter 10

Children reported to have intellectual disability by family income,
2005--2008

FIGURE 10.23

Above the poverty line Below the poverty line All incomes 0

5

10

Cases per 1,000 children

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Anton Oparin/Alamy Stock Photo

individuals with intellectual disability face several common problems.
Many children with intellectual disability form insecure attachments
with their caregivers, described in detail in Chapter 11 (Vandesande et
al., 2019). ideally, children form a secure attachment characterized by
demonstrating a clear preference for a caregiver over strangers,
protesting when the caregiver leaves, and indicating a willingness to
explore their environment (Ainsworth & bowlby, 1965). Language skills
are affected depending on the severity of the intellectual disability
(Mcduffie et al., 2017). Children with intellectual disability have
problems expressing themselves clearly, although they may understand a
great deal that is said to them. in conjunction with typically poor
social skills, these language deficits may result in peer rejection.
Consequently, successful intervention programs address language and
social skills, in addition to academic and life skill work. intellectual
disability increases a person's risk for other emotional or behavioral
disorders (Yoo et al., 2012). Anxiety, impulsiveness, and mood disorders
are the most common disorders seen in this population. When intellectual
disability is more severe, individuals may engage in pica, or the eating
of nonedibles, or self-injurious behaviors, such as banging the head
against the floor or wall.

NG Images/Alamy Stock Photo

Giftedness and Genius individuals with intellectual giftedness, who make
up Australian model and fashion designer approximately 1% to 3% of the
population, score two or more standard deviations above Madeline Stuart
has Down syndrome. the mean, or more than 130 on a standardized iQ test.
There are no established criteria for defining "genius," but this term
usually combines high intellect with remarkable creativity (Simonton,
2008). having a high iQ score provides advantages in many aspects of
life. one of the longest giftedness An extreme of intelligence running
studies in psychology is a longitudinal examination of gifted children
initiated in defined as having an IQ score of 130 or 1921 (Terman, 1925;
Terman & oden, 1959). The original participants were children seabove.
lected because of their very high iQ scores, averaging 150. The gifted
participants not only maintained their high iQ scores throughout their
adult lives, but also enjoyed better physical health, emotional
stability, occupational attainment, and social satisfaction. high
intellect, particularly as measured by an iQ score, does not capture
completely what we mean by genius. despite their successes, the gifted
participants in the longitudinal study just cited did not produce genius
work. nor do all remarkable thinkers possess particularly high iQ
scores. nobel laureate Richard Feynman was disappointed to learn that
his iQ score was "only" 124 (gleick, 1992). Like individuals on the
lower extreme of iQ scores, children with high iQ scores benefit from
educational opportunities tailored to their abilities. Unfortunately,
the structure of public education in the United States, with its
emphasis on grade levels based on age, rarely provides optimum learning
for gifted children. A report by the U.S. department of education noted
that children with iQ scores of 140 or above typically know at least
half of a grade's curriculum before the school year even begins, and
those with iQ scores of 170 or above know virtually all of it (U.S.
department of education office of educational Research and improvement,
1993). Their time in school is subsequently wasted, and the material is
so easy that it encourages poor learning habits ill-suited to later
educational challenges. one solution to the educational needs of gifted
youth has been academic acceleration, including skipping grades and
taking advanced learning prior to graduation from high school These
teens, standing with former astronaut and NASA administrator (taking
community college courses, etc.). Although this apCharles Bolden, are
not satisfied by finding the "right answer" to proach has been viewed
negatively by some educators, a study teachers' questions. Instead, they
tackled tough problems to compete of accelerated students over
thirty-five years showed no negative in the White House Science Fair.
impacts on social and emotional well-being (bernstein et al., 2020).

WhAT iS inTeLLigenCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

401

THINKING SCIENTIFICALLY Can Children's IQ Scores Be Increased with
Special Baby Videos? DESPITE ADVICE FROM the American Academy of
Pediatrics telling parents that children under the age of 2 should have
zero screen time (television, tablets, phones, or computers), the market
for electronic media designed to make babies smarter is booming.
Sporting names like Baby Einstein, Brainy Baby, and Baby Genius, these
materials make their intent clear to consumers. The popularity of these
programs indicates that today's parents take the need for nurture
seriously.

What am I BeIng asked to BelIeve or accept? We are being asked to accept
that electronic media intended to make babies smarter actually work.

are there other Ways thIs evIdence could Be Interpreted? Observations
about screen time and language acquisition are usually correlational. It
is possible that children who are least likely to develop language well
are also those most likely to have higher screen time. When tested
directly, however, no support was found for a causal role of language
ability in determining the amount of screen time a child experiences
(Madigan et al., 2019). One of the defenses posed by the producers of
infant media products is that many infants are watching screens anyway,
so they might as well be watching something geared to their
developmental level.

What other evIdence Would I need to evaluate these alternatIves?

Direct testing of infants exposed to Baby Einstein and infants with no
media exposure showed no improvement in learning target words by the
Baby Einstein group (Richert et al., 2010). Watching baby videos
actually seems to have a detrimental effect on young children's language
acquisition. Infants younger than 16 months and exposed to the videos
understood from six to eight fewer words for each hour of exposure
compared to nonexposed infants (Zimmerman et al., 2007). This should not
be surprising, given other research that emphasizes the social nature of
language learning discussed in this chapter, such as the study showing
that young children learn language from a speaker in the room, but not
from the same speaker being televised.

While we strive for objectivity in these features, it will be hard for
us to view this as anything other than a fairly settled conclusion.
These videos seem to have no appreciable benefits and instead raise the
possibility of doing harm. There is a larger question here, too, that
would benefit from further research--- why do contemporary parents seek
"expert" opinions on everyday behaviors like talking to their children?
As

402

Chapter 10

What are the most reasonaBle conclusIons? Rather than investing in baby
videos and apps, we hope that parents can sit back, relax, play with,
and enjoy their children, who grow up all too quickly. We do encourage,
however, regular reading of the psychological science of human
development. ■

Vitalinka/Shutterstock.com

What evIdence supports thIs posItIon?

this book goes to press, the creator of the original Baby Einstein
videos has released an app called ParentPal that not only tracks daily
routines of eating and sleeping but also recommends activities to "take
the guesswork out of parenting" (prnewswire, 2020). Whether the app is
more successful in meeting its lofty goals than the videos remains to be
seen.

Despite advice from the American Academy of Pediatrics to avoid screen
time for children under the age of 2 years, there is a booming market
for apps and DVDs advertising their ability to make children smarter.

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Interpersonal Relationships The Cognitive Perspective

iStock.com/adrian brockwell

HOW DOES BEING A MAXIMIZER OR A SATISFICER AFFECT RELATIONSHIPS? CLASSIC
RESEARCH SUGGESTS that some people are "maximizers," who strive to reach
the best outcome. "Satisficers" are more willing to choose outcomes that
are merely acceptable (Simon, 1957). Maximizers are perfectionists who
evaluate all choices before settling on one, so they do not make quick
decisions. because maximizers feel more regret when a decision doesn't
work out well, they tend to avoid making decisions. Although they may
experience better outcomes than satisficers on many occasions,
maximizers might still feel worse. Satisficers are more likely to see
their glass of life as half full, whereas maximizers are more likely to
see their glass as half empty. What does this distinction mean for
interpersonal relationships? Finding a romantic partner and making a
long-term commitment to that person involve some important decisions.
Romance is consistently ranked among the top regrets in life for most
people (Roese & Summerville, 2005). These facts suggest that maximizers
might experience obstacles within the realm of relationships. either
they will let opportunities pass by because they are still looking for
that perfect person, or they will avoid making a commitment for fear of
regretting it later. Their perfectionist standards might make it
impossible for them to appreciate a partner who is a good match, perhaps
because that person does not look like a supermodel or squeezes the
toothpaste tube the wrong way. Maximizers look at more profiles on
online dating sites than satisficers do (Yang & Chiou, 2010). even after
a commitment is made, maximizers continue to rate their choice against
all possible partners they continue to encounter, an obvious risk for
infidelity (French & Meltzer, 2019). does this mean maximizers are
doomed in relationships? not at all. Recognizing that our automatic ways
of behaving will not always lead us to our goals can help us identify
areas where we need to take conscious, systematic control. Many
maximizers blame their partners for a failed romance (the partner just
didn't measure up) instead of taking a hard look at their own
contributions to the relationship. if you know your maximizing
tendencies are leading you in the wrong directions, you can use the
steps to effective problem solving outlined earlier in this chapter to
supply alternatives that might work better. ■

Faced with a large array of choices, satisficers will pick one that
works, but maximizers will evaluate all the options to find the perfect
choice. We're guessing that most of these candies taste good.

WhAT iS inTeLLigenCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

403

Psychology Takes On Real-World Problems As we have learned in this
chapter, the availability heuristic suggests that topics that come
easily to mind seem more likely. What makes something come "easily to
mind"? Three factors stand out in particular: frequency, recency, and
vividness of information. As this textbook goes to press, news headlines
continue to be dominated by the COVID-19 pandemic, and it is easy to
find examples of the availability heuristic in action. In five
countries, participants vastly overestimated both the percentage of
cases and the resulting deaths (Kekst CNC, 2020, p. 365). In the United
States, respondents believed that 20% of the population had contracted
the virus at a time when the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) reported that only 1% of the population had experienced a
confirmed case. U.S. respondents also believed that 9% of the population
had died from the virus, which would be an astonishing 29.5 million
people, as opposed to the true 0.04% rate, or 131,280 national deaths
reported at the time by the CDC.

In keeping with our emphasis in these sections on policy formation, we
ask how policy makers might avoid this level of public misinformation.
Although the scientific literature provides extensive insight into the
availability bias itself, it provides relatively little advice about how
to counter it. Education and information can be the answer if presented
thoughtfully. Care must be taken to avoid stimulating fear and other
strong emotions, which can lead to "probability neglect" (Sunstein,
2002). This phenomenon often leads the public to overestimate rare but
heavily publicized events, such as air travel following the terrorist
attacks of 9/11. An additional strategy, which we will discuss in more
detail in Chapter 13, involves providing action steps following an
emotional message. If people are experiencing strong negative emotions
regarding COVID-19, reminding them of steps they can take to reduce
their risk should alleviate some of the fear and hopefully reduce
probability neglect at the same time. Can you identify other heuristics
and problem-solving issues relevant to

Antonio Guillem Fernández/Alamy Stock Photo

COVID-19 and the Availability Heuristic

Policy makers have the difficult task of providing information that
stimulates appropriate responses to emergencies without overly
frightening the public.

COVID-19? Once again, psychological science can help us illuminate many
otherwise puzzling human behaviors in the context of the big problems of
the day. ■

Summary 10.3 Types of Intelligence Type of intelligence

Description

Example

General intelligence (g)

A single measure of an individual's intellectual ability that predicts
most of that person's intellectual performance.

Verbal, mathematical, spatial, and logical skills showing high positive
correlations within an individual.

A type of general intelligence that allows logical thinking without
needing learned knowledge.

Recognizing relationships between geometric shapes.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Fluid intelligence

Crystallized intelligence Fluid intelligence

404

Chapter 10

The Thinking Mind: Thinking, LAngUAge, And inTeLLigenCe

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

type of intelligence

Description

example

Crystallized intelligence

A type of general intelligence that requires learned knowledge.

Using your knowledge of the multiplication tables to figure out interest
on a new car loan.

Multiple intelligences

Single skills that tend to show relatively low correlations with one
another and with general intelligence.

Strong musical abilities in people with Williams syndrome, which results
in a lower than normal IQ score.

Emotional and social intelligence

The ability to manage emotions and reason about other people's states of
mind.

Managing anger appropriately and showing empathy for others.

Collective intelligence

A quality of group process independent of individual group members'
intelligence that predicts group performance.

A team featuring good social sensitivity and conversation sharing that
completes a task successfully.

Crystallized intelligence Fluid intelligence 30

40

Age

50

60

70

80

90

0.6 Ability to predict performance

0

0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 Collective intelligence 0.1 0

Average member intelligence Maximum member intelligence Study 1: Video
game

Study 2: Architectural design

Credits: Second row---iStock.com/acilo; Third row---Carlo Allegri/Getty
Images Entertainment/Getty Images; Fourth row---DAVE YODER KRT/Newscom;
Fifth row---RBlaser Photos/Alamy Stock Photo.

Key terms The Language of Psychological Science be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

affect heuristic, p. 374 algorithm, p. 371 aphasia, p. 385 availability
heuristic, p. 372 bilingual, p. 390 cognition, p. 362 concept, p. 363
crystallized intelligence, p. 393 exemplar, p. 365

fluid intelligence, p. 393 functional fixedness, p. 370 general
intelligence (g), p. 392 giftedness, p. 401 heuristic, p. 371
intellectual disability, p. 400 intelligence, p. 392 intelligence
quotient (iQ), p. 392 language, p. 382

morpheme, p. 384 phoneme, p. 384 problem, p. 368 problem solving, p. 369
prototype, p. 365 recognition heuristic, p. 371 representativeness
heuristic, p. 373

WhAT iS inTeLLigenCe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

405

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Around the age of 3 years, fiber pathways connecting the frontal lobes
with the rest of the brain are developing rapidly, making changes in
decision making and memory possible.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Developing Mind

11

LIFE SPAN DEVELOPMENT Learning Objectives 1. Evaluate the evidence for
sensory capacities, preferences, and reflexes in newborn infants. 2.
Identify major physical, cognitive, and social/ emotional differences
among the prenatal period, infancy, childhood, adolescence, and
adulthood, and give examples of ways in which these three trajectories
influence one another.

3.  Differentiate Jean Piaget's four stages of cognitive development
    (sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete operational, and formal
    operational), and critique Piaget's theory, using research from
    alternate approaches.

4.  Debate the adaptive function of infant attachment, and analyze the
    roles of temperament, culture, and parenting in driving individual
    attachment styles.

5.  Identify epigenetic processes, critical or sensitive periods, and
    the impact of experience on biological development.

6.  Debate the research evidence for continuity versus discontinuity in
    the trajectories of physical, cognitive, and social/ emotional
    development.

WHAT IS YOUR EARLIEST MEMORY? A BIRTHDAY party? A new puppy? We are
guessing that your earliest autobiographical memories, which we
discussed in Chapter 9, probably date to when you were between 3 and 5
years old. Why this age period and not another? Zooming in, we can see
that one of the factors driving memory abilities is the development of
the brain during childhood. As you will see in this chapter, changes
taking place in the hippocampus and frontal lobes during the third year
of life give children a boost in their abilities to form longterm
memories, particularly about the sequences of events that make up our
autobiographical memories. But there are other parts to this story. To
form an autobiographical memory, children must have a sense of self. As
we discussed in will learn about the further development of
self-awareness as children gradually separate from their parents and
family and move into adult roles in the community. Zooming out still
farther, we find that cultures influence the formation and timing of
autobiographical memories. When white American adults are compared with
Chinese adults, the white Americans access more autobiographical
memories from earlier ages and provide

iStock.com/Christopher Futcher

Chapter 6, babies as young as 18 months can recognize themselves in a
mirror. In this chapter, you

407 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGURE 11.1 Cultural Influences on Emotion Knowledge. White American
adults recall more childhood autobiographical memories in greater detail
than do Chinese adults. These differences may have their roots in
earlier cultural influences on emotional knowledge, or an understanding
of how a situation can lead to emotions. When asked to describe
situations that would make a person happy, sad, fearful, or angry, white
American children provided more information than Chinese or Chinese
immigrant children. Emotional knowledge increases when a person focuses
on information relevant to the self rather than more general
information. Source: Adapted from Q. Wang (2008). "Emotion Knowledge and
Autobiographical Memory Across the Preschool Years: A Cross-Cultural
Longitudinal Investigation," Cognition, 108(1), 117--135. doi:
10.1016/j.cognition.2008.02.002

Mean emotional knowledge scores

25

20

15

10

5

0

Age 3.5

Age 3

Age 4.5

White Americans Chinese Chinese immigrants

more episodic details of these memories (Wang, 2008). Wang believes that
this difference observed in adults originates earlier in childhood, when
white American children show more "emotion knowledge," or an
understanding of how situations can lead to emotions, than do Chinese
children (see ● Figure 11.1). Emotion knowledge is assessed by asking
children such questions as, "What makes people happy?" Cultures
influence emotion knowledge development by focusing on information
relevant to the self versus more general

trubach/Shutterstock.com

aspects of information. To understand the development of
autobiographical memory, psychologists must explore the biological,
individual, developmental, social, and cultural contributions to this
ability. At the same time, the development of an autobiographical memory
capability forms reciprocal influences with these other aspects of the
individual's

behavior. In this chapter, we will explore many examples of how the
normal changes that occur across A major milestone in children's
development of a sense of self is the ability to recognize themselves in
a mirror by the age of 18 months.

the life span interact with our behavior and mental processing.

What Does It Mean to Develop? in Chapter 8, we defined learning as a
relatively permanent change in behavior due to experience. in this
chapter, we will explore an additional force for changes in
behavior---changes that unfold with the passage of time. The study of
human development considers changes in behavior that correlate with
growth or maturation. As we explore the normal changes that occur at
different stages of life, we will concentrate on three interwoven
threads: physical development, cognitive development, and social/
emotional development. Although we discuss each separately, they are
constantly interacting. For example, moving independently by crawling or
walking produces a more rapidly changing and interesting environment,
which spurs an infant's cognitive growth. At the same time, a mobile
infant is likely to elicit different reactions from parents or
caretakers than one who is stationary, stimulating further social and
emotional development. in addition to documenting these three types of
change over time, the study of development highlights several major
questions that stretch across the entire life span. how does

408

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

nature interact with nurture? is development gradual and continuous or
abrupt and discontinuous? how much of human development is universal
across the human species or dependent upon a person's culture?

Nature and Nurture Intertwined Kevin Dodge/Masterfile

Although we will be discussing the genetic heritage of individuals, as
well as environmental influences on their development, we will be
emphasizing the interactions between nature and nurture that predict
developmental outcomes. Significant progress has been made in the
understanding of how genes and the environment interact. As we discussed
in Chapter 3, we now understand that the underlying deoxyribonucleic
acid (DnA) that makes up our genes is turned on or off by the
surrounding chemical tags (the epigenome) that accumulate through life.
Among the external environmental factors that can chemically "tag" our
DnA are diet, nurture, and stress. epigenetic influences accumulate over
the life span. Because younger children have had less time for
epigenetic interactions between their genes and their experience to take
place, they have more in common with one another at any particular age
than do older adults, whose decades of experience have caused their
epigenetic paths to lead them in many different directions. A group of
8-year-olds is more consistent in its physical characteristics and
behaviors than a group of 20-year-olds, who still have more in common
with one another than any group of 65-year-olds. This contrast between
children and adults might have led earlier psychologists to the mistaken
belief that development "stopped" at some point in childhood or
adolescence, when all they were seeing was a transition point where
internal influences were becoming overshadowed by external ones.

Early developmental psychologists described normal age-related changes
up through childhood to puberty but not beyond. Today, we know that the
ages represented in these four generations bring their own set of
characteristic behaviors.

Continuity or Discontinuity

Patrik Giardino/Stone/Getty Images

Another major question asks whether development proceeds gradually and
smoothly over time (continuity) or changes more abruptly from one stage
to the next (discontinuity). The gradual approach might be visualized as
a rainbow, with one color (stage) gradually merging into the next, with
no bold line separating the two. in contrast, the discontinuity approach
views development as a staircase to be climbed. The behavior on one step
is qualitatively different from that on the step that preceded it, and
the change from one step to the other is abrupt (see ● Figure 11.2).

As children develop physically, they are able to move out into the
world. Mobile children face new problems that stretch their cognitive
abilities and new social and emotional challenges as they learn
self-regulation and experience control from their parents. WhAT DoeS iT
MeAn To Develop?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

409

FIGURE 11.2 Continuity Versus Discontinuity in Development. Development
can appear as a gradual, continuous process, such as the acorn growing
into a mighty oak tree, or as a sudden, discontinuous process, such as
the butterfly emerging from a chrysalis.

veloping organism between the zygote and the fetus stages, or between
gestational weeks 3 and 8 weeks in humans.

fetus The term used to describe a developing organism between the embryo
stage and birth, or between gestational weeks 8 and approximately 40
weeks in humans.

psychologists taking the universal approach to development look for
age-related behaviors that are found across the entire human species,
whereas psychologists taking an ecological view ask questions about the
impact of culture and environment on development. Which approach is
correct? Both universal and ecological approaches improve our
understanding. Although we will see universals of development in this
chapter, such as the age at which most children begin walking
unassisted, we will also see that children growing up in cultures where
early walking is encouraged walk at slightly younger ages than children
growing up in cultures where restricting infant movement is the norm.
Although a consideration of human universals is useful, most
contemporary psychologists would be unwilling to consider many behaviors
outside their context of social relationships and culture.

Radius Images/Alamy Stock Photo

Epigenetic influences accumulate over the life span. Groups of
8-year-olds have more in common than groups of 20-year-olds, who have
more in common than groups of older adults. The contrast between the
degree of similarity seen in children and that seen in adults might have
led early developmental psychologists to the mistaken conclusion that
development stops.

Universal or Ecological Development

410

Chapter 11

Phovoir/Shutterstock.com

embryo The term used to describe a de-

As in the case of nature and nurture, the continuity--discontinuity
debate does not have a "right answer." Some features appear to be more
continuous in their developmental course, such as the gradual
development of infant temperament into later personality. other features
seem to develop more abruptly. parents are often surprised when their
child becomes suddenly more mobile, such as rolling across the bed or
walking, although the underlying physical development is probably quite
gradual.

Image Source/Alamy Stock Photo

zygote The term used to describe a developing organism immediately
following conception until the embryo stage, or the first 2 gestational
weeks in humans.

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The 9 months between conception and birth are full of growth and
activity. For the first 2 gestational weeks, the developing organism is
known as a zygote. During the second gestational week, the zygote
completes its journey through the mother's fallopian tube to the uterus,
where it implants in the lining. During gestational weeks 3 through 8,
we use the term embryo, and for the remainder of the pregnancy, we use
the term fetus. During the first gestational week, the zygote
differentiates into three germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm
(see ● Figure 11.3). The ectoderm develops into nerve tissue and skin,
while the mesoderm gives rise to muscle and bone. The endoderm is the
source of the body's soft tissue, such as the organs of the digestive
tract. By gestational week four, the central nervous system has
differentiated into forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord. By
gestational week seven, cells that will form the cerebral cortex begin a
carefully orchestrated journey from the lining of the neural tube (which
will later mature into the ventricles of the brain) to their ultimate
destinations. other systems, while perhaps not as dramatic as the
nervous system, also begin to differentiate and develop during the
embryonic stage. The heart, stomach, liver, and other organs are formed
during this period. During the sixth gestational week, expression of a
gene on the y chromosome initiates the differentiation of the generic
gonads into testes in males, while alternate genes guide the development
of the gonads into ovaries in females. The remainder of the pregnancy
involves continued growth and maturation of the systems that are now in
place (see ● Figure 11.4). During gestational month three, generic
internal reproductive organs differentiate into the uterus, fallopian
tubes, and upper portion of the vagina in females and into the seminal
vesicles, vas deferens, and prostate in males. new neurons are born in
large numbers and begin the process of forming connections with one
another. Myelination of the nervous system begins at gestational month
six (rivkin et al., 1995). As you may recall from Chapter 4, myelin
allows neurons to communicate faster and more efficiently. By
gestational month seven, most of the neurons you will ever have are in
place (rakic, 2000) and brain waves can be recorded through the mother's
abdomen.

(b) 

Fertilized egg

(d) 
(e) 

Zygote

Developing nervous system Ectoderm Mesoderm Endoderm

The universal approach sees development as common to all people, whereas
the ecological approach emphasizes the influences of environment and
culture on development. In the United States, we tend to look at child
soldiers, some as young as 10 years old, as being a product of the
poverty and lack of opportunity in their environments. However, some
universal aspects of being a preteen or young teen, such as an immature
sense of morality and greater obedience to adults, might apply equally
to very young violent gang members in the United States.

FIGURE 11.3

Embryo

Eye of Science/Science Source; K. H. Kjeldsen/Science Source; Dr G.
Moscoso/Science Source /© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

(a) 

AP Images/Mohamed Sheikh Nor

How Do We Change Prenatally?

Prenatal Development. (a) For the first 2 gestational weeks, the
developing organism is known as a zygote. (b) Cell division continues at
a rapid pace as the zygote travels down the mother's fallopian tube,
reaching the uterus during its second week. (c) The embryo stage lasts
from gestational week 3 through gestational week 8. (d) During the
zygote stage, cells begin to differentiate into three types: the
ectoderm, which is the source of cells making up the nervous system; the
mesoderm, which develops into muscle and skeleton; and the endoderm,
which will form internal organs.

hoW Do We ChAnge prenATAlly?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

411

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

9 1

12 16 2.13 4.57

20 6.46

0.07 oz. 3.53 oz. 10.58 oz. 0.49 oz.

24 11.81

28 14.8

32 16.69

36 18.66

40 20.16

weeks

1.32 lb.

2.22 lb.

3.75 lb.

5.78 lb.

7.63 lb.

weights

inches

FIGURE 11.4 Fetal Development. During the fetal stage, from gestational
week 8 to approximately gestational week 40, considerable growth and
maturation of organs and tissues prepare the fetus for birth.

Genetic Risks to Development By Ian Miles-Flashpoint Pictures/Alamy
Stock Photo

In the United States, about 10% of babies are born at 37 or fewer weeks
of gestation. The smallest surviving baby on record was born in December
2018, weighing only 8.6 oz with a length of 9 inches. Term newborns are
usually about 20 inches long and weigh about 7 pounds. The earliest
surviving baby was born at 21 weeks gestation in 1987, when neonatal
care was much less advanced than today, but grew into a healthy adult.

you may be under the impression that the fetus resides in a rather
isolated, self-contained environment in the womb, but this is not the
case. The fetus's ability to hear develops by 28 gestational weeks (Das
et al., 2020). newborn babies show an immediate preference for their
mother's voice (DeCasper & Fifer, 1980; Moon, 2017). When pregnant
mothers read the Dr. Seuss classic The Cat in the Hat out loud twice a
day, their infants later preferred to listen to tapes of their mothers,
but not others, reading this story (DeCasper & Spence, 1986). This
preference has obvious advantages in the attachment and bonding that
occurs between mother and newborn. Most pregnancies last about 40 weeks,
and babies born between gestational weeks 37 and 42 are considered
typical or term births. in the United States, about 10% of infants are
born prior to 37 weeks of gestation (Chawanpaiboon et al., 2019).
premature infants are at greater risk than term infants for a number of
conditions that can affect lifetime health and development, including
disorders of the lungs, vision, and development of the brain (Cole et
al., 2011).

412

Chapter 11

in most cases, prenatal development proceeds according to plan. As we
observed in Chapter 3, genetic abnormalities that have adverse effects
are rarely passed along in large numbers. The more common genetic
abnormalities seen in children are those that become more likely when
their parents are older, especially errors in the development of eggs
and sperm. The final division of a woman's immature egg, formed during
her own prenatal period, into a mature ovum does not occur until just
before ovulation. Before they make this last crucial division, a
40-year-old woman's eggs have been exposed to 40 years of potentially
harmful environmental influences that raise the probability that
something will go wrong as they divide. in contrast, it takes a little
over 2 months for a man to produce a sperm cell, which reduces the
chances of the cell's exposure to harmful influences.

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Risk of Down syndrome in live births (%)

4.0 3.5 3.0

FIGURE 11.5

2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 Maternal age (years)

Risk of Down Syndrome and Maternal Age. Many genetic disorders, such as
Down syndrome, are more common as the age of the mother increases.
Errors in the final cell division forming the mother's egg immediately
before ovulation become more likely over time as a woman is exposed to
more potentially harmful environmental influences, such as radiation.

Down syndrome, or trisomy 21, results when the child receives a third
full or partial copy of the 21st chromosome along with the usual two,
usually because of faulty cell division. Down syndrome results in
intellectual disability (see Chapter 10), a pattern of mild physical
abnormalities, and a probable life span of only 40 to 50 years. A
woman's chances of giving birth to a child with Down syndrome are only
about 1 in 2,000 at age 20 but rise to 1 in 30 at age 45 (see ● Figure
11.5).

Environmental Risks to Development During pregnancy, the developing
fetus is protected from exposure to toxins and disease-causing agents by
the placenta, an organ attached to the wall of the mother's uterus that
provides the fetus with nutrients and oxygen. This protection, however,
is not perfect. in some cases, substances that are relatively safe for
the mother can have devastating effects on the health and development of
her fetus. Any agent that can produce harmful effects in the zygote,
embryo, or teratogen A chemical agent that can fetus is known as a
teratogen (see ● Figure 11.6). ● Table 11.1 lists some common teratogens
harm the zygote, embryo, or fetus. and their effects. About 90% of
pregnant women in the U.S. take at least one medication other than
pregnancy-related vitamins (Centers for Disease Control, 2020). Both
prescription and overthe-counter medications can produce adverse effects
in the fetus. exposure to commonly used antidepressant medications has
been linked to higher rates of heart and other physical defects
(Anderson et al., 2020). A link between antidepressants and autism
spectrum disorder continues to be debated (Bölte et al., 2019; vega et
al., 2020; see Chapter 14). Use of acetaminophen (Tylenol and Anacin)
during pregnancy is associated with higher risk for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder in children (Ji et
al., 2020). Use of antifungal medications to treat common yeast
infections reduces masculinization of male offspring (Mogensen et al.,
2017). Because even the safest and most routine substances are capable
of acting as teratogens, pregnant women are well advised to consult with
health care providers before taking any type of prescription According
to one expert in medical ethics, today's or over-the-counter medication.
technology makes it possible to screen embryos recreational drugs
consumed by the mother are the most common for every known
disease-causing mutation in the and preventable sources of adverse
effects in the developing fetus. infants human genome (Leroi, 2006).
What would be the born to women who use tobacco are at risk for
premature birth and bebenefits and costs of this practice? ing
underweight, circumstances that are major risk factors for numerous hoW
Do We ChAnge prenATAlly?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

413

Zygote (weeks) 1 2

3

Period of dividing, zygote implantation

Embryonic period (weeks) 4 5 6

Eye Heart Heart CNS

Eye

Ear

7

8

Fetal period (weeks) 12 16

20−36 Brain

Full term 38−40

Teeth Palate Ear

Arm Leg

External genitalia Central nervous system (CNS) Heart Arms Eyes Legs
Teeth External genitalia Ears

Prenatal death

Major structural abnormalities

Physiological defects and minor structural abnormalities

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Palate

FIGURE 11.6 Risks From Teratogens. The orange bars indicate times in
which teratogens can cause major abnormalities and the yellow bars
indicate times when teratogens will cause more minor abnormalities.

fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) A condition resulting from alcohol
consumption by the mother during pregnancy that produces physical
abnormalities and cognitive and behavioral problems in her child.

414

Chapter 11

physical and psychological problems later on in the child's life (US
Department of health and human Services, 2014). e-cigarettes do not
reduce these risks, as it is the nicotine in the tobacco that causes
most problems for the fetus, not the smoke itself (hawkins et al.,
2020). Although the intricate programming of nervous system development
in the fetus appears to be especially vulnerable to interruption by
alcohol consumed by the mother during pregnancy, about 10% of pregnant
women in the United States consume alcohol anyway (Dejong et al., 2019).
Alcohol consumption by a pregnant woman can result in a condition known
as fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS). As shown in ● Figure 11.7, FAS produces
a number of physical abnormalities, including growth retardation, skin
folds at the corners of the eyes, nose, and mouth abnormalities, and a
small head circumference, as well as cognitive and behavioral problems,
including reduced iQ, attention problems, and poor impulse control
(Dejong et al., 2019). prenatal exposure to opioids produces
long-lasting cognitive and motor deficits (yeoh et al., 2019). Cannabis
use during pregnancy is associated with higher rates of autism spectrum
disorder, intellectual disability, and learning disability (Corsi et
al., 2020). A mother's use of alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, or cocaine
during pregnancy significantly reduces the volume of gray matter of her
child's brain, but combinations of two or more of these drugs produce
even more dramatic reductions. As we mentioned in Chapter 4, gray matter
refers to areas populated by neural cell bodies, and the thickness of
cortical gray matter is correlated with measures of intelligence. These
are not short-term effects because children exposed prenatally to
multiple drugs show reduced gray matter thickness and head circumference
at 10 to 13 years of age (rivkin et al., 2008). A pregnant woman can be
exposed to viruses that can trigger conditions that occur immediately or
later in the child's life (lydholm et al., 2019). hiv can be passed from
mother to child during pregnancy, birth, or breast-feeding. prenatal
exposure to the mosquito-borne Zika virus, first identified in Brazil in
2015, produces abnormally small brains (microcephaly) and other serious
brain abnormalities in the fetus (pomar et al., 2019). CoviD-19 has been
shown to produce more severe outcomes in pregnant women, and in very
rare instances, it

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TABLE 11.1 Examples of Some Common Teratogens and Their Effects
teratogen

type

Alcohol

Recreational drug

Tobacco (Nicotine)

Recreational drug

Possible effects on the child ●

Small stature

●

Facial abnormalities

●

Hyperactivity

●

Intellectual disability

●

Low birth weight

●

Premature birth

●

Cleft lip and/or palate

●

Risk of SIDS

●

Cannabis

Phenytoin (Dilantin)

Recreational drug

Prescription medication for epilepsy

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (Prozac, Zoloft, etc.)

Prescription antidepressants

Varicella (chickenpox)

Viral infection

Zika

Viral infection

Aspirin

Over-the-counter pain medication

Acetaminophen

Over-the-counter pain medication

Lung and brain damage due to carbon monoxide in smoke

●

Possible link to ADHD

●

Autism spectrum disorder

●

Intellectual disability

●

Learning disability

●

Heart defects

●

Intellectual disability

●

Cleft palate

●

Slow growth

●

Premature birth

●

Heart and other physical defects

●

Possibly autism spectrum disorder

●

Scars

●

Small head size

●

Blindness

●

Seizures

●

Malformed and paralyzed limbs

●

Microencephaly

●

Heart defects

●

Intellectual disability

●

Slow growth

●

ADHD

●

Autism spectrum disorder

can be transmitted to the fetus (vivanti et al., 2020). previous
pandemics with similar viruses have been linked to premature birth and
fetal distress, but more data are needed to evaluate the potential risks
of CoviD-19 to the fetus. There is reason to believe that the effects
will not be severe. CoviD-19 differs from other viruses known to cause
extensive birth defects, such as rubella and cytomegalovirus, in that it
does not travel primarily through the blood, making intrusion through
the placenta less likely. The types of cells that serve as entry points
for the Zika virus are plentiful in the placenta, but the cells that
serve as entry points for CoviD-19 are not. hoW Do We ChAnge prenATAlly?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

415

(a)

(b) 
(c) 

Small head

Flat midface

Thin upper lip Underdeveloped jaw

Courtesy of Dr. Sterling K. Clarren

Small eye openings

Short nose

Rick's Photography/Shutterstock.com

Folds near eyes

Low nasal bridge

(b) Brain affected by FAS (left) compared to normal brain (right)

(c) Facial features of FAS

FIGURE 11.7 Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS). No known amount of alcohol
consumption is considered safe during pregnancy, yet about 10% of
pregnant women in the United States drink some alcohol (Dejong et al.,
2019), and about 3.9% binge drink or have five or more drinks at one
time (Denny et al., 2019). Drinking during pregnancy can result in FAS,
which produces (a) characteristic facial features, (b) reduced brain
volume compared to a typically developing fetus, and attentional and
other behavioral problems in children.

Tony Wear/Shutterstock.com

What Can Newborns Do?

Newborn babies grasp anything placed in their hand, including a parent's
finger.

human development is characterized by a longer period of dependency than
in other primates, including chimpanzees and gorillas. physical
abilities present at birth in other primates, such as independent
movement, require about 1 year to develop in human infants (Walker,
1996). human adults house, feed, clothe, protect, and educate their
young for the better part of two decades, if not longer. however, even
though human newborns are less mature than primate infants of other
species, they come into the world with a number of useful capacities.

The Newborn's Reflexes

The newborn stage of life begins officially at birth and lasts 28 days.
newborns have a number of reflexive behaviors that begin to operate
immediately (see ● Table 11.2). Babies immediately turn their head to
the source of a touch, open their mouth, and search for the mother's
nipple. This rooting reflex assists the newborn with the essential
process of feeding. if an object is placed in the mouth, babies begin to
suck reflexively, which also leads to effective feeding. very young
babies reflexively grasp any object placed in the hand, which leads to
the later voluntary grasping of objects. if parents hold newborns
upright with their feet touching a surface, babies show a stepping
reflex, which possibly serves as a basis for later walking (Zelazo,
1998).

The Newborn's Activity newborns spend up to 16 to 18 hours per day
sleeping. As we mentioned in Chapter 6, a large proportion of this time
is spent in reM sleep, which might participate in the wiring of the
newborn's brain. During times of wakefulness, the baby alternates
between periods of alert looking about and periods of physical movement
of the arms and legs. Unfortunately for parents, most

416

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TABLE 11.2 Newborn Reflexes reflex name

action

Possible purpose

Babinski

Stroking the baby's foot causes toes to spread out.

Unknown; disappears as nervous system matures.

Blink

Eye closes in response to strong stimuli.

Protects eyes.

Moro

If the baby's head falls backward, the arms first spread out and then
"hug."

A possible evolutionary remnant allowing primates to cling to an adult.

Palmar

Placing an object in the hand produces reflexive grasping.

A possible evolutionary remnant allowing primates to cling to an adult's
fur.

Rooting

Stroking a baby's cheek results in the baby turning toward the touch and
opening the mouth.

Helps the baby nurse.

Stepping

Placing the baby's feet on a flat surface initiates stepping.

Possible precursor to walking.

Sucking

The baby sucks anything that touches the roof of the mouth.

Helps the baby nurse.

newborns also spend about 2 to 3 hours per day either crying or being
close to tears. As upsetting as this crying may be, it represents the
infant's first efforts at communicating with the parents. Babies
generally cry for a reason, such as hunger or pain, and most parents are
stimulated by the crying to find ways to make their infant more
comfortable.

We refer to physiological characteristics, such as having an XX or Xy
genotype, as "sex," while psychosocial aspects of the
maleness--femaleness continuum are referred to as "gender." The sex
chromosome genotype that a zygote receives at conception begins a
cascade of hormonal, structural, and behavioral events that lead to
mature sex and gender. An intersex outcome occurs when this cascade
includes elements of both male and female development. in the vast
majority of cases, individuals have either an XX or Xy genotype, but
variations in sex chromosomes occur about once in every 426 births
(nielsen, 1991). These differences can take the form of having numbers
of sex chromosomes other than two. For example, individuals with Turner
syndrome have a single X chromosome and are phenotypically female.
individuals with Klinefelter syndrome have two X chromosomes and one y
chromosome, and are phenotypically male. in some cases, hormone therapy
is used at puberty to suppress the development of female secondary sex
characteristics, such as breast enlargement. individuals with Jacob
syndrome have one X chromosome and two y chromosomes, and are
phenotypically male. Cognitive and behavioral outcomes in these cases
are quite variable, with many individuals experiencing normal
development while others are at greater risk for psychological
disorders. in particular, individuals with Jacob syndrome have high
rates of autism spectrum

© Retna/Photoshot

The Newborn's Sex and Gender Development

A child's sex chromosomes, XX or XY, typically begin a trajectory toward
adult maleness and femaleness but not always. Intersex refers to the
presence of male and female features in the same individual. Model Hanne
Gaby Odiele recently disclosed that she has androgen insensitivity
syndrome (AIS). People with AIS are genetic males (XY) who do not
respond to circulating male hormones in utero. They are born with
femaleappearing external genitalia and typically maintain female gender
identities. Because the female reproductive organs are suppressed during
fetal development, these individuals are likely to be infertile.

WhAT CAn neWBornS Do?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

417

disorder (van rijn, 2019). one set of genetically identical twins having
a very complicated genotype featured an individual who was
phenotypically male and an individual who was phenotypically female
(Maeda et al., 1991). These variations highlight the complicated nature
of the contributions of genetic sex to adult phenotypes. The appearance
of the newborn's external genitalia remains an important marker of sex
and gender. The appearance of the external genitalia is usually, but not
always, consistent with genetic sex. in cases of androgen insensitivity
syndrome (AiS), an individual with male genetic sex (Xy) cannot respond
to circulating male hormones, leading to female external appearance. A
very rare condition known as 5-alpha-reductase syndrome results in
ambiguous genitalia at birth with later masculinization at puberty.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAh) exposes the fetus to excess male
hormones, which has little effect on male sexual development but might
masculinize the external genitalia and behavior of genetic females
(Meyer-Bahlburg et al., 2004; Speiser et al., 2018).

The Newborn's Senses newborns have significant, although immature,
sensory capacities. Because babies can't talk, researchers have had to
be creative in assessing their sensory capacities (see ● Figure 11.8).
Measures of heart rate, facial expression, and head movements correlate
with distinctions among stimuli. researchers also take advantage of
habituation, the type of learning in which we reduce responding to
repeated stimuli (see Chapter 8). Because of habituation, babies gaze
longer at a new stimulus than at one they have seen previously. When
babies spend equal time looking at two stimuli, we can assume they
cannot tell the difference between them. newborns show considerable
sensitivity to smells and respond differently to pleasant smells such as
chocolate or honey than to unpleasant smells such as rotten eggs (Maurer
& Maurer, 1988).

8

Mark Philbrick/Brigham Young University

Increase in looking time (seconds)

10

6

4

2 Facial expression plus voice Voice alone 0

Facial expression alone 4-month-olds

5-month-olds

7-month-olds

Age

FIGURE 11.8 Studying Infants Requires Clever Experimental Methods. By
studying the amount of time infants look at a new stimulus after
habituation, such as the face of a person, Ross Flom and Lorraine
Bahrick were able to demonstrate that infants as young as 4 months could
correctly perceive emotional expression if they both saw and heard the
same expression simultaneously. The ability to perceive emotion using
voice alone appeared around the age of 5 months, and the ability to
perceive emotion from facial expression alone appeared around 7 months.
Source: Adapted from R. Flom, & L. E. Bahrick, (2007). "The Development
of Infant Discrimination of Affect in Multimodal and Unimodal
Stimulation: The Role of Intersensory Redundancy," Developmental
Psychology, 43(1), 238--252. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.43.1.238

418

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

They are also capable of recognizing their mother by smell, which has
obvious survival advantages. Babies even recognize their mother's
favorite brand of perfume (porter et al., 1991). infants are quite
sensitive to taste and can respond differentially to the major taste
qualities of sweet, sour, bitter, and salty. They apparently have a
sweet tooth and nurse longer when their breast-feeding mother has
consumed sweet-tasting foods (Mennella & Beauchamp, 1996). The fetus can
hear quite well beginning in gestational month seven, but improvement in
hearing continues after birth. We might tiptoe around a sleeping
newborn, but older children and adults have superior hearing for very
quiet sounds. The infant prefers sounds with higher frequencies (pitch)
(Fernald & Kuhl, 1987). This might account for the spontaneous use of a
higher voice, an aspect of "motherese," by most adults when speaking to
children. infant vision can be tested by measuring the amount of time
the child spends viewing a pattern rather than a uniform screen. Using
this technique, we can demonstrate that young infants do not see detail
at a distance as well as adults do. in addition, infants need more
contrast than adults to see well. As we discussed in Chapter 5, contrast
refers to differences in intensity between adjacent stimuli. The black
letters on this white page are an example of high contrast, whereas dark
gray letters on a black background would be an example of low contrast.
These features of infant vision probably explain babies' preference for
large, high-contrast, colorful objects. newborns demonstrate an innate
preference for looking at faces (otsuka, 2014) (see ● Figure 11.9). This
capacity sets the stage for further social behavior and language
learning. We know that infants who refuse to make eye contact often
develop social and language impairments later (Knickmeyer et al., 2005).
other primates show similar preferences for faces, which may be related
to the importance of social relationships in primate species, including
our own (Thierry, 1994). The emerging picture of the newborn infant is
one of immature yet formidable capacities. The remainder of this chapter
will explore the unfolding of these capabilities as the individual
matures.

FIGURE 11.9 Newborns Show a Preference for Facelike Stimuli. Newborns
looked at the stimulus on the left for about 16 seconds longer than the
less facelike stimulus on the right. Looking time has been used as one
measure of preference for infants. Source: Adapted from C. Turati et
al. (2002). "Newborns' Preference for Faces: What Is Crucial?"
Developmental Psychology, 38(6), 875--882. doi:
10.1037/0012-1649.38.6.875

summary 11.1 Milestones of Prenatal and Newborn Development stage

timing

Highlights

Zygote

Gestational weeks 1--2

●

Differentiation into germ layers

Embryo

Gestational weeks 3--8

●

Nervous system and organs form

●

Sex organs differentiate

WhAT CAn neWBornS Do?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

419

stage

timing

Fetus

Gestational week 9 through remainder of pregnancy

Newborn

Highlights

First 28 days of life

●

Growth and maturation of existing organs

●

REM sleep from seventh month of pregnancy

●

Good hearing from seventh month of pregnancy

●

Reflexive movement

●

Large amounts of sleep

●

Improving sensory capacities

●

Preference for faces

Credits: Top row---K. H. Kjeldsen/Science Source; Second row---Dr G.
Moscoso/Science Source; Third row---© Argosy Publishing, Inc.; Bottom
row---Tony Wear/Shutterstock.com.

What Physical Changes Occur in Infancy and Childhood?

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

physical development in infancy and childhood features rapid growth,
particularly during the first year of life, when children triple their
birth weight (see ● Figure 11.10).

4 months (fetal)

5 months (fetal)

Newborn

2 years

6 years

12 years

25 years

FIGURE 11.10 Physical Growth Is Rapid in Childhood. Infants grow
rapidly, tripling their birth weight during the first year alone. As
they grow, their proportions also change significantly. The head takes
up approximately one-quarter of a newborn's height, versus about
one-seventh to one-eighth of an adult's height. In contrast, the ratio
of the trunk to the overall height, about three-eighths, remains the
same over the life span. Source: Adapted from R. V. Kail & J. C.
Cavanaugh (2010). Human Development: A Life-Span View (5th ed., p. 93).
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Cengage Learning.

420

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Nervous System Development in the latter months of pregnancy and for the
first 18 months of life, the human brain shows rapid growth in gray
matter or collections of neural cell bodies, which we discussed in
Chapter 4. Between birth and the end of the infant's third month, the
brain grows 64% and goes from less than one quarter to about half the
size of an adult brain (holland et al., 2014). By the age of three
years, the brain is about 80% of its eventual adult size. The two- to
three-year-old child has about twice as many synapses as an adult
(huttenlocher, 2009). over time, cells and connections that are not
useful are systematically deleted. in other words, we produce more
neurons and synapses than we will eventually need and then keep only
those that are working well for us (see ● Figure 11.11). What does it
mean to have neurons and synapses that are working well? If a child's
rate of growth during the first year The nervous system develops
according to a "use it or lose it" principle, which of life continued, a
10-year-old would be about emphasizes the important role of experience
in wiring the brain. Children the size of a jumbo jet (McCall, 1979).
who are raised in a stimulating and enriched environment, with many
things to explore, are likely to have the best outcomes. Children living
in intellectually impoverished circumstances may retain too few
connections, which may lead to mild forms of intellectual disability
(see Chapter 10). Myelination, the growth in white matter that begins
around gestational month six, continues to develop throughout childhood
and adolescence (see ● Figure 11.12) (houston et al., 2013). Although
myelination of the chimpanzee brain is complete by sexual maturity,
myelination in the human brain extends into the early 20s (Miller et
al., 2012).

Motor Development As we mentioned earlier, newborn human infants are
relatively helpless compared to their chimpanzee and gorilla
counterparts. newborn humans' mobility is handicapped by their 100 90

Percent of the maximum

80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

0

2

6 4 Months

8

10

1 2

4

6

8

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Prefrontal cortex Visual cortex

Years

FIGURE 11.11 Synaptic Connections Are Pruned in Response to Experience.
During development, we produce more synapses than necessary. Synapses
that are not useful are deleted in a process known as synaptic pruning.
Pruning takes place at different rates in different systems, as
illustrated by this comparison of pruning in the visual and prefrontal
cortices. This process emphasizes the importance of experiencing
enriched environments during development. Source: P. R. Huttenlocher
(1994). "Synaptogenesis, Synapse Elimination, and Neural Plasticity in
Human Cerebral Cortex." In C. A. Nelson (Ed.), Threats to Optimal
Development: Integrating Biological, Psychological, and Social Risk
Factors (Vol. 27, pp. 35--54). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

WhAT phySiCAl ChAngeS oCCUr in inFAnCy AnD ChilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

421

Dr. Lana Karasik

ROBIN MOORE/National Geographic Image Collection

Courtesy of Paul Thompson/UCLA Lab of Neuro Imaging

proportions. one quarter of their length is made up by newborns' heads.
in contrast, adults' heads make up approximately one-seventh to
one-eighth of their height. Motor development, or change in our ability
to move and perform physical skills, is largely driven by our human
genetic blueprint. identical twins typically reach motor milestones such
as walking with more similar timing than that of fraternal twins or
nontwin siblings (Fox et al., 1996). Because identical twins share more
genes in common compared with fraternal twins, reaching milestones at
the same time indicates an important role for genetics in early motor
development. At the same time, children's motor development takes place
within a complex context of opportunities to move and cultural
child-rearing practices (Adolph & hoch, 2019). Motor development in
childhood proceeds simultaneously in two directions. First, we see
development in the head-to-toe direction. Controlling the muscles of the
neck and shoulders allows 2-month-old infants to raise their head to
look around. This achievement is followed by development of the muscles
of the torso around 3 months of age, which are necessary for rolling and
sitting. Between 6 and 9 months, babies begin to crawl, although some
happily skip this stage. Finally, around the first birthday, the muscles
of the legs are developed sufficiently to supFIGURE 11.12 port the
weight of a child when standing or walking. Well into middle childhood,
children continue to improve their movement and coordination,
demonstrated by the abilities to skip rope, hop on one foot, Myelination
Increases During and combine movements, such as throwing a ball while
running (see ● Figure 11.13). Childhood. Imaging technologies The second
direction of motor development begins at the midline, an imaginary line
dividhave captured the progress of ing the human body in equal halves,
and proceeds outward. infants can bat at toys suspended myelination
(white matter growth) above their cribs (3 months) before they are able
to grasp objects (5 months). in other words, in childhood. Red and
yellow areas accurately directing the arms precedes the ability to
direct the hands and fingers. incidentally, show the largest changes.
Myelinated infants learn to grasp objects before they learn to release
them, a fact parents may wish to consystems are faster and more
efficient sider before wearing long hair or dangling earrings. Well into
elementary school, children are than unmyelinated systems. continuing to
master control over the fine muscle movements of the hands and fingers
required for writing. perhaps you recall the rather large-lined paper
you used in first grade and the challenges of coloring "within the
lines." Parents in most cultures attempt to teach toileting Although
early motor milestones are driven largely by biology, they practices
when children are about 2 years old. Not respond to experience. it is
possible to slow down motor milestones by coincidentally, the motor
systems required to achieve restricting movement. Some cultures, out of
safety concerns, restrict the sphincter control are generally myelinated
somewhere movement opportunities of young children, which slightly
delays motor around 21 months of age (Largo, Molinari, von milestones
such as walking alone (Kaplan & Dove, 1987; Karasik et al., 2018). in
other cases, motor milestones may be reached slightly earlier
Siebenthal, & Wolfensberger, 1996).

Kenyan parents often encourage early walking in their children. Compared
to American children, whose average age of walking unassisted is about 1
year, Kenyan children observed by Super (1976) walked between the ages
of 7 and 11 months. In contrast, infants in Tajikistan spend up to 20
hours bound in a special cradle called a gahvora (Karasik et al., 2018).
The passing of these beautifully crafted cradles from generation to
generation is marked by a huge celebration. While bound, the infant
remains at the center of the family, surrounded by caregivers, siblings,
and peers. Ongoing research is exploring the impact of restraint on
infant motor and social skills.

422

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Walking alone

Motor milestone

Standing alone

Walking with assistance

Hands-&-knees crawling

Standing with assistance

Sitting without support

3

6

9

12 Age in months

15

18

21

FIGURE 11.13 Motor Milestones. These motor milestones emerge at
predictable times over the course of childhood but can range
significantly from child to child. This chart provides the typical
windows of time at which children reach major motor milestones. Credits
Bottom to top: Samuel Borges Photography/Shutterstock.com, JGI/Jamie
Grill/Tetra images/Getty Images, lostinbids/E+/Getty Images,
aldomurillo/iStock/ Getty Images, Golbay/Shutterstock.com,
PIYAPHOTOGRAPHY/Shutterstock.com

by providing specific practice in sitting, standing, and walking (Super,
1976; Adolph & hoch, 2019). These changes in the developmental timeline
are usually slight, because myelination of motor nerves usually just
precedes the achievement of a new skill. once the relevant parts of the
nervous system are sufficiently mature, new skills develop rapidly with
little practice.

Gender Development in Childhood like most other types of human behavior,
gender identity, or the sense of one's own place on a scale from
maleness to femaleness, develops in response to both biological and
environmental factors. Children begin to prefer sex-typed toys between
the ages of 12 and 18 months, although at this age, they are not yet
able to match sex-typed toys (vehicles or dolls) with male or female
faces and voices. This suggests that they have not yet been socialized
to think of particular toys as "male" or "female" (Serbin et al., 2001).
The fact that young vervet monkeys make similar sex-typed toy choices as
young humans suggests that socialization has relatively little to do
with these early differences in behavior (Alexander & hines, 2002).
Cases of girls WhAT phySiCAl ChAngeS oCCUr in inFAnCy AnD ChilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

423

MCT/Tribune News Service/Getty Images

MCT/Tribune News Service/Getty Images

Very young vervet monkeys show the same toy preferences as young human
children, suggesting that biology plays a role in the choice of
sex-typical toys.

with CAh, who experience unusually high levels of prenatal exposure to
male hormones, also provide insight into toy choice. in spite of the
fact that girls with CAh receive more positive reinforcement from their
parents for playing with "girl" toys than typically developing girls do,
they nonetheless show much greater interest in masculine toys (see ●
Figure 11.14) (pasterski et al., 2005). This is not to say that parental
and societal socialization has no impact

(a) 

1.2

Play with Girls' Toys

Percentage of time

1.0

Boys with CAH 0.4

Healthy boys

0.0

Source: M. Hines (2010). "Sex-Related Variation in Human Behavior and
the Brain," Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14(10), 448--456. doi:
10.1016/j.tics.2010.07.005

(b) 

1.2

Play with Boys' Toys

1.0 Percentage of time

Prenatal Hormones and Play Behavior. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(CAH) results in higher prenatal exposure to male hormones in both
females and males. Girls with CAH show less interest in girls' toys and
more interest in boys' toys than is shown by healthy females. Boys with
CAH show the same interest in both types of toys as do healthy boys.

Chapter 11

Healthy girls

0.6

0.2

FIGURE 11.14

424

Girls with CAH

0.8

0.8 0.6

Girls with CAH Healthy girls Boys with CAH

0.4

Healthy boys

0.2 0.0

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Diverse Voices in Psychology What Are the Implications of Gender
Assignment? The concept of gender has been transformed from a binary,
categorical system (male or female) to a bimodal continuum (see Chapter
2). This transition is evident in the legal codes of many nations, where
official government documents such as passports now provide options
other than male or female, and in the social media giant Facebook's 58
choices for personal identifiers, plus unique identifiers that users
choose for themselves. Health care providers find no easy solutions
within this environment when faced with cases of individuals with
ambiguous physical features resulting from chromosome and hormonal
influences. Gender assignment using the more traditional binary choices,
in spite of passports and Facebook, remains a common goal within the
medical community. One of the most contentious areas of gender
assignment involves individuals born with ovotesticular syndrome
(Meyer-Bahlburg et al., 2016). These

that include the goals of the patient would be individuals used to be
referred to as "true very helpful (Lee et al., 2020). ■ hermaphrodites,"
as they possess a gonad that contains both testicular tubular structures
and ovarian follicles. Typically, about half of the newborns in this
category are assigned to the female gender and the other half to the
male gender, but clinicians do not necessarily agree on the criteria for
making this judgment. Some are more influenced by the surgical
challenges presented by an individual case while others consider
fertility. As a result, many individuals with ovotesticular syndrome
later develop gender dysphoria, a sense of mismatch between their
assigned gender and their identities, and/or patientinitiated gender
change. Perhaps the fluidity of the concept of gender will make gender
assignment Advocates for individuals with intersex are decisions on the
part of the medical encouraging medical professionals to postpone
community simply unnecessary. In the surgical and hormonal treatments
until a child is meantime, further research supporting old enough to
participate in decisions about their evidence-based decisions (see
Chapter 15) sex and gender.

It's time to stop cosmetic genital surgery

on intersex infants

STOP

on gender identity, but rather to remind us that biology and experience
interact to produce an outcome. By the age of 3 years, children begin
using gender labels consistently for themselves, although we don't know
for certain whether this represents an awareness of their assigned
gender or an identification with their assigned gender (Meyer-Bahlburg
et al., 2016). A small number of children with unambiguous biological
sex develop incongruent gender identity. Complex interactions among
genetic, hormonal, cognitive, and psychosocial factors contribute to the
development of a transgender identity. young transgender children do not
appear to be "confused," but rather show a strong preference for their
expressed gender rather than their natal (at birth) sex (olson et al.,
2015).

How Does Cognition Change During Infancy and Childhood? interacting with
brain development and the child's ability to move and explore the
environment are changes in the way children process information and
solve problems. even when children are exposed to the same information
as adults, their thinking often leads them to different conclusions.
When asked why clouds move across the sky, a 4-year-old hoW DoeS
CogniTion ChAnge DUring inFAnCy AnD ChilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

425

ERIC PIERMONT/AFP/Getty Images

might suggest that the clouds are pulled by airplanes, but an adult is
unlikely to come to this conclusion. Both child and adult have observed
clouds and airplanes moving across the sky, but viewing these
occurrences as related is something that only a small child would do. To
understand these differences, we need to examine how cognition changes
as a function of age and experience. one of the classic theories about
the development of cognition was proposed by Swiss psychologist Jean
piaget (1896--1980). While working with Théodore Simon, who along with
Alfred Binet developed some of the first intelligence tests (see Chapter
10), piaget became more interested in the errors made by the children
than in their correct responses. he believed that these errors were
representative of growth in the child's ability to reason. like many
early theorists in psychology, including Freud, piaget has been
criticized by more contemporary thinkers. After reviewing piaget's
theories, we will consider the points made by his critics along with
more recent approaches to cognitive development.

Jean Piaget's Theory of Cognitive Development According to piaget's
theory, cognitive abilities develop through regular stages, making
piaget's work a classic example of the discontinuity approach discussed
earlier in this chapter. Cognition matures as the child increasingly
uses concepts and organizing schemas to think. We discussed concepts and
schemas in Chapters 9 and 10. Two types of adjustments can be made to a
schema, depending on the nature of discrepancies between the new
information and the existing category. Assume that a child has a rather
well-developed schema for birds, which includes features such as "has
wings," "has feathers," and "can fly." if the child then learns about a
new species of bird, such as a hawk, the child can assimilate the new
information into the existing bird schema: hawks have wings, feathers,
and the ability to fly. in assimilation, no changes to the existing
schema are required to add the new instance. however, let's now assume
that the child meets a kiwi, a small, flightless bird from new Zealand.
The kiwi doesn't fit neatly into the existing schema, which assumes that
all birds can fly. The schema must be adapted to fit the new
information, a

A preschool child might believe that airplanes pull clouds across the
sky, but an adult is unlikely to come to the same conclusion, even
though they are watching the same events.

Bill Anderson/Science Source

Jean Piaget (1896--1980).

426

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

TABLE 11.3 stage

approximate age

Highlights

Sensorimotor stage

Birth to age 2

●

Here and now rather than past and future

●

Exploration through moving and sensing

●

Object permanence

●

Language acquisition

●

Egocentrism

●

Illogical reasoning

●

Logical reasoning

●

Mastery of conservation problems

●

Learning by doing

●

Abstract reasoning

●

Idealism

●

Improved problem solving

Preoperational stage

Concrete operational stage

Formal operational stage

2--6 years

6--12 years

12 years and older

process piaget called accommodation. Through accommodation, the child
now understands that although most birds can fly, some exceptions occur.
in addition to his interest in the development and refinement of
schemas, piaget made many other observations about cognition at
different ages. We will now explore the particular characteristics found
in each of piaget's four stages (see ● Table 11.3).

The Sensorimotor Stage piaget's first stage, the sensorimotor stage,
begins at birth

and lasts until the child's second birthday. The name of this stage
reflects the infant's focus on the here and now rather than the past and
the future. Sensations immediately evoke motor responses. As soon as
they can crawl, infants work their way (usually quite rapidly) through
the environment, exploring new objects by interacting with them
physically, particularly by putting them in their mouths. infants do not
seem particularly deterred by features such as taste and are very likely
to sample the drain cleaner under the sink unless parents take
appropriate precautions to babyproof their home. one of the major
milestones that occur during the sensorimotor stage is the achievement
of object permanence. infants under the age of 8 months or so do not
seem to be able to form clear memories or mental representations for
objects once they are removed from the immediate present. if piaget
covered his gold pocket watch with his beret while an infant watched,
the infant would not show signs of searching for the now missing watch.
Around the age of 8 months or so, infants become more persistent. if he
hid the pocket watch, 8-montholds would look for it. object permanence
coincides with achieving sufficient growth in the prefrontal cortex in
both human and non-human primate infants (Diamond & goldmanrakic, 1989).
During the sensorimotor period, the child's language abilities are
developing rapidly. By the age of 18 months, children usually have a
working vocabulary of 10 to 50 words, and by the age of 2 years, they
are beginning to combine words into short but meaningful sentences, such
as "Want cookie" or "go bye-bye." These new ways of thinking
symbolically lead the child into the subsequent preoperational stage.

The Preoperational Stage piaget's preoperational stage lasts from
approximately age

2 to age 6. The stage gets its name from the notion that children are
still incapable of engaging in internal mental operations or
manipulations, such as following the transformation of objects from one
form to another.

Eric Isselee/Shutterstock.com

Jean Piaget's Theory of Cognitive Development

If children can learn about robins without making changes to their
schema of "bird," assimilation will occur. In contrast, learning about
flightless kiwis might require changes in the bird schema, and
accommodation will occur. assimilation The incorporation of new learning
into an existing schema without the need to revise the schema.

accommodation The incorporation of new learning into an existing schema
that requires revision of the schema. sensorimotor stage Jean Piaget's
stage of development beginning at birth and ending at the age of 2 years
and characterized by active exploration of the environment.

object permanence The ability to form mental representations of objects
that are no longer present. preoperational stage Jean Piaget's stage of
development beginning at the age of 2 years and ending at the age of 6
years and characterized by use of symbols, egocentrism, and limits on
the ability to reason logically.

hoW DoeS CogniTion ChAnge DUring inFAnCy AnD ChilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

427

Lew Merrim/Science Source

piaget used a variety of creative tasks to demonstrate the
characteristics of the reasoning of the preoperational child.
Conservation tasks require the child to recognize that changing the form
or appearance of an object does not change its quantity. one of the
observations that led piaget to consider cognitive development as
occurring in stages is the rather abrupt way in which conservation tasks
are often solved. Children who could not solve the problem a few weeks
earlier suddenly look at the adult experimenter with pity, as if to say,
"This may be the world's stupidest grown-up." in addition to difficulty
with transitions, preoperational children have limited abilities to
understand points of view other than their own, a characteristic
described by piaget as egocentrism. one kindergarten teacher asked his
class where the sun went at night and received an enthusiastic response
of "yuba City" (which is located in northern California) from one of the
students. As it turned out, the young student had moved recently from
yuba City to his current home in San luis obispo. Because these were the
only two places on earth the child knew, if he was in one place and the
sun wasn't there, there was only one other logical place for the sun to
be. you guessed it---yuba City. preoperational thinking is also limited
by beliefs that appearances are real. While older children understand
that movies feature real people dressed up and acting like superheroes,
the younger child might believe that not only are superheroes real, but
also that they can really fly.

Preoperational children are unlikely to recognize that pouring liquid
from one glass to another of a different size and shape does not change
the amount of liquid. They usually believe that the glass that is
"higher" holds more. The abruptness with which children master
conservation tasks led Jean Piaget to suggest that cognitive development
proceeds in stages, but other psychologists believe changes occur more
gradually.

The Concrete Operational Stage piaget referred to the stage between the
ages of

6 and 12 as the concrete operational stage. rather suddenly, problems of
conservation are easily solved, and thinking becomes more logical. The
only remaining limitation is an inability to handle abstract concepts,
which will not be resolved until the next and final stage. piaget used
the term concrete operations for this stage because he observed that
children reasoned best when allowed to engage in hands-on learning. The
young child's inability to distinguish fantasy from reality This
observation of piaget's has had an enormous impact has led to a lively
debate about managing entertainment on the way early childhood education
is conducted in many materials for children. Is it appropriate to let
young children nations. Math instruction now features colorful boxes of
believe that fairy tales are real? manipulatives, which allow children
to count and sort real things. Children's museums, petting zoos,
interactive websites, and other opportunities for experiential learning
have become commonplace.

conservation The ability to understand that changing the form or
appearance of an object does not change its quantity. egocentrism
Limitations on the ability to understand the point of view of other
people.

concrete operational stage Jean Piaget's stage of development beginning
at the age of 6 years and ending at the age of 12 years and
characterized by logical but not abstract reasoning.

formal operational stage Jean Piaget's stage of development beginning at
age 12 and extending through adulthood and characterized by mature
reasoning capabilities.

428

Chapter 11

The Formal Operational Stage For piaget, cognitive development matures
in the formal operational stage, which begins around the age of 12. The
final piece to be added to the child's cognitive skill set is the
ability to handle abstract concepts. Abstract concepts usually involve
"what if " types of questions and form the heart of scientific inquiry.
if you were to ask a group of sixth graders what would happen if
everyone on earth became blind tomorrow, they would likely struggle to
come up with a reasonable answer. A group of high school students,
however, would readily reply that people who were already blind would
become instant leaders because they would have existing skills for
coping with blindness. Accompanying the ability to think abstractly is a
big improvement in problem solving. younger children tend to approach
problems by trying things out and seeing what happens, a rather
inefficient trial-and-error approach. Teens are more likely to think
through several alternatives more strategically. Abstract thinking
ability also appears to stimulate a burst of idealism. What if we could
solve world hunger? These are the types of questions teens begin to ask,
and they are not always content with the more practical and less
idealistic responses of older adults. Criticisms of Jean Piaget's Theory
piaget's classic theory set the standard for his time, but more
contemporary developmental psychologists argue that some aspects of his
view of cognitive development need updating and revising. piaget's
methods do not always meet the standards we described in Chapter 2. one
major part of his theories was based entirely on observations of his own
three children.

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Lawrence Migdale/Science Source

piaget's strong interest in biology led him to look at human development
from a species perspective, which in turn reduced his interest in
individual differences. other psychologists point out that individual
cognitive development can be quite variable. Some adults fail to achieve
the ability to reason abstractly or do so only on some problems and not
on others. This variability makes cognitive development look more
gradual and continuous than stagelike, as suggested by piaget. piaget
did not specify mechanisms responsible for moving from one stage to the
next. Today, using brain imaging methods, we can explain some of these
changes, such as the correlation between the achievement of object
permanence and frontal lobe development. other transitions, such as the
relatively sudden mastery of conservation problems, are not so easily
explained. Many psychologists believe that piaget underestimated the
capabilities of young children. At the same time, he might have
overestimated the cognitive abilities of adolescents. As we discussed in
Chapter 4, the human brain is not fully mature until a person's early
20s, so we would not expect fully adult cognition in an adolescent.
Finally, piaget has been criticized for viewing developing children in
relative isolation from their family, community, and culture. These
criticisms have formed the basis for extensions to piaget's approach,
described in the next section.

One of Jean Piaget's legacies to early childhood education is his
emphasis on hands-on learning. Colorful objects or manipulatives have
replaced endless worksheets used to teach math concepts such as sorting
to older generations of students.

Alternative Approaches to Cognitive Development in the next sections, we
will explore alternatives to piaget's view of cognitive development.

Lev Vygotsky Soviet psychologist lev vygotsky (1896--1934) proposed an
early alternative to piaget's theories. piaget and vygotsky illustrate
the theme of universal versus ecological development introduced at the
beginning of the chapter. Unlike piaget, whose interest viewed human
development as universal across cultures, vygotsky (1934/1962) stressed
the role of culture and cultural differences in the development of the
child. For vygotsky, cultures teach children not only what to think but
also how to think. piaget's developing individual learns to understand
the world by actively exploring it, like a miniature scientist, whereas
vygotsky's individual gains knowledge of the world by interacting
socially and collaboratively with parents, teachers, and other members
of the community (see ● Figure 11.15). language was a particularly
important aspect of cognitive development for vygotsky. Children first
use language to initiate social contact and opportunities to learn.
later, self-directed talk, such as "i need to finish my game before
dinner," aids in problem solving and, in the older child, forms inner
speech.

A burst of idealism, leading to a desire to make the world a better
place, often accompanies the onset of formal operational thinking in
adolescence. Swedish teen Greta Thunberg gained international
recognition for her advocacy for mitigating climate change.

information processing models of cognitive development provide important
extensions to piaget's theory (Kail & Bisanz, 1991). These models
describe specific changes in the child's ability to reason, such as the
development of working memory.

Jemal Countess/UPI/Alamy Stock Photo

Information Processing

hoW DoeS CogniTion ChAnge DUring inFAnCy AnD ChilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

429

What I cannot do even with help

What I can do myself

FIGURE 11.15

Zone of proximal development

iofoto/Shutterstock.com

Zone of Proximal Development. Unlike Jean Piaget, Lev Vygotsky viewed
development as taking place within the social and cultural environments.
His zone of proximal development included tasks that the child could
learn to do with the assistance of parents, teachers, or other adults or
peers. Vygotsky's advice is to provide children with activities that are
within reach but neither too easy nor too hard.

The overall rate of processing information, analogous to your computer's
CpU speed, increases during childhood (Cerella & hale, 1994) and
provides a foundation for many observed changes in reasoning ability
(Kail et al., 2016). in tasks that require judgment, such as deciding
which of two numbers is larger, adults are three times faster than 4-
and 5-year-olds and twice as fast as 8- and 9-year-olds (Kail & Bisanz,
1992). Surprisingly, by the time children enter elementary school, their
performance on tasks requiring focused attention and disregard of
distracters reaches adult levels (McKay et al., 1994). in contrast, the
ability to sustain attention over time remains limited until the age of
11 years. Around this age, attention span begins to lengthen
significantly each year until adulthood. Children's memory abilities
change dramatically following their second year of life (Bauer &
lukowski, 2010; Bauer et al., 2011). These changes are probably due to
maturation of brain structures related to memory. The amygdala and most
of the hippocampus are relatively mature at a very early age, around 6
months, but changes in the frontal lobe and hippocampus during the third
year of life allow children to form more long-term memories,
particularly for sequences of events. improved memory and a growing
sense of self combine to produce some of the first autobiographical
memories between the ages of 3 and 5 years (Wang, 2008).

Naïve Theories one of the ways in which piaget possibly underestimated
children was his suggestion that children's abilities to understand
objects in their world develop slowly over time. Contemporary
developmental psychologists believe that this assertion was wrong.
instead, very young children seem to understand a great deal about
objects and how they work, even before they have had much experience
interacting with them (Baillargeon et al., 2011). For example, infants
as young as 2-½ months old looked longer at an impossible situation (a
toy mouse that should have been seen moving between two blocks did not
appear). early reasoning extends from objects to the social environment.
As shown in ● Figure 11.16, infants can distinguish between the
different types of social power held by leaders and bullies (Margoni et
al., 2018). theory of mind (TOM) The understanding that others have
thoughts that are different from one's own.

430

Chapter 11

Theory of Mind piaget used the concept of egocentrism to describe the
young child's relative lack of awareness of the viewpoints of others. An
elaboration of this concept, theory of mind (TOM), has emerged as an
important tool in tracking typical and abnormal

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Intervention Event a.

b.  
c.  
d.  

FIGURE 11.16 Children Possess Naïve Theories. Many contemporary
psychologists believe that Jean Piaget underestimated the reasoning
abilities of young children. Seventeen-month-old infants looked longer
at a situation in which a "leader" (the bear in the middle) was expected
to right a wrong (the bear on the right grabbed both toys) but failed to
do so. The leader was established earlier in the experiment by having
the other two bears follow instructions to face "front" or "back."
Source: Adapted from M. Stavans & R. Baillargeon (2019). "Infants Expect
Leaders to Right Wrongs," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 116(33), 16292--16301. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1820091116

development. ToM occurs when people understand that others have beliefs,
desires, and intentions that are different from their own (premack &
Woodruff, 1978). While premack argued that ToM in humans was an
extension of similar abilities in apes, others believed this was a
uniquely human ability. recent research making use of eye-tracking
technology, however, has provided stronger evidence that premack's
observations about apes were correct (Krupenye et al., 2016). The
classic procedure for demonstrating ToM is the false belief task, often
called the "Sally--Anne" task (Wimmer & perner, 1983). imagine that one
doll, Sally, places her ball in a basket and then leaves the room.
Another doll, Anne, enters the room, moves the ball from the basket to a
box, and then leaves. if Sally comes back, where will she look for her
ball? Children who have developed a ToM unThis is Sally. This is Anne.
derstand that their personal knowledge of where the ball is located is
different from the knowledge of Sally, who was absent when the ball was
moved. They will correctly decide that Sally will look in the basket
(see ● Figure 11.17). Sally puts her ball in the basket. Developmental
psychologists generally agree that ToM emerges in children around the
age of 3 to 4 years, somewhat earlier than the end of piaget's
preoperational period. We can identify behaviors in younger children
Sally goes away. that seem to act as building blocks leading to the
achievement of ToM. Joint attention, which includes behaviors such as
following another person's gaze with one's own and using pointing to
direct Anne moves the ball to her box. another person's attention to
something in the environment, emerges in the first year of life (Barresi
& Moore, 1996). The ability of young children to distinguish between
living and nonliving objects is another important step in the
development of ToM. Finally, young children Where will Sally look for
her ball? appear to make distinctions between

FIGURE 11.17 Testing Theory of Mind (TOM). Children who have achieved
TOM recognize that their personal knowledge of the whereabouts of
Sally's ball is different from Sally's knowledge, and they will predict
correctly that she will look in the basket.

hoW DoeS CogniTion ChAnge DUring inFAnCy AnD ChilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

431

intentional and unintentional behaviors, because 3-year-olds will
imitate the former but not the latter (Williamson et al., 2010). ToM
appears critical to further social development, the topic of our next
section. A failure to develop a typical ToM has been linked to the
development of autism spectrum disorder, a condition characterized by
extreme social difficulties that we discuss in more detail in Chapter 14
(Baron-Cohen, 2000; rosenthal et al., 2019).

How Do Social and Emotional Behaviors Change During Infancy and
Childhood? The physical and cognitive development we have witnessed so
far does not occur in a vacuum. Children mature within complex
environments affected by their own intrinsic tendencies, the responses
to those tendencies on the part of others, and the ways in which they
are nurtured.

Temperament Children's temperaments reflect their prevailing patterns of
mood, activity, and emotional responsiveness. Differences along these
initial dimensions predict adult personality. Mary rothbart (2007)
divided temperament into three categories: Surgency or extroversion
(happy, active, vocal, and social), negative affect or mood (angry,
fearful, shy, and frustrated), and effortful control (the ability to pay
attention and inhibit behavior). The likelihood that individual
differences in temperament have their roots in genetics is supported by
the identification of similar differences among infant rhesus monkeys
(Wood et al., 2020). While temperament may predispose a child to
interact with the environment in certain ways and affect the behavior
elicited from caregivers and others, the environment in which children
find themselves also has an impact. For example, fearful children with
gentle parents develop a stronger internal sense of right and wrong than
do fearful children with punitive parents (rothbart, 2007). Similar
interactions between temperament and parenting have also been reported
in rhesus monkeys, emphasizing the possible biological and evolutionary
contributions to these outcomes (Suomi, 2006). rhesus infants with a
particular genotype were more aggressive, but only if they were raised
by their mothers rather than by peers (see ● Figure 11.18).

FIGURE 11.18 Parenting and Temperament Interact. In rhesus monkeys,
variations in a gene called monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) are related to
aggressive behavior. Monkeys with the low-activity variant are typically
more aggressive and attain higher rankings within the monkeys' dominance
hierarchy than do monkeys with the high-activity variant of the gene.
This relationship is seen when the monkeys are raised normally with
their mothers. However, when monkeys are raised in peer groups without
contact with their mothers, the relationship is reversed: The monkeys
with the high-activity version are more aggressive. This research
supports the goodness-of-fit interactions between child temperament and
parenting style proposed by Alexander Thomas and Stella Chess (1977) and
by Mary Rothbart (2007).

Mean seconds engaged in aggression

400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50

Source: Adapted from T. K. Newman, et al. (2005). "Monoamine Oxidase: A
Gene Promoter Variation and Rearing Experience Influences Aggressive
Behavior in Rhesus Monkeys," Biological Psychiatry, 57(2), 167--172.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.10.012.

432

Chapter 11

0

Low activity allele High activity allele Mother reared

Peer reared

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Temperament interacts not only with the socialization provided by
parents but also with the larger-scale socialization provided by
culture. in the United States, but not in China, children with higher
effortful control showed lower levels of negative affect, such as anger.
in China, but not in the United States, higher effortful control was
correlated with less surgency or extroversion (Ahadi et al., 1993).

Attachment Because of the physical dependency of the human infant on the
adult caregiver, maintaining closeness is a high priority. infants
engage in a number of behaviors, such as smiling, cooing, and crying,
that are effective in ensuring adult attention.

CONNECTING TO RESEARCH The Evolution of Attachment Behavior THERE IS A
BIG DIFFERENCE between a newly hatched goose following its mother
because of imprinting and the two-way interactions that promote
attachment between human mothers and their newborns, including body
contact, mutual gaze, and exaggerated facial expressions. Are these more
sophisticated interactions exclusively human? Research evidence suggests
that the answer to this question is "no." Rhesus monkeys also show
complex mutual behaviors between mothers and their newborns (Ferrari et
al., 2009). The Question: Do rhesus monkeys have behaviors that are the
equivalent of human mother--infant behaviors that promote bonding?

METHODS Fourteen mother--infant rhesus monkey pairs were observed while
they were living among social groups housed in indoor--outdoor
enclosures. Six additional pairs were observed in a more naturalistic
setting. For the first 2 months of the infants' lives, the researchers
filmed and recorded the frequencies of mutual gaze (infants and mothers
making eye contact) and lip smacking (an important rhesus social
behavior).

ETHICS All ethical principles regarding animal research outlined in
Chapter 1 would apply

here. The observational method used in this study poses little risk of
violating these principles.

RESULTS The rhesus infant--mother pairs engaged in frequent mutual gaze
and lip-smacking behaviors. The infants spent more time gazing at their
mothers than at other individuals, and this time increased with the age
of the infant. Lip-smacking behavior was also a frequently observed
method for mothers and infants to interact with each other. This
behavior is never observed among adults, so it is exclusive to
interactions with infants. Mutual gaze and lip smacking both appear to
be sensitive to the age of the infant. By the time the infant is in its
second month of

life, it is spending considerable time outside the mother's vicinity,
much as a human child might do when it attends daycare or preschool. As
the infant physically separates more frequently from the mother, the
frequency of the mutual gaze and lip-smacking behaviors also decreases.
The behaviors observed in the enclosed area were confirmed by
observations in the more naturalistic setting.

CONCLUSIONS Rhesus monkeys show some of the same types of mother--infant
interactions, believed to enhance bonding, that have been observed in
humans. This finding suggests that behaviors that set the stage for
social interactions in humans are not unique to our species but rather
have their roots in the evolutionary past. ■

Rhesus monkey mothers and infants show many of the same types of
behavior that enhance bonding in human mothers and infants, including
mutual gaze. Source: Reprinted from P. F. Ferrari et al. (2009).
"Reciprocal Face-to-Face Communication Between Rhesus Macaque Mothers
and Their Newborn Infants," Current Biology, 19(20), 1768--1772. doi:
10.1016/j.cub.2009.08.055. Copyright © 2009, with permission from
Elsevier.

hoW Do SoCiAl AnD eMoTionAl BehAviorS ChAnge DUring inFAnCy AnD
ChilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

433

UpperCut Images/Alamy Stock Photo

Nina Leen/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images

Harry Harlow (1905--1981) studied infant attachment by removing baby
rhesus monkeys from their mothers at birth and providing them with a
wire mother, such as the one shown here, and a similar mother covered
with carpet. Regardless of which "mother" provided food, the infant
monkeys spent more time cuddling with the cloth mother than the wire
one. Harlow concluded that "contact comfort" provided by the mother was
more important to attachment than the food she provided.

Secure attachment results from responsive parenting that teaches
children that the parent is there for them. Unresponsive parenting
teaches children that their needs may or may not be met, so their best
strategy is to make regular, frequent, and persistent demands for the
parent's attention.

434

Chapter 11

Attachment between child and parent is not unique to humans. To identify
behaviors leading to attachment between infants and their mothers, harry
harlow (1905--1981) investigated attachment in rhesus monkeys (1958).
The Freudian theories still popular in harlow's day suggested that the
pleasure obtained through feeding formed the basis of infants' bond with
their mothers. Behavioral approaches suggested that the infant was
positively reinforced with food for staying near the mother. harlow was
not convinced by either of these arguments and set out to contrast the
mother's ability to provide food with her ability to provide comfort,
security, and safety. in research heavily criticized on ethical grounds,
harlow removed newborn rhesus monkeys from their biological mothers. The
infants were presented with two surrogate mothers, one made of wire and
the other of cloth. either surrogate could be rigged with a milk bottle,
allowing harlow to investigate all combinations of comfort and feeding.
regardless of which "mother" provided food, infant monkeys spent most of
their time clinging to the cloth mother and ran to her immediately when
threatened by a novel toy. The wire mothers were visited only if they
provided food, and then for only as long as the infant was feeding.
Based on his observations, harlow concluded that the Freudian and
behavioral emphasis on feeding was wrong. instead, the mother's ability
to provide contact comfort was critical in forming a strong attachment
on the part of her infant. harlow's observations of the importance of
contact comfort are consistent with more contemporary research
demonstrating the importance of touch to infant development. Touch is
one of the first senses to develop in the fetus. Touch enhances immune,
endocrine, and nervous system development, as well as reducing stress
and promoting infant social behavior toward caregivers (Simpson et al.,
2019). A key factor in predicting the timing of attachment appears to be
mobility. young birds that are mobile upon hatching need to form
immediate attachments to a protective adult. human infants, who are not
particularly mobile until the second half of their first year of life,
have more time to bond with a caregiver. About the same time infants
begin to crawl, usually between 6 and 8 months, they also begin to show
evidence of having bonded with particular people in the form of
separation anxiety (Bowlby, 1969/1982, 1973/1999a, 1973/1999b). Before
this stage, infants tolerate being handed around to admiring relatives
and babysitters without much protest. once children demonstrate stranger
anxiety, however, they respond to unfamiliar people with crying and
distress. Although stranger anxiety might be a nuisance for parents
hiring a new sitter or an insult to visiting relatives, it is an
important step forward in infants' social development. The children
recognize who does and, more importantly, who does not belong in their
social world. Several patterns of attachment between infant and
caregiver were demonstrated in classic research by Mary Ainsworth and
her colleagues (1978). young children in a laboratory playroom were
observed through a two-way mirror as their mothers or a friendly
stranger left or entered the room. Based on the children's reactions to
these separations and reunions, their attachment to their mothers was
classified as either secure or insecure. Children who demonstrated
secure attachment played happily and interacted positively with the
stranger as long as their mothers were present. however, when their
mother left, the children responded by searching for her, crying, and
showing other signs of distress. efforts by a stranger to comfort the
children were rejected. When their mother returned, she was greeted
warmly, and the children returned to their play. The remaining children
demonstrated different patterns of insecure attachment. Two of these,
avoidant and anxious--ambivalent attachment, were identified by
Ainsworth, and a fourth, disorganized attachment, was identified by
other researchers (Main & Solomon, 1986). Children with avoidant
attachment did not react to their mother's leaving with distress

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

attachment Emotional bond linking an infant to a parent or caregiver.

secure attachment A pattern of infant-- caregiver bonding in which
children explore confidently and return to the parent or caregiver for
reassurance.

insecure attachment A pattern of infant--caregiver bonding that can take
several forms but is generally characterized as less desirable for the
child's outcomes than secure attachment.

Footage from www.davidsonfilms.com

and allowed themselves to be comforted by the stranger. When the mother
returned, the child with an avoidant attachment did not immediately
approach her. Children who showed anxious--ambivalent attachment never
seemed comfortable, even when their mother was present. her leaving was
greeted with great distress, and the child was alternately clingy and
rejecting when she returned. Children with disorganized attachment
seemed confused and not well attached. Such children showed
contradictory behavior, such as approaching the mother walking backward.
What types of parenting behavior might foster secure attachment? When
you are in public places, such as parks and malls, take a minute to
watch parents interact with their children. Some parents are sensitive
and responsive to their children's needs (Cox et al., 1992). The
responsive parents are teaching their children that the world is a
predictable place in which their parents are there for them when needed.
Consequently, these children feel free to explore their environment,
knowing that if an emergency arises, they will be able to quickly and
reliably obtain assistance from their parents. Small, securely attached
children have a relatively short radius of exploration, which lengthens
gradually as they get older. in contrast, unresponsive or inconsistent
parents are teaching their children that the world is an unpredictable
place and that the parent may or may not be there for them when needed.
in response to such insecure circumstances, children do not venture far
from the parent. As suggested by the results of partial reinforcement
experiments discussed in Chapter 8, children with unresponsive or
inconsistent parents make regular, frequent, and persistent demands for
attention because they know that only a small subset of these demands
will be met. it might seem counterintuitive, but ignoring children
results in clinginess and constant demands for attention, whereas
meeting children's needs promptly and reliably fosters independence.
Cultural influences on parenting behaviors influence attachment.
Although American psychologists view a secure attachment to be ideal,
attachment might be better viewed with an ecological approach than with
a universal approach. Secure attachment is a good model for relatively
safe societies (Belsky, 1999). in a safe society, parents have the time
and resources to be attentive to children, and exploration is unlikely
to put the children in danger. in contrast, secure attachments in
dangerous societies might be maladaptive. if the environment is
dangerous, parents have less opportunity to be responsive to their
children, and exploration might put the children in great danger. The
message that "The world is an unpredictable place in which we may or may
not be able to help you, so stay close" might be more realistic under
these circumstances. Childhood attachment styles continue to influence
development later in life, affecting self-esteem and romantic
relationships (Feeney & noller, 1990). Secure attachment in childhood is
associated with trusting, confident adult romantic relationships.
Avoidant attachment in childhood predicts avoidance of intimacy in adult
romantic relationships. The person often terminates a relationship that
is getting "too close." Finally, anxious--ambivalent childhood
attachment is correlated with a romantic style featuring dependency and
possessiveness.

Mary Ainsworth used the "strange situation" to assess the quality of
children's attachment to their mothers. While watched through a two-way
mirror, the child's mother first leaves and then returns. Using a
careful grading scale, researchers rate children as having a secure
attachment or one of several variations of insecure attachments. hoW Do
SoCiAl AnD eMoTionAl BehAviorS ChAnge DUring inFAnCy AnD ChilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

435

TABLE 11.4 Parenting Styles High parental support

Low parental support

High behavioral regulation

Authoritative

Authoritarian

Low behavioral regulation

Indulgent

Uninvolved

Although attachment styles are relatively stable across the lifespan,
they can be modified by experience (Davila et al., 1997). A securely
attached individual who experiences a series of negative relationships
might become less secure, whereas an insecurely attached individual
experiencing positive relationships might become more secure.

Parenting Styles

In her 2011 book Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother, Amy Chua described her
initial efforts to raise her daughters in a "strict, Chinese" fashion
instead of a Western style emphasizing self-esteem over achievement,
followed by adjustments she made in response to her older daughter's
rebelliousness at age 13. Contrary to fears expressed at the time the
book was published, Chua's daughters seem to be doing just fine. Sophia
graduated from Harvard and received her law degree from Yale. Lulu
studied art history at Harvard and is pursuing a law degree from the
same institution. How do Chua's experiences fit with our discussion of
parenting styles?

436

Chapter 11

harvardmagazine.com

not all parents approach parenting the same way. parenting styles can be
divided into four categories that vary along two dimensions: parental
support and behavioral regulation (Baumrind, 1975; Maccoby & Martin,
1983). parental support takes the form of empathy and recognition of the
child's perspective. Behavioral regulation involves supervision of the
child's behavior accompanied by consistent discipline and clear
expectations (luyckx et al., 2011). if we look in the upper left-hand
box of ● Table 11.4, we find the authoritative parenting style, a cross
between high parental support and high behavioral regulation. This is
the ideal style for parents, as evidenced by the superior outcomes among
children raised by parents using this style (Milevsky et al., 2007;
Simons & Conger, 2007). limits are appropriate for the age and stage of
the child's development, and consequences are educational, not punitive.
Authoritative parents are consistent and firm but also warm and
reasonable. They communicate their standards and invite feedback, but
there is no question as to who is running the show.

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The upper right-hand box contains the cross between low parental support
and high behavioral regulation, or the authoritarian parenting style.
The high behavioral regulation provided by these parents prepares
children for the limits they inevitably meet in the community from other
authority figures such as teachers and law enforcement personnel, but
this is considered a less-than-ideal approach in most contemporary
environments because of lower levels of warmth and support (luyckx et
al., 2011). Authoritarian parents have a greater tendency than
authoritative parents to place a high value on obedience and to use
harsh punishments, including physical punishment. parents with low
socioeconomic status are more likely to demonstrate authoritarian
parenting (Friedson, 2016). in the lower left-hand box, we find the
indulgent parenting style, produced by crossing high parental support
with low behavioral regulation. in addition to the classic
characteristics of high support and low regulation, three dimensions of
indulgence have been identified: material, relational, and behavioral
(Cui et al., 2019). Material indulgence refers to the provision of
excessive possessions. relational indulgence occurs when parents are
overly protective and do things their children should be doing for
themselves. Finally, behavioral indulgence refers to parents' having low
expectations for responsibility on the part of their children. Children
of indulgent parents experience higher levels of depression and anxiety
(Cui et al., 2019) and antisocial behavior (luyckx et al., 2011). The
lower right-hand box represents the cross between low parental support
and low behavioral regulation, or the uninvolved parenting style. This
style generally does not occur unless there is something seriously wrong
with the family situation. illness, marital discord, psychopathology, or
substance abuse can prevent parents from carrying out their duties in
regards to their children. By the 12th grade, children of uninvolved
parents drink and smoke nearly twice as much as children of
authoritarian or authoritative parents, and sons of uninvolved parents
are at a very high risk of antisocial behavior (luyckx et al., 2011)
(see ● Figure 11.19).

FIGURE 11.19

2.8 2.7 2.6 2.5 2.4

Parenting Style and Child Outcomes. Authoritative and authoritarian
parenting styles are associated with lower rates of antisocial behavior
in children than the indulgent or uninvolved parenting styles. However,
children with authoritarian parents experience more depression and
withdrawal than do children of authoritative parents.

Uninvolved

2.3 2.2

Antisocial behavior score

2.1 2 1.9 1.8

Indulgent

1.7 1.6

Source: Adapted from K. Luyckx et al. (2011). "Parenting and
Trajectories of Children's Maladaptive Behaviors: A 12-Year Prospective
Community Study," Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology,
40(3), 468--478. doi: 10.1080/15374416.2011.563470

1.5 1.4 1.3

Authoritarian

1.2 1.1 1

Authoritative

0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 (a)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7 Grade level

8

9

10

11

12

hoW Do SoCiAl AnD eMoTionAl BehAviorS ChAnge DUring inFAnCy AnD
ChilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

437

Does a parent consistently stay in the same box? The answer to that
question is "no." life circumstances can radically change a parent's
style. A competent parent can be thrown off balance by loss of a job,
poor health, divorce, or other disruptions. once the challenging
circumstances are resolved, we would expect that parent to get back on
track. What if a person's parents each use a different style? Although
this does happen occasionally, most couples share a common style of
parenting (Milevsky et al., 2007). if the parents do have differing
styles, the presence of one authoritative parent can protect the
children from the negative outcomes associated with the other styles
(Milevsky et al., 2007).

summary 11.2 Highlights of Childhood Development aspect of development

Highlights

Physical development

●

Height and weight increase rapidly.

●

Both gray and white matter in the brain increase.

●

Cognitive development

Social and emotional development

Motor control improves from head to toe and from the midline outward to
the periphery of the body.

●

Children select sex-typed toys and use gender pronouns to refer to
themselves.

●

Children demonstrate naïve theories.

●

Children learn language rapidly.

●

Assimilation and accommodation of information build better concepts.

●

Thought becomes more logical and abstract.

●

Temperament shapes initial responses to the environment.

●

Children form secure and insecure attachments to caregivers.

●

Parenting styles interact with temperament.

Credits: Top row---ROBIN MOORE/National Geographic Image Collection;
Second row---Lew Merrim/Science Source; Bottom row---Nina Leen/The LIFE
Picture Collection/Getty Images.

What Does It Mean to Be an Adolescent?

adolescence A period of development beginning at puberty and ending at
young adulthood.

438

Chapter 11

Adolescence is an artificial, arbitrary period of development that is a
relatively recent phenomenon in human experience. in hunter--gatherer
societies, sexual maturity at puberty signaled the young person's entry
into adult roles, privileges, and expectations. our word puberty comes
from the latin word for "adult." The transition between adolescence and
adulthood has been pushed back even farther in recent years. if we
define adulthood as the assumption of adult roles, such as completion of
education, long-term employment, marriage, and parenting, the starting
point has been extended from 21 years of age in 1960 to 25 or more in
the 21st century (Arnett, 2014). This has led to the identification of a
new developmental stage, emerging adulthood, which is discussed in a
later section. As a result, most developmental psychologists mark the
endpoint of adolescence at the age of 18 years.

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16

Age (years)

15

14

FIGURE 11.20

13

12 1820

1840

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

Years

1960

The Age of Puberty Has 12.6 years Decreased Over the Last 100 Years.
Since 1840, the average age of first menstruation, a major indicator of
puberty in females, has 1980 2000 dropped from nearly 16 years to its
current average of 12.6 years.

physical changes in adolescence provide individuals with their final
preparation for taking on adult roles. Among the most striking physical
changes in this period are those related to sexual maturity and brain
development.

Sex, Gender, and the Adolescent Puberty typically marks the beginning of

adolescence. over the last 100 years, for reasons that are not fully
understood, the average age of puberty in the United States has dropped
from about age 16 to around age 12 (Frisch, 1983; see ● Figure 11.20).
The onset of puberty is marked by a cascade of hormone release,
culminating in the maturity of reproductive organs and the development
of secondary sex characteristics. Males experience muscular development,
maturity of the external genitalia, growth of facial hair, and
enlargement of the larynx, which leads to a deeper voice. Females
experience menarche (the first menstrual cycle), breast growth, maturity
of the external genitalia, maturity of the uterus, and changes in fat
distribution and quantity. The obvious evolutionary purpose of puberty
is to prepare an individual for reproduction, so not too surprisingly,
teens respond to the physical changes of puberty with a dramatic
increase in sex drive. Sexual maturation during the teen years parallels
further development in gender identity, the assumption of sex-role
behaviors, and sexual orientation. gender identity refers to a person's
sense of being male or female. Sex-role behavior refers to a pattern of
traditionally male or female behavior. As we discussed in Chapter 7,
sexual orientation refers to a stable pattern of attraction to people of
a certain sex, independent of gender identity, sex-role behavior, and
sexual experiences. Many complex variations in combinations of these
variables occur. people with a homosexual orientation typically
demonstrate a gender identity consistent with their biological sex,
while showing the same range of variation in sex-role behaviors, from
traditionally masculine to traditionally feminine, as people with a
heterosexual orientation. individuals with AiS, mentioned earlier in the
chapter, typically develop female gender identity and sex-role behaviors
in spite of their genetic male sex (Xy). girls with CAh, who are exposed
to much higher levels of prenatal male hormones than typically
developing girls, have higher rates of bisexual and lesbian sexual
orientations. however, it's important to note that the vast majority of
bisexual and lesbian women do noT have CAh, and that a substantial
majority of women with CAh are heterosexual.

The Adolescent Brain early developmental psychologists, including
piaget, argued

that cognition is rather mature at puberty, which in turn implies that
the brain is mature. in

Universal Images Group North America LLC/Alamy Stock Photo

Physical Changes in Adolescence

The physical growth that accompanies the onset of adolescence does not
happen to everyone at the same time. Middle school students show a range
of physical maturity.

puberty A period of physical changes leading to sexual maturity.
secondary sex characteristics Physical changes occurring at puberty
associated with sexual maturity.

WhAT DoeS iT MeAn To Be An ADoleSCenT?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

439

some aspects, this conclusion is correct. By the teens, areas of the
brain that process language, spatial relations, hearing, and other
sensory processes appear complete. however, much additional work remains
to be done before we can consider the brain to be fully adult. Far from
considering the brain complete at puberty, today's psychologists are
viewing the early teen years as being a second critical period of brain
growth, the first being prenatally up to age 18 months (Kuhn, 2008). The
onset of puberty is accompanied by substantial gray matter growth, which
peaks between the ages of 11 and 12 years (Semple et al., 2013).
Following this burst of growth, the gray matter of the frontal,
parietal, and temporal cortex normally thins somewhat over the remainder
of the teen years, a process that tapers off in the twenties (Tamnes et
al., 2017; see ● Figure 11.21). Abnormalities in this process may be
associated with the onset of schizophrenia, described in Chapter 14.
youth with early-onset forms of this disorder show four times more loss
of gray matter in the frontal lobes than is usually seen in teens of the
same age (rapoport, 1999). White matter, or myelin, continues to mature
gradually through the teen years and into young adulthood. Myelination
of the frontal lobes is greater in adults 23 to 30 years old than in
youth between the ages of 12 and 16. Unfortunately, an adolescent's
white matter is more susceptible than an adult's to damage, such as that
caused by binge drinking (McQueeny et al., 2009). Structural differences
between the brains of teens and those of adults affect their
interpretations of the emotions of other people (Thomas et al., 2007;
yurgelun-Todd, 2007). Adults

EXPERIENCING PSYCHOLOGY How Risky Are You? IN THIS CHAPTER, we explore
the impact of brain development on risk-taking. In general, we find that
behaving in risky ways is more typical of teens, in spite of the fact
that they perceive risk similarly to adults. How do psychologists know
this? We can use instruments like the Domain-Specific Risk-Taking
(DOSPERT) Scale (Blais & Weber, 2006). To complete this scale, rate each
of the 30 items twice: Once for how likely you would be to do the
behavior (your risk-taking score) and then for how risky you think the
behavior is (your risk-perception score). Once you have your responses,
use the codes at the

end of the box to divide your scores into the five domains: ethical,
financial, health/safety, recreational, and social. Add your scores for
risk-taking and risk-perception for each domain. You might find that
your behavior and perceptions are quite different from one domain to the
next. 1. Admitting that your tastes are different from those of a
friend. 2. Going camping in the wilderness. 3. Betting a day's income at
the horse races. 4. Investing 10% of your annual income in a moderate
growth mutual fund.

6.  Taking some questionable deductions on your income tax return.
7.  Disagreeing with an authority figure on a major issue.
8.  Betting a day's income at a high-stake poker game.
9.  Having an affair with a married man/ woman.
10. Passing off somebody else's work as your own.
11. Going down a ski run that is beyond your ability.
12. Investing 5% of your annual income in a very speculative stock.

Risk-taking Scale: 1

5.  Drinking heavily at a social function.

2

3

Extremely

4

5

6

Not Sure

7 Extremely

13. Going whitewater rafting at high water in the spring.

Likely

14. Betting a day's income on the outcome of a sporting event

Risk Perception Scale:

15. Engaging in unprotected sex.

1

7

16. Revealing a friend's secret to someone else.

Not at all

Extremely

17. Driving a car without wearing a seat belt.

Risky

Risky

18. Investing 10% of your annual income in a new business venture.

Unlikely

440

2

Chapter 11

3

4

5

6

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1.0 Courtesy of Paul Thompson/UCLA Lab of Neuro Imaging

0.9

Gray Matter

0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0

20

5

Age

FIGURE 11.21 Brain Growth in Adolescence. In contrast to early
developmental theories such as Jean Piaget's theory that viewed the mind
as mature at the outset of adolescence, gray matter growth continues
into early adulthood, although the pace slows, and the cortex thins in
some areas. Areas shown in red and yellow are experiencing the greatest
rates of growth.

identify expressed emotions accurately, but teens frequently
misunderstand the emotions being displayed. Brain imaging demonstrated
that the amygdala, which provides a quick, subconscious assessment of
emotion, showed the same pattern of activity in adults and teens.
however, the adults showed more activity in the frontal lobes than the
teens did, which might account for the adults' superior judgment of
emotional expression.

19. Taking a skydiving class.

20. Bungee jumping off a tall bridge.

21. Riding a motorcycle without a helmet.

22. Piloting a small plane.

23. Choosing a career that you truly enjoy over a more secure one.

24. Walking home alone at night in an unsafe area of town.

25. Speaking your mind about an unpopular issue in a meeting at work.

26. Moving to a city far away from your extended family.

27. Sunbathing without sunscreen.

28. Leaving your young children alone at home while running an errand.

29. Not returning a wallet you found that contains \$200. Ethical: 6, 9,
    10, 16, 29, 30 Financial: 3, 4, 8, 12, 14, 18 Health/Safety: 5, 15,
    17, 20, 23, 26 Recreational: 2, 11, 13, 19, 24, 25 Social: 1, 7, 21,
    22, 27, 28 ■

40 35 30 Risk taking

28. Starting a new career in your mid-30s.

25 20

FIGURE 11.22

15

Risk Taking and Risk Perception. Risk taking and risk perception are
negatively correlated in individuals (see Chapter 2). As the perception
of riskiness increases, people are less likely to take a risk.

10 210

25

0 5 Risk perception

10

15

Source: A.-R. Blais & E. U. Weber (2006). "A Domain Specific Risk-Taking
(DOSPERT) Scale for Adult Populations," Judgment and Decision Making,
1(1) 33--47. doi: 10.1037/t13084-000.

WhAT DoeS iT MeAn To Be An ADoleSCenT?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

441

ZUMA Press Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

During adolescence, youths apply their new executive strategies to
problems and build their knowledge base for specific subjects. High
school senior Ronit Abramson won an Intel International Science and
Engineering Fair prize for her science project on marine biology.

A "mismatch model" has been proposed to account for the greater levels
of risktaking and sensation-seeking that characterizes adolescence as
compared to childhood and adulthood (Dumontheil, 2016). The more
emotional parts of the brain, including the amygdala and reward systems,
mature earlier relative to the logical frontal lobes, possibly leading
to reckless and drunk driving, driving without seatbelts, experimenting
with drugs, and having unprotected sex. risky behavior does not result
from the teen's inability to judge what is risky or not (Fischhoff et
al., 2010). instead, teens typically believe that they are somehow
immune from the consequences of risky behavior---for example, that drunk
driving accidents happen to other people (reyna & Farley, 2006). The
teen brain also responds more vigorously to pleasure than does the adult
brain, which means that the immediate pleasurable consequences of a
risky behavior can overwhelm the teen's better judgment (galvan et al.,
2007).

Cognitive and Moral Development in Adolescence The continuing maturity
of the nervous system, interacting with the expanding physical and
social environment of the adolescent, leads to more adult ways of
thinking and reasoning.

Adolescent Cognition During adolescence, executive functions such as
working memory reach adult levels (Murty et al., 2016). Adolescents
begin to think more logically or analytically (Kokis et al., 2002). For
example, children often use their personal experience as a heuristic
(the teacher didn't catch my friend cheating on the test, so it's safe
for me to cheat too) instead of the more logical, statistical reasoning
of the teen (my friend might have had a lucky break, but this teacher is
extra good at catching cheaters, so my odds of getting caught remain
high despite my friend's experience). Teens are hard at work acquiring
data, and as they build up their knowledge bases, their ability to use
executive processes such as strategies improves (peverly et al., 2002).
As we mentioned in Chapter 9, the more you know about a subject, the
easier it becomes to learn new things about it. you acquire skills
specific to a subject, such as how to solve statistics problems or
prepare for a final covering thousands of pages of reading in your
literature course.

preconventional morality Lawrence Kohlberg's stage at which moral
choices are made according to expectations of reward or punishment.

Moral Reasoning our human history and literature are filled with heroes
and villains, and we are fascinated by their development. how does one
child grow to be Mother Teresa and another to be Adolf hitler? lawrence
Kohlberg, a student of piaget's, attempted to extend piaget's theory of
cognition to explain the development of moral reasoning (1981, 1984). To
assess changes in moral reasoning, Kohlberg presented children,
adolescents, and adults with a series of ethical dilemmas. he was not as
interested in the choice participants would make in response to the
dilemma as he was in the reasoning participants provided their choice.
Based on the participants' responses to his dilemmas, Kohlberg
identified three major stages in moral reasoning, shown in ● Table 11.5.
Children and young adolescents are typically in the preconventional
morality stage. in this stage, children make moral choices based on

TABLE 11.5 Lawrence Kohlberg's Stages of Moral Development

442

Chapter 11

stage

Features

Preconventional

Uses probability of rewards and punishments to guide behavior.

Conventional

Maintains reputation and follows the law.

Postconventional

Follows self-chosen ethical principles.

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

their expectations of reward and punishment. some individuals never
progress beyond this stage, even in adulthood, and believe that stealing
or cheating is okay as long as they don't get caught. Kohlberg believed
that during adolescence most of the population moves to the next stage,
conventional morality, and stays there throughout adulthood. In this
stage, rules are seen as governing moral behavior and are, therefore, to
be followed. conventionally moral people are also sensitive to public
opinion. they want to do the right thing so that others will approve of
their behavior. although conventional morality adds to the stability of
a society, it runs the risk of being arbitrary and rigid. In addition,
history is full of situations in which local public opinion was
supportive of morally abhorrent activities, such as genocide or slavery.
the final step of moral development for Kohlberg was postconventional
morality. Relatively few people, according to Kohlberg, attain this
stage. In conjunction with the abstract reasoning of formal operations,
the individual now recognizes that rules are made by humans and can,
therefore, be flawed. consequently, personal standards are used as
reference points. If everybody used postconventional reasoning to select
a driving speed on the highway, chaos would ensue. however, the
postconventional thinker is likely to evaluate laws and rules critically
before complying with them. Kohlberg is not without his critics.
although Kohlberg's earlier stages appear to be universal across many
cultures (Jia & Krettenauer, 2017), postconventional reasoning has been
criticized as characteristic of males in europe and the United states
(Murphy et al., 1994). children and adults living in the United states
give responses to Kohlberg's dilemmas consistent with the culture's
emphasis on personal justice and individual rights. other cultures place
a higher priority on interpersonal factors, such as duty and
responsibility to others, and these values can lead to different
responses to ethical dilemmas (Miller & Bersoff, 1992). Kohlberg assumed
that moral decisions were made through reasoning, but other
psychologists view these as fairly automatic responses shaped by
evolution. Jonathan haidt (2007) identified five dimensions of morality:
harm, fairness, ingroup, authority, and purity. not only do cultures
vary in their emphasis on these factors, but individuals endorsing
liberal and conservative political ideologies do as well. In several
countries, political liberals place more emphasis on harm and fairness
than the other values, while conservatives weigh the five values more
evenly (Graham et al., 2009).

conventional morality Lawrence Kohlberg's stage of moral development in
which moral choices are made according to law or public opinion.
postconventional morality Lawrence Kohlberg's stage at which moral
choices are made according to personal standards and reason. identity A
consistent, unified sense of self.

Social and Emotional Development in Adolescence as the teen prepares to
transition to adulthood, questions emerge about what kind of adult to
be. the focus of social activity begins to shift from the family to the
peer group, which is where most adult interaction will be taking place.

Identity Formation in Adolescence We pick up social

SteveSimonsPhotography/Shutterstock.com

development in adolescence by introducing erik erikson, a student of
sigmund Freud who outlined stages of social development beginning in
infancy, shown in ● table 11.6. erikson (1968) made significant
contributions to our understanding of identity, or a unified, consistent
sense of self. For erikson, social development proceeds in stages, with
each stage characterized by a fork in the road between a positive
outcome and a less desirable outcome. adolescence challenges teens to
develop a sense of identity (the positive outcome). If they fail, the
result is role confusion (obviously, the less desirable outcome). teens
begin the process of identity formation by asking such questions as "Who
am I?" and "What kind of person do I want to be?" these are profound
questions, made possible by the newly developed abstract reasoning
skills of the teen. the answers are not immediately apparent.
considerable exploration may be necessary before the teen discovers a
direction. Many teens try on several identities, from jock to nerd to
goth, before finding one that works.

Many teens explore questions of identity by trying on different roles
and affiliating with different groups.

What Does It Mean to Be an aDolescent?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

443

TABLE 11.6 Erik Erikson's Psychosocial Stages stage

challenge

Description

Birth to 18 months

Trust versus mistrust

Children view the world as a safe, dependable place.

18 months to 3 years

Autonomy versus shame and doubt

Children begin to explore.

3--6 years

Initiative versus guilt

Children begin to act on the world.

6--12 years

Industry versus inferiority

Children develop self-confidence.

Adolescence

Identity versus role confusion

Teens begin to form an identity by asking "Who am I?" Failure to achieve
a stable identity leads to role confusion and problems with subsequent
stages.

Young adulthood

Intimacy versus isolation

Young adults with clear identities form stable, intimate relationships,
while others experience feelings of loneliness and isolation.

Midlife

Generativity versus stagnation

Midlife adults who find value in their lives, even if they have not met
all their earlier goals, experience generativity. They are likely to
"put back" energy into family, work, and community.

Late adulthood

Integrity versus despair

Toward the end of life, adults who feel that they have lived fully
experience a sense of integrity and calm.

Because developing an identity can be somewhat unpleasant, teens may be
tempted to short-circuit the process. one technique for prematurely
adopting an identity is to assume the identity of a group (erikson,
1968). By affiliating with a particular club, clique, or gang, teens
take on a preformed identity and avoid the challenges of finding their
individual identities. A second approach is the adoption of ready-made
identities provided by parents or other mentors. Although parents may
have valuable advice regarding choice of college major and career, these
are highly individual choices with significant implications. erikson,
like most classical theorists, is not without his critics. erikson's
approach to identity has been particularly influential compared to his
other stages, but critics object to its focus on the Western male
experience (Sorell & Montgomery, 2001).

The Benefits of Ethnic Identity For many adolescents, ethnic identity,
or how an individual feels about being a member of a particular ethnic
or racial group, is a major part of their overall identity (see ● Figure
11.23). having an ethnic identity boosts the overall selfesteem of
adolescents and young adults (erol & orth, 2011; rivas-Drake et al.,
2014). A growing number of individuals identify with more than one
ethnic or racial group. in the United States, multiracial youth
experience less racial identity affirmation than African-American youth,
but both groups experience more affirmation than white youth (Fisher et
al., 2014). Family and Peer Influences running parallel to the search
for identity is a tendency

on the part of teens to spend more time with peers and less with family.
A healthy balance between family and peer influences appears to produce
the best outcomes. Teens who continue to interact positively with their
parents experience better outcomes (see ● Figure 11.24; Fulkerson et
al., 2006). eating dinner with family members is associated with better
diet, fewer eating disorders, lower levels of substance abuse, and
better academic performance (Walton et al., 2016). The importance of the
peer group to adolescents can be demonstrated by their heightened
sensitivity to peer exclusion. Compared to adults over the age of 22,
adolescents reported significantly worse mood following an experimental
procedure designed to instill feelings of social exclusion (Blakemore &
Mills, 2014). Teens are also more susceptible than adults to negative
peer influence. Compared to young adults and older adults, adolescents
made many more risky decisions when in the presence of peers than while
alone (Chein et al., 2011; Simons-Morton et al., 2014).

444

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

0.5 African American Hispanic

Self-esteem

0.25

White 0

−0.25

−0.5

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23 24 Age (years)

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

FIGURE 11.23 Ethnic Identity May Lead to Higher Self-Esteem. Identifying
with an ethnic group appears to boost the overall self-esteem of African
American and Hispanic teens during adolescence and young adulthood.
Psychologists have pointed out the need to obtain more data about Asian
American ethnic identity and self-esteem. Source: Adapted from R. Y.
Erol & U. Orth (2011). "Self-esteem Development from Age 14 to 30 Years:
A Longitudinal Study," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
101(3), 607--619. doi:10.1037/a0024299

in contrast to popular press accounts of the "stormy" teen years, many
teens (and their parents) navigate their passage to adulthood with no
more than a few bumps and bruises (Steinberg & levine, 1997). Compared
to stages before and after adolescence; however, the negative
emotionality, frequency of conflict with parents, and risk-taking
behaviors that characterize adolescence can make this a more difficult
time for many families (Arnett, 1999). Sexuality looms large in the
context of adolescent peer interactions. After all, the biological
purpose of puberty is to prepare individuals for reproduction. The
influence of high levels of sex hormones during adolescence makes
sexuality highly salient. For both sexual-majority and sexual-minority
youth, adolescence typically marks the start of exploration and sexual
identity formation than extends into a person's late twenties (Kaestle,
2019). Teen Tobacco, Alcohol, Marijuna use by Relationship with Father

50 40

20

16%

12%

0

30

27%

23%

Less than very good

Alcohol Very good

26%

24% 18%

20

15% 8%

6% Marijuana

45%

40

35%

30

10

50

Teen Tobacco, Alcohol, Marijuana use by Relationship with Mother

13% 6%

Tobacco Excellent

10 0

9%

16% 11% 6%

Marijuana

Alcohol

Less than very good

Very good

Tobacco Excellent

FIGURE 11.24 Family Remains Important in Adolescence. Adolescence is a
time characterized by increasing focus on relationships with peers, but
strong relationships with family members remain important. Teens who
report lower quality relationships with their parents are more likely to
use marijuana, alcohol, and tobacco. Source:
http://www.centeronaddiction.org/addictionresearch/reports/importance-of
-family-dinners-2012.

WhAT DoeS iT MeAn To Be An ADoleSCenT?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

445

What Is It Like to Be an Emerging or Young Adult? As we mentioned
previously, defining the exact point when a person becomes an adult is
not easy. numerous roles are considered as marking this transition,
including the completion of education, full-time employment, independent
living, marriage, and parenthood. people do not usually assume all these
roles simultaneously, leading to a gradual emergence of adulthood over a
period of several years. The experience of 18- to 25 year-olds in
developed countries differs in several respects from the experience of
young adulthood after the age of 25, leading to the identification of a
stage of emerging adulthood (Arnett, 2014; see ● Figure 11.25). emerging
adults continue the exploration of identity begun in adolescence. Their
experience in love, work, and place of residence is relatively unstable.
At no other time of life is self-focus stronger. having moved away from
the parental home and without having taken on marriage and parenting
roles, the emerging adult has far fewer obligations to others than
people at other stages of life. emerging adults recognize a feeling of
transition, being neither adolescents nor adults. They agree that at
this stage of life, "it still seems like anything is possible." 90

Physical Status in Emerging and Young Adulthood

80 70

Percent

60 18-29

50

30-44 45-65

40 30 20 10

FIGURE 11.25 Features of Emerging Adulthood. Jeffrey Arnett (2014)
identified five factors that distinguish emerging adulthood from later
stages of adulthood. Emerging adults are still more likely to be engaged
in exploring identities. They are less stable in place of residence,
romantic relationships, and work. They remain more focused on themselves
and describe a feeling of being "in-between" adolescence and adulthood.
They are slightly more likely than individuals in other age groups to
believe many possibilities lie ahead of them. Source: J. J. Arnett
(2014). Emerging adulthood: The winding road from the late teens through
the twenties. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

446

Chapter 11

lit ie s bi Po s

si

w ee n et -b In

fo cu s lfSe

ab ilit y st In

ex Ide pl n or tit at y io ns

0

The young adult has reached the pinnacle of physical development. if you
are in this age group, you are as tall, strong, and fit as you're ever
likely to be. Your brain is mature by your early twenties, and your
senses and reaction time are in excellent shape. it is not too early for
young adults to consider how to best maintain their physical health.
Through childhood and adolescence, we have seen that physical
development often follows a blueprint that is strongly genetic. in
adulthood, however, lifestyle factors begin to play a greater role in a
person's outcomes. emerging adulthood represents a transition from the
behavioral causes of death (unintentional accidents, suicide, and
homicide) in adolescence and health-related causes of death in later
life, such as diabetes and heart disease (neinstein & irwin, 2013).
Continued risk-taking in emerging adulthood coupled with vocational
instability leaves many emerging adults without appropriate health care.

Cognition in Emerging and Young Adulthood: Postformal Thought in your
college experience, you might have seen a professor become annoyed by a
student's inquiry about "the right answer." The search for a single
answer, however, is characteristic of formal operations as described by
piaget. At formal operations stage of cognitive development, the teen
can follow a logical course of steps to solve a problem (guignard &
lubart, 2006; Wu & Chiou, 2008). lack of agreement with the solution is
viewed by the formal operational thinker as a sign that the solution is
incorrect. Although many questions we face in college have right
answers, such as an element's atomic weight or whether a hypothesis was
shown to be incorrect, many more are open to debate. The professor's
frustration with your fellow student's interest in only one right answer

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

reflects a difference in adolescent versus adult thinking, or postformal
thought. Postformal thought recognizes that the "right answer" is often
"it depends" and that many important questions are complex and ambiguous
(king & kitchener, 2002). adolescents are more likely to think in
absolutes and defer to authorities, such as professors (Perry, 1970).
efforts to move adolescents toward independent, postformal thought are
often described as critical thinking exercises, described in Chapter 2.

THINKING SCIENTIFICALLY Are Younger Generations More Narcissistic Than
Previous Generations?

What am I BeIng asked to BelIeve or accept? We are being asked to accept
that younger generations are experiencing higher levels of narcissistic
traits compared to older generations, possibly due to cultural changes
such as parenting style and social media.

What evIdence supports thIs posItIon? Generational cohorts are shaped by
their shared experiences, such as war, recession, and pandemics in ways
that might shape narcissism (Vater et al., 2018). In 1963, only 12% of
adolescents agreed with the statement "I am an important person," but
levels of agreement went up to 77% to 80% by 1992 (Newsom et al., 2003).
Twenge (2013) argues that the U.S. culture is becoming more
individualistic and self-oriented. Television shows are more likely to
focus on fame, books use more individualistic language than previously,
and song lyrics are more narcissistic and antisocial. Scores on scales
that measure

narcissistic traits are increasing (see ● Figure 11.26). Simultaneously,
scores on instruments measuring empathy declined (Konrath et al., 2011).

empathy over the lifespan would provide a better foundation for
evaluating cohort effects (Chopik & Grimm, 2019; Oh et al., 2020).

are there other Ways thIs evIdence could Be Interpreted?

What are the most reasonaBle conclusIons?

As we mentioned in Chapter 2, developmental research requires special
methodologies. So it comes as no surprise that research showing an
increase in narcissism across cohorts has been criticized on the basis
of the methods and statistical analyses used (Wetzel et al., 2017).

We have conflicting reports, with the majority of researchers arguing
that the observed changes in narcissism and empathy are real. Improved
instruments and statistical analyses might eventually give us a clearer
picture. Further research into the causes of narcissism and empathy
would also be helpful. ■

What other evIdence Would I need to evaluate these alternatIves?

Narcissistic Personality Inventory (NPI)

Since the time of Aristotle, it has been almost a tradition to despair
over the traits of young people. Younger generations are being accused
of higher levels of narcissism (Twenge, 2013). In Chapter 14, we will
explore narcissistic personality disorder, which is characterized by an
inflated sense of importance, a high need for attention, troubled
relationships, and reduced empathy. While the full disorder is rare,
many people possess some of these characteristics, possibly in milder
forms.

18

17

Most of the research in this area has been 16 conducted with convenience
samples of college students. 15 Across decades, changing demographics,
such as the proportion of racial and ethnic minorities 14 1980--84
1985--89 1990--94 1995--99 2000--04 2005--08 attending college, might
influence conclusions FIGURE in significant ways. Comparisons of more
younger generations and narcissism. Scores on the Narcissistic
representative samples Personality Inventory (NPI) have risen since
1990. would be useful. A better understanding of Source: J. M. Twenge
(2013). "The Evidence for Generation Me and Against Generation We,"
Emerging Adulthood, 1(1), 11--16. doi: 10.1177/ the trajectories of both
2167696812466548 narcissistic traits and

11.26

What Is It LIke to Be an emergIng or Young aduLt?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

447

Cultura Creative (RF)/Alamy Stock Photo

Why is it important to embrace postformal ways of thinking? in Chapter
2, we discussed the importance of generating and testing new hypotheses
to move science forward. Using formal operations, a student can evaluate
a hypothesis and conclude whether it needs to be rejected. however,
postformal thinking is an integral part of creativity, in science or in
any other field (guignard & lubart, 2006). Scientists who are unable to
look beyond the "right answers" already existing in their fields are
unlikely to make creative contributions that stretch that knowledge.

Becoming a parent is no longer restricted to young adulthood. In 1970,
the average age of first-time mothers was 21, and few women became
mothers for the first time after the age of 35. Today, many women are
postponing parenting until midlife.

Maternal depressive symptoms

18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4

Low parenting stress

High parenting stress

FIGURE 11.27 Marital Satisfaction Can Buffer Parenting Stress. Parenting
is tough under any circumstances, but parenting children with special
needs puts parents under considerable strain. Mothers of children with
autism spectrum disorder are at higher risk for major depressive
disorder, but less so when they have strong relationships with their
partners. Source: A. S. Weitlauf et al. (2014). "Relationship
Satisfaction, Parenting Stress, and Depression In Mothers of Children
with Autism. Autism, 18(2), 194--198. doi: 10.1177/1362361312458039

448

As teens enter young adulthood, erickson suggests that they confront a
new challenge: intimacy versus isolation. Those who fail to find the
level of intimacy they seek might experience feelings of loneliness,
which in turn can elicit behaviors that are more likely to alienate
others instead of promoting intimacy (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018). one
key to successful intimacy, according to erikson, is to have established
a solid identity in adolescence. if you still don't know who you are, it
is unlikely that you will make good judgments about the type of person
who will make you happy. if the process of identity extends into
emerging adulthood, as suggested by Arnett (2014), this will further
delay relationship stability. The general instability of emerging
adulthood applies to relationships and sexuality (Arnett, 2014). For
both sexual-majority and sexual-minority individuals, emerging adulthood
can be a time of transition and exploration (Morgan, 2013). The major
theme during this stage in life is diversity---no one pathway determines
how people will develop sexual orientations and identities. For those
who choose to have children, the experience of being parents often
dominates much of their adult lives. The relationship between the
parenting role and happiness is complex and changing. Most parents
experience an initial boost in happiness after the birth of a child
followed by a gradual decline (nelsonCoffey, 2018). Among the variables
impacting the parenting experience are socioeconomic status and
relationship quality. For example, couples' relationship quality acts as
a significant buffer Low relationship against depression in mothers of
children with autism spectrum satisfaction disorder (see ● Figure 11.27;
Weitlauf et al., 2014). High relationship satisfaction

2 0

Relationships in Emerging and Young Adulthood

Chapter 11

What Happens During Midlife? Just as our criteria for leaving
adolescence for emerging and young adulthood were somewhat vague, we do
not have a set of reliable characteristics that signal the transition
between young and middle adulthood. Some people view a specific age,
such as 40, as a starting point for midlife. psychologists often point
to physical changes, such as graying hair or menopause in women, as
signposts for this new transition. others suggest that a person's
growing sense of mortality, possibly boosted by the death of a parent,
leads to a feeling of being closer to death than to birth (Jaques,
1965). Just as the "storm" of adolescence has been often exaggerated,
you have probably heard popular accounts assuming that we all have some
"midlife crisis" (levinson et al., 1976). For most people, this is
simply not true (rosenberg, 1999). Middle adulthood is not without its
challenges because many adults find themselves simultaneously caring for
children and aging parents, working to meet their career and financial
goals, and dealing

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

with physical and possibly marital changes. however, there appears to be
no evidence for a large-scale crisis associated with any one age.

Physical and Cognitive Aspects of Midlife The major theme of physical
and cognitive development in midlife is stability. Assuming that people
maintain good health, changes in the physical and cognitive domains tend
to be mild and gradual. The most significant physical change in midlife
for females is the end of their ability to reproduce. Menopause is the
point where menstruation stops. For most females, menopause is complete
in their early 50s, but loss of fertility is a gradual process beginning
many years earlier. Menstrual cycles may become irregular in a female's
40s as her sex hormone levels that regulate the cycles begin to drop.
During the period of transition between the start of irregular periods
and the final disappearance of menstruation, females can experience a
number of physical and psychological symptoms. hot flashes, night
sweats, headaches, joint pain, mood swings, and sleep disturbances are
common complaints, and the severity of these issues can range from
barely noticeable to nearly disabling. hormone treatments to offset
these symptoms are used quite cautiously because they can also increase
a female's risk of stroke, heart attack, breast cancer, and later
dementia (Banks & Canfell, 2009). Males experience more gradual changes
in their reproductive status through the remainder of their lives. Sperm
quantity may be reduced, but males in their 80s remain half as fertile
as males who are 25. Most males experience little to no decrease in
testosterone over the course of the midlife years, although other
conditions, such as diabetes, can interfere with the maintenance of an
active sex life. For both males and females in midlife, the availability
of a partner is more predictive of sexual activity than any health
issues (Karraker et al., 2011).

menopause The complete cessation of a woman's menstrual cycles.

in contrast to the relative stability in the physical and cognitive
domains during midlife, this period of life is characterized by
significant changes in social and work roles. Children grow up and move
out. if you are the youngest child in your family, you may have noticed
that your parents are beginning to feel somewhat more relaxed. For many
parents, the "empty nest" period following their last child leaving home
is accompanied by an improvement in marital satisfaction (Birchler,
1992). your parents no doubt love you, but they're also relieved to
leave many of the responsibilities of parenting behind them. however, as
● Figure 11.28 shows, the likelihood that negative emotions will
accompany an empty nest varies from culture to culture (Mitchell &
lovegreen, 2009). Adults in midlife continue to pursue their careers,
becoming more expert, or they might initiate a new career that was not
previously compatible with the financial and social responsibilities of
raising a family. recent economic and social changes have made midlife
work less stable than it has been for previous generations. Today's
midlife workers express intent to stay employed longer than previous
cohorts (at least until age 65), but some find themselves taking jobs
below their levels of skill and experience or withdrawing from
employment (elman, 2011). During midlife, erikson suggests that adults
experience either generativity or stagnation. Many people, particularly
during adolescence, set a number of goals for themselves. you may want
to win a nobel prize or compete in the olympics or simply help others
have a better life. Whatever your goals, by the time you reach midlife,
you will have a good idea about whether these goals will be met. in many
cases, people find that progress has been made toward their goals,
although they perhaps didn't meet them. Wherever an adult finds himself
or herself at midlife, the question posed by erikson is whether value
exists.

Blue Jean Images/Alamy Stock Photo

Social Changes in Midlife

With increasing life expectancies on one side and later parenthood on
the other, many contemporary midlife adults find themselves "sandwiched"
or caring for their aging parents and growing children at the same time.

WhAT hAppenS DUring MiDliFe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

449

FIGURE 11.28

70

Responses to the Empty Nest Vary Across Cultures. Although most
Americans report positive reactions to their last child leaving home,
reactions vary across cultures. Among Canadians of different ethnic
groups, being an empty-nest parent has different meanings. Parents from
Chinese and Southern European cultures are less likely to report
negative responses to their last child leaving home than are parents
with a British background. Parents from India experienced the most
negative response of all groups studied. Source: Adapted from B. A.
Mitchell & L. D. Lovegreen (2009). "The Empty Nest Syndrome in Midlife
Families," Journal of Family Issues, 30(12), 1651--1670.
doi:10.1177/0192513x09339020

Percentage reporting negative feelings in response to an "empty nest"

64.1

60 51.4

50 40 30 20

25.9 25.4 21.1 17.1

British 10 0

Chinese

5.6 6.3

Southern European East Indian

Fathers

Mothers

if people feel that their lives have had value, even if they fall short
of their goals, they experience generativity. Adults experiencing
stagnation, in contrast, have not found much satisfaction in their
lives.

What Is Late Adulthood Like? As we have seen in our discussion of
previous stages of development, the starting point of late adulthood is
vague. you might think of age 65, a common retirement age, as a starting
point, but many of today's older adults are living and working longer
than ever before and so are thinking about "old age" differently than in
the past. For example, the baby boomers, or individuals born between
1945 and 1964, are more likely than other age groups to choose 72 as the
start of old age (Cohn & Taylor, 2010). Current life expectancy at birth
in the United States is 78.6 years (Centers for Disease Control, 2017).

Physical Changes in Late Adulthood Assuming good health, the effects of
aging on an adult's physical status are gradual and rather mild.
nonetheless, some physical change is inevitable, and understanding the
nature of these changes provides guidance for coping with them. The
brain reaches maturity around age 25, and few further changes occur
until about the age of 45. At that time, the weight of the brain begins
to decrease, leading to about a 5% decrease by the age of 80 (Anderton,
1997). Decreases in volume are not even. Some structures, such as the
hippocampus and the prefrontal white matter, are more impacted by age
than other areas, such as the occipital lobe (raz et al., 2005).
Decreases also vary substantially from one individual to the next,
possibly reflecting underlying lifestyle and health variables. As with
other physical changes, age-related changes in sensory abilities are
gradual, and their effects can be offset by the use of technologies,
such as eyeglasses and hearing aids.

Cognition in Late Adulthood The most notable cognitive changes in late
adulthood involve memory. episodic memory, or memory for personal
experiences (see Chapter 9), begins to decline gradually from mid-life
into late adulthood (peters, 2006). episodic memories are also the
component of cognition

450

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

DAVID BEBBER/Reuters

Fauja Singh, born in 1911, competed in marathons worldwide until his
retirement in 2013 as part of the Sikhs in the City team, a group of
four runners whose combined age is more than 330 years. Running
marathons isn't necessary to prevent cognitive decline, but people who
participate in 20 minutes or more per day of physical activity have the
lowest rates of dementia.

most likely to be affected by Alzheimer's disease. in contrast, semantic
memories, or memories for facts, increase gradually from mid-life until
the early part of late adulthood, and then decrease in very late
adulthood. intelligence remains relatively stable during adulthood, as
long as general health is good. Although many people erroneously believe
that aging is inevitably accompanied by loss of intellect, only about
8.8% of the population over the age of 65 experience dementia, such as
Alzheimer's disease (langa et al., 2017). rates of dementia have been
dropping over the last three decades (Satizabal et al., 2016) and nearly
25% between 2000 and 2012 alone (langa et al., 2017). improved control
of cardiovascular disease and higher levels of education might account
for some of these improvements. Certain types of intelligence change
more because of aging than others. As we discussed in Chapter 10,
crystallized intelligence, or the use of accumulated knowledge, changes
less than fluid intelligence, or a person's basic information processing
skills (horn & hofer, 1992). Fluid intelligence correlates with speed of
processing, whereas crystallized intelligence might be viewed as wisdom,
or the ability to draw on past knowledge and experience to solve
problems. The relatively gradual decrease in cognitive skills seen in
older adults might represent the ability to use crystallized
intelligence to compensate for decreasing fluid intelligence abilities,
especially in domains that are familiar and wellpracticed (Zaval et al.,
2015). For example, many U.S. Supreme Court justices have served ably
well into their 80s. Creative output can also be tracked across the
lifespan. Creative output usually peaks in a person's 30s to 40s then
declines gradually (Simonton, 2017). Considerable individual variation
occurs, however. The most creative people usually produce their first
important work earlier, maintain a high level of output throughout their
careers, and continue to produce later in life than less creative
people.

Social and Emotional Aspects of Late Adulthood in later adulthood,
erikson suggests that people experience either integrity or despair.
older people who are happy with their life's experiences generally
experience integrity (Sneed et al., 2006; vaillant & Koury, 1993). They
met their goals for the most part and had a fun time doing so. in
contrast, people who reach late adulthood feeling that life passed them
by are likely to experience a sense of despair. WhAT iS lATe ADUlThooD
liKe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

451

PSYCHOLOGY AS A HUB SCIENCE Psychology and the Well-being of Older
Americans

Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com

people TURning 65 YeARS oF Age in 1950 could expect to live about 13.8
more years, or until age 78.8, whereas people turning 65 in 2015 are
likely to live 19.3 years longer, or until about age 84.3 (gatz et al.,
2016). Quantity, of course, does not guarantee quality, so psychologists
have investigated ways to improve the well-being of older adults. These
investigations have produced valuable results in five domains: knowledge
about healthy cognitive aging, understanding decisionmaking, ways to
encourage good health habits, understanding of stereotypes and bias, and
improved adaptive technologies. not only has psychological research
identified neural correlates of healthy and unhealthy cognitive aging,
but psychologists have collaborated with legal experts regarding
judgments of diminished capacity. As a result, older Americans with
cognitive deficits enjoy better protection from abuse, neglect, and
financial exploitation (gatz et al., 2016). psychology's contributions
to improved understanding of decision-making, particularly the effects
of aging on decision making, can assist older adults and those helping
them make better decisions related to retirement and medical care. in
Chapter 8, we explored basic principles of behavior change related to
classical and operant conditioning. Many habits, which respond to
behavioral methods, have critical influence on healthy lifestyles,
regardless of age. Developing healthy habits and reducing unhealthy
behaviors can have significant effects on wellbeing. in an upcoming
chapter, Chapter 13, you will learn more about how stereotyping and
biases can have negative influences on the targets' outcomes. psychology
provides tools for tackling bias among health care providers, such as
the willingness of physicians to rate suicidal ideation in 78-year-olds
as normal and not needing treatment (Uncapher & Areán, 2000). new
technologies, such as social media, have transformed the ability of all
age groups to interact with others and seek information. Technologies
have the potential to help older adults remain in their homes, but this
will require access to digital devices and the knowledge of how to use
them. overall, psychology has already made significant contributions to
policy decisions and allocations of resources related to the aging
population, and is likely to continue doing so in the future. ■

You might hold a common stereotype about older adults being sad and
lonely. if so, you will probably be surprised to learn that
psychological research has found that depression is higher in young
people than in healthy, older adults (see ● Figure 11.29). loneliness
actually decreases with age into the 70s, when it begins to increase
again (hawkley et al., 2019). given the frequent challenges of aging,
including physical and cognitive changes, what could possibly account
for this positive emotional well-being? part of the explanation lies in
the way people look at the time they have remaining in life (Carstensen
et al., 2003, 2010). When people see a long stretch of time remaining in
their lives, they pursue achievement, possibly at the expense of meeting
their social and emotional needs. in contrast, when older adults are
looking at a shorter period of remaining life, their goals are refocused
toward seeking positive emotional experiences.

452

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

iStock.com/hanhanpeggy

Grown children and grandchildren play an important part in the social
life of many older adults. Unlike other primates, humans live long past
their reproductive years, suggesting that grandparents may have
historically contributed to the survival of their extended families.

one thing that doesn't change during our journey through the life span
is the need for social connection. older adults show significant
benefits from their friendships, but they have fewer of them than
younger adults and are less likely than younger adults to form new ones
(rawlins, 2004). relationships with siblings can be especially
meaningful for older adults (gilligan et al., 2020). relationships with
grown children and grandchildren also form a significant part of the
social life of older adults. historically, many parents entered the role
of grandparent during midlife, but with more young adults postponing
parenting, the grandparent role is occurring later as well. humans are
somewhat unusual among primates in their length of life span beyond
their reproductive years, a phenomenon known as the "grandmother
effect." A healthy woman might live 40 or 50 years past her age at
menopause. it is possible that her contributions to the care of her
grandchildren, freeing her children for other tasks, might have provided
an adaptive advantage over the course of evolution (herndon, 2010).
Marriage in late adulthood makes an important contribution to continued
good health. in married older adults, interacting with the spouse
contributes to happiness by buffering the individual from stress
(Waldinger & Schulz, 2010). Seniors who have remained married to the
same person for decades have seen many changes in their relationships
over the years.

Percentage with major depressive disorder

14 11.7

12

FIGURE 11.29

10.7 10

Depression Rates Decrease Over the Life Span. In contrast to stereotypes
about sad, older adults, depression rates are highest in late
adolescence and young adulthood and decrease gradually over the life
span.

8 6

6.4

6.2

4

6.2

3.7

2 Male 0

Female 18--25

26--49 Age (years)

50 or over

Source: Adapted from R. C. Kessler et al. (2003). "The Epidemiology of
Major Depressive Disorder: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication (NCS-R)," JAMA, 289(23), 3095--3105. doi:10.1001/
jama.289.23.3095

WhAT iS lATe ADUlThooD liKe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

453

Dunca Daniel Mihai/Alamy Stock Photo

Relationships continue to play important roles in the social lives of
older adults. Marriage is related to continued good health in older
adults.

We observed earlier that parents of young children experience a drop in
marital satisfaction, which improves as children leave the home as young
adults. long-term marriage partners show more similarities with each
other because of a lifetime spent in each other's company, along with a
characteristic lack of attention to past negative events and personality
traits (o'rourke & Cappeliez, 2005). in other words, they believe their
relationship has been more positive than it was. These couples also show
an interesting pattern of conflict avoidance, which contributes to
higher levels of marital satisfaction.

Interpersonal Relationships The Developmental Perspective IS THERE A
"PERFECT" TIME TO GET MARRIED? one of your authors (lF) and her husband
married, much to the horror of their respective families, at the age of
20. gloom and doom predictions about the length of the marriage
followed. But are there "good" and "bad" ages at which to get married?
What do you think is a good age for marriage? 25? 35? never? your answer
might be based on a social clock, or the cultural norms for the timing
of developmental milestones (neugarten et al., 1965). you might find
that you have many entries in your social clock--- when to finish your
education, when to be established in your career, when to marry, when to
become a parent, when to retire---that are probably based on your
cultural background and the observed experiences of your family and
friends. Did you choose a number in the late 20s as ideal for marriage?
if so, you are probably reflecting the current median age at first
marriage in the United States (27 for females, 29 for males;
Bartle-haring et al., 2018). The median age at first marriage reflects
economic and social factors, dropping from 1900 (22 for females; 26 for
males) to 1950 (20 for females; 23 for males) and then rising gradually
to current levels. The "right time" approach was supported initially by
findings that satisfaction was highest for those who married in their
early to mid-twenties (glenn et al., 2010). Couples marrying earlier
experienced more instability while those who married later tended to
have stable, but less satisfying marriages. More recent research does
not support this mid-20s "right time" hypothesis, however (Bartle-haring
et al., 2018). instead, individual expectations and historical contexts
interact with age at marriage in significant and complex ways to predict
a couple's outcomes. Were your author's detractors correct? no---she is
still married decades later, and happily so. ■

454

Chapter 11

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology Takes On Real-World Problems Pandemic Anxiety Across the
Lifespan Do people of all ages respond the same way to the uncertainties
and disruption of a major pandemic? Policy makers need to understand the
extent of pandemic-related anxiety in the population. Anxiety can
negatively impact the mental health of the public, but it can also serve
as a motivator for positive behavioral changes. Feelings of stress,
worry, and anxiety are higher in younger individuals than in older
individuals under the best of circumstances (Gould & Edelstein, 2010).
COVID-19 has approximately doubled pre-pandemic rates of anxiety
disorder (Kwong et al., 2020). Most respondents admit to moderate-to-

high worry about COVID-19, but older adults, and particularly older
males, were less worried than younger individuals and older females
(Barber & Kim, 2020). This is not the result of unrealistic perceptions
of risk. On the contrary, older adults accurately perceived their risk
as being high. These findings are consistent with more general
observations that younger adults experience more health anxiety than
older adults (Gerolimatos & Edelstein, 2012). COVID-19 is an unusual
virus in that it is dramatically more dangerous for older adults, and
older men in particular, compared to children and younger adults
(Wortham,

2020). Does the reduced concern on the part of the most vulnerable
individuals interfere with their taking necessary precautions? This
appears to be the case. Older males are the least likely to engage in
protective behaviors, such as wearing masks and social distancing
(Barber & Kim, 2020). Now that we have a better understanding of the
problem, we can direct policy in effective ways. Younger adults need
more interventions than older adults to bring anxiety under better
control. Older adults, especially men, would benefit from targeted
messaging that would encourage them to take more precautions. ■

Proportion above anxiety threshold (%)

35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0

Age 18--40

Age 40--49

Age 50--59

Age 60--69

Age 70+

FIGURE 11.30 Anxiety Rates Doubled During COVID-19. Rates of anxiety
disorder during COVID-19 were twice as high as pre-pandemic levels
measured in the same population (24% versus 13%). Anxiety was highest in
younger age groups and declined gradually with age. Source: A. S. F.
Kwong, R. M. Pearson, M. J. Adams, K. Northstone, K. Tilling, D. Smith,
D., . . . N. J. Timpson (2020). "Mental Health during the COVID-19
Pandemic in Two Longitudinal UK Population Cohorts," The British Journal
of Psychiatry, 1--27. doi:10.1192/bjp.2020.242

WhAT iS lATe ADUlThooD liKe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

455

Summary 11.3 Highlights of Adolescent and Adult Development aspect of
development

Highlights

Physical change

●

Adolescents mature sexually and reach adult height and weight.

●

The brain continues to grow through adolescence and into young
adulthood.

●

Menopause is a major transition for women in midlife.

●

Among healthy older adults, physical changes are gradual.

●

Working memory and reaction time reach adult levels during adolescence.

●

Thinking becomes more logical during adolescence and more independent in
young adulthood.

●

Moral reasoning in adults is usually conventional or postconventional.

●

Intelligence remains relatively stable in healthy adults.

●

Adolescents seek to develop identity.

●

Relationships might lead to marriage and parenting in young adulthood.

●

Midlife adults may experience changes in family and work domains.

●

Older adults show significant benefits from social connections.

Cognition

Social and emotional life

Credits: Top row---Universal Images Group North America LLC/Alamy Stock
Photo; Second row---ZUMA Press Inc/Alamy Stock Photo; Bottom row---Blue
Jean Images/Alamy Stock Photo.

KEy TErmS The Language of Psychological Science Be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

accommodation, p. 427 adolescence, p. 438 assimilation, p. 426
attachment, p. 434 concrete operational stage, p. 428 conservation,
p. 428 conventional morality, p. 443 egocentrism, p. 428 embryo, p. 411

456

Chapter 11

fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), p. 414 fetus, p. 411 formal operational
stage, p. 428 identity, p. 443 insecure attachment, p. 434 menopause,
p. 449 object permanence, p. 427 postconventional morality, p. 443
preconventional morality, p. 442

preoperational stage, p. 427 puberty, p. 439 secondary sex
characteristics, p. 439 secure attachment, p. 434 sensorimotor stage,
p. 427 teratogen, p. 413 theory of mind (ToM), p. 430 zygote, p. 411

The Developing MinD: liFe SpAn DevelopMenT

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Different versions of the serotonin transporter gene are not equally
distributed throughout the world.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Individual Mind

12

PERSONALITY AND THE SELF Learning Objectives 1. Compare and contrast the
psychodynamic, humanistic, trait or Big Five, and social--cognitive
theories of personality. 2. Debate the validity of self-report
inventories versus projective tests as measures of personality.

3.  Differentiate and illustrate several distinct aspects of self
    (selfconcept, self-awareness, self-esteem, and selfregulation) in
    terms of their content, sources, and implications.

4.  Analyze evidence for the biological bases of personality and the
    self.

5.  Distinguish between the personal and interpersonal self, and relate
    these to cultural differences in individualistic versus
    collectivistic aspects of self-concept.

ALTHOUGH YOU MIGHT BE COMFORTABLE WITH THE IDEA THAT a trait like a
moth's color can make it better adapted to one environment over another,
how do you feel about your personality as an adaptation? Are there some
types of personalities that thrive in some circumstances better than
others? Can a culture shape personality? Can the personalities of a
group of people shape their culture? In Chapter 3, we introduced you to
the serotonin transporter gene, which can come in two versions or
alleles: Short (S) and long (L). Children with two short alleles (SS)
were more likely than children with either a combination of alleles (SL)
or two long alleles (LL) to react negatively to the experience of being
bullied frequently (Sugden et al., 2010). Zooming out to the map of the
world, you can see that these genotypes are not equally distributed
worldwide. Yellow areas on the map have low frequencies of the S allele,
and orange and red areas have higher frequencies. South Africa has a
relatively small number of people with the S allele (28%) compared to
the United States, Australia, and Great Britain (about 40% to 45%),
which in turn have many fewer than China (about 80%). How can we explain
these different distributions of the S allele? It is possible that
unequal distributions of genes occur by chance, or genetic drift (see
Chapter 3; Eisenberg & Hayes, 2011). However, cultural neuroscientists
suggest an alternative explanation. It is possible that a particular
environment shapes a population's genetics and culture, which in turn
influence each other or coevolve (Mrazek et al., 2013; see ● Figure
12.1). In this chapter, we will consider a number of variables that
influence the individuals who develop and live within a culture,
including dimensions of individualism and collectivism. Cultures can
also be characterized by their strength of social norms and tolerance
for deviant behavior, or

459 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

so-called tightness---looseness (Gelfand et al., 2011). Cultural
tightness might have evolved in response to ecological threats, which
can be biological, environmental, or human-made. Tight cultural norms,
found in nations such as India, Singapore, Turkey, and Japan, encourage
structured, coordinated responses to threat. In contrast, loose
cultures, found in countries like Estonia, Hungary, Israel, and the
Netherlands, face less frequent ecological threats requiring coordinated
responses. What role might genetics play in these cultural differences?
Zooming in to the level of the individual, we find that people carrying
the S allele are especially attentive to negative information, such as
words and pictures that produce negative emotions (Beevers et al., 2007;
Osinsky et al., 2008). This focus on negativity might help people detect
and respond to risks in threatening environments. The L allele, in
contrast, is associated Glow Asia RF/Alamy Stock Photo

with reduced responses to psychological and social sources of stress
(Nardi et al., 2013; see ● Figure 12.2). It is possible that dangerous
environments favor those who are better at detecting threat, who in turn
build tight cultures as a further mechanism for coping with anxiety and
coordinating responses (Mrazek et al., 2013). At the same time, people
with the S allele might be more successful in navigating the social
structures that characterize tight cultures. As you will see in this
chapter, individual differences are an important aspect of behavior and
mental processing, but they are best understood when viewed within the
larger contexts of the social and cultural environment. East Asians have
a much higher probability of having the S allele of the serotonin
transporter gene than do people living in many other parts of the world.

12

India Singapore

10

Cultural tightness-looseness

Turkey 8

Mexico Germany UK Austria Italy

6

Poland

4

China

France Spain US

Australia

New Zealand Netherlands Hungary

Brazil Israel

Estonia

2

0

Japan

0

10

20

30

40 50 60 5-HTTLPR (% S Allele)

70

80

90

FIguRE 12.1 The Distribution of the Short (S) Serotonin Transporter
Allele as a Function of Culture Type. The percentage of people carrying
the S allele of 5-HTTLPR, or the serotonin transporter gene, varies
according to a culture's position on the continuum from tightness
(highly structured with low tolerance of social deviance) to looseness
(less structure and higher tolerance of social deviance). The size of
the bubbles reflects a culture's level of ecological threat. Tight
cultures are associated with greater ecological threat and higher
proportions of the S allele within their populations. Source: Adapted
from A. J. Mrazek et al. (2013). "The Role of Culture-Gene Coevolution
in Morality Judgment: Examining the Interplay between
Tightness--Looseness and Allelic Variation of the Serotonin Transporter
Gene," Culture and Brain, 1, 100--117. doi: 10.1007/s40167-013-0009-x

460

Chapter 12

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

VNTR region

Transcriptional Control region

3'

5'

"Short" allele Transcriptional Control region

VNTR region

5'

3'

Photos, top: ArtmannWitte/Shutterstock.com; bottom:
ArTono/Shutterstock.com

"Long" allele

FIguRE 12.2 The Serotonin Transporter gene. The serotonin transporter
gene comes in two versions or alleles. People with a copy of the short
(S) allele tend to focus more on negative information, possibly leading
to increased anxiety, whereas people with a copy of the long (L) allele
are less influenced by psychological and physical sources of stress.

What Is Personality? Suppose that you were given the following feedback
about your personality (Forer, 1949, p. 120): You have a need for other
people to like and admire you, and yet you tend to be critical of
yourself. although you have some weaknesses, you are generally able to
compensate for them. You have considerable unused capacity that you have
not turned to your advantage, however. disciplined and self-controlled
on the outside, you tend to be worrisome and insecure on the inside. at
times, you have serious doubts as to whether you have made the right
decision or done the right thing. You prefer a certain amount of change
and variety and become dissatisfied when hemmed in by restrictions and
limitations. You also pride yourself as an independent thinker and do
not accept other's statements without satisfactory proof. But you have
found it unwise to be too frank in revealing yourself to others. how
well does this description fit your beliefs about your personality? You
might be impressed by how this paragraph presents such specific and
personalized information about you. Ironically, you probably relate to
this description because it applies to nearly everyone. So, the question
is: If our personalities are so unique, how can we all be so easily
described in a few brief sentences? The science of personality explores
characteristic patterns of thinking, feeling, and behaving. To what
extent is a person's personality truly unique, and to what extent is
personality based on general characteristics that describe nearly
everyone? how consistent is our behavior across time and across
situations? how much of a role does biology or experience play in
developing our personalities? Is the basic nature of humans good or bad?
WhaT IS PeRSOnalITY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

461

Rawpixel.com/Shutterstock.com

Personality is our characteristic way of thinking, feeling, and
behaving. How unique are we? How much do our personalities overlap with
the personalities of other people?

Personality theories represent far more than simple curiosity about
human behavior. These theories are intimately bound to our views of
normal and abnormal behavior, which we will discuss in Chapter 14. Many
of the psychologists who proposed personality theories also contributed
influential ideas to the treatment of psychological disorders.

Historical Approaches to Personality The study of personality for the
first half of the 20th century was dominated by the psychodynamic
approaches of Sigmund Freud and his followers. Behaviorists such as B.
F. Skinner attempted to apply principles of learning to personality. The
humanistic psychologists, including Carl Rogers, actively rebelled
against Freud's psychodynamic approach. While few contemporary
psychologists adhere to these historical approaches to personality,
these theories stimulated interest in individual differences.

How Do Psychodynamic Theories View Personality?

psychodynamic A theory put forward by Sigmund Freud in which psychic
energy moves among the compartments of the personality: id, ego, and
superego. psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's treatment approach based on his
psychodynamic theory. id The component of Sigmund Freud's personality
theory containing primitive drives present at birth.

ego The component of Sigmund Freud's personality theory that is the self
that others see.

462

Chapter 12

The term psychodynamic was first used by ernst von Brücke in 1874 (hall,
1954/2016). von Brücke used the term as an extension of the first law of
thermodynamics, which states that energy in a closed system can change
from one form to another but cannot be created or destroyed. You may not
have heard of von Brücke before, but you are likely to be familiar with
one of his students, Freud, who made psychodynamics the foundation of
his theory of personality. as a young physician, Freud became famous for
his success in treating patients with hysteria, a condition
characterized by physical symptoms without medical cause that is known
today as somatic symptom disorder (see Chapter 14). Freud sought to
incorporate his observations of his patients into a new, unifying theory
of psychology. his treatment approach, which we cover in Chapter 15, was
known as psychoanalysis.

The Id, Ego, and Superego Personality was viewed by Freud as a closed
energy system,

in which "psychic" or instinctive energy moves among three compartments:
id, ego, and superego (see ● Figure 12.3). Freud proposed that the id,
which literally means "it" in latin, is present at birth and contains
the primitive drives that serve as a source of energy for the
personality, such as hunger, thirst, and sex. Freud believed that the id
operates according to the pleasure principle, seeking immediate
gratification and relief. as a child begins to interact with parents and
other social influences, the ego and the superego begin to control the
id. The ego is the component of the personality that is readily seen by
others, so it acts as the person's "self."

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIguRE 12.3 The Id, Ego, and Superego. Sigmund Freud viewed the mind as
a closed system in which energy flows from one compartment to the next.
It is the job of the ego, or self, to balance the pleasure-seeking
impulses of the id with the morality imposed by the superego. Imbalances
can be the source of unhealthy behavior. An overly dominant id can lead
to antisocial behavior, and an overactive superego might produce too
much guilt.

Id

Photos, clockwise from top left: LukFu/Shutterstock.com;
hartphotography/Shutterstock.com; iko/Shutterstock.com

Superego

Ego

Its task is to coordinate the needs of the id with reality. The superego
develops when a child begins to internalize society's rules for right
and wrong, forming what we normally refer to as a conscience. as shown
in ● Figure 12.4, we are not conscious of the operations of the id,
although we might become consciously aware of the operations of the ego
and superego.

Freudian Defense Mechanisms Threats to the balance of the id, ego, and
superego

can result in anxiety or the sense that danger is around the corner.
When the ego is faced with anxiety, it engages in a variety of
protective behaviors called defense mechanisms. according to Freud, each
of these mechanisms helps us channel potentially self-destructive or
painful psychic energy into more constructive or manageable behaviors.
For example, when we use the defense mechanism of sublimation, we
redirect negative energy. an aggressive teen might take up martial arts
rather than starting fights at school. Freud noted, though, that each
mechanism has its limits; if people continually use defense mechanisms,
they risk doing damage to the ego or self as well.

Psychosexual Stages of Development For Freud, the development of the

personality is critical to the remainder of his theories and to the
therapeutic process of psychoanalysis. Freud assumed that the origins of
his patients' problems could be found in their developmental past, not
in their present circumstances. as the word psychosexual implies, Freud
was interested in how the developing personality would deal with the
sexual impulses of the id. Freud proposed five psychosexual stages of
personality development: Oral, anal, phallic, latency, and genital.
Personality, according to Freud, is the product of conflict occurring
during these psychosexual stages. Personality characteristics emerge as
the id, ego, and superego resolve their conflicts and struggle for
balance. Should the conflict become so great as to produce a clash
between ego and reality, psychosis (including abnormal behaviors
characteristic of schizophrenia and other serious disorders) might occur
(Freud, 1938).

superego The component of Sigmund Freud's personality theory that
internalizes society's rules for right and wrong, or the conscience.

defense mechanism In Sigmund Freud's personality theory, a protective
behavior that reduces anxiety.

psychosexual stage A stage in Sigmund Freud's theory of the developing
personality.

hISTORICal aPPROaCheS TO PeRSOnalITY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

463

Conscious: Ideas, thoughts, and feelings of which we are aware

Preconscious: Material that can be easily recalled

Ego Self; coordinates needs of id with reality

Supergo Internalization of morality; conscience

Unconscious: Well below the surface of awareness Id Pleasure principle;
inborn drives

FIguRE 12.4 Sigmund Freud's Levels of Conscious Awareness. According to
Freud, we are consciously aware of only a small percentage of the mind's
activities. Some information exists in the preconscious mind and can
become conscious at any moment. Information in the unconscious mind can
affect our behavior without our awareness.

Contemporary Assessments of Sigmund Freud's Approach although there is
no question regarding the tremendous

Unemployed Philosophers Guild

Freud and the Arts: Freud's theories often find their way into books,
plays, and movies, as characters are driven by unconscious conflicts
they don't understand.

Sigmund Freud has become a mainstay in popular culture.

464

Chapter 12

influence Freud has had on modern thinking, his legacy today is
considered mixed. Freud's approach to development contrasts sharply with
the scientific theories of development we explored in Chapter 11, but
his work remains important in that it had such a profound influence in
psychology and popular culture. a few Freudian constructs appear to be
supported by scientific investigation, even though the theoretical
mechanisms he proposed have been refuted. The notion of defense
mechanisms, the distinction between conscious and unconscious processes,
and the descriptions of some types of adult personalities remain topics
of research in psychological science (Kline, 2013). however,
contemporary scientists point out that Freud's ideas rarely lend
themselves to scientific investigation. Some of his ideas, such as
women's penis envy, are viewed today as remarkably sexist (Sprengnether,
1990). additional criticisms center on the questionable effectiveness of
psychoanalysis, which we discuss in more detail in Chapter 15.

The Neo-Freudians no theory as influential as Freud's is likely to be
left alone without revision. Several of Freud's followers built on his
approach to construct their own psychodynamic theories. We

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

AP Images/A yue gz/Imaginechina

refer to these as "neo" or "new" Freudians. a common feature of the
neo-Freudian theories was a substitution of social competence for
sexuality and pleasure as the major motivation for human behavior. These
theorists brought the psychodynamic approach closer to contemporary
views of humans as social animals, a theme we discuss throughout this
textbook. unfortunately, neo-Freudian theories share one of Freud's
greatest weaknesses---the proposal of constructs that do not lend
themselves to scientific investigation. We will highlight a few of the
notable contributions of this group. alfred adler (1870--1937)
contributed the notion of an inferiority complex to psychodynamic
thought. according to adler (1956), an inferiority complex or
overwhelming feelings of inferiority can lead to overcompensation,
usually in the form of seeking the appearance of superiority rather than
the substance. For example, a person might overcompensate for feelings
of inferiority by purchasing a fancy, expensive automobile. adler was
also one of the first psychologists to suggest that siblings, along with
parents, influence development, leading to investigations of the effects
of birth order. Contemporary research, however, casts serious doubt onto
the existence of any birth order effects on personality or intelligence
(damian & Roberts, 2015). Carl Jung (1875--1961), a Swiss psychiatrist,
divided the unconscious mind into two components. The personal
unconscious remained the same as Freud's unconscious mind. Jung added a
deeper level, the collective unconscious, composed of our common
psychological predispositions as humans passed from generation to
generation (Jung, 1928). after observing common themes in cultures
around the world during his extensive travels, Jung argued that
generations of experience with concepts such as darkness, power, death,
and parents would lead to characteristic ways of unconsciously thinking
about such topics. Jung's ideas are echoed in today's evolutionary
approach to psychology, which views the mind as having adapted over the
course of evolution (Walters, 1994). In addition to his expansion of the
concept of the unconscious, Jung deviated from Freud by providing more
specific information about differences in individual personality. In
particular, Jung's concepts of the personality characteristics of
extroversion (outgoing) and introversion (relatively less outgoing) are
still very much alive in current discussions of personality. Jung's
personality characteristics form the basis for several popular
personality tests, such as the Myers--Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI).
unfortunately, as we will see later, the MBTI does not hold up well to
analyses of validity and reliability. Karen horney (1885--1952) was one
of the first female psychiatrists. horney rejected many of Freud's ideas
to concentrate on aspects of culture that contribute to women's feelings
of inferiority. Simultaneously, while treating male patients, horney
became convinced that men envied women's ability to become pregnant and
be mothers. her emphasis on the impact of a male-dominated society on
women helped set the stage for many subsequent feminist scholars
(horney, 1923--1937/1967, 1950). Sanjay Kanojia/AFP/Getty Images

Alfred Adler suggested that an inferiority complex can lead to
overcompensation in the form of seeking the appearance of superiority.
"Man heels" that add at least 2 inches of height have become
increasingly popular and are worn frequently by Hollywood stars.

Classic Behaviorist Approaches to Personality Behaviorist approaches to
personality emphasized learning as an important influence on personality
development. Because learning is a lifetime process, behaviorists
expected to see change in personalities over time. according to B. F.
Skinner, the principles of operant conditioning, discussed in Chapter 8,
would lead to the development of stable "response tendencies" that might
appear to others as

This Tibetan mandala represents unity formed out of the four elements of
earth, wind, water, and fire, a theme that Carl Jung believed was
universal in the human collective unconscious.

neo-Freudian A theorist who attempted to update and modify Sigmund
Freud's original theory of personality. unconscious mind The part of
mental activity that cannot be voluntarily retrieved.

hISTORICal aPPROaCheS TO PeRSOnalITY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

465

"traits." For example, if your parents were strict about enforcing rules
at home, such as finishing chores, you might look like a conscientious
person who always finishes assigned tasks on time. Compared to stable
personality traits, Skinner's response tendencies were more flexible and
subject to change. If people experienced something new, their ways of
responding would change to reflect that new interaction with the
environment. If you move away from home to college, and you no longer
have your parents to reward or punish you based on your completion of
tasks, you may not be conscientious about finishing your homework on
time. as we will see later in this chapter, many contemporary
psychologists agree that an understanding of personality requires
consideration of situations and environments.

Science Source

How Do Humanistic Psychologists Approach Personality?

Courtesy of Ryan Whitlock

Karen Horney (1885--1952) was one of the first female psychiatrists, and
although she is considered a neo-Freudian, she rejected many of Sigmund
Freud's ideas to concentrate on the sources of women's feelings of
inferiority.

until the 1960s, american psychology was dominated by two perspectives:
behaviorism and the psychodynamic approach. at that time, some
psychologists began to consider other ways of approaching psychology in
general and in personality specifically. One alternative approach,
initially called third-force psychology (behaviorism and psychodynamic
theory were forces one and two), later became known as humanistic
psychology. humanistic psychology differed from behaviorism and the
psychodynamic approach in several ways. humanistic psychologists were
convinced that humans are unique, and they argued that the animal
research favored by behaviorists was irrelevant. The humanistic
psychologists' belief that human nature is basically good contrasts
dramatically with the darker view of human nature put forward by Freud
and other psychodynamic theorists. humanistic psychologists believed
that psychodynamic theories placed too much emphasis on abnormal
behavior. Instead, they advocated studying exceptional people to see why
they succeeded, a tactic continued by contemporary positive psychology
approaches, discussed in Chapter 16. One of the leading humanistic
psychologists, abraham Maslow, was interested in motivation, and we
discussed his contributions to this area in Chapter 7. he did not
attempt a full-fledged theory of personality, although he made some
interesting conclusions about the characteristics of exceptional people.
after reviewing biographies of people such as albert einstein, Jane
addams, William James, and abraham lincoln, Maslow (1950) observed that
exceptional people shared a number of common traits. In addition to
expected characteristics, such as creativity, realistic thinking, and
concern for others, Maslow's exceptional people had some surprising
qualities. They had few friends, well-developed senses of humor, and
periodic mystic or peak experiences. Carl Rogers (1951, 1980), another
humanistic psychologist, put forward a theory of personality based on
his experience as a therapist. We discuss Rogers's approach to therapy
in Chapter 15. Rogers, like Maslow, believed that humans strive toward
self-actualization or maximizing their individual potential. For Rogers,
people who follow the path laid out by their feelings will lead
productive, healthy lives. They will experience congruence, or
similarity, between their real selves and their ideal selves. Congruence
is most likely to occur in response to unconditional positive regard, or
a nonjudgmental appreciation for a person's true nature. Being treated
judgmentally makes people act in ways that are incongruent or
inconsistent with their ideal selves, which might lead to disordered
behaviors (see ● Figure 12.5). as was also the case in psychodynamic
theories, it is difficult to move from the humanistic psychologists'
description of personality to our definition of personality as
characteristic ways of thinking, feeling, and behaving. The humanistic
psychologists are more interested in

Early behaviorists like B. F. Skinner believed that personality traits
represented response tendencies that were elicited consistently by
different situations. Being at home and being at school might bring out
different sets of behaviors for many people.

466

Chapter 12

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

BASIC HUMAN NEEDS

FIguRE 12.5

OTHERS' RESPONSES

RESULT

Unconditional positive regard

Self-actualization

Conditional positive regard

Self-discrepancies

Need for self-actualization

Need for positive regard

the process by which personality develops than in the actual
characteristics that emerge. like the psychodynamic theories they
rejected, the humanistic psychologists are subject to criticisms of
being unscientific in their methods (Child, 1973).

How Do Trait Theories Explain Personality? Following a discussion of
psychodynamic, behaviorist, and humanistic approaches to personality,
the trait approach seems relatively simple. a trait is a stable
personality characteristic. Psychologists were hard at work testing
personality traits long before they derived coherent theories to explain
their findings. They realized intuitively that traits clustered
together. an outgoing person might also be expected to be brave and
cheerful. however, these approaches lacked the precision required by a
true theory of personality. Statistical methods of correlation and
factor analysis came to the rescue (see ● Figure 12.6). as we discussed
in Chapter 2, correlations allow us to see whether two variables have
some systematic relationship with each other, such as height and weight.
Factor analysis allows a researcher to compare large numbers of
correlations simultaneously, which makes the technique perfectly suited
to the study of clustered personality traits (Spearman, 1904).

O Perfectionism

Anxiety

Q3

Warmth

Self-control

A

C Conformity H

Q2

Emotional stability Boldness

L Skepticism

Impulsivity

Extroversion

G

Independence Openness to Q1 change

F

Self-reliance

E

Receptivity

Dominance

Source: Adapted from D. A. Bernstein (2011). Essentials of Psychology,
5th ed. Belmont, CA: Cengage.

trait A stable personality characteristic.

FIguRE 12.6

Q4 Irritability

Insecurity

Carl Rogers's Humanistic Theory of Personality. Rogers, like other
humanistic psychologists, believed that people strive for
self-actualization or the ability to maximize their potential. Achieving
that goal depended on the response of other people (family, friends, and
society) to the self. If people receive unconditional positive regard or
nonjudgmental acceptance, they can reach self-actualization. However, if
their acceptance is conditional on whether they please others, the
result is "self-discrepancies" that can lead to depression, anxiety, and
other negative outcomes.

Factor Analysis Identifies Clusters of Personality Traits. The
statistical technique of factor analysis allows psychologists to
identify factors that positively correlate or cluster together, as well
as the strengths of those relationships. Raymond Cattell identified 16
personality factors that formed five clusters (extroversion, anxiety,
self-control, independence, and receptivity) that are similar to the
factors in the Big Five theory later proposed by McCrae and Costa
(1985). The darker lines represent stronger statistical relationships.

Imagination

N Privateness

M Sensitivity I

B Intelligence

hOW dO TRaIT TheORIeS exPlaIn PeRSOnalITY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

467

Early Trait Theories

OPENNESS Fantasy Aesthetics Feelings Actions Ideas Values

C

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS Competence Order Dutifulness Achievement-striving
Self-discipline Deliberation

E

EXTROVERSION Warmth Gregariousness Assertiveness Activity
Excitement-seeking Positive emotion

A

AGREEABLENESS Trust Straightforwardness Altruism Compliance Modesty
Tender-mindedness

N

NEUROTICISM Anxiety Angry hostility Depression Self-consciousness
Impulsiveness Vulnerability

Figure 12.7 The Big Five Theory of Personality.

One of the earliest efforts to identify personality traits began with
the selection of 4,500 words that described observable traits out of a
dictionary (allport & Odbert, 1936). Some of these terms were defined as
central traits, or characteristics that most clearly define and
differentiate a person (allport, 1937). These are the terms you might
use when trying to describe someone you know: smart, hardworking, and
outgoing. emerging computer technologies in the 1940s allowed
psychologists to refine lists of traits further (Cattell, 1946/1969).
using factor analysis, allport and Odbert's original list of 4,500 words
was reduced to 16 major personality traits. each trait took the form of
a continuum between opposites. For example, the trait of suspiciousness
would range from "trusting" at one extreme to "suspicious" at the other.
The basic methods and elements for trait theories were now in place.

The Big Five Theory a common theme found in the work of early trait
theorists is that relatively few traits are required to describe and
predict an individual's behavior accurately. Based on this work, a Big
Five theory identified five core traits: Openness to experience,
conscientiousness, surgency (extroversion), agreeableness, and
neuroticism (norman, 1963; McCrae & Costa, 1985, 1987). To remember the
Big Five traits, use the acronym OCean. The development of a personality
test to measure the five traits has made it possible for many
investigators to explore the Big Five theory scientifically (see ●
Figure 12.7). The current version of the test is known as the neO-PI-R
Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 2011). You will have an opportunity to take a
short version of this test in this chapter. each of the Big Five traits
consists of a continuum from one extreme to the other. For example, the
majority of people are "ambiverts," or somewhere in the middle of the
extremes of introversion and extroversion (see ● Figure 12.8). We will
discuss the five traits in order of the OCean acronym. Openness to
experience involves fantasy, aesthetics (an appreciation for the arts),
feelings, actions, ideas, and values. People high on openness are
curious, unconventional, and imaginative. They are interested in
exploring aspects of life that are different from their own, whether
this means trying new foods, traveling to exotic locations, or studying
other religions. People low on openness are more practical, traditional,
and conforming. They prefer the familiar over the new, choosing a chain
restaurant in a new city rather than experimenting with the local
cuisine. 30 Percentage of participants

O

25 20 15 10 5 0

Big Five theory A trait theory that identifies five main characteristics
that account for most individual differences in personality.

openness A Big Five personality trait characterized by an appreciation
for fantasy, feelings, actions, ideas, values, and aesthetics.

468

Chapter 12

1

2 3 4 Introversion to extroversion score

5

Figure 12.8 Big Five Traits Are Not either/Or. Data from nearly 300
students enrolled in a recent class taught by one of your authors show
that most people are not extremely introverted or extroverted. Instead,
the majority are ambiverts, or midway between the extremes of
introversion and extroversion. Source: L. Freberg

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mieke Dalle/Getty Images

Conscientiousness incorporates competence, order, dutifulness,
achievement striving, self-discipline, and deliberation. people high on
this trait are reliable, work hard, and complete tasks on time. people
low on this trait are unreliable, somewhat lazy, and undependable. it is
frustrating to work on group projects with people who are low in
conscientiousness, but under some circumstances, they make valuable
contributions. For example, they might identify unnecessary steps in a
process, reducing the time pressure felt by a group, or promote some
forms of "outside the box" thinking and problem solving. Extroversion is
characterized by warmth, gregariousness, assertiveness, activity,
excitement seeking, and positive emotion, although extroverts also tend
to be insensitive and overbearing. Introversion is characterized by
coolness, reserve, passivity, and caution, although introverts also tend
to be sensitive and reflective. Both introverts and extroverts enjoy
social activity, but introverts tend to be more stimulated by it, which
can be tiring (Grant, 2013). Agreeableness includes trust,
straightforwardness, altruism, compliance, modesty, and tender
mindedness. people low in this trait are cynical, uncooperative, and
rude. it is challenging to identify advantages for a trait like
disagreeableness. in People who score high on the trait of employment
settings, however, disagreeable people are capable of making tough
decisions, openness are curious, unconventional, whereas their more
agreeable colleagues find it difficult to supervise others (rust, 1999).
in and imaginative. one study, men who scored below the mean on measures
of agreeableness earned 18% more than men who were more agreeable (Judge
et al., 2012). Finally, neuroticism combines anxiety, angry hostility,
depression, self-consciousness, impulsivity, and vulnerability. The
opposite trait could be described as emotional stability. although
scoring high on neuroticism sounds unpleasant, this trait has survival
advantages (Zhang et al., 2005). in threatening and impoverished
environments, high neuroticism increases a person's chances of surviving
to reproduce. we observed a similar argument in Chapter 11, in which a
child's insecure attachment to the parents had benefits for survival in
a dangerous environment (Belsky, 1999). whether considering a
personality trait or attachment, Across a range of professional,
skilled, and the anxious, clinging child is more likely to stay near
protection, enhancing unskilled job descriptions, the conscientiousness
survival in dangerous situations. variable had the greatest positive
correlation Big Five traits have provided a framework for investigating
job perforwith work-related success (Barrick & Mount, mance (Barrick &
Mount, 1991), parenting style (prinzie et al., 2009), psycho1991).
Surprisingly, the same meta-analysis found logical disorders and
substance abuse (Kotov et al., 2010), cognitive decline little
relationship between agreeableness and job in older adulthood (Curtis et
al., 2014), happiness (Deneve & Cooper, 1998), academic performance
(Komarraju et al., 2009), and many other specific performance.

conscientiousness A Big Five personality trait characterized by
competence, order, dutifulness, achievement striving, self-discipline,
and deliberation. extroversion One of the Big Five traits characterized
by warmth, gregariousness, assertiveness, activity, excitement seeking,
and positive emotion; opposite of introversion.

wunkley/Alamy Stock Photo

introversion One of the Big Five traits

Out of the Big Five characteristics, conscientiousness shows the highest
positive correlation with work-related success, whether a person is
employed in a professional, skilled, or unskilled job.

characterized by coolness, reserve, passivity, inactivity, caution, and
negative emotion; opposite of extroversion.

agreeableness A Big Five personality trait characterized by
trustworthiness, altruism, trust, compliance, modesty, and tender
mindedness. neuroticism A Big Five personality trait characterized by
anxiety, angry hostility, depression, self-consciousness, impulsivity,
and vulnerability.

How Do TraiT THeories explain personaliTy?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

469

outcomes. evidence across diverse cultures, including the united States,
Japan, South Korea, Germany, Portugal, Israel, and China, suggests that
these personality traits represent universal human characteristics
(McCrae & Costa, 1997).

How Do Situations Affect Personality? not all psychologists agree that
personality originated in stable traits that produce consistent patterns
of behavior across different situations. Research showing that
situations could exert a stronger influence on people's behavior than
any individual predispositions

EXPERIENCING PSYCHOLOGY A Short Version of the Big Five Inventory THE
FULL VERSION of the Big Five Inventory (BFI) contains 44 items. The
10-item version in ● Table 12.1 has served as a reasonable substitute
for the full test for research purposes when time is limited (Rammstedt
& John, 2007). If reading about the different Big Five traits has left
you wondering about your own

personality, this is your chance to get an idea of where you stack up on
each of these factors. Circle the number that represents your best
answer for each item. At the end, we'll tell you how to add up your
scores. A self-report test like this is only as good as you make it by
answering honestly. Wanting to appear so-

cially desirable by downplaying your negative characteristics might make
you feel better, but this approach reduces the validity of the test
results. At the same time, no paper-and-pencil test is perfect, and if a
result does not fit the way you honestly view your personality, feel
free to disagree with the results. ■

TABLE 12.1 The BFI-10 Personality Test 1. I see myself as someone who is
reserved. 1

2

3

4

5

Disagree strongly

Disagree a little

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

2.  I see myself as someone who is generally trusting. 1

2

3

4

5

Disagree strongly

Disagree a little

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

3.  I see myself as someone who tends to be lazy. 1

2

3

4

5

Disagree strongly

Disagree a little

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

4.  I see myself as someone who is relaxed, handles stress well. 1

2

3

4

5

Disagree strongly

Disagree a little

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

3

4

5

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

5.  I see myself as someone who has few artistic interests. 1 2 Disagree
    strongly

Disagree a little

6.  I see myself as someone who is outgoing, sociable.

470

1

2

3

4

5

Disagree strongly

Disagree a little

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

Chapter 12

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

highlighted limits to the general trait approach. We discuss several of
these situations in Chapter 13. For example, studies of obedience or
conformity might be better understood by evaluating the situations
people encounter rather than the predispositions or traits they bring to
the laboratory (asch, 1951; Milgram, 1963). Kurt lewin (1951) argued
that a person's behavior is a function of the person and the person's
environment. This led to a vigorous debate regarding which element,
personality or the situation, produced the greatest influence on
behavior. historically, many psychologists continued to focus on
personality traits. More recent work has demonstrated an increasing
respect for the influences of situational variables on behavior.
Personality may predict typical behaviors performed by individuals, but
situations often provide better insight into cases in which people
behave in uncharacteristic ways (Sherman et al., 2015). as predicted by
lewin, personality and situations usually interact. For example,
individual personality traits influence the types of situations we
choose to encounter as well as the way we think about those situations,
which in turn reinforces

7.  I see myself as someone who tends to find fault with others. 1

2

3

4

5

Disagree strongly

Disagree a little

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

8.  I see myself as someone who does a thorough job. 1

2

3

4

5

Disagree strongly

Disagree a little

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

9.  I see myself as someone who gets nervous easily. 1

2

3

4

5

Disagree strongly

Disagree a little

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

10. I see myself as someone who has an active imagination. 1

2

3

4

5

Disagree strongly

Disagree a little

Neither agree nor disagree

Agree a little

Agree strongly

Here is how you should score your results. To ensure that you don't just
pick the same number for each item, half of the questions "reverse" the
scale. Follow the directions below carefully so that you obtain a
correct score. Scores can range from 1 to 5 on each trait.

Extroversion: Q1R (Reverse) and Q6 Subtract your answer to Q1 from 6 and
add to your answer to Q6. Divide by 2. Scores of 1 or 2 are introverted,
scores of 4 and 5 are extroverted, and a score of 3 is neutral.

Agreeableness: Q2 and Q7R (Reverse) Add your response to Q2 to (6 minus
your answer on Q7), and divide the sum by 2. Scores of 1 or 2 are
disagreeable, scores of 4 and 5 are agreeable, and a score of 3 is
neutral.

Conscientiousness: Q3R (Reverse) and Q8 Add (6 minus your answer on Q3)
to your answer on Q8, and divide the sum by 2. Scores of 1 or 2 are low
conscientiousness, scores of 4 and 5 are high conscientiousness, and a
score of 3 is neutral.

Neuroticism: Q4R (Reverse) and Q9 Add (6 minus your answer on Q4) to
your answer on Q9, and divide the sum by 2. Scores of 1 or 2 are low
neuroticism, scores of 4 and 5 are high neuroticism, and a score of 3 is
neutral.

Openness: Q5R (Reverse) and Q10 Add (6 minus your answer on Q5) to your
answer on Q10, and divide the sum by 2. Scores of 1 or 2 are low
openness, scores of 4 and 5 are high openness, and a score of 3 is
neutral.

hOW dO SITuaTIOnS aFFeCT PeRSOnalITY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

471

Vibe Images/Shutterstock.com

Is this man helping these women with their car troubles because of his
individual personality traits? Or do situational variables do a better
job than personality traits at predicting behavior?

the original personality traits (Rauthmann et al., 2015). In other
cases, the power of situations can have large and lasting effects on
personality. For example, the experience of unemployment produced
long-term changes in individual levels of agreeableness,
conscientiousness, and openness (Boyce et al., 2015). Personality is
usually studied, not surprisingly, in individuals, but one situation
that might have a particularly strong influence on personality is being
in a group. at least in the case of fish, individual personality is
sometimes suppressed in groups in favor of the collective decisions of
the school (Mcdonald et al., 2016). Fish, like humans, show individual
differences in "boldness," or the willingness to choose reward over
risk. The boldness of individual fish tested alone is quite consistent,
but the behavior of the same fish within a school of fish is not. This
suggests that at least in the area of risk-taking, testing individuals
might give psychologists very different results than testing the same
people in a group setting. Recognition of the importance of personality
in social contexts led to a number of social--cognitive learning
theories that are consistent with our observations that single
perspectives in psychology do not always capture the whole story.

Locus of Control

One influential social--cognitive learning theory featured a concept
known as locus of control (Rotter, 1966). If you have an external locus
of control (locus means "place" in latin), you expect that most of your
outcomes occur because of chance, luck, opportunity, or other factors
beyond your control. however, if you have an internal locus of control,
you believe that most of your outcomes are due to your own talent and
effort. People with an internal locus of control manage stress more
effectively, floss their teeth more regularly, are more likely to seek
shelter in response to tornado warnings, use their seat belts more
consistently while driving, and are more likely to practice effective
birth control (Wallston, 2005). however, people with an internal locus
of control tend to be less sympathetic with the plight of others,
viewing their troubles as due to their choices and behavior as opposed
to outside forces they can't control (lane, 2001).

Reciprocal Determinism and Self-Efficacy social--cognitive learning
theory A theory of personality that features cognition and learning,
especially from the social environment, as important sources of
individual differences in personality.

locus of control A cognitive expectancy featured in social--cognitive
learning theories of personality about the source of individual
outcomes; an external locus of control sees outcomes as resulting from
luck or chance, while an internal locus of control sees outcomes as the
result of individual effort.

reciprocal determinism A social-- cognitive learning theory of
personality that features the mutual influence of the person and that of
the situation on each other.

472

Chapter 12

albert Bandura, whom we met in Chapter 8, attempted to capture a balance
between external, environmental factors and internal traits in his
theory of reciprocal determinism (Bandura, 1990, 1993). like other
social--cognitive learning theorists, Bandura rejected the strict
behaviorism of Skinner as applied to personality. he agreed with Skinner
that the environment can determine behavior but thought that it does so
reciprocally, as people influence the environment through both their
internal cognitions and their behavior. Bandura believed that
observation of others' behavior played an important role in the
development of personality. although much of his work centered on
aggression, Bandura believed that many other characteristics were
learned in this same manner. he was particularly interested in
self-efficacy (Bandura, 1990, 1993, 1995). This characteristic refers to
confidence in your abilities to gain reinforcement. If self-efficacy is
high, you have strong expectations that positive outcomes are within
reach. If you study hard and get good grades, you expect to obtain a
good job in your chosen career. however, if self-efficacy is low, you
might doubt your abilities to reach your goals. Self-efficacy can be
situation specific. You might be confident in your abilities in science
but less so in your abilities in rock climbing. Self-efficacy influences
a person's environment and experiences. a confident job candidate is
probably more likely to be hired than an applicant who appears insecure.

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

People with an internal locus of control believe that most of our
outcomes are due to our own efforts, while people with an external locus
of control believe that our outcomes are more often due to factors
beyond our control. Although people with an internal locus of control
experience less stress, they tend to be less sympathetic with the plight
of others. The person with an internal locus of control might believe
this woman needs to try harder to escape homelessness, while the person
with an external locus of control might believe this woman just needs
help and better opportunities.

GABRIEL BOUYS/Getty Images

Walter Mischel argued that trait theories could not explain the
variation in an individual's behavior across situations (Mischel, 1968).
For example, when 51 boys at a summer camp were observed, their
extroversion--introversion scores did not predict their extroverted or
introverted behaviors across 21 situations (newcombe, 1929). Instead of
focusing on traits alone, Mischel argued that the stability we expect in
a person's behavior arises from that individual's characteristic way of
interpreting situations (Mischel, 2004). To illustrate this process,
consider two children who both score high on some measure of aggression.
Trait theorists would expect the children to be consistently more
aggressive than their low-scoring peers regardless of circumstances, yet
these are precisely the results that Mischel found to be lacking in
actual studies (Mischel, 1968). Instead, an individual child's behavior
can be predicted by considering "if--then" relationships between
situations and behavior (Mischel & Shoda, 1995). One child may be
aggressive when approached by peers but respond passively to an adult's
efforts to apply discipline, while another might show the opposite
pattern. In other words, if the child experiences a particular situation
(interacting with peers or adults), that child then responds with a
unique, stable set of behaviors (aggressive or passive). These if--then
patterns are characteristic of an individual, leading to the stable
characteristics we think of as personality.

P.A. Lawrence, LLC./Alamy Stock Photo

If--Then Relationships

What Are the Biological Bases of Personality?

Self-efficacy is the belief that you can handle a challenging situation
and obtain future rewards.

Biological theories of personality build bridges between observed traits
and their underlying biological correlates. among the biological
variables connected to personality are temperament, genetic
predispositions, and brain structure. These variables serve as
behavioral phenotypes that can be used to compare and contrast
underlying genetic profiles (Skuse, 2000).

Temperament and Personality We introduced the concept of temperament, or
a child's pattern of mood, activity, or emotional responsiveness, in
Chapter 11. Contemporary psychologists believe that temperament is
biological in origin (Rothbart, 2011) but quickly begins to interact
with the social and physical environments. not only does a bold,
fearless child select different activities, but that child is treated
differently than a quiet, cautious child by peers, parents, and
teachers.

temperament A child's pattern of mood, activity, or emotional
responsiveness linked to later personality.

WhaT aRe The BIOlOGICal BaSeS OF PeRSOnalITY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

473

ConneCting to ReseaRch Temperament Traits Can Be Contagious AS WE HAVE
OBSERVED in this chapter, children demonstrate individual differences
along several dimensions of temperament, including positive
emotionality, negative emotionality, and effortful control (Shiner &
DeYoung, 2013). While we have emphasized a role for biology in
temperament, it is clear that environment also plays important roles.
Preschool-aged children are in a state of transition as they become less
dependent on their parents and begin to venture into a world featuring
more peer interaction. The Question: Does increased interaction with
peers influence preschoolers' temperament traits?

METHODS Two classrooms of 3- and 4-year-olds at a university preschool
were observed over the course of one year. Trained observers rated the
children for temperament traits and observed their social networks. A
total of 15,387 observations were taken and analyzed.

DISCUSSION The results of this study suggest that for preschoolers,
positive emotionality and effortful control are contagious. This finding
is consistent with research using adults that show people become more
similar to others with whom they associate in the expression of positive
emotion, such as happiness (Fowler & Christakis, 2008). A married
partner who is high in conscientiousness has a positive influence on the
other partner's work outcomes, above what would be predicted by the
other partner's own conscientiousness (Solomon & Jackson, 2014). In
contrast, children's negative emotionality did not seem to be influenced
by their peers, perhaps because children with high negative emotionality
experienced fewer peer interactions. They would have fewer opportunities
to model (see Chapter 8) the more positive behaviors of their peers. ■

RESULTS Temperament traits were stable over the year of observation, but
some change did occur. Children who were high in negative emotionality
were less likely to be selected as a play partner. Children with high
levels of positive emotionality formed social relationships with others
sharing this trait. Over the year, children's levels of positive
emotionality and effortful control became more like that of their
playmates (see ● Figure 12.9).

22

25

14

ETHICS Children are subject to enhanced protection when they serve as
research participants. In a university preschool, it is likely that
parents have signed a global consent for their children to participate
in research. To the extent that they can understand, children can
withhold assent to participate even when their parents approve their
participation.

15

24

8 11

10

7

18 20

26

12

13

19

21

23

1

9 6

3

17

5

2 16 4

Bottom quintile

474

Chapter 12

Middle Top quintile quintile Positive emotionality

Figure 12.9 Children's Play Networks Shape and Are Shaped by
Temperament. Children's temperaments shape their choice of peer
relationships, as shown by the clustering of the children with higher
levels of positive emotionality (light blue dots). At the same time,
longitudinal observations show that children's temperaments also shape
those of their playmates. Source: Adapted from J. W. Neal et al. (2017).
"Codevelopment of Preschoolers' Temperament Traits and Social Play
Networks Over an Entire School Year," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 113(4), 627--640. doi: 10.1037/pspp0000135

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Genetics and Personality

ACE STOCK LIMITED/Alamy Stock Photo

several dimensions of temperament are particularly important for adult
personality, including reactivity and self-regulation (rothbart &
Derryberry, 1981; ahadi & rothbart, 1994; rothbart et al., 2000).
reactivity describes differences in people's responses to novel or
challenging stimuli. People's responses may vary in terms of both
intensity and timing. some people respond to such stimuli immediately
with highly intense anxiety, others respond more slowly, and some barely
notice the stimuli. self-regulation involves the ability to control
attention and inhibit responding to perceived stimuli. these dimensions
of temperament appear to be related to the Big five traits. higher
reactivity is characteristic of introversion and neuroticism (aron et
al., 2010), while self-regulation is associated with later
conscientiousness (rothbart et al., 2011).

Principal component 2 (19% of total genetic variance)

the early emergence of temperament suggests a genetic origin for
personality. in spite of vastly improved genetic methods, identifying
particular genes associated with personality traits remains difficult.
traits are usually associated with large numbers of genes that each have
a small influence on personality (sanchez-roige et al., 2018). large
genomewide association studies (gWas) have identified six genetic loci
that are significantly associated with the Big five traits (lo et al.,
2017). these loci also are predictive of different types of
psychological disorders (see chapter 14 and ● figure 12.10). studies of
the effects of genetics on personality often use the twin study method,
such as the Minnesota study of twins reared apart (Bouchard et al.,
1990; Bouchard, 1994). in this ongoing research, thomas Bouchard and his
colleagues have studied 59 pairs of identical twins and 47 pairs of
fraternal twins who had been raised in separate families, as well as a
larger number of twins raised in the same home. the pairs of identical
twins were quite similar, regardless of whether they were raised
together. some characteristics showed stronger positive correlations
between identical twins, such as their scores on an occupational
interest scale. other characteristics showed relatively weaker positive
correlations, such as nonreligious social attitudes. the critical
finding was that the identical twins raised apart and together were
similar to each other, whether the overall positive correlation for a
particular characteristic was strong or weak (see ● figure 12.11). the
Big five personality traits show an approximate heritability of 0.50 in
humans (Jang et al., 1996; loehlin et al., 1998). as discussed in
chapter 3, heritability refers to populations rather than individuals.
saying that a trait such as shyness has a heritability of 0.40 does not

0.8

Extraversion

II

Agreeableness

0.6

0.2

I Openness Bipolar disorder

ADHD

0.4

Schizophrenia

Conscientiousness

0

Anorexia nervosa

20.2

Autism

Major depression

20.4 20.6 20.8

Differences in the temperament dimension of reactivity predict
children's responses to novel or challenging stimuli. Children with high
reactivity often display high introversion and neuroticism later in
life.

Neuroticism III 20.9 20.7 20.5 20.3 20.1 0.1

IV 0.3

0.5

0.7

0.9

Principal component 1 (25% of total genetic variance)

Figure 12.10 genotypes Correlate with Both Personality Traits and
Psychological Disorders. A genomewide analysis (GWAS) identified
relationships between six genetic loci, personality traits, and several
types of psychological disorders. Narrow angles between arrows, such as
between ADHD and extroversion, indicate stronger correlations. Arrows
pointing in opposite directions, such as agreeableness and autism,
indicate negative correlations. Source: Adapted from M.-T. Lo et
al. (2017). "Genome-wide Analyses for Personality Traits Identify Six
Genomic Loci and Show Correlations with Psychiatric Disorders," Nature
Genetics, 49(1), 152--156. doi: 10.1038/ ng.3736

What are the Biological Bases of Personality?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

475

Figure 12.11 Comparisons Between identical Twins raised Together or
Apart. Some characteristics, such as the number of ridges you have in
your fingerprints, are more strongly influenced by genetics than other
characteristics, such as your nonreligious social attitudes. Regardless
of how much genetic influence a trait might have, identical twins show
considerable similarity, whether they grow up in the same household or
not.

Fingerprint ridge count Responses on a personality questionnaire
Occupational interest scale

Religious attitudes Identical twins raised

Nonreligious social attitudes

Source: Adapted from T. Bouchard, Jr. et al. (1990). "Sources of Human
Psychological Differences: The Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart,"
Science, 250, 223--228. doi: 10.1126/science.2218526

Apart Together 0

0.2

0.4 0.6 Correlations

0.8

1.0

Beth Eberth, St. Bonaventure University, St. Bonaventure, N.Y.

mean that 40% of a person's shyness is produced by genes and the other
60% is produced by the environment. Instead, a 0.40 heritability ratio
suggests that across the human population, the variations we see in
shyness from high to low are influenced moderately by both genetics and
environmental factors. If genetics accounts for about half of the
variability seen in the population's personality, what is the source of
the other half? environmental influences take the form of shared
experiences, which affect all members of a family, and nonshared
experiences, which affect an individual. For example, you and your
siblings might attend the same elementary school and have Thanksgiving
dinner with the extended family (shared experiences) while studying
different musical instruments, having different friends, or playing
different sports (nonshared experiences). Knowing the heritability for a
trait like extroversion does not tell us much about the development of
an individual's personality. heritability estimates are similar to
knowing the overall average annual temperature in north america.
although this information could be useful for the study of global
climate trends, it doesn't tell us whether California is likely to have
more wildfires or whether the skiing industry in Colorado will have a
good year. We know that the population heritability for positive
emotionality is between .46 and .52, but this doesn't tell us how
heritability interacts with shared and nonshared environments to produce
particular outcomes (Krueger et al., 2008; Sanchez-Roige et al., 2018).
In spite of their heritability, personality traits are far from being
set in stone. We observed earlier that confronting experiences such as
unemployment can produce wide-ranging influences on personality.
Researchers have even noted that if you want to change a personality
trait (for example, by becoming more agreeable), that can actually be
done (hudson & Fraley, 2015). not only can people change personality
traits on purpose, but the change will be reflected in their relevant
behaviors.

Adrian and Julian Riester were identical twin friars who died within
hours of each other at the age of 92. Their shared experiences of more
than 65 years as members of the Franciscan order probably accentuated
their genetic similarities.

Personality, Brain Structure, and Brain Function Genes produce proteins
that build the nervous system, which in turn produces behavior,
including personality differences. It follows, then, that personality
traits might be reflected in the structures and activity of the nervous
system. early efforts to link personality and biology examined the
correlations between extroversion and neuroticism traits and the
activities of the

476

Chapter 12

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Courtesy of Jennifer Mather/University of Lethbridge and Roland
Anderson/Seattle Aquarium

autonomic nervous system and reticular formation, structures involved
with arousal discussed in Chapter 4 (e.g., eysenck, 1967). Personality
neuroscientists have investigated individual differences in
neurochemical activity. We have already seen that variations in one gene
related to serotonin function has implications for individual
differences in personality. dopamine and opioid activity appears to be
related to extroversion (deYoung & allen, 2019). variations in cortisol,
a hormone released at times of stress, might be associated with
different levels of neuroticism. early explorations suggested that brain
structure differs across Big Five personality traits. however, more
recent studies using larger numbers of participants, improved brain
imaging technologies, and sophisticated statistical methods have failed
to establish significant differences in cortical thickness, volume of
structures, or white matter related to any of the Big Five traits
(avinun et al., 2020). activity in brain networks, rather than
structural differences, forms the basis of a personality model called
reinforcement sensitivity theory (RST). Individual differences in
approach, avoidance, and inhibition of behavior reflect the activity of
three brain networks: the behavioral approach system (BaS), the
fight--flight freeze system (FFFS), and the behavioral inhibition system
(BIS) (Gray & Mcnaughton, 2003; Kennis et al., 2013). using brain
imaging, researchers have mapped the networks in which activity
successfully predicts individual differences in these three dimensions
of behavior (Kennis et al., 2013; adrián-ventura et al., 2019).
variations in BaS (approach) activity predict a person's response to
reward, or impulsivity. The FFFS (flight--freeze) is active when an
organism experiences unlearned punishment or lack of reward, while the
BIS (inhibition) is active when an organism senses learned signals for
punishment or lack of reward (Gray, 1970, 1987). Individual differences
in FFFS (flight--freeze) activity correlate with reactivity, described
earlier, while differences in BIS (inhibition) activity are associated
with anxiety levels or neuroticism.

After noticing that staff at the Seattle Aquarium had been naming their
octopuses based on their behavior (from shy Emily Dickinson to
destructive Lucretia McEvil), Jennifer Mather tested 44 octopuses
systematically for their responses to stimuli, such as being touched
with a brush. The octopuses seemed to have unique and stable responses,
similar to having a "personality."

The Evolution of Personality If we accept the idea that personality
characteristics are influenced by genetic factors leading to individual
differences in nervous system functioning, an interesting question
arises: how might differences in personality have evolved? as we
mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, cultures and genetic
differences related to personality probably influenced each other over
time. variations exist across cultures, such as the proportions of
highly neurotic individuals, but the Big Five traits in general are
universal because they influence survival for the entire species (Buss,
1996, 1999). Identifying "personality" in other species would support
this evolutionary approach. Ivan Petrovich Pavlov, discussed in Chapter
8, noticed that individual dogs responded differently to frustration:
Some responded "cheerfully," others responded with "anger," some went to
sleep, and still others appeared to have a nervous breakdown (Pavlov,
1906). using a modified human personality questionnaire to evaluate
animals, extroversion and neuroticism have been identified in hyenas,
octopuses, guppies, rats, pigs, dogs, cats, donkeys, monkeys, gorillas,
and chimpanzees (Gosling et al., 2006). humans and chimpanzees share
variations in all of the Big Five traits, but over the course of
evolution, humans lost a sixth trait related to dominance found in
chimpanzees (King & Figueredo, 1997). These differences might have
emerged from unique selection pressures experienced by the two species
(Weiss, 2018). WhaT aRe The BIOlOGICal BaSeS OF PeRSOnalITY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

477

Physical traits appear to change in predictable ways when animals are
domesticated by breeding the most tame members of each generation to
each other. The loss of fur color and the curliness of tails
characterizing many domestic dogs also appeared when researchers
attempted to breed tame foxes. These data suggest that evolution can act
on personality and physical traits in interwoven and complex ways.
Source: L. Trut et al. (2009). "Animal Evolution During Domestication:
The Domesticated Fox As a Model," BioEssays, 31(3), 349-360. doi:
10.1002/bies.200800070

How Do We Assess Personality? Personality is assessed or tested for a
variety of reasons, including the refinement of personality theories,
diagnosing psychological disorders, selecting employees, or making
decisions in courts of law. In everyday life, we assess other people's
personalities by listening to them and watching their behavior.
Observation remains one of the most reliable means of making personality
judgments about others (leichtman, 1995; asendorpf et al., 2002).
however, observation takes precious time and can be biased, as we will
discuss in Chapter 13. In addition to observation, we rely on
interviews. although a skilled interviewer might obtain reliable
information, it is also easy for the person being interviewed to conceal
some aspects of personality. To avoid the pitfalls of observation and
interview, many psychologists turn to standardized tests of personality.
In Chapter 2, we noted that good tests require validity and reliability.
a valid test literally does the job it is advertised to do. For example,
if you constructed a test of creativity, people with high scores on your
test should demonstrate more creativity than do people with lower
scores. a reliable test returns similar results when it is interpreted
by different observers or is taken repeatedly. The results of most
standardized personality tests rely on self-report, which introduces
errors. Self-reports can be influenced by a person's need to appear
socially appropriate (Cyders & Coskunpinar, 2011). an individual
applying for a job in sales is unlikely to admit to being shy. In
Chapter 9, we distinguished between conscious or explicit and
unconscious or implicit memories. Self-report measures do a good job of
tapping into our explicit information about our personalities but may
not capture implicit aspects of personality (asendorpf et al., 2002).
Furthermore, answers on a questionnaire may indicate a person's beliefs
but have relatively less to say about how a person would behave.
Claiming to be honest on a questionnaire says little about whether a
cashier will steal money from the cash register, as we will explore in
Chapter 13. analysis of data from cell phones and social media provides
personality psychologists with ecologically valid snapshots of real
behavior. Researchers constructed a computer algorithm that assesses a
person's "likes" on Facebook (Youyou et al., 2015). The resulting
assessment of a person's Big Five personality traits turned out to be
more accurate than the assessments made by work colleagues, friends,
roommates, and family members (see ● Figure 12.12). Only a person's
spouse could rival the computer. as entertaining as these results might
be, they do raise significant privacy concerns.

personality inventory An objective test, often using numbered scales or
multiple choice, used to assess personality.

478

Chapter 12

Personality Inventories Personality inventories are objective tests,
often using numbered scales or multiple choice, such as the short Big
Five test that you took earlier in the chapter. These tests have

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Correlation with Self-Ratings Computers' Average

0.56

Humans' Average

0.49

Spouse Family

0.50

Cohabitant (Roommate)

0.45

Friend

0.45

Work Colleague

FIguRE 12.12 0.58

0.27

Computers Can Judge Personality, Too. A computer analysis of the
Facebook likes of 86,220 people provided a more accurate assessment of
their personalities, as measured by responses to a 100-item online
questionnaire, than judgments made by their human friends. Source:
Adapted from W. Youyou et al. (2015). "ComputerBased Personality
Judgments Are More Accurate Than Those Made by Humans," Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 112(4), 1036--1040. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1418680112

Olimpik/Shutterstock.com

advantages over more subjective measures, such as interviews or
observation. large numbers of people can be assessed quickly and
inexpensively. Many of the tests perform quite well in terms of
reliability and validity (McCrae et al., 2011). a frequently used
personality inventory is the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
(MMPI), published in the early 1940s and most recently revised in 2020.
The most recent version included new items to assess eating concerns,
impulsivity, compulsivity, and selfimportance and made a greater effort
to include diverse participants in its development process. This test
compares the responses to a number of true--false items made by typical
people and those diagnosed with a psychological disorder (see ● Figure
12.13; hathaway & McKinley, 1940, 1943). For example, responses to the
statement "I usually feel that life is worthwhile and interesting" might
differentiate between people who either are or are not depressed. People
with schizophrenia, but not others, are likely to agree with the
statement, "I seem to hear things that other people can't hear."
although the MMPI was designed to assist with clinical diagnosis, this
is only one of its present-day uses. The publisher's website suggests
that the test can also be used for medical, forensic, and public safety
assessment (Pearson assessments, 2020). The MMPI has been joined by
hundreds of additional objective tests featuring personality
characteristics, including the neO-PI-R, which assesses the Big Five
traits. Most of these tests use response scales rather than the
true--false options of the MMPI. These numbered scales are often called
Likert scales, after Rensis likert (1932). For example, you might be
asked to select the number that best describes you:

We can learn quite a bit about "what kind of person" we have just met
through an interview, but it is also relatively easy for people being
interviewed to present an inaccurate view of their personality.

Outgoing 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Withdrawn

hOW dO We aSSeSS PeRSOnalITY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

479

FIguRE 12.13

95

The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI). The MMPI
compares a participant's responses along several dimensions to people
with diagnosed psychological conditions. Scores above 65 are cause for
concern. In this case, the individual scored normally with the exception
of scale 4, which is the psychopathic deviate scale. This scale measures
conflict, struggle, anger, and respect for society's rules. This person
might be diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder, which we
discuss in Chapter 14.

85

90 80

T-score

75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 VRIN TRIN 43

57

F

FB

FP FBS

L

K

S

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

43

46

56

47

64

60

49

47

57

73

60

57

54

59

51

37

48

Validity scales

Clinical scales

THINkING SCientifiCaLLY Evaluating the Validity and Reliability of
Personality Tests ONE OF THE most widely used personality tests is the
Myers--Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), which is based on the work of Carl
Jung. More than 2 million Americans take the MBTI annually, and most of
the top employers in the United States use it for employment purposes
(Paul, 2010). After answering several forced-choice questions, the MBTI
sorts you into 1 of 16 possible personality types combining four
dimensions: Extroversion--introversion, sensing--intuition,
thinking--feeling, and judging--perceiving. However, experts in
psychological assessment have expressed serious reservations about the
MBTI and many other popular personality tests.

WHaT aM I BEINg aSkED TO BELIEvE OR aCCEpT? We are being asked to
believe that popular personality tests, such as the MBTI, might not meet
our standards of a good test, including strong reliability and validity.

WHaT EvIDENCE SUppORTS THIS pOSITION? One of the greatest weaknesses of
the MBTI and other similar approaches is either/or thinking. As we have
mentioned previously, traits such as introversion/extroversion are

480

Chapter 12

a continuum, with most individuals scoring as "ambiverts," or in the
middle between the extremes (Grant, 2013). In our discussion of
personality testing, we noted that validity and reliability were
essential features of any good test. How does the MBTI hold up on these
criteria? Unfortunately, the answer is not well (Druckman & Bjork,
1991). Validity describes how well a test measures what it is supposed
to measure. Two approaches to evaluating the validity of the MBTI are
using factor analysis and assessing the predictive power of the MBTI
(Pittenger, 1993). Factor analysis allows researchers to explore
correlations among items on a personality test such as the MBTI. If the
MBTI is a valid model, the factor analysis should identify the four
clusters, answers to the questions associated with each cluster should
be highly correlated with each other, and the questions that fit in a
cluster statistically should make sense. In other words, an item
stating, "I like to be the life of the party" should be found in the
extroversion--introversion cluster (Pittenger, 1993). Items in the MBTI
do not meet these validity criteria well. What about the predictive
power of the MBTI? One of the major uses of the test is in career
counseling and employment.

Unfortunately, there is no evidence that certain MBTI types are more
successful than others in an occupation, that certain types are more
satisfied with their occupations, or that certain types remain in their
occupation longer (Pittenger, 1993). The Myers & Briggs Foundation
(2020) now states that the test is intended to be "descriptive" rather
than "predictive" and that the test should not be used to screen
applicants for employment. What about the reliability of the MBTI? If
your personality as measured by the MBTI is stable, we would expect
little variation as you take the test multiple times. However, even with
test--retest intervals as short as five weeks, as many as 50% of all
test takers will be classified into different types on the second try
(Pittenger, 1993). Pittenger's conclusions are disputed by the Myers &
Briggs Foundation (2020), which claims four year re-test correlations of
.57 to .81.

aRE THERE OTHER WayS THaT THIS EvIDENCE COULD BE INTERpRETED? These
criticisms leave us wondering why tests that do not meet the standard
criteria for validity and reliability are still used. Why is the
Rorschach Inkblot Test still admissible to American courts of law? Why
do employers invest in the MBTI for their

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Projective Tests

projective test A test of personality

Projective tests are derived directly from projection, one of Freud's
defense mechanisms. according to the psychodynamic approach, tests can
access the unconscious mind by displaying an ambiguous stimulus, onto
which the test participants "project" their personalities as they
describe the object. a famous projective test, the Rorschach Inkblot
Test, contains 10 different inkblots, some in color and others in black
and white (Rorschach, 1921). The job of the participants is to describe
what each inkblot looks like to them. These responses are written down
by the examiner and scored according to a manual. For example, the
examiner might note that a participant talked about a portion of the
inkblot instead

Swiss psychologist Hermann Rorschach (1884--1922), the son of an artist,
was nicknamed "Klecks," or "inkblot," by his high school classmates
because of his hobby of making inkblot pictures. After becoming a
psychiatrist, he became curious about why people saw the inkblots
differently, and he began analyzing their responses. Despite poor
validity and reliability, the Rorschach Inkblot Test continues to be
used widely.

NetPhotos/Alamy Stock Photo

based on Freudian theory that provides an ambiguous stimulus onto which
test takers "project" their personality.

WHaT OTHER EvIDENCE WOULD I NEED TO EvaLUaTE THESE aLTERNaTIvES? In
Chapter 10, we discussed how decisionmaking depended on a level of
understanding of probability theory that might elude even college
graduates, and a similar argument can be made about the evaluation of
personality tests. Understanding their strengths and weaknesses requires
a sophisticated mastery of statistics that most people simply do not
possess.

WHaT aRE THE MOST REaSONaBLE CONCLUSIONS? What we all can do is use our
best critical thinking skills and ask meaningful questions about the
validity and

reliability of the tests rather than being influenced by brand loyalty
or passively assuming the tests are what they're advertised to be. ■

Applied to a Target Customer As a fun example of how this works, let's
analyze Carrie---she's an ESFP and the target customer for the Ford
Escape compact utility vehicle Personal characteristics

Myers-Briggs preference

Favorite feature

Outgoing and social

Extraversion

Spacious seating for five friends

She lives in the moment and travels to experience life

Sensing

Her powerful EcoBoost engine delivers the fuel efficiency to feed her
curiousity

Stays true to her values, beliefs and ideals

Feeling

Intelligent 4WD system helps the vehicle stay grounded

"I know marriage and family is in my future. I crave change!"

Perceiving

Class-exclusive hands-free, foot-activated liftgate is perfect for her
evolving lifestyle

ESFP

Minerva Studio/Shutterstock.com

employees? Why do so many top tech CEOs rely on enneagrams? Academic
experts in assessment frequently disagree about the usefulness of
certain tools with practitioners, such as therapists, career advisors,
and human relations practitioners, with practitioners much more
influenced by brand name awareness (Furnham, 2018; Lake et al., 2019).
Another reason is our love of insight, which drives otherwise reasonable
people to consult horoscopes, tarot cards, palm readers, and crystal
balls. Upon receiving a description of their MBTI profile, many people
have an "aha" moment, but the same could be said of horoscopes. In
fairness, however, tests like the MBTI are so well marketed and used by
so many reputable institutions that it is natural for the public to feel
a level of trust (see ● Figure 12.14).

FIguRE 12.14 What Not to Do With a Personality Test. Not only is the
Myers-- Briggs Type Indicator questionable in terms of validity and
reliability, but this real-world application of the test to an
automobile customer's choice for a "hands-free, foot-activated liftgate"
in her car is not in the best scientific tradition. hOW dO We aSSeSS
PeRSOnalITY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

481

of the entire image. This response would be scored as indicating the
participant's concrete, rather than abstract, way of thinking. despite
serious questions about its reliability and validity (Wood et al., 2003;
Wood et al., 2010), the Rorschach Inkblot Test remains more widely used
than the MMPI. Out of a randomly selected group of 1,000 therapist
members of the american Psychological association, 82% reported using
the Rorschach at least occasionally, and 43% use it frequently or always
(Watkins et al., 1995).

The Ethics of Personality Testing Personality tests are used by
therapists, potential employers, judges, attorneys, educators, and
others, raising important ethical concerns. Who gets to see these data?
how are they stored? For what purposes may they be used? Is the examiner
trained in the administration and evaluation of tests? In many cases,
such as in the use of the MMPI, sensitive and private data are
generated. In other cases, like the Rorschach Inkblot Test, the results
are at best controversial. This widely used test has described normal
children as having problems approaching psychosis (hamel et al., 2000;
Garb et al., 2005). using invalid results to make important real-world
decisions could be disastrous. The american Psychological association
has wrestled with these questions, incorporating recommendations
regarding the disclosure of test data into the organization's code of
conduct (american Psychological association, 2017). Should you be asked
to take a personality test, it would be prudent to fully educate
yourself regarding the test and make an informed decision about whether
to proceed.

Diverse Voices in Psychology Diversity and Personality Assessments

482

Chapter 12

assess personality as a function of sexual with English, we might assume
the test orientation (e.g., Bogaert et al., 2018) and is asking us if we
are good bartenders or disability status (e.g., Youngman, 2017) have
sound technicians rather than someone only recently begun to be
examined. ■ who is comfortable around new people. Much work remains to
be done to assess race, ethnicity, and other facets of diversity
appropriately. Most standardized instruments have taken gender and age
into consideration, although many approach gender in a binary manner.
Challenges associated with the Ethical uses of personality assessments
take multiple types of diversity use of standardized into account,
including race, ethnicity, gender, age, sexual orientation, instruments
to and disability. Cultura Creative (RF)/Alamy Stock Photo

AT THE HEART OF RESEARCH related to diversity and personality is a
dependence on the appropriate use of accurate assessments. The practice
of administering a personality test to people representing different
groups and then concluding that any differences should be attributed to
group membership is common but full of risks (Weiner & Greene, 2017).
Many studies of this type fail to control for confounding variables such
as socioeconomic status and education. The heterogeneity of large ethnic
groups is often ignored. For example, the U.S. federal government
recognizes over 500 distinct native entities, including Native American
and Alaskan groups. Further difficulties arise when a person is asked to
take an instrument in English when English is not the person's native
language. We can easily imagine the potential for confusion for someone
unfamiliar with English when responding to an MMPI item that states, "I
am a good mixer." Even if we are familiar

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

summary 12.1 The Big Five Traits trait

Description

Openness to experience

Artistic, curious, imaginative, insightful, original, wide interests,
unusual thought processes, intellectual interests

Conscientiousness

Efficient, organized, planful, reliable, thorough, dependable, ethical,
productive

Extroversion

Active, assertive, energetic, outgoing, talkative, gesturally
expressive, gregarious

Agreeableness

Appreciative, forgiving, generous, kind, trusting, noncritical, warm,
compassionate, considerate, straightforward

Neuroticism

Anxious, self-pitying, tense, emotionally unstable, impulsive,
vulnerable, touchy, prone to worry

Credits: Top row---Mieke Dalle/Getty Images; Second row---wunkley/Alamy
Stock Photo.

What Does It Mean to Have a Self? One of the most fundamental
psychological distinctions we make is between our self and others.
William James (1890, p. 330) argued in favor of "the belief in a
distinct principle of selfhood" and believed that such a principle could
be studied scientifically. Knowing something about the personalities of
others makes it easier for us to anticipate what others will feel,
think, or do and, therefore, to interact more effectively with them. But
what about the patterns of thought, feelings, and actions we see in
ourselves? When we think about this personal knowledge, we are thinking
about the self. a person's sense of self combines a number of separate
factors (Kahn, 2013). having a self means having a sense of unity, or of
being a single human. The self incorporates a history or a sense of
continuity. This aspect of self helps us organize our personal knowledge
on a timeline, providing us with a past, present, and future. a sense of
embodiment means that the self is embedded in the body (as opposed to
the sensation of having an out-of-body experience, discussed in Chapter
6). a self has free will, or the feeling we can do whatever we want to
do,

self Patterns of thought, feelings, and actions we perceive in our own
minds.

WhaT dOeS IT Mean TO have a SelF?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

483

and self-location, which means we understand our current location. The
self uses a firstperson perspective. Finally, the self is embedded in a
social network and is influenced by the quality of those relationships.
Psychologists approach the study of the self by examining the aBCs:
affect, behavior, and cognition. The affective or emotional components
of the self include our evaluation of the self or level of self-esteem,
discussed in greater detail later in this chapter. Behavior and
self-concept form reciprocal relationships. We gain self-knowledge by
observing our behavior, and our thoughts about the type of people we are
influence our behavior. Cognitive processes help us organize information
and think about the self.

Courtesy of John T. Cacioppo and Laura Freberg

Self-Concept

Our self-concept captures the way we see ourselves, which we often
portray through our choice of social networking profile pictures. Here
are profile pictures on Facebook featuring your authors. What do your
profile pictures say to others about you? self-concept People's
description of their own characteristics.

self-schema A cognitive organization that helps us think about the self
and process self-relevant information.

For the moment, set aside your reading and make a list of 10 things that
complete the sentence "I am \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." If you are like
most college students, this description of your self-concept includes
references to demographic factors, such as age, sex, or student status
(first year or psychology major); personality features (outgoing or
shy); relationships with others (friend, lover, daughter, son, sister,
or brother); physical attributes (pretty, tall, or brown eyed); and
various other roles (athlete, club member, or Texan). We use
self-schemas to think about these many aspects of the self (Markus,
1977). as we discussed in Chapters 10 and 11, schemas provide cognitive
structures for organizing information. The structure provided by a
self-schema influences not only the way you view yourself but also how
you view and interact with others. a major implication of having a
self-schema is that we process self-relevant information differently
than information about others. For example, we might think about our own
brown hair in different ways than we think about our neighbor's brown
hair. This self-reference effect (SRe) was demonstrated when four groups
of participants were given lists of adjectives to memorize with
different instructions (Rogers et al., 1977). The first group judged the
size of letters making up the word, the second group judged whether the
word rhymed with another word, the third group judged whether the word
had the same meaning as another word, and the last group judged whether
the word described them. The fourth group's recall for the words was
subsequently superior to recall by the other groups (see ● Figure
12.15). These results implied that the self provided "a superordinate
schema" (Rogers et al., 1977, p. 685). Questions remain, however, as to
the true cause of the observed SRe. Is there something special about
self-schemas, or is the SRe simply a result of general memory processes
such as depth of processing or elaboration, which we discussed in
Chapter 9? For example, memory

FIguRE 12.15

Source: Adapted from T. B. Rogers et al. (1977). "Self-Reference and the
Encoding of Personal Information," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 35(9), 677--688. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.35.9.677

484

Chapter 12

0.35 0.3 Mean adjusted recall

using a Self-Schema Improves Recall for Words. Participants in this
experiment were asked whether a word was in larger font (structural),
rhymed with another word (phonemic), meant the same thing as another
word (semantic), or described the participant (self-reference). As you
can see from these results, when participants used their self-schemas to
consider a word, later recall for the word was better than when the word
was considered structurally, phonemically, or semantically. These
results suggest that your memory for material you are studying will be
improved by thinking about how it relates to your own life.

0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0

Structural

Phonemic

Semantic

Self-reference

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

enhancement also occurred in a group that judged whether words described
the study participants' mothers (Bower & Gilligan, 1979). We may
remember self-relevant information simply because we know a lot about
the subject---ourselves.

Self-Awareness When answering the questions posed in the previous
section, how do you know what to say? To know yourself requires you to
make the self an object to be examined. Just as you try to figure out
what kind of people your classmates and instructor are, you have the
capacity to turn this analysis inward to the self. Self-awareness, or
knowledge of your own internal traits, feelings, roles, and memories, is
the result of this self-study. In addition, self-awareness allows us to
establish boundaries between the self and other people. When we talk
about ourselves, look at ourselves in a mirror, watch a video of
ourselves, or stand out from the crowd in some way, we become more
self-aware than usual. This state of heightened self-awareness can be
quite unpleasant. Many people experience a negative mood when they look
in a mirror (Fejfar & hoyle, 2000). Related to this negative
self-awareness is the concept of self-consciousness, our awareness of
our own characteristics and the way the self is perceived by others. In
many cases, we overestimate how much attention others pay to our
behavior, a phenomenon known as the spotlight effect. When student
participants wearing an embarrassing T-shirt featuring 1970s pop singer
Barry Manilow entered a room full of other students, they expected at
least half of their fellow students to notice (Gilovich et al., 2000).
In fact, only 23% of the students paid attention to the T-shirts. The
particularly active spotlight effect that accompanies puberty is
responsible for substantial pain during adolescence (elkind, 1967;
elkind & Bowen, 1979). Teens are convinced that their every flaw and
blemish is scrutinized by others. how reassuring it would be to
understand that other teens are so worried about the imaginary
audience's reactions to their own flaws that they scarcely have time to
notice the flaws of others. Self-consciousness might be unpleasant, but
it makes people behave more ethically. When children were instructed by
a sign to "take only one halloween candy," they were more likely to
comply when they could see their image in a mirror (Beaman et al.,
1979). In a similar study, an honor-system coffee bar featured either a
poster showing a pair of eyes or a poster showing a bouquet of flowers
(Bateson et al., 2006). People were more likely to put money in the box
to pay for their coffee when they saw the poster of the eyes (see ●
Figure 12.16). use of body cameras by police officers, raising their
self-awareness of their actions, has decreased officers' use of force
and number of complaints (ariel et al., 2015).

FIguRE 12.16

10

8

Time (weeks)

7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

Eye weeks Flower weeks 0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Money paid per liter of milk consumed

0.7

Photos: Blaj Gabriel/Shutterstock.com; Guzel Studio/Shutterstock.com

9

Self-Consciousness and Honesty. The amount of money collected in a
college department honor-system coffee bar relative to consumption was
measured by tracking milk consumption (this study was conducted in the
United Kingdom, where coffee is rarely consumed black). Donations
increased when a poster of eyes appeared above the bar and decreased
when a poster of flowers appeared above the bar. Self-consciousness,
perhaps from feeling "watched" by the photograph of eyes, typically
results in more ethical behavior. Whether we are responding similarly to
the large numbers of surveillance cameras in our environments remains to
be demonstrated through future research. Source: Adapted from M. Bateson
et al. (2006). "Cues of Being Watched Enhance Cooperation in a
Real-World Setting," Biology Letters, 2(3), 412--414. doi:
10.1098/rsbl.2006.0509

WhaT dOeS IT Mean TO have a SelF?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

485

Roger Freberg

Barry Manilow might have sold millions of records in the 1970s, but
students in 2000 thought wearing this shirt would be embarrassing. We
tend to overestimate how much attention others pay to us, though, and
only 23% of study participants noticed the T-shirt.

how do we obtain self-knowledge? an obvious source of self-awareness is
the process of introspection, or the direct observation of one's own
thoughts and feelings. after all, who is in a better position to know
what goes on inside our heads than we are? unfortunately, as we
discussed in Chapter 1, introspection is not considered reliable.
Perhaps we could bypass mental states and focus instead on our
observable behavior. People seem to use their behavior as a clue to
their characteristics, just as any other observer does (Bem, 1972). If
they see themselves behaving in a kindly way toward others, maybe they
are kind people. In support of this approach, people who were gently
encouraged to provide flattering descriptions of themselves scored
higher on a subsequent test of self-esteem (Jones et al., 1981). In
other words, if they observe themselves providing a positive
self-analysis, it must be true. The people around us also contribute to
our self-knowledge. We use the reactions of other people like a mirror
to "see" our own characteristics, developing a looking-glass self. We
also incorporate the opinions of significant others into our
self-concept. If our parents viewed us as brilliant, it is likely that
we would view ourselves as brilliant too. using the reactions of others
works better when defining some characteristics than others. If our
parents inaccurately view us as brilliant, we soon learn the truth at
school. If they unfairly think we're lazy, though, it is more difficult
to figure out they're wrong. an obvious component of self-knowledge
arises from autobiographical and episodic memories, described in Chapter
9. Who we are today is intimately linked with the self from the past
that we remember. While offering valuable information about "who we
are," episodic and autobiographical memories can provide a partial,
incomplete, and occasionally inaccurate picture. as one psychologist
noted, "The past is remembered as if it were a drama in which the self
was the leading player" (Greenwald, 1980, p. 604).

Self-Esteem not only do we form a self-concept, but we also judge its
value. This personal report card is known as self-esteem. Self-esteem
may be global, based on our overall self-worth, or specific, relating to
particular characteristics such as appearance or intelligence.
Self-esteem introduces an emotional aspect to our self-concept. not only
do we judge ourselves, but we experience emotional responses to that
judgment. Judgments of the self are not necessarily accurate. Most
people experience "positive illusions," which lead them to judge
themselves more positively and less negatively than they judge others
(Taylor & Brown, 1988). despite inaccuracies, people who experience
positive illusions enjoy a heightened sense of well-being. People with
high and low self-esteem respond differently to failure. The low
self-esteem person overgeneralizes from failure (Brown & Mankowski,
1993). In other words, people with low self-esteem who fail one exam
might assume that they are going to fail all their classes. This
tendency to overgeneralize might explain why people with low self-esteem
are more prone to depression (Sowislo & Orth, 2013), discussed further
in Chapter 14. In contrast, people with high self-esteem respond to
failure in one domain by exaggerating their abilities in other domains
(Brown & Smart, 1991). If people with high self-esteem fail an exam,
they are more likely to remind others about how great they are in
sports, appearance, or dating.

Sources of Self-Esteem Because of the importance of self-esteem to
psychological well-

self-esteem A judgment of the value of the self.

486

Chapter 12

being, psychologists have looked at the origins of self-esteem
carefully. Many psychologists believe that the process of developing
self-esteem begins early in childhood (Cvencek et al., 2016). across 48
nations, self-esteem is generally high during childhood, drops during
adolescence, rises gradually in adulthood, then drops again slightly in
old age (Bleidorn et al., 2016). Self-esteem is influenced by social
comparisons, or the judgments we make of our own worth relative to those
around us (Festinger, 1954). The impact of social comparisons on
self-esteem was demonstrated in an experiment in which researchers
placed an advertisement for a research assistant (Morse & Gergen, 1970).
Prospective employees found themselves in a waiting room with another
candidate, who was actually an actor working for the

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Image Courtesy of The Advertising Archives

Dove, a division of Unilever that produces skin and hair care products,
lists its social mission as building women's self-esteem. The company
reports that only 4% of women worldwide consider themselves beautiful.
To combat the influence of upward social comparisons, in which girls and
women judge their attractiveness against the impossibly beautiful images
of women in the media, Dove has committed to using diverse, natural
looking models in their advertisements.

experimenters. The actor took the role of either Mr. Clean or Mr. dirty.
Participants waiting with Mr. Clean experienced drops in self-esteem,
whereas the self-esteem of participants waiting with Mr. dirty rose.
Psychologists have been curious about the effects of social media on
social comparisons and self-esteem. viewing selfies frequently on social
media is negatively correlated with selfesteem (Wang et al., 2017).
People with a high need for popularity responded more dramatically to
viewing selfies. The same researchers reported that viewing groupies
frequently was positively associated with self-esteem. People with high
self-esteem tend to make downward comparisons, in which they compare
themselves to those they consider less worthy on a particular dimension.
For example, a beautiful woman with high self-esteem is more likely to
congratulate herself on how much better looking she is than her friends
but is unlikely to compare herself with hollywood beauties. In contrast,
people with low self-esteem are likely to do the opposite. a beautiful
woman with low self-esteem will engage in upward comparisons, chastising
herself because she doesn't measure up to the most beautiful women in
the world. Regardless of self-esteem, we all seem to engage in a
reassuring type of downward comparison when viewing our own pasts
(Wilson & Ross, 2000). Most of us look back in time with a sense that we
have improved. Our virtues are greater today than they used to be, and
our faults are less.

Gender, Race, and Culture and Self-Esteem Given the influence of social

comparisons on self-esteem, we might suspect that belonging to certain
social groups would affect an individual's self-esteem. If you are a
member of a privileged group in society, for example, shouldn't you have
higher self-esteem than people who have experienced prejudice and
discrimination? Males appear to have a small to moderate advantage over
females in self-esteem (Bleidorn et al., 2016). This finding is stable
across 48 nations, suggesting the possibility of biological
contributions to self-esteem. On the other hand, it is also possible
that the male advantage emerges from social patterns that are universal
across cultures. Further research is needed to clarify the sources of
this gender difference. WhaT dOeS IT Mean TO have a SelF?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

487

Courtesy of Missy Beers

The bask-in-reflected-glory (BIRG) effect predicts that sales of apparel
featuring a winning team like the Ohio State Buckeyes are likely to be
much higher than those for a losing team. Associating with those we
admire can produce self-enhancement.

Meta-analyses of self-esteem demonstrated differences based on race and
ethnicity in the united States (Twenge & Crocker, 2002; erol & Orth,
2011). as we noted in Chapter 11, beginning in adolescence,
african-americans score higher than white americans in measures of
self-esteem. however, americans identifying themselves as asian or
native american scored below white americans in measures of self-esteem.
hispanic adolescents had lower self-esteem than white teens but reported
higher self-esteem at age 30 than white americans (erol & Orth, 2011).
Cultural differences among groups might account for some of these
results. as we mentioned previously, people in more collectivistic
cultures might avoid standing out from the group by giving themselves
highly positive ratings (see ● Figure 12.17). Results from tests that
tap into implicit attitudes by asking participants to associate
themselves with either positive words (glorious, happy, or laughter) or
negative words (agony, horrible, or nasty) suggest that asian americans
have about the same level of self-esteem as white americans, but
cultural values of modesty usually override their outward expression of
that self-esteem (Greenwald & Farnham, 2000). Culture plays an
additional role in self-esteem by setting the values by which people
measure themselves. adherence to cultural values, more so than to
individual values, were shown to predict self-esteem across 20 different
cultural settings (Becker et al., 2014). although individual achievement
is an important part of self-esteem, finding meaningfulness through
belonging to multiple groups is also a predictor of a person's
self-esteem (Jetten et al., 2015). The group membership effect on
self-esteem is not simply a matter of having more friends but more
likely from a sense of belonging to something larger than the self.

Using Self-Enhancement to Protect Self-Esteem The good news is that most
of us feel rather positively about ourselves. The bad news is that we
are a wee bit unrealistic. People who perform most poorly are the most
likely to engage in self-enhancement by inflating their opinions of
themselves. College students who performed in the bottom 12% on tests of
logic, grammar, and humor guessed that they performed better than 62% of
their peers (Kruger & dunning, 1999). as student performance increased,
the amount of inflation decreased. Some people begin protecting their
self-esteem long before a performance takes place. In self-handicapping,
people begin to build an excuse in advance, just in case they fail
(Berglas & Jones, 1978). Self-handicapping strategies take many forms,
including taking drugs, failing to practice or do homework, commenting
on poor health or stress, or sandbagging. Sandbagging occurs when you
let everyone know how bad you are at something. By lowering expectations
of your performance, nobody will notice much when you fail. although
self-handicapping may protect your self-esteem, it does not make you
popular with others (Rhodewalt et al., 1995).

FIguRE 12.17

450

Cultural Differences in Explicit and Implicit Measures of Self-Esteem.
Apparent cultural differences in self-esteem must be evaluated
carefully. Using explicit measures of self-esteem, it appears that white
Americans have higher self-esteem than Asian Americans. However, when
implicit measures of self-esteem are used, this difference disappears,
suggesting that the observed difference is probably because of cultural
norms related to modesty.

350

Source: Adapted from A. G. Greenwald & S. D. Farnham (2000). "Using the
Implicit Association Test to Measure Self-Esteem and SelfConcept,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 1022--1038. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.79.6.1022

488

Chapter 12

Self-esteem measures

400

300 250 200 150 100 50 0

White Americans Asian Americans Implicit self-esteem

Explicit self-esteem

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

another method of self-enhancement is to associate with others you
admire. This approach has been labeled the bask-in-reflected-glory
(BIRG) effect (Cialdini et al., 1976). On the Monday following a
football game, university students are more likely to wear sweatshirts
with their school's name if their team won than if it lost. We are
equally quick to distance ourselves from failure. Many an athlete or
performer has been surprised at how many friends they have during
successful times and how quickly those friends disappear when times are
tough. Self-enhancement may serve to protect self-esteem, but it can
have many unwanted effects. Primary among these negative side effects is
being disliked by others. People who engage in self-enhancement
typically make good first impressions, but these impressions do not last
(Paulhus, 1998).

© U. S. Department of Health and Human Services

The Advantages of Self-Esteem having high self-esteem provides several
benefits both to the individual and to the groups to which the
individual with high self-esteem belongs. among the advantages of high
self-esteem for individuals are happiness and persistence (Baumeister et
al., 2003). These outcomes occur because high self-esteem acts as a
buffer. When faced with bad news, people with high self-esteem are more
likely to weather the storm than are people with low self-esteem. In
addition, high self-esteem enhances social dominance within a peer group
(Juvonen, 2005). Self-esteem contributes to belongingness or the
maintenance of good social relationships (Baumeister & leary, 1995;
leary & downs, 1995; leary et al., 1995). Because social rejection could
have such devastating effects on survival in our evolutionary past,
self-esteem could have emerged as a way of estimating the likelihood of
rejection. Self-esteem drops following the experience of social
exclusion (leary et al., 1995). a drop in self-esteem serves as an early
warning signal that rejection by the group is imminent, and behavior
designed to regain the favor of the group should be initiated. a terror
management theory suggests that self-esteem interacts with a cultural
worldview to buffer our fear of death (Greenberg et al., 1986;
Pyszczynski et al., 1991). Cultural worldviews can include shared
beliefs that allow us to attain feelings of immortality, whether through
producing children, writing books, or believing in an afterlife. By
conforming to these cultural worldviews, people enjoy enhanced
self-esteem that reduces their anxiety related to death. having members
with high self-esteem is an advantage to groups in several respects.
People with high self-esteem are more likely to speak critically when in
groups (lePine & van dyne, 1998). Groups that do not have members who
are willing to question group decisions might fall prey to poor
decision-making, discussed further in Chapter 13. People with high
selfesteem not only value themselves but also value the groups to which
they belong (aberson et al., 2000). People with low self-esteem do not
show this favoritism. If a group is highly valued by its members, its
overall success is likely to be enhanced, which in turn benefits its
members.

Terror management theory suggests that self-esteem serves as a
protection against our fear of death. When people are reminded of their
own mortality, self-esteem can increase. Ironically, these labels
proposed by the government for cigarette packages might have the
unintended consequences of enhancing, rather than diminishing, favorable
attitudes about smoking. Some smokers equate smoking with improving
their image, which in turn improves their self-esteem (Hansen, Winzeler,
& Topolinski, 2009).

WhaT dOeS IT Mean TO have a SelF?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

489

PSYCHOLOGY aS a Hub SCienCe

Although many people believe that raising children's self-esteem is a
good thing, research suggests that self-esteem is more likely to be the
outcome rather than the cause of behavior. Providing feel-good messages
that are not based in real achievement can backfire (Forsyth & Kerr,
1999).

IN 1989, THE CALIFORNIA TASK FORCE ON SELF-ESTEEM AND PERSONAL AND
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY published a report that declared "many, if not
most, of the major problems plaguing society have roots in the low
self-esteem of many of the people who make up society" (Mecca et al.,
1989, p. 1). Teachers, parents, and therapists express similar beliefs
and actively work to increase the self-esteem of others. These
approaches mirror a commonsense attitude toward self-esteem. high
self-esteem seems more desirable than low self-esteem, and interventions
designed to raise self-esteem appear on the surface to be a good thing.
how accurate are these views of self-esteem? Self-esteem and school
grades are positively correlated, although the effects are surprisingly
small (Baumeister et al., 2003). as with all correlations, we cannot
reach conclusions about the cause of this relationship without further
data. explicit efforts to identify a causal relationship between
self-esteem and school performance have failed to support the
commonsense hypothesis that high self-esteem produces good performance.
a sample of 1,600 young males in the 10th grade was followed for an
additional 8 years (Bachman & O'Malley, 1977). no evidence for a causal
role for self-esteem in school performance was discovered. Instead,
third factors, including socioeconomic status, IQ, and early school
performance, appeared responsible for the correlation between
self-esteem and school performance. In fact, high self-esteem seems more
likely to be a result of good grades, not vice versa (Rosenberg et al.,
1989). What do these findings mean for efforts such as the California
Task Force, which sought to raise achievement by improving self-esteem?
unfortunately, interventions intended to boost self-esteem can backfire.
When students receiving poor grades on a midterm were sent an e-mail
message designed to boost their self-worth, they performed significantly
worse on the next exams than did students in control groups (Forsyth &
Kerr, 1999). This study provides an important lesson: Providing
indiscriminate feel-good messages that are not anchored in achievement
results in lower achievement. If relationships between school
achievement and self-esteem are weaker than many believe, what about the
relationships between self-esteem and social problems such as
aggression? again, our commonsense hypotheses fail us. We have heard
parents, teachers, and legislators lament that many social problems
would dissipate if only we could raise selfesteem. This commonsense
notion was challenged by Roy Baumeister and his colleagues, who
discovered that aggressive people were more likely to have positive and
frequently inflated views of their self-worth (Baumeister et al., 1999;
Baumeister et al., 2003). ■

Contrary to many stereotypes, bullies typically do not suffer from low
self-esteem. They experience less depression, less anxiety, and less
loneliness than prosocial youth and are likely to be considered by peers
"the coolest kids in their classes." (Juvonen, 2005).

490

Chapter 12

oliveromg/Shutterstock.com

Douglas Pulsipher/Alamy Stock Photo

Self-Esteem, Academic Performance, and Aggression

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© 2006 Elsevier B.V.

Sometimes when we try to use our self-regulation abilities to not think
of something ("Whatever you do, don't think about white bears"), we end
up thinking quite a bit about the object we wish to avoid.

Emotional domain: self \> nonself

The Brain and the Self

Facial domain: self \> nonself

If the mind is the product of the activity of the nervous system, is it
possible to locate the self within these patterns of activity? this
question suggests that information about the self is processed in unique
and special ways by the nervous system (Gillihan & farah, 2005). as we
have seen so far in this chapter, the concept of self can mean many
things. Brain correlates have been found for knowledge of our own
bodies---their configuration, appearance, and location---as well as for
memories of personal experiences, interpersonal connections, and use of
a first-person perspective. Given the large number of different aspects
of the self, it should not be surprising that a widely distributed
network of brain structures participates in the processing of the self
(Cacioppo & Decety, 2011). activity in the default mode network or DMn
(see Chapter 6) is often associated with thinking about the self (Kahn,
2013). however, during thinking about the self, activity in the DMn is
joined by activity in parts of the brain that process external sources
of information, such as the awareness of other people and the
environment. these observations remind us of our constant use of context
when we think about ourselves. an important aspect of the self is the
recognition of our own faces. the right hemisphere plays a special role
in distinguishing our own faces from those of other people. In one
study, one hemisphere of each participant's brain was made inactive
using an anesthetic. When study participants then viewed a photograph
combining one half of their face with the half-face of a famous person,
they recognized themselves when the left hemisphere was anesthetized but
reported

Memory domain: self \> nonself Motor domain: self \> nonself Social
domain: self

U

to meet the expectations we have for ourselves, we engage in
self-regulation, also known as self-control or willpower.
self-regulation consists of conscious executive efforts to control our
thoughts, motives, feelings, and behaviors (Carver & scheier, 2000).
failures to regulate behavior frequently lead to some of the most
perplexing problems facing society, including drug abuse, domestic
violence, and binge eating. In addition, deficits in self-regulation
characterize several psychological disorders we discuss in Chapter 14,
including schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(aDhD), and obsessivecompulsive disorder. Individual differences in
self-regulation, as we observed earlier in this chapter, are apparent at
young ages. While a certain amount of self-regulation is related to
training and supervision on the part of adults, individuals show
different patterns of brain activation while facing temptation.
Increased activity in the nucleus accumbens, which is implicated in
processing reward and addiction, is associated with self-control
failures, such as eating something we intended to pass by.
simultaneously, higher activity in the prefrontal cortex was associated
with an individual's ability to withstand temptation (lopez et al.,
2014). In self-regulation, we make distinctions between what is good for
the current self (eating a yummy treat) and what is good for the future
self (having good health). We perceive the future self more like a
different individual who stands in judgment of our current choices.
thus, activity in brain areas associated with self-centered (egocentric)
thinking is associated with more impulsive and selfish decisions
(soutschek et al., 2016). self-regulation is made even more difficult
because the harder we think about not doing something, the more likely
we are to do it (Wegner, 1994). try, for example, to avoid thinking
about a white bear for the next 30 seconds. If you are like most people,
your thoughts were suddenly dominated by images of white bears. We can
explain this phenomenon as follows. When you try to control your
behavior, you simultaneously activate a concern about failing. In an
effort to avoid failure, you automatically pay more attention to the
item or behavior to be avoided. "What exactly is this white bear thing I
should avoid?" Because of this attention, we end up doing what we hoped
to avoid doing.

Iakov Filimonov/Shutterstock.com

Self-Regulation

other Social domain: self \> other Spatial domain: self \> nonself
Verbal domain: self \> nonself

A widely distributed network of brain structures participates in
processing the different aspects of self. Self-referential processing,
or the processing of information relevant to ourselves but not others,
can occur in our emotional, facial, memory, motor, social, spatial, and
verbal domains. Source: G. Northoff et al. (2006). "Selfreferential
Processing In Our Brain--- A Meta-analysis of Imaging Studies On the
Self," NeuroImage, 31(1), 440--457. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.12.002

What Does It Mean to have a self?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

491

seeing the famous person when the right hemisphere was anesthetized
(Keenan et al., 2001; see ● Figure 12.18). In addition to playing an
important role in recognizing our own faces, the right hemisphere is
necessary for the construction of stable traits and attitudes. The
location of brain damage (right hemisphere only, left hemisphere only,
or both hemispheres) can be correlated with observed changes in personal
characteristics that usually show little change over time, such as
political views and religious beliefs (Miller et al., 2001). Only people
with right hemisphere damage alone showed changes in these normally
stable characteristics. Schizophrenia, which we discuss in Chapter 14,
produces distortions in a person's sense of self (Feinberg, 1978). One
common symptom is a delusion of control, or the sense that some external
agent is either monitoring or influencing a person's behavior. This
delusion is highly relevant to our current discussion, because it
represents confusion over the behavior produced

Famous

LH anaesthesia

RH anaesthesia

Number of patients

5 4 3 2 1 0 Self

(a) 

Famous

Self

Famous

(b) 

Illustration: Argosy Publishing, Inc.; photo (Marilyn): Image
Source/Alamy Stock Photo; Alfred Eisenstaedt/Getty Images

Self

FIguRE 12.18 Recognizing Your Own Face. Participants in this experiment
viewed blended faces made from one half of their own photograph and one
half of a photograph of a famous person. When the participants' left
hemispheres (LHs) were anesthetized, leaving the right hemisphere (RH)
active, they believed the photo was their own (a). When their right
hemispheres were anesthetized, leaving the left hemisphere active, most
believed the photo showed the famous person (b). These results suggest
that for many people, the right hemisphere plays a role in recognizing
our own faces. Source: Adapted from J. P. Keenan et al. (2001).
"Self-Recognition and the Right Hemisphere," Nature, 409(6818), 305.
doi: 10.1038/35053167

492

Chapter 12

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

mangostock/Shutterstock.com

AISPIX/Shutterstock.com

by the self or by others. For example, people with this symptom might
describe their behavior as controlled by others through implants in
their brains. a comparison of brain activity during such delusions and
after they recede indicated that the delusions of control were
correlated with excess activity in the right hemisphere (Spence, 1997).

When we interact with significant others, such as family members, we
experience the relational self. When we interact with larger groups, for
example, other fans supporting the same sports team, such as these
Brazilian soccer fans, we experience the collective self.

The Social Self The self we have discussed so far represents the
personal self or the attributes that differentiate an individual's self
from all others (Brewer & Gardner, 1996). This self both shapes and is
shaped by interactions with others. Just who those others are and how
they interact with the self has been the subject of significant
psychological inquiry.

The Interpersonal Self William James (1890) remarked that an individual
has "as many different social selves as there are distinct groups of
persons about whose opinion he cares" (p. 294). In other words, in
addition to having a personal self, we experience an interpersonal self.
In current psychological discussions of the self, influences on the
interpersonal self fall into two categories: a person's significant
others and the social groups to which the person belongs. Significant
others include family members, friends, coworkers, and others with whom
the self interacts or has interacted. as we interact with significant
others, we experience the relational self (Brewer & Gardner, 1996; Chen
et al., 2006). The influence of the larger groups to which we belong
provides our collective self (Brewer & Gardner, 1996). The concept of
the interpersonal self implies that an individual's self is more
flexible and complex than it would be based on a personal self alone.
This flexibility is illustrated by the suggestion that we have a
relational self when we are with a particular person, such as the "me
when I'm with mom" (Chen et al., 2006, p. 153). It is likely that a
great deal of overlap occurs among the many interpersonal selves we
experience, but recognizing that we may not be consistent across all
social situations is important. The differences we experience echo the
discussion earlier in the chapter about personality traits and
situations. Cultural Influences on the Self Given the interpersonal
dimensions of the self described in the previous section, it should come
as no surprise that the concept of the self means different things in
different cultures. One aspect of cultural differences that is
particularly relevant to the study of the self is the distinction
between individualism and collectivism (see ● Figure 12.19).
Individualism is characterized by an emphasis on independence and
self-reliance. In contrast, core values of collectivism include
interdependence, cooperation, and lack of conflict. as we discussed in
the introduction to this chapter, these relative weightings of self and
others tend to characterize entire nations. The united States,
australia, Great Britain, Canada, and the netherlands appear to be the
most individualistic, while venezuela, Colombia, Pakistan, Peru, Taiwan,
and China appear to be the most collectivistic (hofstede, 1980). The
individualistic--collectivistic nature of any particular culture is a
moving target across time (hamamura, 2012), and our characterization of
particular social groups requires constant updating. The typical view of
Japanese as collectivists and americans as individualists was supported
by only five out of

interpersonal self The self we are in the presence of other people.

WhaT dOeS IT Mean TO have a SelF?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

493

FIguRE 12.19

120

Source: Adapted from G. Hofstede (1980). Culture's Consequences. Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage.

100 80 Score

Individualism and Collectivism. Geert Hofstede compared cultures on five
dimensions relevant to individualism and collectivism. Compared to the
Chinese, Americans are less tolerant of unequal distributions of power
(PDI), more likely to expect self-reliance (IDV), about equally
assertive and competitive rather than modest and caring (MAS), more
tolerant of ambiguity and lack of structure (UAI), and far less thrifty
and persistent (LTO).

60 40

China

20

USA

0

World PDI

IDV

MAS

UAI

LTO

Dimension PDI: Less powerful accept and expect that power is distributed
unequally. IDV: Refers to individuals or groups, not the state, and
their role in taking care of you. MAS: Higher numbers indicate more
assertive and competitive, rather than modest and caring. UAI: Tolerance
for ambiguity, unstructured situations. LTO: Thrift, perseverance

30 reviewed studies (Takano & Osaka, 2018). Instead, 19 studies found no
difference in collectivism and individualism between the cultures, and
11 studies reported that Japanese are more individualistic than
americans. Two major differences occur between highly individualistic
cultures and more collectivistic cultures (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). The
first difference predicts a person's source of satisfaction. People in
individualistic cultures feel best about themselves when they experience
personal achievement, whereas people in collectivistic cultures feel
good about belonging to a successful group. For example, a baseball
player from an individualistic culture might take pride in having a
terrific batting average even though his team is losing, whereas the
player from a more collectivistic culture might feel better about being
a member of the top team regardless of his personal performance. The
second difference predicts a person's sense of being similar to other
group members. In individualistic cultures, people are more likely to
see themselves as unique. In collectivistic cultures, conformity and
appearing like others are more highly valued. White american and Korean
study participants were offered the gift of a pen, which they were to
choose from a group of three or four pens of the same color and one pen
with a unique color. Whereas 74% of the white americans chose the
uniquely colored pen, 76% of the Koreans chose a pen with the more
common color (Kim & Markus, 1999).

interpersonal Relationships The Personality Perspective HOW DOES
pERSONaLITy aFFECT aTTRaCTION? PERSONALITY PROVIDES A PERFECT
OPPORTUNITY to revisit the "birds of a feather flock together" theme
that we discussed previously in this textbook. Is it true that people
with similar personalities are attracted to each other? People in
long-term relationships who have similar personalities experienced
different levels of satisfaction at different stages in their
relationships (Shiota & levenson, 2007). early in a relationship,
similarity was particularly important to promoting bonding and intimacy.
But what happens when we take one more step backward in time to look at
the effects of similarity when two people first meet each other? In one
study, pairs of heterosexual, opposite-sex college students were left in
a waiting room while a researcher ran an errand (Cuperman & Ickes,
2009). Without their knowledge, the pairs' interactions were filmed. as
predicted by "birds of a feather," pairs of introverts and pairs of
extroverts reported having a better conversation and liking their
partner more

494

Chapter 12

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Actor believes that partner wants to interact more in the future

(see ● Figure 12.20). however, similarity in agreeableness was not so
important. leaving two disagreeable people together did not result in a
pleasant conversation. Surprisingly, though, having at least one
agreeable person produced the same quality of interaction as having two
agreeable people. apparently, agreeable people know how to produce a
good interaction whether or not their partner is equally capable. You
might be wondering how personality similarities compare to other factors
when people first meet, and the answer is not well, at least in the
context of a speed-dating session for college students (luo & Zhang,
2009). under these circumstances, the overwhelming determinant of
attraction for both men and women was physical appearance. no similarity
in attitudes and Big Five characteristics significantly predicted
attraction. This outcome might be one of the reasons we are cautioned to
"get to know each other better" before becoming involved in a serious
relationship. If similarity plays an important role in long-term
satisfaction, even with the bumps and bruises of middle age described by
Shiota and levenson (2007), it appears that we need more time than the
speed-dating situation provides to make important relationship
decisions. ■ 7.5 7.0 6.5 6.0 5.5 5.0 4.5 4.0

Partner introverted Partner extroverted Actor introverted

Actor extroverted

(a) 

Actor's number of self-disclosures

7.0 6.5 6.0 5.5 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0

Partner disagreeable Partner agreeable Actor disagreeable

Actor agreeable

(b) 

FIguRE 12.20 Do Opposites attract? Introverts conversing with other
introverts and extroverts conversing with other extroverts were more
likely to believe their partner would want to interact in the future
than pairs in which one person was introverted and the other was
extroverted. When agreeableness was investigated, one disagreeable
person having a conversation with another disagreeable person was not
very positive, but as long as one of the partners was agreeable, the
conversation went well. Source: Adapted from R. Cuperman & W. Ickes
(2009). "Big Five Predictors of Behavior and Perceptions in Initial
Dyadic Interactions: Personality Similarity Helps Extraverts and
Introverts, but Hurts 'Disagreeables.'" Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 97(4), 667--684. doi:10.1037/a0015741

WhaT dOeS IT Mean TO have a SelF?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

495

Psychology Takes on Real-World Problems Personality and Responses to a
Pandemic Several Big Five perSonality traits seem like they might
predict individual responses to the COvId-19 pandemic, conscientiousness
and neuroticism in particular. Is this commonsense hypothesis actually
correct?

A recent study of U.S. adults compared results of a personality test
administered in January and February of 2020, before public concerns
about COVID-19 were prevalent, with questions about pandemic responses
administered in late March of 2020 (Aschwanden et al., 2020).
Personality factors were associated with both the precautions taken and
estimates of the length of the pandemic. As you have seen many times in
this textbook, our commonsense notions of behavior are not always
consistent with scientific data. Instead of predicting high levels of
compliance with behaviors such as frequent hand washing and maintaining
physical distance, neuroticism was actually negatively correlated with
these behaviors (see ● Figure 12.21). In other words, the most neurotic
people were the least likely to engage in pandemic precautions. It is
possible that the real culprit in this case is depression (see Chapter
14), which is more common among people with high neuroticism. Depression
can lead to more emotion-focused coping strategies rather than more
problem-focused coping strategies (see Chapter 16). Less surprising is
the finding that conscientious people were much more likely to engage in
precautionary behaviors. Highly neurotic people were more pessimistic
and highly extroverted people were more optimistic about the length of
the pandemic. In keeping with our belief in considering problems from
multiple psychological perspectives, the influence of age appears to
have been important in this study. Preparatory behaviors, such as
stockpiling food and toilet paper, were higher in conscientious older
adults, but not among

496

Chapter 12

there was a way to tailor messages to different personality types, these
might be more persuasive. By understanding the interactions between
personality and preparatory behaviors, authorities might do a better job
of convincing the public to engage in healthy precautions and to stop
stockpiling essential goods. ■

middle or young adults. This might reflect a realistic assessment of
their higher risk and the need to reduce trips to the store. This
section of each chapter focuses on the policy implications of relevant
research results. In this case, we might argue that one-size-fits-all
messaging from authorities might not be very effective. If

Neuroticism

Conscientiousness

Wash hands

--

+++

Hand sanitizer

--

- 

Avoid touching

--

++

Physical distance

--

++

Face mask

0

--

Clean

--

++

Precautions

Figure 12.21 Personality Predicts Pandemic responses. Big Five
characteristics of neuroticism and conscientiousness predicted
participants' adherence to precautions related to a pandemic. Minus
signs indicate negative correlations and plus signs indicate positive
correlations. The 0 indicates no significant correlation. The number of
plus signs indicates the strength of the correlations. Public health
officials could modify messaging based on these different responses.
Source: Adapted from D. Aschwanden et al. (2020). "Psychological and
Behavioural Responses to Coronavirus Disease 2019: The Role of
Personality." European Journal of Personality. doi: 10.1002/per.2281

The IndIvIdual MInd: PeRSOnalITY and The SelF

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

summary 12.2 Some Important Self Terms trait

Description

Self-concept

Attributes assigned to the self, as in "I am a first-year botany major."

Self-schema

Collection of all self-concept attributes, used to organize thinking
about the self.

0.35

Mean adjusted recall

0.3 0.25 0.2 0.15 0.1 0.05 0

Structural

Phonemic

Semantic

Self-reference

Self-awareness

Knowledge of the self.

10 9 8

Time (weeks)

7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

Eye weeks Flower weeks 0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Money paid per liter of milk consumed

0.7

Self-esteem

Judgments of the self's worth.

Self-regulation

Self-control or conscious efforts to manage the self.

Credits: Top row---Courtesy of John T. Cacioppo and Laura Freberg; Third
row---Photos: Blaj Gabriel/Shutterstock.com, Guzel
Studio/Shutterstock.com; Fourth row---Image Courtesy of The Advertising
Archives; Bottom row---Iakov Filimonov/Shutterstock.com.

Key terms The Language of Psychological Science Be sure you can define
these terms and use them correctly.

agreeableness, p. 469 Big Five theory, p. 468 conscientiousness, p. 469
defense mechanism, p. 463 ego, p. 462 extroversion, p. 469 id, p. 462
interpersonal self, p. 493 introversion, p. 469 locus of control, p. 472

neo-Freudian, p. 465 neuroticism, p. 469 openness, p. 468 personality
inventory, p. 478 projective test, p. 481 psychoanalysis, p. 462
psychodynamic, p. 462 psychosexual stage, p. 463 reciprocal determinism,
p. 472 self, p. 483

self-concept, p. 484 self-esteem, p. 486 self-schema, p. 484
social--cognitive learning theory, p. 472 superego, p. 463 temperament,
p. 473 trait, p. 467 unconscious mind, p. 465

WhaT dOeS IT Mean TO have a SelF?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

497

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Genes on chromosome 6 not only influence a person's immune system, but
also determine the nature of a detectable body odor that affects our
choice of a partner.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Connected Mind

13

SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY Learning Objectives 1. Discuss person perception,
including first impressions, our use of dispositional and situational
attributions, and the types of attributional biases that can occur. 2.
Define attitude and discuss the origins of attitudes and their
susceptibility to change.

3.  Differentiate prejudice, stereotyping, and discrimination.

4.  Evaluate social influence by distinguishing among conformity,
    compliance, and obedience.

5.  Identify types of group influence, including social facilitation,
    social loafing, deindividuation, group polarization, and groupthink.

6.  Summarize research on the mechanisms of attraction, cooperation and
    competition, and aggression.

MUCH OF OUR SUCCESS AS A SPECIES CAN BE attributed to our social nature.
Our need to understand our complex social environment was one of the
driving forces that shaped the development of our large human brains
(Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2020). But as we all know from personal
experience, the social world can be challenging; consider, if you can,
some truly embarrassing memories about social mistakes that you've made.
Among the social environments with the largest minefields is the
connections that we make with others in intimate, romantic
relationships. The two people in the photograph at right appear to find
each other attractive, and they are engaged in behaviors---both variable
and choreographed---designed to further their relationship. Looking at
the developing relationship, psychologists can see a number of processes
at work, such as first impressions and the effects of perceived
similarities that are discussed in detail in this chapter. Zooming in,
however, we see a different set of processes at work. Although most of
us believe that we choose romantic partners on the basis of perceived
attractiveness and compatibility, there is some "chemistry" at work here
too. Overall, humans share more genes in common with spouses (Domingue
et al., 2014) and friends (Christakis & Fowler, 2014) than they do with
strangers. In genes in the larger image help determine a person's immune
system response. Furthermore, variations of these genes, or alleles, are
associated with different detectable body odors (Wedekind & Füri, 1997).
As attractive and compatible as these individuals seem to each other,
one might reject the other in response to this odor. Our evolutionary
history has left us with the ability to detect a genetic compatibility
in a partner, as well as more surface compatibilities.

Maridav/Shutterstock.com

some cases, however, being genetically different from your partner is
desirable. The highlighted

499 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Hans Deryk/Reuters

Individual humans are not that impressive, but cooperating in groups
makes our species more capable.

Zooming out from our couple, we see that their romance takes place
within a larger social context. What will their families and friends
think of their relationship? How do cultural attitudes and biases shape
the likelihood of their success? To what extent will they feel
comfortable conforming to these cultural expectations or rejecting them?
These external factors can help determine the course of their
relationship.

Why Are Humans So Social? humans depend on each another. We sit in
houses and offices built by contractors and laborers, work on computers
designed and built by armies of engineers and technicians, eat food
grown and transported by others, wear clothes made by people living
halfway around the globe, and look forward to the next text message from
a friend. As far back as the historical record goes, we have evidence
that humans lived in groups. What advantages might cooperative living
have provided to our early ancestors? As predators or fighters,
individual humans have rather modest equipment relative to other
species. our teeth and nails are not particularly frightening, and we
are frequently outmatched in speed and strength. instead, our strength
lies not in our individual might, but in our ability to unite. What
makes us a truly formidable species is our ability to collaborate,
communicate, work together, and form alliances. early evolutionary
pressures favored humans who chose to affiliate or associate with
others, and by doing so, sculpted much of the social behavior that we
observe today (dunbar, 2011; Cacioppo et al., 2015). Social interaction
is not just a helpful option but is also a basic human need, which can
be more powerful than other basic needs such as hunger (Cacioppo et al.,
2014). A mother's ability to comfort her infant through touch has a
greater impact on the infant's attachment to her than her ability to
provide food (harlow & harlow, 1973). Study participants expecting a
painful electric shock prefer the company of strangers to facing their
fears alone (Schachter, 1959). We depend on today's mobile technologies
that allow us to carry our social networks wherever we go (Finkel et
al., 2012; Przybylski & Weinstein, 2013). We not only need social
contact, but also react negatively when social support is withdrawn (see
● Figure 13.1). Perceived social isolation shares similar risks of death
with obesity and a sedentary lifestyle and is positively correlated with
risk of suicide (Cacioppo et al., 2015; holt-Lunstad et al., 2015).
disruptions of social connections through divorce, bereavement,
separation, or ridicule are known to be among the most stressful
experiences people may face (Williams, 2007). Perceived isolation, or
loneliness, can initiate a cascade of negative interactions that further
separate individuals from the social contact they need and want,

500

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Including the third player

Excluding the third player

Courtesy of Kip Williams and David Yeager

FIGure 13.1 eliciting Feelings of exclusion. Psychologists have many
ways to make study participants feel socially excluded for short periods
so that they can evaluate the effects that social exclusion has on
everything from brain activity to sharing cookies. Many experiments use
this Cyberball game, developed by Kip Williams of Purdue University. The
participant, represented by the little hand in the foreground, is
initially included in the game of catch with the other two players, who
are just part of a computer program. Midway through the game, the other
players throw the ball between themselves, excluding the participant,
whose little hand is left with nothing to do.

interfere with the quality of sleep, increase feelings of negative mood
and hostility, and lead to a heightened sensitivity to threat and attack
(Cacioppo et al., 2015; Cacioppo et al., 2010). The lonely person begins
to behave in ways that are self-protective but that paradoxically push
people away and promote further rejection and isolation. As a result, we
are highly motivated to stay in the good graces of our social groups. in
the remainder of this chapter, we will see how this need to maintain our
social connectivity shapes many types of behavior, from the attitudes
that we hold about brands of cereal to our responses as members of teams
and committees.

How Accurate Are First Impressions? our success in the social world
begins with our ability to perceive the characteristics and intentions
of others. What was your immediate reaction to your psychology professor
on your first day of class? if you're like most people, you came to some
quick conclusions that are likely to last a long time. We form rapid and
enduring first impressions of other people. When we say first
impressions are formed "rapidly," we are not talking about months,
weeks, days, or hours, but in some cases, in as little as one-tenth of a
second (Willis & Todorov, 2006). The responses to faces by infants are
similar to those made by adults (Cogsdill et al., 2014), and strong
cross-cultural agreement in perceptions of warmth and dominance has been
observed (Zebrowitz et al., 2012). These observations suggest that
forming first impressions is adaptive (Zebrowitz, 2017). We attend to
cues about age, familiarity, fitness, and emotional hoW ACCurATe Are
FirST iMPreSSionS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

501

ExpErIEnCIng Psychology The UCLA Loneliness Scale IF YOU HAVE
EXPERIENCED pangs of loneliness during your time at college, you are not
alone. University students are especially susceptible to loneliness
(Cutrona, 1982). Why do we feel loneliness? It might have evolved to
provide our ancestors with an "early warning system" that their social
connectivity needed repair (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2020). The UCLA
Loneliness Scale (Russell, 1996) is a standardized instrument that
assesses a person's subjective self-report of loneliness. The scale,
found in ● Table 13.1, includes 20 items; after you complete them, we
will tell you how to score and interpret your results. Adding up your
scores: To obtain your final score, add up your responses to all the
non-asterisked items. Then add up all the asterisked items and subtract
this total from 45. You will notice that these items are "reversals," in
which the "nonlonely" answers are the higher numbers. Questionnaires use
this strategy to keep someone from just picking the

same number all the way through an instrument. Add the two sums together
to find your total score, which can range from 20 to 80. Interpreting
your score: Obviously, there are no right or wrong answers on an
instrument like this, but higher numbers indicate higher levels of
subjective loneliness. For comparison's sake, Russell (1996)
administered this instrument to college students, nurses, public school
teachers, and the elderly. The nurses had the highest scores (mean
40.14), followed by college students (40.08), older adults (31.51), and
teachers (19.22). It might surprise you that the college students felt
more loneliness than the older adults! This is probably because
loneliness results from one's perceived disconnection, not absolute
number of relationships. It is possible that college students have
higher expectations for connectivity or that the elderly have had more
time to establish meaningful relationships with others.

If your score seems on the high side, don't despair. Not only do
psychological scientists understand quite a bit about loneliness, but
they also have some empirically supported suggestions for alleviating
it. One key to reducing feelings of loneliness is to understand how
lonely people behave. Loneliness is associated with a number of
maladaptive social cognitions, including increased sensitivity to social
threats, better memory for negative social information, more negative
social expectations, and behavior that confirms negative expectations.
In other words, lonely people act in counterproductive ways that further
drive them away from the social connectivity they seek (Cacioppo &
Cacioppo, 2020). Interventions designed to reverse those maladaptive
cognitions were found to reduce loneliness better than other strategies
in a large metaanalysis (Masi et al., 2011). ■

tAbLe 13.1 The UCLA Loneliness Scale \*1. How often do you feel that you
are "in tune" with the people around you? Never 1

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Sometimes 3

Always 4

2.  How often do you feel that you lack companionship? Never 1

Rarely 2

3.  How often do you feel that there is no one you can turn to? Never 1
4.  How often do you feel alone? Never 1

\*5. How often do you feel part of a group of friends? Never 1

Rarely 2

\*6. How often do you feel that you have a lot in common with the people
around you? Never 1

502

Chapter 13

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7. How often do you feel that you are no longer close to anyone? Never 1

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

8.  How often do you feel that your interests and ideas are not shared
    by those around you? Never 1

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Rarely 2

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Sometimes 3

Always 4

Sometimes 3

Always 4

*9. How often do you feel outgoing and friendly? Never 1* 10. How often
do you feel close to people? Never 1 11. How often do you feel left out?
Never 1

12. How often do you feel that your relationships with others are not
    meaningful? Never 1

Rarely 2

13. How often do you feel that no one really knows you well? Never 1
14. How often do you feel isolated from others? Never 1

\*15. How often do you feel that you can find companionship when you
want it? Never 1

Rarely 2

\*16. How often do you feel that there are people who really understand
you? Never 1 17. How often do you feel shy? Never 1

18. How often do you feel that people are around you, but not with you?
    Never 1

Rarely 2

\*19. How often do you feel that there are people you can talk to? Never
1

Rarely 2

\*20. How often do you feel that there are people you can turn to? Never
1

Rarely 2

hoW ACCurATe Are FirST iMPreSSionS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

503

2.5 2 1.5 1

FIGure 13.2

0.5 0 −0.5 −1

Junko Kimura/Getty Images News/Getty Images

3

Courtesy of the United States Snate

Accuracy of election predictions (t scores)

American candidates Japanese candidates

Courtesy of the United States Senate

Speed dating, in which people have a limited time to decide whether they
would like further contact with another person, takes advantage of the
rapid assessments of one another that we make. After only 30 seconds of
contact, people make enduring evaluations of other people.

Official White House Photo by Lawrence Jackson

Marmaduke St. John/Alamy Stock Photo

state that might have had significant consequences as hunter--gatherers
interacted with one another. We make quick assessments of others by
focusing on a subset of traits and behaviors, rather than trying to sum
up an entire person. in particular, people are likely to use faces to
form impressions. halo effects occur when one characteristic or a small
number of characteristics have a large impact on overall perception. if
people see characteristics that they value or dislike, they tend to make
simple thumbs-up or thumbs-down assessments. one person might be
attracted to blue eyes, and another might be turned on by tattoos. in
one study, students hearing a professor described as "warm" instead of
"cold" were willing to say after a brief encounter that he was a more
effective teacher, less ruthless, and more humorous (Widmeyer & Loy,
1988). First impressions are not only fast, but also persistent. once we
have reached a conclusion about a person, even after a brief social
exchange in a speed-dating experiment, we tend to stick with that
assessment for a long time. Most of us have formed a false first
impression of others (either overly positive or overly negative) that
breaks down only after extensive further exposure, if at all. however,
in the face of certain types of new information, first impressions do
change (Brannon & Gawronski, 2017; Mann & Ferguson, 2017). it would not
be very adaptive to hold onto a false impression indefinitely, so it
makes sense to think that we also have the ability to update our
beliefs. Although the tendency to make first impressions may be
characteristic of all humans, our abilities to shape accurate judgments
are also influenced by culture. As shown in ● Figure 13.2, Japanese and
American participants successfully used their first impressions to
predict which political candidates would win an upcoming election, but
their predictions were more accurate for candidates from their own
culture (rule et al., 2010).

American

Japanese Participants

Judging Winners and Losers Across Cultures. Can you pick which of these
candidates won or lost their elections?\* Apparently, people can do this
quite well, but they perform better within their own cultures. Based on
viewing the photos of candidates' faces, without recognizing the
candidate or even knowing that the person was running for office,
Americans did a good job of predicting the outcome of an election for
unfamiliar American candidates for the U.S. Senate but did not do as
well when predicting the outcome for Japanese candidates for the
shugi-in (the Japanese equivalent of the U.S. House of Representatives).
Japanese participants predicted the success of Japanese candidates, but
most of the American candidates who they expected to win ended up
losing. Source: Adapted from N. O. Rule et al. (2010). "Polling the
Face: Prediction and Consensus Across Cultures," Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 98(1), 1--15. doi:10.1037/a0017673 \*The two on
the left won; the two on the right lost.

504

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Why Did That Just Happen? We not only size up other people quickly in
terms of their personal characteristics, but also ask why they behave
the way they do. Being able to predict the behavior of others has
significant survival value. our answers to questions about why others
behave in certain ways are attributions, or judgments about the causes
of other people's behavior. Behavior can be seen as resulting from some
combination of dispositional attribution (internal) factors and
situational attribution (external) factors (heider, 1958). For example,
if your friend just flunked an important exam, you could try to answer
the question "Why?" by considering your friend's personal
characteristics and circumstances. in considering your friend's
disposition, you might recall that she is anxious (being anxious is
dispositional), which might have interfered with her performance on a
stressful test. in considering your friend's situation, you remember
that she just broke up with her romantic partner of several years
(breaking up is situational), which was depressing and distracting for
her as she prepared for her test. Thinking that disposition and
situation act in an either/or fashion instead of interacting to produce
an outcome is no more helpful to our understanding of behavior than
using either/ or thinking in considering nature and nurture (Funder,
2009; Johnson, 2009). however, as will be shown in the next section, the
weight placed on dispositional and situational variables as explanations
for behavior can vary dramatically from one case to the next. Although
our attributions typically guide us in the right direction, we do make
errors. We are not able to read minds, so we must make a logical leap
from what we observe in a person's behavior to the internal state of
mind that produced it. however, sometimes that leap takes us in the
wrong direction. As we have seen in the case of visual illusions and
heuristics, seeing the flaws in our mental processing can illuminate how
systems usually work.

attribution A judgment about the cause of a person's behavior.
dispositional attribution A judgment assigning the cause of a person's
behavior to personal qualities or characteristics. situational
attribution A judgment assigning the cause of a person's behavior to the
environment. correspondence bias The tendency to view behavior as the
result of disposition, even when the behavior can be explained by the
situation in which it occurs.

The Correspondence Bias and the Fundamental Attribution Error

AP Images/The Janesville Gazette/Dan Lassiter

When you hear about people flunking a test, you might start making
conclusions about their dispositions ("she is a lazy student" or "he is
not very smart"), even though you are quite aware that the professor
giving the test has a reputation for writing brutal exams. This
willingness to infer a person's disposition from observed behavior, even
when strong situational factors are obvious, is known as the
correspondence bias (Gilbert & Jones, 1986; Gilbert & Malone, 1995). in
other words, we usually expect people's behavior to correspond to their
dispositions, even when we know for sure that the situation is having a
powerful effect. Given the importance of making accurate attributions to
our survival and social relationships, why would such a bias ever occur?
Psychologists are still debating the reasons for this error. one
possibility might be the genuine stability of personality traits
(discussed in

Are the famous Wal-Mart greeters really friendly people? Or are they
just doing their jobs? Because of the correspondence bias, we tend to
view WalMart greeters as friendly people, even though we fully
understand that their jobs require them to act this way.

WhY did ThAT JuST hAPPen?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

505

Chapter 12). People often believe that the "You did it because that is
the kind of person you are" explanation is accurate. There is some truth
to these beliefs, which is why they persist. But at the same time, our
discussion of personality showed that situations make important
contributions to behavior. You might consider yourself to be a helpful
person, but you might ignore someone with a flat tire when you're late
for class or work. other factors that contribute to the correspondence
bias include a lack of awareness of the power of the situation and
unrealistic beliefs about how situations should affect people (Gilbert &
Malone, 1995). in many everyday instances, we simply do not have enough
information about somebody's circumstances to consider situational
variables in our attributions. A grumpy, unenthusiastic professor might
be having health or personal problems of which students in the classroom
are unaware, but by default, the students believe that the professor is
characteristically grumpy and unenthusiastic. in other cases, we seem to
misjudge the likelihood that typical people will respond to a situation
in a certain way. Later in this chapter, you will learn how a majority
of individuals were willing to electrocute another participant simply
because they were told to do so by an experimenter. You might think, "i
would never respond to the situation like that," which might lead to
your misjudging the power of the situation. A concept closely related to
the correspondence bias is known as the fundamental attribution error
(FAE; ross, 1977). According to this view, people do not just
underestimate situational variables as proposed by correspondence bias,
but instead completely fail to consider situational variables while
making attributions. By default, this total neglect of situational
influences leads to a reliance on dispositional contributions to explain
the resulting observed behavior. research evidence for a complete
neglect of situational variables is lacking (Gawronski, 2004). For
example, in the study mentioned earlier about administering shock, how
do you think people view the minority of participants who did not comply
and refused to shock another person? if we globally ignore situational
variables, as required by the FAe, we should attribute the behavior of
these individuals to their strong moral character (disposition), but
this is not what usually happens (Gilbert & Malone, 1995). instead, most
people attribute the minority's behavior to simply responding to the
situation "the way people ought to do." The situation still plays a
significant role in people's interpretation of the observed behavior,
which is inconsistent with the premises of the FAe. This leaves the
correspondence bias as the superior explanation for how people balance
their assessments of disposition and situation.

actor-observer bias Emphasizing dispositional attributions to explain
the behavior of others while emphasizing situational attributions to
explain our own behavior.

self-serving bias Attributing success to dispositional factors while
attributing failure to situational factors.

Olympic figure skater Rachael Flatt told a newspaper, "I was ultimately
responsible for my work, no one else! No excuses! And, that is true in
daily training. I am responsible for my own work, no one else." Elite
athletes like Flatt rarely indulge in the selfserving bias, in which we
attribute our successes to dispositional qualities (I'm a talented
athlete) and our failures to situations (the judging wasn't fair or the
ice wasn't prepared properly). By avoiding this bias, athletes can learn
from their mistakes and continue to improve their performances.

506

Chapter 13

EPA/FRANCK/Newscom

Defensive Attributions The correspondence bias is not the only flaw in
our judgment of behavior. When our personal needs and motives enter the
picture, additional errors can occur. Classic studies suggested that an
actor--observer bias occurs when we use situational variables to explain
our own behavior while continuing to use dispositional variables to
explain the behavior of others (Jones & nisbett, 1972): if my friend and
i both flunked a test, i flunked because i was sick, but my friend
flunked because he's not a very hard worker. Although this suggestion
has some intuitive appeal, a more recent meta-analysis suggested that
people judge their own behavior similarly to the behavior of others
(Malle, 2006). Because of a self-serving bias, we view our successes
differently than our failures (Miller & ross, 1975). When we succeed, we
are more likely to attribute our success to dispositional variables. For
example, if you get an A in this course, you are likely to congratulate
yourself for your brains and hard work.

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ConnECTIng to ReseaRch Farming, Collectivism, and Individualism IT IS
ERRONEOUS TO ASSUME that large populations, like the people of China,
are all alike, yet many cross-cultural psychologists have assumed that
Chinese culture is uniformly collectivist. Not only is this not the
case, but researchers also have suggested some novel contributing
factors to explain the variations in social structure that can be
observed. For example, differences in the type of crops that you raise
is probably not the first variable that comes to mind when we consider
differences in individualism and collectivism, yet this variable seems
to play a role (Talhelm et al., 2014). The Question: Does the type of
crop farmed predict the tendencies of a culture to be collectivist or
individualist?

METHODS More than 1,000 Han Chinese students in six areas of China (see
● Figure 13.3) completed measures of cultural thought, implicit
individualism, and loyalty/nepotism. None of the measures were
self-report because the researchers expressed concerns that the students
would feel the need to answer in socially appropriate ways. For example,
the cultural thought task asks

the participants to decide which two items out of a group of three "go
together." If we asked you to do this for "train, bus, tracks," what
would you choose? People from individualistic cultures tend to make
abstract pairings, such as train and bus, which belong to the same
category. People from collectivistic cultures tend to make more holistic
pairings, such as train and tracks, because they share a functional
relationship. The responses of the students were analyzed in terms of
their location in the wheat-growing north of China or the rice-growing
south. Raising rice requires high levels of cooperation (a married
couple cannot grow the rice needed to support a family by themselves),
but growing wheat requires less, so the authors expected more
collectivist responses from southern students than from northern
students. The authors quoted a 17th-century Chinese farming guide that
says, "If one is short of labor, it is best to grow wheat."

ETHICS Chinese protections for research participants are similar to
those in the United States, but there are some concerns about how these
translate to a different culture. Participants who are expected to put
the collective good

ahead of their individual interests might participate when they
otherwise would prefer not to.

RESULTS The researchers tested their rice explanation against other
potential explanations, such as the influence of pathogens or
modernization. They found that the rice theory was the only one that
consistently fit the cultural data. People from provinces that
traditionally farmed rice performed more collectively and holistically,
while people from provinces that traditionally farmed wheat performed
more individualistically and analytically.

DISCUSSION The participants were unlikely to have ever engaged in
farming, but traditional farming practices had shaped their cultural
values nonetheless. A history of having to cooperate to survive might
have shaped the local culture for centuries. These results also remind
us that simple answers to psychological problems are usually not the
best. Rather than thinking of East Asia as a consistent whole, it is
more accurate and interesting to investigate the nuances of behavioral
differences within cultures. ■

FIGure 13.3

90% Shanghai Chongqing

Percent holistic categorizations

Tianjin Henan

80%

Shanxi Hebei

Sichuan

Guangxi

Heilongjiang

70%

Wheat border counties

Zhejiang Fujian

Hubei

Liaoning Shaanxi Shandong Gansu

Guangdong

Collectivism and Individualism Correlate with regional Farming History.
Han Chinese living in areas that have historically farmed rice scored
higher on holistic thinking and were less likely to disrupt social
organization through divorce than Han Chinese living in areas that have
historically farmed wheat.

Jiangxi

Rice border Jiangsu counties

Hunan

Hainan

Source: Data from T. Talhelm et al. (2014). "Large-Scale Psychological
Differences Within China Explained by Rice Versus Wheat Agriculture,"
Science, 344(6184), 603--608. doi: 10.1126/science.1246850

Anhui Jilin

Size = Divorces per 1,000 marriages

Guizhou Yunnan

Beijing Qinghai

60%

60

Ningxia

0%

20%

40%

60%

280

80%

100%

Percent cultivated land devoted to rice paddies

WhY did ThAT JuST hAPPen?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

507

Marmaduke St. John/Alamy Stock Photo

in contrast, if you fail the course, it is because of situational
factors, such as the professor's asking unfair questions on the final
exam. The self-serving bias can make you feel better, but it also can
make it harder to learn from experience. elite athletes, for example,
are less likely to use situational variables to excuse poor performance,
such as blaming the weather when they lose a game (roesch & Amirkhan,
1997). By considering their own contributions to failure, elite athletes
can make the adjustments necessary for future success. Similar
attribution errors occur at the group level (Forsyth & Schlenker, 1977).
in a group-serving bias, an organization tends to attribute success to
its dispositional characteristics but blames failures on the situation.
if a sports team wins, most members attribute the victory to team
disposition, such as talent, good preparation, or sheer will. if the
team loses, the members are unlikely to blame the loss on team
dispositional factors (Sherman & Kim, 2005). By failing to consider
dispositional factors that might be remedied in the future, a group
might miss opportunities to correct its course of action. in addition to
self-serving bias, we frequently engage in other types of defensive
reasoning. it is a short step from "Your behavior reflects your
disposition" to causal judgments about the outcomes of behavior, such as
"You get what you deserve." Through the just-world belief, people assume
that good things happen to good people and bad things happen to bad
people (Lerner & Miller, 1978). When you see something bad happen to a
good person, you might reduce your anxiety by thinking that the person
must have done something to deserve the bad outcome and that you can
avoid that outcome by behaving differently. however, this reduction in
personal anxiety can come at the expense of the victim, who is being
blamed unfairly. Strong just-world beliefs have been positively
correlated with negative attitudes toward the poor, people with
hiV/AidS, the elderly, and the unemployed (Sutton & douglas, 2005).

A just-world belief leads people to expect good things to happen to good
people and bad things to happen to bad people. A strong just-world
belief might lead people to "blame-thevictim" thinking, making them less
sympathetic to the poor and the sick.

just-world belief The assumption that good things happen to good people
and bad things happen to bad people.

508

Chapter 13

Cultural Influences on Attribution There are subtle differences in
attribution between cultures that value individualism and cultures that
value collectivism. individualistic cultures, including the united
States and many other Western nations, stress individual achievement and
competition. Collectivistic cultures, including those in many east Asian
nations, traditionally have valued cooperation as a means of attaining
family and work group goals. Members of collectivistic cultures tend to
place more emphasis on situation than members of individualistic
cultures do (Choi et al., 1999; ho & Fung, 2011). As a result, members
of individualistic cultures are more likely to demonstrate the
correspondence bias (dean & Koenig, 2019). For example, in the united
States, murder is viewed as resulting from the disposition of the
murderer, whereas in China, murder is often described in terms of the
histories of the people involved and the situation in which the murder
occurred (Morris & Peng, 1994). These cultural differences in
attribution may be rooted in the tendency for people in eastern cultures
to focus on context or situations and relationships, while people in
Western cultures are more likely to focus on objects than on situations
(Masuda & nisbett, 2001). As mentioned earlier, we tend to attribute
behavior to the factors that we perceive. if being raised in a
particular culture leads you to focus on different features of the
environment, the attributions that are made vary accordingly (see ●
Figure 13.4). Because of the importance placed on individual achievement
in individualistic societies, members of these societies are more likely
to use defensive attributions, such as self-serving bias (Leung et al.,
2011). Members of more collectivistic cultures show an interesting
groupserving bias, in which they attribute more success to the group
than it deserves and less failure than it deserves (Leung et al., 2011).
That is, if you were raised in a collectivistic culture, you

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Importance of disposition

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

Singapore United States Low

Moderate

High

Peer pressure

FIGure 13.4 Situational Attributions and Punishment Across Cultures. In
the individualist U.S. culture, but not in collectivist Singapore,
recognition of peer pressure leading to crime (a situational variable)
reduces the attribution of the crime to a person's disposition. An
American criminal who commits a crime because of peer pressure is not
seen to be as bad as a person who acts without such pressure. As a
result, extenuating circumstances usually lead to reduced sentences in
the United States. Even though collectivist nations like Singapore place
a higher emphasis on situational variables when making attributions
overall, they do not view peer pressure as a reason to reduce punishment
of an individual. If anything, the individual will be blamed for
associating with the wrong peer group. Source: Adapted from P. E.
Tetlock et al. (2010). "The Punitiveness Paradox: When Is External
Pressure Exculpatory---and When a Signal Just to Spread Blame?" Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 46(2), 388--395.
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2009.11.013

would show the same attributional biases about your in-group as
individuals raised in an individualistic culture would show about
themselves.

How Are our Attitudes Influenced by others? To survive, all animals must
make appropriate approach or avoidance responses to stimuli. The
reflexes, fixed action patterns, and unconditioned responses discussed
in Chapter 8 provide some guidance in simple situations, such as seeing
a predator. To respond to more complex situations, humans form
attitudes, or favorable or unfavorable evaluations that predispose
behavior (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986). Attitudes are pervasive. We form
positive and negative attitudes about everything from world events to
celebrities to brands of peanut butter, and attitudes provide an
efficient means of communicating with others. if a friend asks you for a
recommendation for a movie, restaurant, or class, a simple attitude
statement ("i liked my psychology class!") can serve as a quick and
efficient summary for a wide set of beliefs, behavioral experiences, and
emotions. decision making is simpler, faster, and less stressful when
attitudes exist to serve as a guide. Attitudes can influence behavior,
although their influence can vary in impact from weak to strong (Briñol
et al., 2019). Many people hold attitudes related to controversial
topics like abortion or gun control, but these positions do not always
predict voting behavior. Because we depend on our attitudes to guide our
behavior, we want to make sure that they are "correct" (Festinger,
1950). imagine what would happen if you woke up one day

attitude A positive or negative evaluation that predisposes behavior
toward an object, person, or situation.

hoW Are our ATTiTudeS inFLuenCed BY oTherS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

509

Some of our attitudes result from personal experience, but others are
quickly absorbed from the world around us, especially through peers and
the media.

Nippon News/Aflo Co. Ltd./Alamy Stock Photo

Jaguar PS/Shutterstock.com

If you have any doubt whether people are emotional about their
attitudes, just ask some friends whether they prefer an Apple
(represented by the late Steve Jobs, left) or a PC (represented by Bill
Gates, right). Be prepared to duck for cover.

to discover that your attitudes about people, objects, and issues were
all wrong. Suddenly your closest friends would dislike you, your major
would be a poor match for your interests and abilities, and your entire
collection of music would sound dreadful. occasional mistakes happen,
but holding accurate attitudes makes it easier for us to maneuver
through environments successfully. Attitudes form networks comprised of
three interacting elements: affect (i.e., emotion), behavior, and
cognition (the ABCs; dalege et al., 2016). For example, how might your
attitudes about your college major be affected by hearing a negative
news report about the job market for new college graduates in that
field? The affective aspect of an attitude addresses emotional responses
to the object. This information about your future job prospects could
make you feel quite helpless, frightened, or angry. Behavior reflects
the way that people respond to the object. After hearing the news, you
might schedule an appointment with your adviser to discuss ways that you
can pursue the subjects you love and still have a great career. The
cognitive aspect of an attitude includes beliefs about the object. in
response to this news, you might believe that you have chosen the wrong
major or that the news report was inaccurate.

Attitude Formation We form many attitudes on the basis of our personal
experiences. You like a flavor of ice cream after sampling it, and you
dislike the parking situation at your school because you can never find
a spot near your classes. in other cases, we absorb attitudes from our
contacts with peers, parents and other family members, religious
leaders, teachers, and the media. We often adopt the attitudes of those
around us to strengthen our chances of being socially included. As a
result, many people prefer to stay on the "winning side" by forming
attitudes based on how frequently they hear an opinion expressed by
others and in the media (noelle-neumann, 1984). Later in this chapter,
we explore how fear of social rejection also can lead to conformity and
strict adherence to social norms or values. The learning principles
explored in Chapter 8 play important roles in the development of
attitudes. operant conditioning suggests that approval or disapproval
shapes a person's attitudes. An opinion expressed in class that is
followed by nods and claps will be repeated in the future more than one
that is met with horror and disgust. Because of classical conditioning,
you are likely to form positive attitudes toward stimuli associated with
positive outcomes. if a song is popular at a happy time of your life, it
is likely that your subsequent attitude toward the song will be positive
too. observational learning also can be a powerful mechanism for
learning attitudes. Children who are exposed to particular attitudes in
their homes, communities, and media duplicate them, especially if they
observe the person expressing the attitude being rewarded. Can attitudes
be influenced by genetics? identical twins who were adopted by different
families at birth, making it unlikely that they were exposed to the same
attitudes, still show a surprising amount of similarity in their
attitudes as adults (Bouchard et al., 1990).

WireStock/Alamy Stock Photo

Cognitive Dissonance

510

Chapter 13

Although our attitudes typically guide us well, attitude change is often
desirable. After all, we are sometimes flat-out wrong. Addiction, for
example, includes attitudes and preferences that are not in the best
interests of anybody concerned. The addict by definition cannot easily
change these attitudes and preferences, however. Similarly, people who
are unable to change their attitudes in the face of new evidence can be
quite handicapped. understanding the circumstances in which attitude

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

change takes place gives us additional insight into the formation of our
attitudes and their cognitive dissonance The uncomfortrole in guiding
our behavior. able state that occurs when behavior and Cognitive
dissonance provides a powerful tool for producing attitude change
(Festinger, attitudes do not match and that can be 1957). Cognitive
dissonance is an uncomfortable state that occurs when our outward
behavior resolved through attitude change. doesn't match our attitudes.
For example, you might have been accepted by several colleges cognitive
consistency A preference for holding congruent attitudes and beliefs.
and universities, but you can choose to attend only one. Thinking about
the positive features of the schools you reject causes dissonance (i
like these schools, but i didn't choose them), which could be resolved
either by becoming a "superfan" of your chosen school or by forming
negative attitudes toward the schools that you reject. Cognitive
dissonance helps explain why hazing, how could you even consider making
another choice? Who would want to or requiring an unpleasant initiation
to become go to those other schools? a member of a group, increases the
value of the For attitude change to occur as result of cognitive
dissonance, we must group (Aronson & Mills, 1959). If you choose
attribute our actions to our own voluntary, free will. in an early
demonstration of cognitive dissonance (Festinger, & Carlsmith, 1959),
students to endure so much to join, the group must be completed two
boring tasks (putting empty spools on a tray, emptying the something
special. tray, then filling it again; turning square pegs one
quarter-turn at a time). Afterward, they were asked to tell another
person that the tasks were fun. This should produce some level of
cognitive dissonance (i publicly said the tasks were fun, but i really
think they're boring). The researchers offered to pay \$1 (about \$8.90
in 2020 dollars) or \$20 (about \$178.08 in 2020 dollars) to
participants for saying that the tasks were fun. in contrast to students
who were neither paid nor asked to say that the tasks were fun (the
control group), the students paid \$1 rated the tasks as much more fun.
rating of the tasks' enjoyability by the students paid \$20, who could
easily justify their behavior (i'm being paid well to do this), did not
differ from the controls. neuroscience studies provide substantial
support for cognitive dissonance. Making difficult choices, like
choosing among the schools that accepted you, reliably produces
cognitive dissonance. The dissonance is resolved after a decision is
made by devaluing the option that was not chosen. eeG recordings in this
type of situation were similar to recordings taken in many instances of
performance monitoring, an executive process that helps us detect errors
(Colosio et al., 2017). Cognitive dissonance, which focuses on conflicts
between attitudes and behaviors, is part of a broader phenomenon---our
need for cognitive consistency (Gawronski & Brannon, 2016). We form many
associations between ideas, which in turn lead to expectations.
discomfort caused by conflicts among these ideas might help us recognize
errors in our belief systems. You might believe very strongly that being
vegan will make people healthier, and your friend wants to be healthy,
but she is not vegan. To resolve this inconsistency, one of these ideas
needs to change. You might now believe that it's possible to be healthy
without being vegan, your friend really doesn't want to be healthy, or
your friend really is vegan and just doesn't want her

David Rafael Espejo Serrano/Alamy Stock Photo

Choosing to vape despite news reports of lung disease and greater risk
in COVID-19 can produce cognitive dissonance. To reduce dissonance, this
user might start to think that the warnings are not believable and that
vaping isn't that bad for you.

hoW Are our ATTiTudeS inFLuenCed BY oTherS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

511

persuasion A change in attitude in response to information provided by
another person.

elaboration likelihood model (ELM) A model that predicts responses to
persuasive messages by distinguishing between the central and the
peripheral route to persuasion.

family to know. Aversive feelings that we experience when our ideas are
inconsistent might motivate us to think more deeply about our beliefs.

Why Does persuasion Happen? Cognitive dissonance can produce attitude
change, but it does not occur in response to a direct effort by another
person. When we change our attitudes in response to information provided
by others, persuasion occurs. Knowing how to persuade others and
understanding the efforts of others to persuade you are important life
skills.

The Elaboration Likelihood Model The elaboration likelihood model (ELM)
organizes and predicts our responses to persuasive messages by
recognizing two major pathways leading to changes in attitudes (Petty &
Cacioppo, 1981). The first, known as the central route to persuasion,
occurs when a person considers persuasive arguments carefully and
thoughtfully. The second, known as the peripheral route to persuasion,
occurs when a person responds to peripheral cues, as described in the
following section, without considering the quality of the argument
carefully. importantly, attitudes achieved through the central route are
more enduring, more resistant to counterpersuasion, and more predictive
of behavior than are attitudes achieved through the peripheral route
(Petty & Cacioppo, 1986). Why do we need two systems for responding to
persuasive messages? ideally, we would use the central route to consider
all messages that we encounter. however, given our limited time,
knowledge, and cognitive resources, a thorough evaluation of all the
messages that we perceive is not practical. using the peripheral route
allows us to use heuristics, or rules of thumb (as described in Chapter
10), to react promptly to many situations. if you feel overwhelmed by
the large number of candidates on your ballot, you might use the
heuristic of voting along party lines or voting like your friends.

Routes to Persuasion FREDERIC J. BROWN/AFP/Getty Images

What determines whether we use the central or peripheral route?
According to the eLM, a person's motivation influences which route is
used to evaluate a particular argument. When students are highly
motivated to take time out of their busy schedules to attend a
presentation by a guest speaker on campus because they know and care
about the topic of the lecture, they are likely to use the central route
and evaluate the speaker's points carefully. People are also likely to
use the central route to persuasion when they are well educated about a
topic. however, even people who are knowledgeable occasionally take the
peripheral rather than the central route. if you know about a topic but
do not have the time to think about it or don't care about it, you might
find the shortcuts provided by the peripheral route more useful. in
addition, because using the central route requires so many cognitive
resources, including attention, we are less likely to process persuasive
messages this way when we are distracted by other information or
activities. As you concentrate on driving down a busy highway, you do
not have the cognitive resources to evaluate the messages on billboards
carefully. if a person is using the peripheral route to persuasion, what
cues might influence the amount of attitude change that occurs?
Peripheral cues usually apply to the persuasive

Experts attending a technology trade show are likely to use the central
route to persuasion while evaluating the speaker's message. They will
concentrate on the logic of the message and will be relatively
unimpressed by peripheral cues, such as the speaker's attractiveness or
use of emotion.

512

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Robert W. Ginn/AGE Fotostock

Robert Landau/Alamy Stock Photo

message (e.g., the number of arguments), the manner in which the message
is presented (e.g., speed of speech and accent), or the characteristics
of the speaker (e.g., credibility or celebrity). emotional appeals can
influence people using the peripheral route. Both positive and negative
emotions can enhance persuasion. Students asked to read persuasive
messages about topics such as curing cancer and the state of military
forces were more likely to agree with the statement they read while
happily snacking on Pepsi and peanuts (dabbs & Janis, 1965). efforts to
persuade using negative emotions are especially common. We hear daily
warnings about the dangers of drinking too much, not using our
seatbelts, engaging in risky sex practices, riding a bicycle without a
helmet, not maintaining social distance, and so on. Arousing negative
emotions, such as fear, can be risky. if people are too frightened by a
message, they go into a state of denial. "it's really not that bad,"
they will say, or "That can't happen here." denial is most likely to
occur if the audience is not given an action to do Driving down a busy
street requires your full attention, making to reduce their anxiety. it
is fine to scare smokers to death about the it unlikely that you will
have the resources you need to evaluate appearance of their lungs, so
long as you include a message that tells persuasive messages using the
central route. Instead, the them where to get help to quit smoking.
having a sense of control advertisements that you pass on the road
attempt to influence over their response will reduce the fear and make
the message more you in a few seconds to think better of the product
that they are persuasive (Ajzen, 1991). boosting or the message that
they display. A positive response to the speaker can enhance a message's
persuasion. despite the common-sense warning that "beauty is only skin
deep," people have a deep-seated stereotype that what The less a speaker
stands to gain by persuading you, the is beautiful is good (dion et al.,
1972). Student evaluations of a more credibility the speaker appears to
have. We understand professor are heavily influenced by the perceived
attractiveness that athletes and other celebrities are being paid large
of the professor (hamermesh & Parker, 2003). People are more amounts of
money to advertise particular products, so likely to be persuaded by
people they like and with whom they we tend to discount their opinions
(Moore et al., 1994). A share some similarity (Van Knippenberg & Wilke,
1992; Cialdini, testimonial by someone who has nothing to gain by
speaking 2001). Similarities need not be substantial to produce this
effect; study participants who shared a first name or birthday with the
in favor of a product or issue is more persuasive. As a result supposed
author of a persuasive essay were more likely to agree of these
findings, bloggers must disclose whether they are with the essay
(Silvia, 2005). being compensated for writing about a brand. Without
this A credible speaker is usually more persuasive, especially
information, we might not evaluate their arguments correctly. when
listeners are traveling the peripheral route. in turn, credibility is
based on the speaker's perceived expertise and trustworthiness.
expertise is often established by a person's history and credentials. We
suspect that your psychology professors would look different to you if
they indicated that their degrees were in other subjects and that they
really didn't know much about psychology. Persuasion is also influenced
by the medium used to communicate a message, from the face-to-face
presentation of the door-to-door salesperson (a rarity these days) to
print media, social media, the internet, and movies and television.
Typically, we find that the more a medium resembles a live interaction
with another person, the more effective it is in transmitting a
persuasive message. in general, face-to-face contact remains more
effective than the use of other media (Bavelas et al., 1997). This
arrangement is the most natural way for humans to communicate. not only
is face-to-face communication the first medium we learn in childhood,
but various technologies allowing communication at a distance developed
at much later points in human history. Children are more likely than
adults to respond to persuasive Finally, the age and intelligence of an
audience can influence the effecmessages emotionally rather than
logically, making them tiveness of a persuasive message. Young children
are more likely to respond more susceptible to persuasion. Threatened
with lawsuits to persuasive arguments emotionally rather than logically,
which might from public interest groups, several major U.S. food make
them more susceptible to attitude change (and advertising) than
companies agreed to reduce their marketing to children and adults.
intelligent, well-educated audiences are more difficult to persuade to
make products that appeal to children healthier. in most situations
(rhodes & Wood, 1992). WhY doeS PerSuASion hAPPen?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

513

Psychology as a hub science Social Media, Persuasion, and Fake News THE
INTERNET HAS PROVIDED NEW WAYS for people to communicate, from the use
of webcams, video, and live chat to Twitter, Facebook, instagram,
Snapchat, TikTok, and blogs. Many of these new technologies have
advantages in providing immediacy and collaboration. To the extent that
they duplicate the advantages of face-to-face communication, we would
expect them to provide effective means of persuading others. The
internet not only provides a new medium for communicating persuasive
messages, but also challenges the status of credible, expert sources.
Trust in traditional news sources is very low, 42%, and dropping (newman
et al., 2019). digital sources of news currently rank second only to
television, and twice as many adults see news online compared to seeing
news in print (Matsa & Lu, 2016). historically, persuasive messages from
traditional news outlets such as newspapers, magazines, radio, and
television were more of a one-way street. however, in an environment in
which everybody with a computer or phone can produce information,
receivers of information can be influencers as well by sharing and
commenting on messages in blogs and on social networking sites. research
in this area suggests that user-generated content in the form of blogs,
uploaded videos, comments, and reviews is considered as credible and
accurate as formal news reports prepared by professional journalists
(Lee et al., 2010). in addition, knowing that content is "popular" with
other users significantly raises a message's impact (Steyn et al.,
2010). As more people depend on online sources for their information,
psychologists and other professionals have expressed concerns about the
quality of that information (Lazer et al., 2018). So-called fake news is
not a new concept, but the ability of the internet to spread it brings a
whole new dimension to its ability to persuade large numbers of people.
At risk are people's collective memories, or our shared understanding of
"what really happened." Fake news can occur in both traditional and
online sources, and can range from clickbait to poorly researched
information to maliciously constructed messages intended to do harm.
Among the most widely spread fake news stories of 2016 included "obama
signs executive order banning the pledge of allegiance in schools
nationwide" (with 2,177,000 Facebook shares, comments, and reactions)
and "Pope Francis shocks world, endorses donald Trump for President,
releases statement" (with 961,000 Facebook shares, comments, and
reactions). About 16% of Americans have admitted to having shared fake
news by mistake (Barthel et al., 2016), and an alarming number seem to
think satirical sites like The onion and BabylonBee post real news
stories. in addition to the critical thinking steps outlined in Chapter
2, the following questions can help us avoid being fooled by fake news
(Kiely & robertson, 2016). note that many of these steps are related to
the peripheral cues for persuasion identified in this chapter, such as
the credibility of a speaker, and thus require us to use the resource-
and time-intensive central route instead. Because many people are
unwilling to put in this work, fake news is likely to flourish. 1.
Consider the source and evaluate the source's mission and purpose. 2.
read beyond the headline. 3. Check the authors for credibility. 4.
Assess the supporting sources. 5. Check the date of publication. 6.
determine whether it is a joke or satire. 7. reflect on your own biases
related to the topic. 8. Ask experts. Again, we see the power of the
social group in shaping our ideas (see ● Figure 13.5). emerging
interactions between social media and credibility are likely to continue
changing the landscape of persuasion. ■

514

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Intent to comply with a food safety message

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

Professional source User-generated source Boomers Gen X Echo Baby bust
(born before 1946) (born 1946--1964) (born 1965--1976) (millenials; Gen
Y; born 1977 or later) Age groups

Figure 13.5 responses to user-generated Messages by Age group. Social
media, with their ability to make users into spokespeople, raise new
issues for our understanding of speaker credibility in persuasion.
Different age groups have embraced user-generated content, such as
blogs, tweets, and articles shared on Facebook, to different degrees.
Younger age groups are as likely to say they would comply with a food
recall message posted on their Facebook wall by a friend (user-generated
message) as they are to an official notice from the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (professional message), but older age groups are
less likely to say that they would comply with the user-generated
messages. Source: Adapted from K. J. Freberg (2011). Intention to Comply
with Food Safety Messages in a Crisis as a Function of Message Source
and Message Reliability (doctoral dissertation), retrieved from
http://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_graddiss/970/.

again, the influence of cues related to the message, speaker, medium, or
audience is greatest when people are using the peripheral route to
persuasion. When people are using the central route, their focus remains
on the quality of the arguments being presented.

The Neuroscience of Persuasion researchers are beginning to explore the
underlying brain processes responsible for attitude changes in response
to persuasion (Cacioppo et al., 2017). examinations of neural correlates
of source factors (such as expertise and celebrity) and message factors
(such as positivity/ negativity) identify areas of the prefrontal cortex
as playing an important role, but many additional structures and
networks also participate. some untapped possibilities for pursuing this
research question involve studying the aging brain and manipulating
brain activity through the use of magnetic stimulation (Cacioppo et al.,
2018). The aging brain would enlighten this discussion because the
prefrontal cortex undergoes more dramatic change during aging than many
other areas of the brain. older adults differ from younger adults in
their susceptibility to deceptive advertising and their unwillingness to
change their attitudes in the face of conflicting information. assessing
the differences in susceptibility to persuasion between younger and
older participants could be very useful.

Why Does Persuasion haPPen?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

515

summary 13.1 Sources of Attribution Error type of error

Definition

example

Correspondence bias

Overestimating the dispositional causes of a person's behavior

My friend flunked her exam because she's not very bright.

Self-serving bias

Attributing personal success to dispositional causes, while attributing
personal failure to situational causes

I got an A on one test because I'm smart, but I flunked the other test
because it was unfair.

Group-serving bias

Attributing group success to dispositional causes, while attributing
group failures to situational causes

Our team won its first game because we're talented and skilled but lost
the second because the referees were biased.

Just-world belief

Assuming that people get what they deserve

That homeless person doesn't try hard enough to get off the streets.

Credits: Top row---AP Images/The Janesville Gazette/Dan Lassiter; Second
row---EPA/FRANCK/Newscom; Bottom row---Marmaduke St. John/Alamy Stock
Photo.

prejudice A prejudgment, usually negative, of another person on the
basis of membership in a group.

stereotype A simplified set of traits associated with membership in a
group or category.

discrimination Unfair behavior based on stereotyping and prejudice.

Why Are We prejudiced? Among the most damaging perceptions that we form
about other people are those based on their group memberships, which can
include factors such as race, gender, age, socioeconomic status, height,
weight, disabilities, attractiveness, sexual orientation, and religion.
Psychologists use a group of related terms to discuss the assessment of
others based on group membership. Prejudice, which literally means "to
prejudge," is an attitude (usually negative) about others. Prejudice is
supported by cognitions known as stereotypes, which are simplified sets
of traits associated with group membership. A person might believe a
stereotype that all blondes are dumb, which leads to negative attitudes
(prejudice) about blondes. Behavior based on prejudice and stereotyping
is discrimination. hiring practices, housing, educational opportunities,
and many other facets of modern living can be conducted in
discriminatory ways.

Sources of Prejudice and Stereotyping Without excusing prejudice and
stereotyping and their negative social consequences, it helps to
understand that some tendencies to develop prejudice and stereotypes are
extensions of the typical ways that we process information. Chapter 10
noted that humans organize information and experience into schemas made
up of categories or concepts, which is generally useful. our concepts
are associated with a variety of characteristics, such as "Birds have
feathers." We frequently have exemplars, or best examples, of each
category. if you think of the word bird, you are probably more likely to
imagine a canary than an ostrich. Finally, we generalize from our known
concepts when faced with new information. if we know that birds peck at
objects placed before them, we are less likely to stick our fingers near
the beak of a new type of bird. in

516

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

People often have negative stereotypes about overweight people as a
group. In one online survey, more than 75% of respondents believed that
overweight people should either buy a second seat or pay a "fat tax" to
travel on airplanes (Siegfried, 2010). Comedian Kevin Smith, ejected
from a Southwest Airlines flight for "infringing on a portion of the
next seat," tweeted that he "broke no regulation, offered no 'safety
risk' (what, was I going to roll over on a fellow passenger?)."

s_bukley/Shutterstock.com

other words, based on our past experience with or knowledge of birds, we
are prejudging the behavior of an unfamiliar bird. This process of
categorizing information enables us to make rapid decisions about new
situations and objects, similar to the rules of thumb, or heuristics,
discussed in Chapter 10. effective concepts are inclusive, recognizing a
full range of associated characteristics. When our categories are
oversimplified, we are left with stereotypes. Although it is true that
most birds fly, it is inaccurate to oversimplify the matter by just
saying "Birds fly," because ostriches do not. Stereotypes often contain
an element of truth but become inaccurate because of the information
that they exclude. Stereotypes form reciprocal relationships with
prejudice, both feeding further prejudice and being shaped by prejudice
(Phills et al., 2020). Associating negative qualities with a group
enhances prejudice at the same time prejudice makes it more likely that
you will form further negative associations. Perhaps most importantly,
stereotypes conflict with our valid desire to be viewed and treated as
individuals. if stereotypes can lead us astray, why are they so
pervasive and persistent? People tend to misjudge correlations between
groups and their stereotypical behaviors. They might overestimate the
percentage of Asian students who excel in math and science or
underestimate the number of White athletes who play professional
basketball. Attributions, discussed earlier, also contribute to
continued stereotyping. if you see an exception to your stereotype
(perhaps a female who is running faster than her male friend), you might
view her success as the result of situational variables. Perhaps the man
is letting her win to be nice. This type of thinking allows us to
maintain a "women are weaker" stereotype. You have probably noticed that
people's prejudice toward a group often conflicts with their behaviors
toward individual members of that group. Someone might express
dramatically prejudiced opinions about a group and yet treat members of
that group well. individuals can be viewed as being different or
exceptions, allowing people to retain their stereotypes in the face of
conflicting observations. instead of rethinking a stereotype about truck
drivers and country music, you view your truck-driving friend who enjoys
opera to be one of a kind. As we observed in Chapters 11 and 12,
maintaining a social identity can boost selfesteem, but this can also
contribute to prejudice. A social identity refers to people's sense of
who they are based on the groups to which they belong (Tajfel & Turner,
1979; Tajfel, 1982). in the process of developing social identities,
people move from the categorization discussed earlier to adopting the
identities of their groups. This can lead to both behavior (acting like
a group member) and emotion (tying your own self-esteem to that of the
group). Finally, social identity can lead to group comparisons. if the
goal is to maintain our self-esteem, we might begin to think of our own
group as superior to other groups. expressing your school spirit at an
athletic event featuring your chief rival builds in-group pride and
cohesion, but it doesn't make you popular on the other side of the
field. As Paolini et al. (2010) caution us, highlighting the differences
that define our in-group status reminds others that they belong to an
out-group. Prejudice, like other types of attitudes, can result from
direct experience (i had one boring history professor, so all history
professors must be bad) or can be indirectly absorbed from the social
world of peers, parents, the community, and the media. human prejudice
based on group membership, however, might have deeper roots in our
evolutionary past. recognizing and reacting to individuals based on
group affiliation was probably an important skill for early
hunter--gatherers, whose survival often depended on quickly identifying
others as potential trading partners or foes. This pressure could have
led to a tendency to distinguish between in-groups, or the group to
which we belong, and out-groups, or everybody else (see ● Figure 13.6).
This categorization is made primarily on the basis of physical
appearance, and people still instantly (and often unconsciously)
categorize others on the basis of physically observable features,
including age, gender, and race (Fiske, 1998). This type of
categorization was demonstrated by recording brain activity as people
viewed photographs of faces and made judgments about either race or
gender (ito & urland, 2003). Study participants reacted quickly to both
race and gender information, even when the information was irrelevant to
their task. in other words, a participant who was asked to differentiate
between male and female faces still showed evidence of having paid
attention to the race of the faces, without being asked to do so.

WhY Are We PreJudiCed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

517

High

Christians Women

Elderly

Middle class

Warmth

Intellectually disabled

Poor Welfare recipients

Whites Gay men Blue-collar Native Americans Blacks Young Muslims
Hispanics

Students Educated Professionals Asians Jews Men Rich

Homeless Low

Low

High Competence

FIGure 13.6 American Perceptions of Out-Groups. Out-groups often elicit
mixed reactions. Some out-groups (rich people) are respected for their
perceived competence but disliked for their supposed lack of warmth.
Elderly people and the disabled are viewed as low in competence, but
they are viewed warmly because of the lack of threat that they pose.
Groups such as the poor are viewed most harshly as a result of having
both low status and representing a threat of exploiting the in-group.
Source: Adapted from S. T. Fiske et al. (2002). "A Model of (Often
Mixed) Stereotype Content: Competence and Warmth Respectively Follow
from Perceived Status and Competition," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 82(6), 878--902. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.82.6.878

Outcomes of Prejudice

Prejudice, whether subtle or overt, can lead to discriminatory behavior
in a number of ways. not only are African Americans convicted of murder
more likely than Whites to be given the death penalty in the united
States, but perceptions of "Blackness" are also predictive of a murderer
being sentenced to death (eberhardt et al., 2006). researchers presented
photographs of African American defendants to participants without
telling them that the men depicted had been convicted of murder. The
participants ranked the photographs on the basis of stereotypical Black
features, such as broad nose, dark skin, and thick lips. The ratings
were highly predictive of the men's sentences when the victim was White.
Men who appeared more stereotypically African American were more than
twice as likely to be given the death sentence as men whose physical
appearance was less stereotypical. This difference disappeared, however,
when the victim was also African American (see ● Figure 13.7). Prejudice
affects not only the way we view others, but also the way we view
ourselves. raising awareness of a negative stereotype about a group to
which we belong has the ability to reduce our performance, a phenomenon
known as stereotype threat (Steele & Aronson, 1995; Steele, 1997).
Anxiety about confirming a negative stereotype attributed to your group
can prevent you from doing your best work. in a set of studies
demonstrating this effect, researchers asked Stanford university
undergraduate students to complete difficult items taken from the verbal
portion of the Graduate record exam (Gre), used as part of the
admissions process for some graduate programs (Steele & Aronson, 1995).
one group of students, the stereotype threat group, was told that the
test accurately assessed their cognitive abilities, a statement that was
designed to stimulate thinking about possible racial stereotypes about
intelligence. The other group was told that the test was a routine
laboratory procedure. Subsequently, the performance of Black and White
students on the test was compared. After controlling for the
participants' previous Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores, the Black
students in the stereotype threat group performed more poorly than did
the White students. in contrast, in the nonthreatening condition, Blacks
and Jennie Hart/Alamy Stock Photo

Oversimplified categories, such as "girl toys" or "boy toys," can lead
to stereotypes.

different emotional responses can accompany these instant
categorizations. When study participants viewed faces from their own
racial group, activity in the amygdala was lower than when they viewed
faces from another racial group (hart et al., 2000). As discussed in
Chapter 4, activity in the amygdala is correlated with assessments of
threat. either realistic or imaginary threats from an out-group are
viewed as a major source of prejudice (Stephan & Stephan, 2000).
Furthermore, the intensity of the amygdala's response to race are
correlated with several implicit measures of prejudice (Phelps et al.,
2000). implicit measures are designed to demonstrate subconscious
associations between concepts (spiders and flowers, for example) and
attitudes (good and bad) (e.g., nosek, 2007). Psychologists continue to
debate the extent to which implicit measures actually assess unconscious
processing or predict actual prejudice (Brownstein et al., 2019).
understanding that cognitive, biological, and evolutionary processes are
involved with in-group/out-group differentiation does not make prejudice
inevitable or acceptable. By understanding why we develop prejudice, we
can better identify ways to reduce it. As we will see later in this
section, prejudice can change.

518

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Reducing Prejudice

Percentage of death sentences

Whites with equal SAT scores performed similarly on the Gre items, which
is the result that we would expect because of the tests' reliability and
validity, discussed in chapter 2 (see ● Figure 13.8). however, it would
be an inaccurate interpretation of Steele and Aronson's work to suggest
that stereotype threat accounts for the bulk of group differences in
performance (Stoet & Geary, 2012). Meta-analyses have supported the
existence of the stereotype threat effect, but its contribution to
overall performance appears to be small to moderate (Spencer et al.,
2016). Nonetheless, any irrelevant influence on a person's performance
is noteworthy, as these small individual effects can add up to larger
influences at the level of entire populations.

70 57.5

60 50

45

46.6

40 30

24.4

20 10

Less stereotypical

0

More stereotypical White victim

Black victim

Figure 13.7 implications of Stereotyping. Study participants' ratings of
stereotypical Black features predicted the men's likelihood of being
sentenced for murder with the death penalty, but they did so only when
the victim was described as White. The men in these photographs have no
criminal records but are examples provided by the authors for
individuals who were viewed as less stereotypical (left) and more
stereotypical (right). Source: J. L. Eberhardt et al. (2006). "Looking
Deathworthy: Perceived Stereotypicality of Black Defendants Predicts
Capital Sentencing Outcomes," Psychological Science 17(5), 383--386.
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01716.x Copyright © 2006 Association for
Psychological Science. Reprinted by Permission of SAGE Publications

Although we would prefer a world in which prejudice never occurred,
psychologists at least have gained insight into how prejudice can be
reduced. increased contact can reduce prejudice, as shown by dramatic
changes in heterosexual attitudes toward sexual minorities (herek &
Glunt, 1993). contact can be in person, over the internet, or
vicariously, as in the case of fictional role models

The Implicit Association Test (IAT) measures reaction time to assess
people's unconscious attitudes. In this version of the test, either a
face (African American or European American) or a word appears at the
center of the screen. The participant pushes a specified key on a
computer for the face (African American) and then again for the word
(joy is Good). Later in the test, the combinations at the top of the
screen are switched to African American or Bad and European American or
Good. An implicit bias in favor of African Americans would be shown if
reaction time in the first condition (African American or Good) is
faster than in the second condition (African American or Bad). Source:
Project Implicit/Dr. Anthony Greenwald

Why Are We Prejudiced?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

519

Diverse Voices in Psychology The Shooter Bias RECENT NEWS STORIES HAVE
FEATURED a number of tragic and often fatal shootings of unarmed African
Americans by police. In many cases, the anger over these cases has
boiled over to affect entire communities and the conscience of the
nation. What does psychological science tell us about these situations?
Research demonstrates a consistent pattern. In computer simulations,
White Americans, both real police officers and college undergraduates,
are more likely to "shoot" unarmed African American than White suspects
(Kenworthy et al., 2011). In many cases, the researchers explain their
results in terms of cultural stereotypes. Stereotypical views of African
American men as more dangerous might shape these quick decisions. To
directly assess the role of cultural stereotyping on the decision to
shoot, researchers first gave participants a "personality" test that
supposedly gave them a "red" or "green" personality (Miller et al.,
2012). In actuality, participants were randomly assigned to red or green
groups. In addition, participants completed a questionnaire assessing
how dangerous they thought the world was. Next, the researchers
presented faces of White males against a background of either red or
green, which the participants were told reflected the personality of the
individual. Results showed that no shooter bias occurred when
participants were low to

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

moderate in their beliefs about the danger of the world, but a bias did
occur among those who saw the world as very dangerous. They were more
likely to "shoot" the faces that were of the "other" personality color.
The researchers performed a second study using White, African American,
and Asian faces. They assumed that there would be no cultural stereotype
that Asian males are dangerous. All participants were still more likely
to shoot the African American faces than the White or Asian faces, but
participants with high scores on the "world is dangerous" scale were
more likely to shoot Asian faces than White faces.

A video game including individuals holding guns or other objects has
been used to examine the effect of race and ethnicity on decisions to
"shoot." Civilians and police officers both make faster decisions to
shoot an armed person if that person is African American and not to
shoot an unarmed White target.

What have we learned from this research? Certainly, these studies
confirm that cultural stereotyping is an important source of influence
on quick, defensive decisions. In addition, a person's view of the world
as a dangerous place is likely to accentuate a general defensiveness
with regard to any out-group member. This research raises concerns about
rhetoric among law enforcement personnel likening police work to combat
and other factors that heighten a police officer's sense of being in
mortal danger. Viewing our cities as war zones as opposed to communities
is likely to produce more, not less, conflict. ■

Mean items solved (adjusted by SAT)

20 18

Figure 13.8

16 14

Stereotype Threat. Students at Stanford University were told that a
verbal test measured their true abilities (stereotype threat). After
controlling for prior performance on the SAT, the subsequent performance
by African American participants was worse than when they were told that
the test was being used to understand the "psychological factors
involved in solving verbal problems" (no stereotype threat). The
different instructions did not affect the performance of the White
students.

12 10

520

8 6 4 2

Black participants

0

White participants Stereotype threat

Chapter 13

No stereotype threat

Source: Adapted from C. M. Steele and J. Aronson (1995). "Stereotype
Threat and the Intellectual Test Performance of African Americans,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 797--811. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.69.5.797

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGure 13.9

Source: Adapted from M. Sherif et al. (1961). The Robbers Cave
Experiment: Intergroup Conflict and Cooperation, Norman, OK: University
of Oklahoma Institute of Intergroup Relations.

90 80 Percentage of friends

the reduction of In-Group and Out-Group bias through Cooperation. After
arbitrarily dividing campers into two groups, the Rattlers and the
Eagles, Sherif and his colleagues observed considerable
ingroup/out-group bias between the groups. During this phase, few of the
campers reported having friends from the out-group. To resolve the
resulting discord, the researchers set up false emergencies, such as a
problem with the camp's water supply, which required the boys to
cooperate. After cooperating, many of their previous biases were no
longer present, and more boys reported having friends among the
outgroup.

100

70 60 50 40 30 20 10

Choice of friends from in-group

0

Choice of friends from out-group During competition phase

During cooperation phase

Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com

like Chadwick Boseman's Black Panther. however, not just any contact
will have a positive effect. Allport (1954) suggested four criteria for
positive contact: equal standing, common goals, cooperation, and support
from authorities or customs. Contact is particularly beneficial in
reducing prejudice when groups participate in cooperative activities
(see ● Figure 13.9). in a study using two groups of boys at a summer
camp, negative feelings between the groups decreased after the boys
cooperated to solve false emergencies, such as interruptions to the
camp's water supply (Sherif et al., 1961). Another

Cooperative learning programs similar to Aronson's jigsaw classroom are
used in most public schools in the United States today. WhY Are We
PreJudiCed?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

521

classic example of the effectiveness of cooperation in reducing
prejudice is the jigsaw classroom, designed to reduce racial tensions in
newly desegregated school districts in the 1970s (Aronson, 2011).
Children in cooperative groups were assigned a part of the answer that
their group needed to learn, leading to interdependence among the group
members. White athletes showed less prejudice toward their African
American teammates when competing in team sports requiring cooperation,
like football, than in individual sports like tennis or swimming (Brown
et al., 2003). note that in addition to featuring cooperation, these
circumstances also meet Allport's criteria of equal standing (e.g.,
among campers, school children, or sports team members), shared goals
(solving problems or winning), and support from authorities or custom
(adults in charge of camp or school, coaches and managers of teams). not
all psychologists agree that contact, even under the ideal circumstances
outlined by Allport, produces positive effects on prejudice. While
contact can promote more positive intergroup attitudes, stereotypes are
reduced only if the out-group member both contradicts stereotypes and is
still perceived as "typical," a rather rarified set of circumstances
(Park & Judd, 2005). it is even possible for contact to make prejudice
worse. if a person has a bad experience with a member of another group,
the typical response is to pay more rather than less attention to group
membership (Paolini et al., 2010). To the extent that prejudice
originates in categorizing people and engaging in in-group/ out-group
thinking, another strategy for reducing prejudice is to expand the
definition of the in-group. After 9/11, German Chancellor Gerhard
SchrÖder described the terrorist attacks as "a declaration of war
against the entire civilized world" (SchrÖder, 2001). nations
traditionally hostile to the united States, such as Cuba and north
Korea, offered condolences and assistance. This expansion of the
in-group obviously built a unity and resulted in kinder feelings toward
the united States across many nations. however, establishing an in-group
usually means there will be out-groups. in the case of 9/11, Muslims
quickly became the new out-group and the target of increased prejudice.
Most of us have multiple social identities. You might think of yourself
as a female Catholic student living in California. What happens when you
focus on one of these identities in particular? Classic research in
cross-categorization suggested that if a White female and an Asian
female concentrate on the similarities that they share as women, they
should experience fewer feelings of bias toward each other on the basis
of race (deschamps & doise, 1978). Although this effect is not always
seen in the laboratory (Vescio et al., 2004), when combined with
realworld extended contact, the strategy seems to be promising (eller et
al., 2007). unfortunately, cross-categorization in the real world
becomes less likely when our multiple identities are not equally
important to us (Brewer, 2000). Some single categories, such as race or
religion, might become so dominant that areas of commonality are simply
ignored and cannot be expected to reduce intergroup conflict. We do not
want to leave you with the idea that solving prejudice is hopeless. Many
psychologists are working tirelessly to further our understanding of the
causes of prejudice, which in turn should lead to more practical and
effective ways to reduce it.

Why Do We go Along with the group? social norms Usually unwritten or
unspoken rules for behavior in social settings.

522

Chapter 13

When acceptance by a group is important to us, we are motivated to
behave in ways that increase the likelihood of gaining the group's
approval and avoiding rejection. Groups typically have rules for
behavior, known as social norms. Social norms can be explicit, or
conscious, like wearing a mask during the CoVid-19 pandemic; they can
also be implicit, or unconscious, like moving to the back of an elevator
and turning to face the doors. We often conform to social norms without
being asked to do so. in contrast, compliance and obedience lead us to
fulfill a request from another person. in compliance, the person making
the request has no authority over us, but in obedience, the request is
coming from an authority figure.

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Figure 13.10

40

20

36

14

10 0

37

32

30

4 0

2

4

6 8 10 Group size

12

14

16

Joel Gordon

Exhibit 1

A B C Exhibit 2

Percentage conforming

50

Conformity

Source: Adapted from S. E. Asch (1951), "Effects of Group Pressure Upon
the Modification and Distortion of Judgments." In H. Guetzkow (Ed.),
Groups, Leadership and Men: Research in Human Relations, (pp. 177--190).
Oxford, UK: Carnegie Press.

conformity Matching behavior and appearance to perceived social norms.

In 2001, Stephen Reicher and Alexander Haslam re-created aspects of the
classic Stanford Prison Study, which was conducted by Philip Zimbardo
and his colleagues in the 1970s. Zimbardo argued that the roles of guard
or prisoner overwhelmed individuality, but Reicher and Haslam believe
that the study's participants were simply responding to Zimbardo's
instructions. Scientists do not always agree with one another, and their
debates bring us closer to realistic representations of our world.

From The BBC Prison Study. Copyright © BBC. Photograph courtesy of Alex
Haslam, Ph.D.

Matching your behavior and appearance to the perceived social norms of a
group constitutes conformity. in a classic study of conformity by
Solomon Asch (1951), participants were asked to match a reference line
to one of three comparison lines. As you can see in ● Figure 13.10, the
lines are sufficiently different that solving this task was not rocket
science. in the conformity condition, one real participant was placed
among a group of confederates (fake participants employed by the
investigator). Before the real participant gave an answer, the
confederates provided some wrong answers. Would the real participant
tell the truth or conform to the answer given by the confederates? in
about one-third of the trials, the real participants conformed by
deliberately choosing a response that they knew was wrong. About
three-quarters of the study participants conformed on at least one
trial. in other words, the participants chose social cohesion over
objective truth at least some of the time (hodges & Geyer, 2006).
Conformity to expectations associated with roles was investigated in the
Stanford prison Study (haney et al., 1973). in a short time, young men
who had been randomly assigned to prisoner or guard roles quickly
adopted behaviors consistent with those roles, leading to such
inappropriate behavior (violence, etc.) that the study was stopped after
only 6 days instead of the planned 14 days. the study has been
criticized on the basis of methodological problems due to the active
role taken by researcher philip Zimbardo, who served as the warden in
the study and thus influenced how the guards behaved. A similar prison
experiment was conducted for BBC television, and this time, few of the
guards acted inappropriately (reicher & haslam, 2006). in contrast to
Zimbardo's active participation in his own study, the British prison
experiment featured little direction from the investigators. however,
the possibility that we unconsciously fulfill the roles expected of us
by others remains an active area of scientific investigation. Why do
people conform? Conformity can be useful in ambiguous situations. if you
are uncertain about what to do, such as how to dress at work, observing
the behavior of others and conforming to it can be helpful. in a
computer simulation comparing the effectiveness of social learning
strategies, which includes imitation of others, to nonsocial learning
strategies, such as trial and error, the social strategies proved far
more successful (rendell et al., 2010). the availability of others to
copy might contribute to the overall success of group over independent
living. Conformity also reduces the risk of rejection by a social group,
a situation that would have greatly threatened the survival of our human
ancestors. Children as young as five years of age view conformity as a
way to make friends (Cordonier et al., 2018). in a study demonstrating
the rejection of nonconformists, participants were asked to debate the
fate of an imaginary juvenile delinquent named Johnny rocco (Schachter,
1951). three members of the group were confederates. one was instructed
to agree with the group consistently, another to disagree with the group
consistently, and the third to switch positions from disagreeing to
agreeing with the group. When the real participants rated how

Conformity. When a lone participant was asked to match the Exhibit 1
line to Line A, B, or C, the person chose the correct line, A. However,
when placed in a group of confederates told to pick another line, people
became more likely to go along. Conformity reached its peak in groups of
three to four people and did not increase as the group became larger.

Why Do We Go AlonG With the Group?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

523

well they liked other members of the group, members who agreed with the
majority were all well liked, and the confederate who changed position
was liked best. The participants were unanimous in their intense dislike
of the confederate who disagreed with the group.

compliance Agreement with a request from a person with no perceived
authority.

door-in-the-face A persuasive technique in which compliance with a
target request is preceded by a large, unreasonable request.

Compliance

foot-in-the-door A persuasive technique in which compliance with a small
request is followed by compliance with a larger request that might
otherwise have been rejected.

low-balling Making further requests of a person who has already
committed to a course of action.

solomon7/Shutterstock.com

obedience Compliance with a request from an authority figure.

According to the foot-in-the-door technique, agreeing with a small
request, such as clicking the "Like" button on Facebook, makes it more
likely that you will agree with larger requests, such as buying products
from a company.

524

Chapter 13

Compliance occurs when we simply agree to do something because another
person asks us to do it, even if that person has no authority over us.
From messages in junk mail that tell us to "open immediately. do not
discard" and advertising appeals to "Buy now" to medical instructions
that we receive from our dentist or family physician, we are bombarded
with requests for compliance. Fulfilling requests from authority figures
such as teachers or police officers can provide considerable advantages
to society. it is more difficult, however, to explain why people would
develop the tendency to comply with requests made by strangers who have
no authority. it appears that our natural tendency to affiliate leads us
to behave in ways that encourage the development of relationships,
including being compliant. Compliance is higher when factors that
normally lead to the formation of relationships are present, such as
perceived similarity and physical attraction. For example, we are more
likely to comply with requests presented by physically attractive people
(McCall, 1997; Lynn & Simons, 2000). This behavior provides yet another
example of the "Beauty is good" stereotype that influences persuasion in
general. People are more likely to comply with a request from a person
who shares some similarity, even when the similarity is irrelevant, such
as a shared birthday (Burger et al., 2004). Many seemingly simple yet
sophisticated sales techniques exploit our natural tendencies to comply
in response to perceiving a social tie with another person (Cialdini &
Goldstein, 2004). once a sense of relationship is established, powerful
norms of reciprocation are brought into play. Reciprocation, in which we
feel obligated to give something back to people who have given something
to us, is one of the most powerful tools of social influence (Gouldner,
1960). The importance of reciprocation to the cohesion of early human
groups probably can't be overestimated. if somebody shared food with
you, and you reciprocated by sharing yours, a powerful bond would be
formed. reciprocation has been used to explain compliance in the
door-in-the-face scenario, in which a large, unreasonable demand is
followed by a smaller request, which is the one that the requester
expects to work (Cialdini et al., 1975). For example, you might be asked
to donate a large amount to an organization, followed by a request to
"give what you can afford." By lowering the initial demand, the
salesperson has made a concession. The rules of reciprocation now
suggest that you have an obligation to that person and should respond to
this concession with one of your own---sending a donation (see ● Figure
13.11). in addition to reciprocity, the need to appear consistent may
drive a considerable amount of compliance. The foot-in-the-door
technique, in which a small request is followed up by a larger request,
is especially effective in gaining compliance. "Liking" an organization
on Facebook (a small request) can lead to more purchases and brand
loyalty (larger requests). Another technique based on the need to appear
consistent is the low-balling strategy, in which an initially favorable
deal is revised upward once the buyer appears committed (Cialdini et
al., 1978). once you have made a commitment to buy a car, the
salesperson leaves to "check" the deal with a supervisor and invariably
returns with a few more charges to "make the deal work." The salesperson
is counting on you to agree to the higher price because you have already
made a public commitment to buy the car. if you stand up at this point
and prepare to leave, it is likely that those extra charges will quickly
disappear.

Obedience Obedience is defined as compliance with the request of an
authority figure. When you take an exam from a professor or show your
driver's license to a police officer, you are being obedient. The power
of authorities to gain obedience is probably due to our perception of
their legitimacy.

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60 50

Percentage compliance

50 40 30 20

25 16.7

10 0

Small request only

Exposure control

Door-in-the-face

FIGure 13.11 Door in the Face. In a study by Cialdini et al. (1975),
participants in the door-in-the-face condition were first asked to
volunteer for 2 hours per week for 2 years as a "big brother" or "big
sister" at a local juvenile detention center. None agreed. Subsequently,
they were asked to spend 2 hours chaperoning a group of delinquents to a
local zoo, and 50% agreed. In comparison, only 16.7% of the participants
hearing only the zoo request agreed, and 25% of people asked whether
they would choose one of the two activities agreed to the zoo request.
It is possible that feeling guilty for turning down the first request
makes people more likely to agree to a second, smaller request. Source:
Adapted from R. B. Cialdini et al. (1975). "Reciprocal Concessions
Procedure for Inducing Compliance: The Door-in-theFace Technique,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 206--215. doi:
10.1037/h0076284

Men dressed in normal attire had less influence than men dressed as
security guards when making simple requests of passersby, even though
the requests ("Pick up that bag" or "Give that man a dime for the
parking meter") had nothing to do with their perceived roles (Bickman,
1974). in a series of classic experiments, Stanley Milgram attempted to
demonstrate the power of authority over personal ethics (Milgram, 1974).
Milgram's participants entered his laboratory at Yale university
believing that they were to take part in a study of the effects of
punishment on learning. The other "participant" present was a
confederate, and the situation was rigged so that the real participant
would take the role of teacher while the confederate took the role of
learner. The punishment for failing to learn pairs of words was an
electric shock, to be administered by the teacher to the learner using
an intimidating piece of equipment. The learner or confederate received
no actual shocks; his verbal responses to shocks were prerecorded. The
first challenge faced by Milgram's teacher occurred at 75 volts, at
which time the learner's first recorded protest could be heard. When
faced with this situation, many of Milgram's participants looked to the
experimenter in the room for guidance. The experimenter assured the
participant that "the experiment must continue" and "you have no
choice." Although most participants showed signs of stress and verbally
stated their concerns about the procedure, all of Milgram's original 40
participants went as far as 300 volts, and 26 out of the 40 (65%) fully
complied by administering the maximum shock (450 volts). Milgram
followed up his original scenario by modifying variables that might have
influenced the large number of people willing to obey. no differences in
outcome were observed when the experiment was conducted in an off-campus
office or with participants of different ages and occupations. Among the
variables that did seem to influence Milgram's results was proximity,
both between the teacher and the learner and between the teacher and the
experimenter. The proximity between the teacher and the learner ranged
from complete separation, in which the two people could neither see nor
hear each other, to closeness, in which the teacher was instructed to
physically hold the learner's hand on a shock grid. As proximity between
the teacher and the learner increased, rates of obedience dropped to
about 30% (see ● Figure 13.12). The implications of this result for
modern war technologies are clear. People are more likely to operate a
drone that harms a person whom they can neither see nor hear than they
are to harm a person whose pain is apparent. The proximity of the
teacher and the experimenter also was quite influential. The
experimenter communicated with the teacher while in the room, by
telephone, or by tape recording. obedience dropped dramatically as
interaction with the experimenter, who represented authority, became
more remote. obedience varies across cultures, but no one is immune.
Milgram's data suggest that about 65% of the American population, with
equal numbers of men and women, would fully comply in his basic
experiment (Milgram, 1963). The highest rates of obedience are found in
the general public of the netherlands (92%; Meeus & raaijmakers, 1995),
Austria (80%; Schurz, 1985), and Germany (85%; Mantell, 1971). Australia
reports some of the lowest levels WhY do We Go ALonG WiTh The GrouP?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

525

Initial study (teacher hears, but does not see learner)

65%

Teacher, learner together

40%

Teacher touches learner

30% 0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Percentage showing obedience

FIGure 13.12 Circumstances Affecting Obedience. After his initial study,
in which the teacher could hear but not see the learner, Milgram varied
the experimental circumstances to see what variables influenced the
amount of obedience that his participants displayed. The "teacher,
learner together" condition took place with both people in the same
room. In the "teacher touches learner" condition, the teacher had to
hold the learner's hand down on a shock device. As the teacher and
learner came into more contact, obedience dropped, but it remained
surprisingly high overall. Source: From the film Obedience 1968 by
Stanley Milgram, © renewed 1993 by Alexandra Milgram, and distributed by
Alexander Street Press. Permission granted by Alexandra Milgram.

of obedience, along with one of the few notable gender differences
reported in the obedience literature---40% of Australian male students
were fully obedient, but only 16% of Australian female students were
fully obedient (Kilham & Mann, 1974). Milgram's original goal was to
illuminate some of the most troubling behavior of modern times,
particularly the killing of millions of innocent people in the
holocaust, so it is no surprise that his results are among the most
disturbing in modern psychology. Milgram clearly demonstrated that
typical people are willing to harm others under the right sets of
circumstances. But did he meet his goal of modeling nazi obedience? he
believed so. You may be more comfortable thinking that people who could
carry out genocide are different from the students sitting next to you
in class. But Milgram's findings suggest otherwise: ordinary people,
simply doing their jobs, and without any particular hostility on their
part, can become agents in a terrible destructive process. Moreover,
even when the destructive effects of their work become patently clear,
and they are asked to carry out actions incompatible with fundamental
standards of morality, relatively few people have the resources needed
to resist authority. (Milgram, 1974, p. 6) You might be thinking
optimistically that people today are different from Milgram's
participants in the 1960s. Between the 1920s and the 1980s, parents in
the united States shifted their preferences for their children's
outcomes from obedience to autonomy (Alwin, 1988). We can begin to
evaluate the impact of this parenting change because Milgram's
experiment has been partially replicated fairly recently by Burger
(2009). By "partially replicated," we mean that Burger made procedural
changes for the purposes of meeting ethical requirements, such as
informing participants that they could leave if they felt uncomfortable.
despite these changes, Burger's results were similar to Milgram's (82.5%
of Milgram's participants obeyed under the same circumstances in which
66.7% of Burger's male participants obeyed). Burger's participants were
told explicitly that they could leave at any time, which raises
questions about previous explanations of Milgram's results in terms of
coercion (Griggs, 2017). An alternative view of the reasons behind the
behavior of Milgram's participants suggests that something called
"engaged followership" is more important than coercion (haslam et al.,
2015). in engaged followership, people are willing to do unpleasant
things, so long as they agree with the objectives. Leaders, like
Milgram's experimenter, promote followers' identification with their
objectives, which makes even the most unpleasant tasks seem virtuous.
This in turn reduces the stress experienced by the followers. This model
seems to present a clearer picture of

526

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

AP Images/JEFF WIDENER

Milgram's participants, the nazis that he wanted to understand, and
fanatic followers of many types. it's sobering to realize that if people
believe in a cause, there aren't too many things they wouldn't do to
reach their goals, including harming others. no society can exist
without obedience. however, history is full of instances in which
blindly following orders leads people into highly unethical behavior.
even in more commonplace situations, obedience to authority can
overwhelm individual judgment. in one chilling obedience experiment, 22
nurses were telephoned by a doctor they didn't know and instructed to
administer a drug not listed on a patient's chart in double its normal
dose (hofling et al., 1966). Astonishingly, 21 of the 22 nurses
indicated that they would be willing to obey the order. We could argue
that it is desirable for nurses to carry out the directions of
physicians, but at what point do we want people to question authority?

The Power of One our discussion of conformity, compliance, and obedience
would be incomplete without considering the circumstances in which an
individual or small group can influence a larger group. Asch provided a
clue to the necessary conditions when he noted that conformity was
greatest when a person faced a unanimous group. A single individual's
willingness to take an opposing view may encourage others to also resist
the pressure to conform to a misguided action, or at least to reconsider
their original position. To successfully influence the majority, a
minority voice must display consistency and confidence. in a study
designed to determine the factors that enabled a minority to influence a
majority, people occasionally agreed with an individual who consistently
stated that blue slides were green, but never agreed with an individual
who judged blue to be green only part of the time (Moscovici et al.,
1969). individual voices that are raised confidently, as in the case of
Mahatma Gandhi or Martin Luther King, Jr., are more likely to influence
the majority than are more tentative efforts.

How Do groups Work Together?

social facilitation A situation in which

We have explored many instances in which situations seem to have a large
impact on people's behavior. Given the sociability of our species, it
should not be surprising to learn that one of the most powerful
situational influences on our behavior is the presence of other people.
how is our behavior different when we are with others compared to when
we are alone?

the presence of other people changes performance.

Because of social facilitation, a wellpracticed skill (like pedaling by
these professional cyclists) is enhanced by the presence of others. Gary
Francis/ZUMA Press/Adelaide/South Australia/Australia/Newscom

Social Facilitation Social facilitation occurs when the presence of
other people changes individual performance. in 1898, norman Triplett
reported that cyclists riding in pairs rode faster than cyclists riding
alone. Social facilitation is not limited to cycling. Children spinning
fishing reels did so faster when in groups than when they were alone. in
contrast to Triplett's observations, we have all seen skilled performers
"choke" in front of an important audience. Why does performance improve
in front of audiences in some situations and become worse in others?
Psychologists noticed that wellpracticed skills, like riding a bicycle,
improved with an audience, but that when people were still learning a
new skill, they performed badly (Triplett, 1898; Zajonc, 1965; Zajonc &
Sales, 1966). When we're performing a well-practiced skill, most of what
we do is correct, but when we are learning something new, many of the
things we do are wrong. The presence of the audience appears to enhance
whichever patterns of behavior are dominant---the right moves in a
well-practiced skill and the wrong moves in a new skill. The moral of
this story is to make sure that you practice thoroughly before you
perform in front of an audience.

The anonymous Tank Man of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests in Beijing,
China, created a minutes-long standoff by maintaining his position in
front of a column of tanks. Single individuals disagreeing with a
majority with confidence and consistency can stimulate others to
reconsider their positions. We do not know the fate of Tank Man today.

hoW do GrouPS WorK ToGeTher?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

527

ZUMA Press Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

Because of social loafing, we would expect the cheering by each of these
fans in a nearly empty stadium to be louder than the cheering produced
by individual fans in a packed stadium.

social loafing Reduced motivation and effort shown by individuals
working in a group. deindividuation Immersion of an individual within a
group, leading to anonymity. group polarization The intensifying of an
attitude following discussion.

The complexity of a task also can interact with the presence of an
audience to produce either improved or impaired performance (Bond &
Titus, 1983). This result implies that one of the functions of the
audience is to increase the performer's level of arousal. The
Yerkes--dodson law, discussed in Chapter 7, states that performance on
simple tasks improves steadily with arousal, but that performance on
complex tasks first improves and then becomes impaired as arousal
continues to grow (Yerkes & dodson, 1908). improvements in performance
due to arousal are more likely to occur when people are engaged in
simple, well-practiced activities, such as riding a bicycle, as opposed
to highly complex, novel activities, such as memorizing a difficult list
of words.

Social Loafing

While working on group projects, you have probably had opportunities to
observe social loafing, or the reduced motivation and effort shown by
individuals working in a group as opposed to working alone. When engaged
in a tug-of-war game at a picnic, members of a team exert less
individual effort with each additional person added to their side
(Kravitz & Martin, 1986). individuals cheer less loudly in a large group
than they do in a smaller group (Latané et al., 1979). individual,
gender, cultural, and task variables interact to produce social loafing.
Women are somewhat less likely to demonstrate social loafing than men,
and people from eastern cultures are less likely to loaf than those from
the West (Karau & Williams, 1993). Simple physical tasks, such as
screwing and unscrewing nuts and bolts, reliably produce social loafing
in most people (Petty et al., 1988). Task complexity interacts with a
need for cognition, or the motivation to engage in and enjoy effortful
cognitive endeavors (Cacioppo et al., 1984). People with a low need for
cognition showed social loafing during both a physical task and a
brainstorming task in which they were asked to generate a list of
possible uses for an object (Cacioppo et al., 1996). in contrast,
individuals who demonstrate a high need for cognition take pleasure in
difficult mental tasks, and although they showed social loafing on the
simple physical task, they did not socially loaf during the more
intellectually demanding brainstorming task. individuals appear less
likely to take the opportunity to socially loaf on tasks that they find
intrinsically enjoyable to perform.

Deindividuation Deindividuation refers to the immersion of the
individual within a group, which makes the individual relatively
anonymous. deindividuation can lead normally law-abiding people to
commit uncharacteristic atrocities, including riots and lynchings. Why
would people go along with the negative behavior of a surrounding group,
especially if they are unlikely to behave this way on their own? one
possibility is that anonymous people feel less accountable for their
actions. in an experiment using a paradigm similar to Milgram's
obedience experiments described earlier, participants If you participate
in online discussions, you might dressed in hoods and oversized lab
coats administered longer shocks than notice a difference in the way
that people relate control participants who were dressed in normal
clothing with name tags on platforms such as Facebook compared to the
(Zimbardo, 1969). other psychologists suggest that you do not
necessarily anonymous platforms in some message boards "lose yourself "
in a group, but that your attention shifts from a personal and chat
rooms. Deindividuation predicts that identity to the identity of the
surrounding group (Lea & Spears, 1991). if anonymous message boards
would feature less the group with which you identify features antisocial
group norms, you will now conform to those (Spears, 2017). inhibition,
such as less civil discussion, than would

platforms where individual identity is obvious.

Group Polarization Common sense suggests that discussion with others who
express different opinions should produce more moderate attitudes for
everyone in the group. Surprisingly, this is not always the case. in
group polarization, a period of discussion pushes group members to take
more extreme

528

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Opinion scale

Before discussion After discussion DeGaulle

Americans

Photographee.eu/Shutterstock.com

FIGure 13.13 Positive 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0
Neutral

Group Polarization. We like to think that we can come together and talk
out our differences, but that does not always happen. Discussion often
moves individuals to take more extreme versions of their original
positions. After individually rating French leader Charles de Gaulle and
Americans in general (both of which were rated somewhat positively),
groups of four French college students were asked to reach consensus on
the ratings and then provide a second set of individual ratings.
Following the group discussion leading to consensual ratings, the
students' individual ratings were more extreme (more positive, in this
example) than their first ratings had been. Source: Adapted from S.
Moscovici & M. Zavalloni (1969). "The Group as a Polarizer of
Attitudes," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 12, 125--135.
doi:10.1037/h0027568

positions in the direction that they were already inclined to prefer
(Moscovici & Zavalloni, 1969). Group polarization does not reverse the
direction of attitudes, but rather accentuates the attitudes held at the
outset (see ● Figure 13.13). if group members began mildly favoring gun
control, their attitudes will be more favorable after discussion,
whereas if group members began with a mildly unfavorable position on gun
control, their attitudes will be more unfavorable after discussion. Two
pressures appear to push individuals to take more extreme positions
following a group discussion. First, conformity and desire for
affiliation contribute to group polarization. if the majority of a group
is leaning in a particular direction, what could be a better way of
fitting in than agreeing with that majority, and maybe even taking its
argument one step farther? There is also a tendency for like-minded
people to affiliate with one another, which can provide reinforcement
for existing opinions, increase people's confidence in those opinions,
lead to the discovery of new reasons for those opinions and
counterarguments to opposing views, and reduce exposure to conflicting
ideas. Second, exposure to discussion on a topic introduces new reasons
for holding an attitude. if you are already opposed to gun control and
you listen to additional arguments supporting your position, you might
end up more opposed than you were originally. Group polarization is
frequently studied in the context of the behaviors of juries. Following
deliberations, final sentencing decisions by mock juries are typically
more severe or more lenient than the original opinions expressed by
individual group members (Bray & noble, 1978). Group polarization
appears to be even more powerful in online discussions, where people are
exposed to many more arguments on issues than they might generate on
their own (Sia et al., 2002; himelboim et al., 2013).

groupthink A type of flawed decision making in which a group does not
question its decisions critically.

Deindividuation, or the loss of personal identity within a crowd, can
lead people to do things that they would not do on their own, such as
destroying this CVS Pharmacy during a protest following the death of
George Floyd. Many psychologists believe that rather than "losing"
oneself in a crowd, people instead adopt the norms of the crowd. If the
crowd becomes violent, normally lawabiding people might follow along.

As we discovered in our discussion of conformity, the presence of others
can influence the process of decision making. in Asch's experiments,
individuals appeared to make a choice in favor of group harmony over
accuracy. if group members suppress dissenting opinions in the interests
of group cohesion, the group may fall into a state of groupthink. This
type of flawed decision making might account for a number of unfortunate
group decisions throughout history (Janis, 1971). Among the examples
most frequently described as results of groupthink are the Bay of Pigs
invasion, the Korean and Vietnam Wars, and the Cuban missile crisis
(rose, 2011). These examples are notable because of their disastrous
results, but they may not be representative

marchello74/Shutterstock.com

Groupthink

hoW do GrouPS WorK ToGeTher?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

529

RICHARD KOCI HERNANDEZ/SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS/Newscom

Smart, experienced groups of people can make some not-so-smart decisions
because of groupthink. In 2001, Yahoo! had the opportunity to buy a
company called Google, started by Stanford University graduates Sergey
Brin (left) and Larry Page (right). The Yahoo! executives hesitated, and
the opportunity passed---a decision that they probably regret today.

of groupthink outcomes. For example, many terrorist organizations meet
the criteria stipulated by Janis (1972) for groupthink, and yet they
have arguably met a number of their short-term objectives, including the
terrorist attacks of 9/11 (rose, 2011). Groupthink is especially likely
in cohesive groups with high morale whose members already share similar
attitudes (Baron, 2005). Members of cohesive groups are less likely to
consider risks or alternatives associated with their chosen plan of
action. in many cases, the group is far from unanimous, but individuals
are unwilling to step forward in dissent, just as many of Asch's
participants preferred to go along rather than rock the boat. This
illusion of a unanimous group further stifles serious consideration of
alternatives before making a decision.

summary 13.2 Group Processes group Process

Definition

example

Social facilitation

Individual performance is influenced by the presence of others.

A jogger runs faster with a buddy than when running alone.

Social loafing

Working in a group decreases individual effort.

A student puts less effort into a group project than into an individual
term paper.

Deindividuation

Behavior differs when in a group, as opposed to when alone and
identifiable.

A normally law-abiding citizen loots a store during a riot.

Group polarization

Attitudes become more intense following discussion.

After a late-night debate with likeminded friends, students hold more
extreme views about an issue than they did before the discussion.

Flawed group decision making fails to consider dissenting views.

A group of friends decides to engage in a risky behavior that seems dumb
in hindsight.

Opinion scale

Positive 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 Neutral

Before discussion After discussion DeGaulle

Americans

Groupthink

Credits: Top row---Gary Francis/ZUMA Press/Adelaide/South
Australia/Australia/Newscom; Second row---ZUMA Press Inc/Alamy Stock
Photo; Third row---marchello74/Shutterstock.com; Fourth
row---Photographee.eu/Shutterstock.com; Bottom row---RICHARD KOCI
HERNANDEZ/SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS/Newscom.

530

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

How Well Do We get Along with others? Part of our heritage as a social
species involves the need not only to affiliate with a group, but also
to form meaningful social relationships with individual people. These
relationships can be between family members, peers, coworkers,
neighbors, or romantic partners. Psychologists have discovered a number
of underlying themes that affect this important part of life.

Attraction and Liking Attraction refers to our attitudes about other
people and can vary along a continuum from strong liking to strong
disliking. it varies in quality and strength, which in turn helps to
determine the type of relationship that we form with another person. We
are attracted to our romantic partners in stronger and more physical
ways than we are attracted to our friends and acquaintances. We know
what attraction to another person feels like, but it is more difficult
to identify the variables that predict our attraction to a particular
person. People who end up together often live, work, or spend leisure
time in the same places. indeed, in an early exploration of the impact
of proximity, 5,000 marriage licenses in which one or both partners
lived in Philadelphia were examined (Bossard, 1932). in about one-third
of the marriages, the partners had lived five blocks or less from each
other before marrying. As distance between homes increased, the number
of couples decreased. in the contemporary era of online dating,
proximity can take forms other than physical closeness. in particular,
CoVid-19 has shown that people can maintain emotional closeness even
when physically separated. Proximity is important to relationships
because simple contact can increase Musicians recognize the advantages
liking. in contrast to the proverb "Familiarity breeds contempt,"
regular exposure of the mere exposure effect. Hearing a to neutral or
positive stimuli generally leads to increased liking, a principle known
song frequently makes it more likeable. as the mere exposure effect (see
● Figure 13.14). in one example of this effect, Placement of a song in a
television show people who repeatedly viewed nonsense words described as
"Turkish" words and Chinese-like symbols reported liking them better
than those that they were seeing or movie is virtually guaranteed to
boost for the first time (Zajonc, 1968). The mere exposure effect
applies to people too sales of the artist's work. (Swap, 1977). From an
evolutionary point of view, the mere exposure effect might have led
people to avoid unfamiliar, and possibly dangerous, stimuli (Young &
Claypool, 2010). unfortunately, having an inclination to make more
negative responses to unfamiliar people also might contribute to
prejudice. To what extent do similarities and differences influence our
friendships and romantic mere exposure effect A situation in
relationships? in one experiment, college students read the results of
an attitude survey supwhich repeated exposure increases liking. posedly
filled out by another student (Byrne, 1961). As the attitudes expressed
became closer

Iktitaf

FIGure 13.14

Sarick Enanwal Zabulon Low frequency

Civadra

High frequency 1

2 3 4 Rated "goodness" of meaning

5

Mere exposure Increases Liking. More frequent exposure to these nonsense
"Turkish adjectives" resulted in higher ratings among American college
students on their "goodness" of meaning. Source: Adapted from R. B.
Zajonc (1968). "Attitudinal Effects of Mere Exposure," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology Monograph Supplement, 9, 1--27. doi:
10.1037/h0025848

hoW WeLL do We GeT ALonG WiTh oTherS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

531

David M. Benett/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images; Ian West/PA
Images/Alamy Stock Photo

to the students' attitudes, the students reported that the anonymous
person was better liked, more intelligent, and better informed about
current events. Apparently, assuming that we like ourselves, we find it
easy to like people with whom we are similar. People tend to choose
friends and romantic partners who hold similar deep values, such as
honesty and loyalty, rather than on the basis of superficial traits like
hair color (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2020). Consistent with these research
findings, the number of interracial couples in the united States has
grown dramatically since 1960 (Bryant & duncan, 2019). Although people
may be initially attracted to those with whom they share similar
characteristics, being attracted to another person also increases
similarity, a process known as attitude alignment. Attitudes of dating
partners grow closer together in a gradual process (davis & rusbult,
2001). At the same time, partners in stable relationships often
overestimate the similarity of their attitudes (Murray et al., 2002).
Physical appearance is a dominant factor in romantic attraction. After
completing questionnaires assessing personality and academic
achievement, study participants were randomly paired for a "computer
dance." Male participants were subsequently asked whether they would ask
their partner for a second date. The only significant variable out of
all the personality and other data collected that predicted the
likelihood of a second date was the woman's physical attractiveness
(Walster et al., 1966). Cultures frequently have their own definitions
of physical beauty, but we appear to have some underlying, biological
preferences. Preferences for faces rated as beautiful by adults can be
demonstrated in infants as young as 3 months of age (Langlois et al.,
1990). Subjective judgments of beauty are heavily influenced by
symmetry, or the degree of similarity between one half of the body or
face and the other half. Symmetry appears to be particularly important
in judging the physical attractiveness of potential romantic partners.
Symmetry of faces was more important to heterosexual research
participants in opposite-sex judgments of attractiveness than in
same-sex judgments of attractiveness (Little et al., 2008).

Most long-term couples share an approximately equal level of
attractiveness and may even have similar features or physique, as do
Sophie Hunter and Benedict Cumberbatch.

People show strong preferences for symmetrical faces (bottom row)
compared to the less symmetrical versions of the same faces (top row).
Symmetry may serve as an outward sign of genetic health. Source: D. I.
Perrett et al. (1999). "Symmetry and Human Facial Attractiveness."
Evolution and Human Behavior, 20, 295--307. doi: 10.1093/beheco/arn049.
Copyright © 2008 Oxford University Press.

532

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Most romantic couples share a common level of physical attractiveness, a
concept known as the matching hypothesis. Couples who were most similar
in terms of physical attractiveness were more likely to be together 9
months later (White, 1980). however, when longer-lasting heterosexual
relationships are examined, female partners tend to be rated as slightly
more attractive than their male partners (Mcnulty et al., 2008).

Liking Intimacy

Building Relationships

Romantic love

Companionate

Intimacy + Passion

Intimacy + Commitment

Yuri Arcurs/Shutterstock.com

Self-disclosure, or sharing personal information about yourself, follows
a regular progression as people become more intimate with one another
(Taylor & Altman, 1987). Acquaintances talk about Consummate general
topics other than themselves. new friends might discuss Love their
personal abilities and attitudes, whereas close friends move Intimacy +
Passion + Commitment on to consider dreams and goals. intimate friends
might share fears and negative past behaviors. Infatuation Fatuous
(foolish) love Empty love intimacy is highest when falling in love, but
what does love Passion Passion + Commitment Commitment look like under
the microscope? robert Sternberg's triangular model of love
distinguishes the building of different types of relaFIGure 13.15
tionships along dimensions of intimacy, passion, and commitment
(Sternberg, 2004). intimacy refers to the closeness or bonding that we
experience with a significant other, passion includes robert Sternberg's
triangular arousal and romance, and commitment describes the promise you
make to yourself to mainModel of Love. According to tain that
relationship over time. intimacy without passion is characteristic of
most friendships Sternberg, close relationships in which you share
personal facts and intimate moments of your life. Passion by itself
characvary along the dimensions of terizes an infatuation directed
toward a particular person. Commitment alone could describe intimacy,
passion, and commitment. the situation in which a person remains loyal
to a partner whose health makes passion no Consummate love combines all
three. longer possible, as in the case of a partner with dementia (see ●
Figure 13.15). Combinations of intimacy and passion define romantic
love. Without the addition of commitment, this type of love can fade
quickly. intimacy and commitment occur together as companionate love.
This love exists without passion in deep friendships or family
relationships. A combination of passion and commitment can occur in an
intense relationship, in which insufficient time has elapsed for the
development of intimacy. Finally, people who are In research by Gottman
and Gottman lucky enough to find all three components in the same
relationship experience consummate, (2017), successful couples are much
or so-called true love.

Maintaining Relationships

gchutka/E+/Getty Images

What factors keep people together? Some strategies seem particularly
important to many types of relationships, including friendships, family
relationships, and romantic relationships. People continue to use
openness and self-disclosure as relationships mature, along with
participation in joint activities, provision of reassurance, and
communication (Berscheid, 1989; Canary et al., 1993). Gottman and
Gottman (2017) describe how turning toward a "bid" for attention offered
by a partner rather than turning away or against is predictive of
happier relationships. For example, one person might bid for a response
from a partner by commenting on something of personal interest, such as
"Look at that beautiful dog!" The partner can turn toward the bid ("Yes,
i agree. That's a really pretty dog, but our dog is even prettier!"),
away from the bid (ignoring it), or against the bid ("don't bother me
now. i'm reading!"). responses to bids were observed in newlywed couples
and marital status was assessed six years later. As newlyweds,
nowdivorced couples had a record of turning toward bids only 33% of the
time compared to 86% of the time in couples still married.

more likely to "turn toward" a bid made by a partner, such as interest
in the Super Bowl. Less successful couples are more likely to turn away
from (don't bother me) or against (I hate football) a partner's bid.

hoW WeLL do We GeT ALonG WiTh oTherS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

533

83

80 70 60

60 50

40

40

Ljupco Smokovski/Shutterstock.com

Percentage reporting greater distress

90

Maintaining a relationship may become easier over time. As couples spend
more time together, they build a shared history, which provides them
with a stronger basis for understanding each other. Couples who have
been together for many years appear to have the ability to communicate a
thought or emotion to each other with a single look (Schober &
Carstensen, 2010). Long-term relationships can become boring, however.
Couples who continue to engage in novel and exciting activities have
higher relationship satisfaction (Aron et al., 2000).

Ending Relationships

30 17

20 10 0

Men

Women

FIGure 13.16 Gender Differences in response to Partner Infidelity. When
asked which would cause greater distress, your partner cheating on you
sexually or becoming deeply emotionally involved with a rival, men
reported greater distress from sexual infidelity, whereas women reported
greater distress from emotional infidelity. Source: Adapted from D. M.
Buss et al. (1992). "Sex Differences in Jealousy: Evolution, Physiology,
and Psychology," Psychological Science, 3, 251--255. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-9280.1992.tb00038.x

As you are no doubt well aware, real life does not typically follow the
scripts of fairy tales, in which the lovers ride off into the Sexual
infidelity sunset to live happily ever after. Maintaining relationships
takes Emotional infidelity time and effort, reciprocity, and
cooperation. A sense of inequity or unfairness in a relationship may
cause it to end. equity in a relationship suggests that costs, such as
curtailed freedom and less time to oneself, are offset by benefits, such
as companionship and security. in general, more equitable romantic
relationships are stable, enjoyable, and sexually intimate. Most couples
experience their share of ups and downs, but the relative number of
their positive and negative experiences is related to the likelihood
that the relationship will survive or end (Gottman et al., 2002).
Couples appear to need about five positive interactions to offset one
negative interaction. As the ratio of positive to negative interactions
slips toward 1:1, the likelihood that the relationship will end
increases. Couples with high levels of apparent conflict might still
stay together, so long as they agree to disagree and their conflict is
offset by a larger amount of positive times together. infidelity often
contributes to the ending of a romantic relationship. data describing
how frequently romantic partners cheat on each other are difficult to
obtain and show wide variations, as in the 33%--75% of men and 26%--70%
of women reported to cheat on their partners in one review of the
literature (Buss & Schmitt, 1993). Paternal discrepancy, or the
identification of a child as biologically fathered by someone other than
the male who believes himself to be the father, provides further insight
into female infidelity. estimates of paternal discrepancy range from 4%
to 10% (Bellis et al., 2005). Males and females appear to respond to
different aspects of cheating behavior (see ● Figure 13.16). Males
become jealous of sexual infidelity, whereas females are more distressed
by emotional infidelity (Buss et al., 1992).

summary 13.3 Sternberg's Three Types of Love type of Love

combines

excludes

Romantic love

Intimacy + passion

Commitment

Companionate love

Intimacy + commitment

Passion

Consummate love

Intimacy + commitment + passion

Nothing

Liking Intimacy

Romantic love

Companionate

Intimacy + Passion

Intimacy + Commitment

Consummate Love Intimacy + Passion + Commitment Infatuation

Fatuous (foolish) love

Empty love

Passion

Passion + Commitment

Commitment

Credit: photo: Yuri Arcurs/Shutterstock.com.

534

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Why Do We Cooperate in Some Situations and Compete in others? our social
interactions with one another can feature cooperation, or working
together toward common goals, or competition, where we struggle with one
another to obtain limited resources. Both cooperation and competition
have a long history in shaping our behavior. in Chapter 3, we described
natural selection as an ongoing race among organisms competing for
scarce resources and opportunities to reproduce (darwin, 1859). The
stakes in this race are high. individuals with characteristics that give
them an advantage over others are able to pass their genes along, while
losers fail to reproduce and die. At the same time, because humans do
not live alone, our survival depends on cooperation.

Competition and Cooperation in Animals

Paul Wayne Wilson/PhotoStockFile/Alamy Stock Photo

individual animals frequently compete for food or opportunities to mate.
Beginning with observations of "pecking order" among chickens
(Schjedlderup-ebbe, 1922), biologists have cataloged many species that
use competition, usually in the form of fighting, to determine the
allocation of mating opportunities, food, and The advantages of
cooperation can be illustrated by a real-life tale of two 1864
shipwrecks in the South other resources both within and between groups.
Too much competition among individual members hampers the Pacific.
Members of one crew worked cooperatively cohesion of a group, breaking
it into factions and possibly resulting in with one another as equals,
while members of the injuries among its members. Consequently, many
animals minimize the other maintained their formal command structure.
extent of within-group conflict by displaying clear signals of
dominance, After 1 year, the first crew managed to build a boat or high
status. The mandrill, a type of baboon, uses facial expressions and
gestures to signify its position in a dominance hierarchy. The color-
and get rescued, while the second was decimated by ing of the mandrill's
face, rump, and genitalia is also reflective of indi- cold, hunger, and
cannibalism (Druett, 2007). vidual fighting abilities (Setchell &
Wickings, 2005). do humans have analogous signals of dominance? it
appears that the male of the species does (Mazur & Mueller, 1996).
dominant human male faces are handsome and muscular, featuring strong
chins, deep-set eyes, and prominent brows. in contrast, "baby-faced"
males are rated by observers as being more submissive (McArthur & Berry,
1987). humans have the advantage of augmenting their natural signals of
status by purchasing and displaying expensive automobiles, homes, and
jewelry.

Animals minimize the damage caused by competing for dominance by
displaying clear signals of submission. The dog on its back is letting
the other dog know that its dominance has been recognized.

WhY do We CooPerATe in SoMe SiTuATionS And CoMPeTe in oTherS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

535

Individual Differences in Cooperation and Competition individuals vary
in their predisposition to cooperation or competition. in one
experiment, groups of participants were given the opportunity to compete
(by keeping tokens) or cooperate (by sharing tokens) while they observed
the decisions made by their group members (Kurzban & houser, 2005).
Three types of dispositions emerged: 17% of the participants were
"cooperators," who gave their tokens freely without paying much
attention to the behavior of other group members; 20% were "free
riders," who didn't give up any of their tokens; and 63% of the
participants were "reciprocators," who cooperated only after seeing
others do so. even though cooperators are in the minority, their
behavior is important to group survival. By contributing selflessly,
they encourage the majority of the group to cooperate too.

The Influence of Culture on Competition and Cooperation Members of
successful groups are more likely to survive and reproduce than members
of unsuccessful groups. Because it is in our best interest to belong to
effective groups, we cooperate with other group members and are quick to
conform to their norms and judgments. Cooperation becomes ingrained in
the group's culture and is passed along to new members. Why is
cooperation so essential to successful group behavior? Without
cooperation, there would be no basis for gathering diverse areas of
individual expertise into a meaningful, useful whole. under the
influence of culture, humans have progressed from simple divisions of
labor to highly specialized areas of expertise. individuals might spend
their entire academic careers exploring the structure of the frog retina
or the surface characteristics of one of Saturn's moons. At the same
time, no single person working alone would be able to put humans on the
Moon or produce all the special effects expected by contemporary movie
audiences. Few fans would pay to see an individual football player
demonstrate his skills on an otherwise empty field on Sunday afternoon.
Cooperation is the glue that holds productive groups together, from the
operating room of a hospital to the baseball diamond. The importance of
group membership to survival is reflected in the remarkable loyalty that
humans show to their culturally defined groups. Fans of a particular
sports team may be every bit as loyal to their group (and as potentially
violent toward others) as our early hunter--gatherer ancestors were to
their tribe or clan. unfortunately, the same loyalty and cultural
distinctiveness that bind us to our groups may lead us into conflict
with other groups, as discussed later in this chapter.

Choosing Between Cooperation and Competition

Gonzalo Fuentes/Reuters

Cooperation is essential to successful group behavior.

536

Chapter 13

how do people decide when to compete and when to cooperate? A classic
model of competition and cooperation within groups is known as the
prisoner's dilemma (Poundstone, 1992). Assume that you and another
person have been arrested for a crime, but that the police have limited
evidence against you. Without being able to communicate with your
partner, you are given the choice to confess (defect from your partner)
or to remain silent (cooperate with your partner). if you both remain
silent, you will each be sentenced to 1 year. if you both confess, you
will each receive 10 years. however, if one confesses and the other
remains silent, the prisoner who confesses will be set free, and the
silent prisoner will receive a 20-year sentence. The dilemma arises
because the best individual strategy is to confess or defect from your
partner, but if both of you figure this out and subsequently confess,
your

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGure 13.17

Prisoner B Prisoner B stays silent.

Prisoner B confesses.

Prisoner A stays silent.

A and B both serve 1 year each.

A serves 20 years. B goes free.

Prisoner A confesses.

A goes free. B serves 20 years.

A and B both serve 10 years each.

Prisoner A

Altruism and Helping We have all read stories about soldiers,
firefighters, and others who have risked or even sacrificed their lives
to save the lives of others. These instances are examples of altruism, a
helping behavior that either fails to reward or actually harms the
person who performs it, which was discussed in Chapter 3. instances of
altruism in which the helper is exposed to risk or experiences harm are
often described as heroism (Franco et al., 2011).

A capuchin monkey refuses to exchange a pebble for a slice of cucumber
after seeing another monkey receive a more highly valued grape for its
pebble, suggesting that nonhuman primates have a sense of fairness.

Science Nation, National Science Foundation

outcome is worse than if you both had remained silent (see ● Figure
13.17). in the prisoner's dilemma, cooperation is moderately rewarded (a
1-year sentence), while defection is punished (10 years). if only one of
you confesses, however, the confessor is highly rewarded (freedom),
while the other person is severely punished (20 years). For real people,
computers, and even animals, the most successful strategy in the
prisoner's dilemma situation is the tit-for-tat (TFT) strategy (Axelrod
& hamilton, 1981). using the TFT strategy, you make cooperation your
first move and then repeat your partner's successive moves. The success
of the TFT strategy has been attributed to three aspects: it is nice
(you begin with cooperation), it is able to retaliate and punish
uncooperative behavior (defection by your partner is followed by your
own defection), and it is forgiving (you return immediately to
cooperation following cooperation on the part of your partner; Brembs,
1996). The research on individual differences in cooperation discussed
earlier found that most human participants were reciprocators, whose
behavior is most similar to the TFT strategy (Kurzban & houser, 2005).
The prevalence of this type might reflect its typical success. if most
people are reciprocators, how can we explain the existence of the other
types? Free riders clearly benefit from their selfish behavior, but what
advantages might increase the chances of the cooperators' survival and
reproductive success? it is easier to be generous when you are well off,
so acting like a cooperator might make people believe that you have
extensive resources, improving your chances of attracting a mate
(Milinski et al., 2002). A person's reputation is also a powerful
motivator for cooperation. in ongoing prisoner's dilemma games,
participants use other people's record of cooperation (or lack thereof)
to determine whether to cooperate with them (Milinski et al., 2002). in
small hunter--gatherer bands or basketball teams, having a reputation
for selfishness is not likely to make you successful. Culture can shape
a person's choice of competition and cooperation. When two people from
different countries played the prisoner's dilemma game, less cooperation
and more competition occurred than when two people from the same country
participated together (Matsumoto & hwang, 2011). Furthermore, the bigger
the difference between the native countries of the participants along
the dimension of individualism or collectivism, the less cooperation
occurred. This finding reflects the in-group bias mentioned earlier in
the chapter. Contributing to our cooperative abilities is a deep-seated,
possibly biological sense of fair play that is shared with other species
in the animal kingdom. Capuchin monkeys will happily trade pebbles for
slices of cucumber until they see another monkey receiving the more
preferred grapes for its pebbles. After seeing the "unfairness" of their
situation, they not only are no longer willing to work for cucumber
slices, but they also respond by shaking their cages in anger (Brosnan &
de Waal, 2003). When people playing a prisoner's dilemma game were
observed with fMri, viewing the faces of cooperators produced activation
in brain areas normally linked to reward (Singer et al., 2004). in
contrast, when people were treated unfairly, activation occurred in
parts of the brain associated with anger, disgust, and pain (Sanfey et
al., 2003).

the Prisoner's Dilemma.

WhY do We CooPerATe in SoMe SiTuATionS And CoMPeTe in oTherS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

537

Michael Loccisano/Getty Images

The designation of hero is often given to people who are altruistic to
the point of risking their lives to help others. In 2007, Wesley Autrey
(shown here with his daughter) selflessly risked his life to save a
young man who fell onto New York subway tracks after suffering a
seizure.

bystander intervention The study of

The New York Times Photo Archive/Redux Pictures

situational variables related to helping a stranger, most notably the
decreased likelihood of helping as the number of bystanders increases.

Sensational (though inaccurate) news accounts of the murder of Kitty
Genovese stimulated research in bystander intervention, which asked
questions about why people seem to help in some situations but not
others.

538

Chapter 13

if behavior usually leads to improved survival and reproduction, how can
we account for altruism? Charles darwin suggested that "\[a\] tribe
including many members who were always ready to give aid to each other
and sacrifice themselves for the common good, would be victorious over
most other tribes; and this would be natural selection" (darwin, 1871,
p. 166). Although this suggestion is attractive, it suffers from a major
flaw in logic. The system suggested by darwin would produce free riders
who were not altruistic themselves, but who would benefit from the
altruistic behaviors of the members of their group (dawkins, 1976).
These individuals, because they would undoubtedly live to reproduce (as
opposed to the altruistic, who might not survive), should eventually
swamp the group with "selfish" genes. Several evolutionary mechanisms
have been proposed that account for the continuation of cooperative,
altruistic behavior (nowak, 2006). Although altruistic behaviors may
have costs for an individual, they may benefit the altruist's genetic
relatives. Altruistic genes will survive in the population so long as
the cost to an altruist is associated with a large-enough benefit to
relatives (hamilton, 1964). Japanese macaque monkeys are more likely to
defend close relatives from attack than they are to defend unrelated
monkeys (Kurland, 1977). People are more likely to help their relatives
than they are strangers, such as in helping to raise their children.
Altruism is also maintained by expectations that a favor might someday
be returned by those you have helped, a process known as reciprocal
altruism (Trivers, 1971). Vampire bats often regurgitate blood to share
with bats who did not hunt successfully; bats are more likely to share
with those who had shared with them recently (Wilkinson, 1984, 1990).
Selfishness might be limited by punishment administered by other group
members. Study participants who had the opportunity to punish those who
had not cooperated activated reward circuits in the brain, lending
credence to the phrase "revenge is sweet" (Fehr & rockenbach, 2004).
unfortunately, the willingness to pay a big price to carry out revenge
against those whose behavior seems unfair might also lead to irrational
acts, such as suicide bombings. however, other instances of altruism do
not fit these models. People have been known to adopt unrelated
children. Arland Williams, a passenger on an airplane that crashed into
the freezing Potomac river in 1982, passed lifelines to other passengers
before disappearing beneath the water. These altruistic acts represent
psychological altruism, or conscious efforts to help. This type of
altruism can be transmitted by a culture through learning (dawkins,
1976). The role of learning in altruism is supported by observations
that the tendency to feel pleasure when helping others is quite low in
children and gradually increases into adulthood (Cialdini et al., 1981).
if cooperation confers so many benefits to individuals and groups, how
can we explain the failure of some individuals to provide help when it
is desperately needed? in 1964, a young woman named Kitty Genovese was
murdered on a new York City street near her home late at night.
Sensational news reports at the time stated that 38 of her neighbors
watched for more than half an hour while Kitty struggled with her
attacker without intervening or calling the police. Although these
reports were not confirmed by later court testimony in the case (one
neighbor, Sophia Farrar, managed to reach Kitty before she died; Manning
et al., 2007), the public outrage that they stimulated led to a series
of experiments into bystander intervention. This research demonstrated
that an individual's likelihood of helping drops as the number of

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

other observers grows. in a typical experiment investigating this
phenomenon, college students filled out a questionnaire as their room
filled with smoke (Latané & darley, 1968). The researchers were
interested in how frequently and quickly the students reported the
smoke. When the college students were alone, nearly 80% sought help
within 6 minutes. When three study participants were tested together,
however, only 40% reported the emergency within 6 minutes. The effect of
the number of observers on the likelihood of intervention is probably
influenced by a sense of individual responsibility. When you are the
only person available to help, your responsibility is clear. When a
crowd of people is gathered around the scene of an accident, it is
easier to assume that others have already called 911 or that a physician
or nurse who is better qualified to help will be present. People also
fail to act because of fears of appearing foolish as a result of
misinterpreting a situation. emergencies sometimes can be ambiguous.
What sounds like a case of domestic violence next door might be a loud
movie or video game or actors practicing a scene for a play. People who
feel anonymous are less likely to help, which is consistent with our
previous observations of how anonymity can lead to less socially
desirable behavior. Finally, people are more likely to help when it is
safe and convenient for them to do so. if you are heading for your car
at the end of the day when you notice a classmate with a flat tire, you
are likely to lend a hand. however, if you are late for work or a final
exam, you may conveniently assume that someone else will take care of
the situation as you continue on your way.

Why Are We Aggressive? Aggression is the conscious intent to harm
others, and it can take several forms. instrumental aggression is the
intentional harm, usually physical, done to others to obtain a goal,
such as attacking a person to steal a wallet or purse. relational
aggression harms another person's social standing through behaviors such
as ignoring, excluding, and gossiping. other types of aggression include
defensive aggression, in which the person may do harm to others in
selfdefense; passive aggression, in which people who aren't comfortable
being openly aggressive get what they want under the guise of still
trying to please others; and maternal aggression, a rather common
phenomenon in the animal world (and occasionally among humans) in which
sickly or unwanted offspring are killed. Like most of the behaviors
discussed in this textbook, factors leading to human aggression form
complex interactions. efforts to find simple correlations between
violence and single variables such as economic growth, population
trends, illegal drug trade, availability of guns, and domestic violence
versus stranger violence do not tell the whole story. We can capture the
flavor of this complexity by examining homicide rates across cultures.
The average homicide rate worldwide is about 0.7% of all deaths.
homicides account for less than 0.1% of deaths in Western europe, 0.7%
of deaths in the united States, but more than 9% of deaths in honduras
(roser & ritchie, 2019). rates in large cities within the united States
vary substantially. St. Louis, Missouri, is the 15th most dangerous city
in the world, with a murder rate of 60.94 homicides per 100,000
residents (Statista research department, 2020). in comparison, there
were 1.55 homicides per 100,000 in Virginia Beach, Virginia. Across all
cultures, males are far more likely than females to be victims of
homicide (81% to 19%), but 58% of females are killed by intimate
partners or other family members (unodC, 2019).

aggression The conscious intent to harm another.

The Biological Psychology of Aggression is a capacity for aggression
simply part of being human? Biological explanations of aggression point
to several possible sources of human aggression: genetics, biochemistry,
and nervous system structure and activity. Aggression is clearly a
disposition that can be selectively bred in animals, as evidenced by the
development of the famous fighting bulls of Spain and hyperaggressive
laboratory mice (Lagerspetz & Lagerspetz, 1983). human twin and adoption
studies imply that aggressive tendencies in humans are at least partly
influenced by genetics (rushton et al., 1986). As we WhY Are We
AGGreSSiVe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

539

Prenatal exposure to testosterone and Aggression. Both male and female
preschoolers who had been exposed prenatally to higher than normal
levels of testosterone were more physically aggressive than their
same-sex siblings who experienced normal levels of prenatal
testosterone. Source: Adapted from J. M. Reinisch et al. (1991).
"Hormonal Contributions to Sexually Dimorphic Behavioral Development in
Humans," Psychoneuroendocrinology, 16, 213--278. doi:
10.1016/0306-4530(91)90080-D

Mean physical aggression scores

FIGure 13.18

12 10 8 6 Participants exposed to high doses of testosterone during
prenatal development

4 2 0

Unexposed participants Males

Females

have seen so frequently in this textbook, genes associated with
aggressive behavior interact with nurture or experience. Among children
who were abused, those with one version of a gene linked to aggression
in animals were likely to behave aggressively, while those with the
other form rarely did so, even when the abuse experienced was severe
(Craig, 2007; Fergusson et al., 2011). Both naturally occurring
chemicals and recreational drugs can influence aggression. Among the
naturally occurring chemicals implicated in aggression are androgens, or
male hormones such as testosterone (see ● Figure 13.18). Prenatal
exposure to high levels of androgens, which can occur naturally or
because of medications occasionally given to pregnant women, increases
the aggressive play of both male and female preschoolers (reinisch et
al., 1991). Adult men with higher levels of prenatal testosterone
exposure score higher on standardized questionnaires of aggression
(Bailey & hurd, 2005; Burton et al., 2009). Testosterone levels on the
high end of the typical range in teen and adult males are positively
correlated with delinquency, drug abuse, and aggression (dabbs & Morris,
1990). Testosterone levels for both male and female criminals correlate
with the violent nature of the crimes for which they were sentenced, as
well as the dominance and violence that they demonstrate while in prison
(dabbs et al., 1987; dabbs & hargrove, 1997). Testosterone appears to
affect aggressive behavior by increasing the sensitivity of the amygdala
to threatening stimuli, such as angry faces (derntl et al., 2009). When
feeling threatened, a person might engage in more aggressive behavior as
a preemptive strike. Serotonin levels are negatively correlated with
aggressive behavior. Male vervet monkeys form precise social
hierarchies, and higher rank is associated with higher levels of
serotonin activity (raleigh et al., 1992). Monkeys at the bottom of the
hierarchy had lower serotonin levels and were much more aggressive than
high-status monkeys. Serotonin might reduce aggression by enhancing
empathy (Siegel & Crockett, 2013) or by promoting activity in
frontallobe areas associated with inhibiting impulsive behavior (heinz
et al., 2011). Many psychoactive substances affect the likelihood that a
person will behave aggressively. For example, alcohol has been
implicated in between 32% and 63% of violent crimes (Giancola, 2013). in
addition, many suicides are committed under the influence of alcohol
(Sher, 2006). The most likely mode of action for alcohol in stimulating
aggression is its general disinhibiting effects on behavior. As
discussed in Chapter 4, alcohol silences higher cortical areas
responsible for impulse control, often leading to behavior that is
normally actively suppressed, including aggression. Keeping in mind the
complexity of human aggression, we can point to variations in brain
structure and function that are associated with senseless violence.
Antisocial, violent behavior is correlated with some types of brain
damage, although these findings interact with experience in ways similar
to the genetics studies discussed earlier (davidson et al., 2000). The
diversity of patterns of brain activity leading to aggression was
demonstrated in a study comparing brain activity in murderers who had
experienced neglect, poverty, physical abuse, or sexual abuse and
murderers who had experienced none of these social deficits (raine et
al., 1998). The brain activity of the neglected and abused murderers was
quite similar to the nonviolent

540

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

(b)

(c) 

Courtesy of Dr. Adrian Raine, Departments of Criminology, Psychiatry,
and Psychology, University of Pennsylvania

(a) 

These brain images were taken from (a) a person with no history of
criminal behavior, (b) a person who was convicted of murder and had a
strong history of childhood abuse and neglect, and (c) a person who was
convicted of murder but had no history of childhood abuse or neglect.
The murderer who had been abused and neglected shows activity that is
similar to that of the person without a criminal history. The murderer
with no history of abuse or neglect shows little activity in the frontal
lobes (toward the top of the image) or in the middle parts of the brain
that usually respond to emotional stimuli.

control participants. in contrast, the brain activity of the non-abused
murderers was quite different, suggesting that their violent behavior
had different roots than in the murderers with a history of child abuse.
The non-abused individuals showed an unusually reduced level of activity
in the frontal lobes. Given the essential role of the frontal lobes in
higher-order judgment and impulse control, this lower level of activity
might help account for their inability to control their aggression.

Learning and Aggression Although it is probably safe to say that our
human heritage contains a capacity for aggression, the actual expression
of aggression is elicited by environmental factors and modified by
experience. As discussed in Chapter 8, Albert Bandura provided
compelling evidence that children who observe aggression are likely to
behave aggressively themselves (Bandura, 1973). in Bandura's classic
demonstration of social learning, preschoolers who observed an adult
attack an inflatable Bobo doll mimicked not just the violent actions,
but also the yells of "Sock him in the nose," "Knock him down," and
"Kick him." opportunities to observe violence are plentiful. Within the
family, children who are disciplined with screaming, slapping, and
beating are more likely to be physically aggressive with their peers at
school (Grogan-Kaylor et al., 2018). even when the parents are violent
toward each other, without involving the child directly, the child's
level of violent behavior may be affected. in studies of violent
children and teens, recent exposure to violence in the home was a useful
predictor for the child's violent behavior outside the home (Singer et
al., 1998; Jouriles et al., 2018). Additional opportunities to observe
violence are provided by the media. By the age of 18, the average
American has seen an estimated 200,000 acts of violence on television
alone (Strasburger, 2007). Children and youth are exposed to
increasingly violent and graphic images and ideas through films, video
games, and music lyrics. As discussed in Chapter 2, however, care must
be taken to avoid misinterpretation of the research results showing
correlations between media exposure and aggression.

Preventing Aggression The human species loses a smaller percentage of
the population to war today than in the time of our hunter--gatherer
ancestors (LeBlanc, 2003), but we still have a long way to go. As in the
case of reducing prejudice, redefining the boundaries of the in-group
might be contributing to this improvement. instead of hunter--gatherer
clans of 100 or so individuals fighting with neighboring clans, we have
nations of millions that cooperate as units. increasing economic
dependencies among nations further reduces the advantages of
between-group violence. damage to one nation's critical infrastructure,
such as its ability to produce or process oil, is likely to have adverse
effects for all nations, including the attacker. despite this progress,
we remain plagued not only by continued war deaths, but also by
homicides, domestic violence, WhY Are We AGGreSSiVe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

541

THInkIng scientifically Brain Damage and Criminal Behavior In
fortunately rare cases, people who experience brain damage suddenly
engage in uncharacteristic, criminal behavior. In 1966, Charles Whitman
stabbed his mother and wife to death and then shot and killed 17 people
the next day from the observation deck of the University of Texas,
Austin tower. Whitman was killed by a police officer and was found to
have a tumor pressing on his amygdala. Identifying common features of
these cases might help us gain a better understanding of criminality.

occurred prior to brain damage, but did follow soon after the brain
damage (Darby et al., 2018). The brain damage these individuals
experienced affected different regions, but these regions were all part
of the same network, which in turn is related to moral decision making.
The circuit included parts of the prefrontal cortex, the orbitofrontal
cortex, and the anterior temporal lobes, which contain the amygdala (see
Chapter 4).

WHaT aM I BEINg aSkED TO BELIEvE OR aCCEpT?

aRE THERE OTHER WayS THaT THIS EvIDENCE COULD BE INTERpRETED?

We are being asked to accept that nervous system correlates of criminal
behavior can be identified.

The authors are careful to note that many factors contribute to criminal
behavior, and that most patients with damage in the circuit identified
in this study do not engage in criminal activity. Their sample was
relatively small (17 individuals). They relied on published studies
rather than having the opportunity to investigate each case themselves.

WHaT EvIDENCE SUppORTS THIS pOSITION? A group of case studies were
collected in which no record of criminal behavior

WHaT OTHER EvIDENCE WOULD I NEED TO EvaLUaTE THESE aLTERNaTIvES? The
authors recommend following people with new lesions in the identified
circuit to see how many engage in criminal activity.

WHaT aRE THE MOST REaSONaBLE CONCLUSIONS? Lesions in the identified
circuit might contribute to criminal behavior, but criminal behavior is
not the inevitable result of this type of damage. In addition, brain
damage should not be considered as the only reason these individuals
engaged in criminal behavior. Further research is needed to understand
the biological correlates of criminal behavior. ■

Bob Daemmrich/Alamy Stock Photo

Police officer Ramiro Martinez was recognized on the 50th anniversary of
the first U.S. campus mass shooting event. In 1966, Charles Whitman, who
was later discovered to have a rare tumor pressing on his amygdala,
opened fire from the University of Texas clock tower, killing 17.
Martinez shot and killed Whitman, ending the tragedy. Understanding the
rare cases of brain damage that lead to violent behavior can give us a
better idea of the brain circuits underlying other forms of violence.

542

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Image courtesy of Mark Levine, Department of Psychology, Exeter
University

rape, bullying, and other destructive aggressive behavior. Psychologists
continue to search for effective ways to reduce aggression. There are no
simple solutions to the problem of aggression. You might think that we
could take advantage of catharsis, or the reduction of an emotion
through its expression, but the research results do not support this
approach. Catharsis theories of aggression are common but suffer from
the same weaknesses shown by catharsis explanations of emotion discussed
in Chapter 7. Just as expressing an emotion typically heightens rather
than decreases a feeling, people who engage in aggression experience an
increase in aggression. in one typical experiment, participants first
were angered by a person who criticized essays they had written
(Bushman, 2002). Subsequently, the participants who were given
opportunities to hit a punching bag while thinking about the critic
specified a willingness to administer louder sound blasts to the critic
when given the opportunity to retaliate than did participants in control
groups. despite the intuitive appeal of the notion of catharsis, when it
comes to aggression, catharsis is generally ineffective. Another
frequent suggestion for reducing aggression that has failed to gain
research support is an active teaching approach in which children are
rewarded for sensitivity and cooperation. Cross-cultural data show that
homicide rates are often high in cultures that feature a loving
socialization of children and aversion to interpersonal conflict, such
as the inuit, !Kung Bushmen, and Gebusi of new Guinea, yet very low
among cultures where children are explicitly taught to fight, like the
Turkana of Kenya (dyson-hudson & dysonhudson, 1995, 1999). Much of the
research discussed so far in this chapter focuses on individual
variables, whether they are related to a person's genetic makeup or
socialization. To truly understand aggression, we need to zoom out to
see this behavior within the social context. For example, we know that
if groups rarely interact, they are more likely to fight than to
cooperate. in contrast, if groups interact regularly and anticipate
future interactions, they may still compete, but they tend to do so in
more prosocial ways. The social environment also can determine whether
aggressiveness escalates to actual violence. in a study using
surveillance footage of public places, researchers observed actual
fighting behavior (Levine et al., 2011). in many cases, one or more
third parties (usually friends of the combatants) intervened to stop the
fight. in an interesting contrast with the helping behavior observed in
the bystander intervention literature discussed previously, third
parties are more likely, not less likely, to intervene in a fight when
the number of bystanders is larger. Perhaps the implications of the
aggression spreading to include the whole group makes stopping the fight
a very high priority for members of the group.

Research using surveillance camera footage shows that third parties
often intervene in an effort to deescalate violence (Levine et al.,
2011). Unlike most laboratory studies of bystander intervention, third
parties in the filmed incidents were more, not less, likely to intervene
as groups of onlookers became larger. Further research should help
clarify the exact conditions leading to helping behavior.

Andrew Aitchison/Getty Images

Homicides among the Turkana of Kenya are quite rare, even though
children are explicitly encouraged to be aggressive toward one another,
under the watchful eyes of adults. However, the Turkana are exceedingly
aggressive toward their neighbors. Over human history, the trait of
aggression has probably been valued when turned against other groups,
but not when it is turned inward.

WhY Are We AGGreSSiVe?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

543

interpersonal Relationships The Social Perspective WHaT DO WE kNOW aBOUT
MaRRIagES THaT BEgIN ONLINE? THE ADVENT OF THE INTERNET is changing our
social interactions right in front of our eyes. Classic research
reviewed earlier in this chapter showed that Americans typically married
someone who lived within five blocks of their home (Bossard, 1932). The
internet has changed all of that. Between 2005 and 2012, a surprising
number of Americans, one out of three, met their spouses online
(Cacioppo et al., 2013). despite the comfort level of younger adults
with the internet, 30- to 39-year-olds were more likely to have met
their spouse online than were those under 30. Those who met their spouse
online were also more educated and had higher incomes, suggesting that
the internet has provided busy people opportunities to socialize.
Marriages begun online were slightly but significantly less likely to
end in divorce or separation than marriages begun offline (see ● Figure
13.19). online marriage partners rated their marriages as more
satisfying. even when factors such as age, education, and income were
controlled, because these might account for higher satisfaction by
themselves, the online marriages remained more successful. What other
factors might account for the success of the online marriages? People
who seek a spouse online might differ from those who don't in important
ways. Perhaps they are more motivated to maintain long-term
relationships, or they might be more selective in their choices.
Self-disclosure differs in the online and offline settings, leading to
greater liking for people you meet in the online realm (Cacioppo et al.,
2013). Finally, the matching algorithms used by online dating sites
might result in people finding more compatible partners than they would
through chance meetings in their face-to-face lives. Further research is
necessary to fully understand the impact of online meetings on
relationship outcomes, but these initial results indicate that many
Americans are using online dating with surprising success. ■ Odds of
divorce observed within each category in sample 30%

16.79%

10%

6.25%

4.35%

210% 214.81% 211.76%

24.14%

7.61%

25.95%

230% 241.07%

250% 270%

266.67%

r Ba

er th O

k W or

ev en t ci

al

om So

h.  c at c

M

Fr ie nd s

hu rc h C

Fa m ily

ol ho Sc

eH

ar m on y

290%

FIGure 13.19 Odds of Divorce are Lower for Couples Meeting at eHarmony.
Researchers at eHarmony reported that their now-married clients are much
less likely to divorce than couples meeting in more traditional ways,
such as through school, family, church, and work. Source:
http://www.eharmony.com/blog/how-you-meetyour-spouse-matters/#.WM2CafnsKUk

544

Chapter 13

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology Takes On Real-World Problems Persuasion During a Pandemic and
interpret and might change as more research is conducted. For a public
that is looking for black and white "truth," an expert's appropriate
reluctance to say "we know without a doubt that masks prevent COVID-19"
damages trust and credibility. Good science is objective, not political,
but public health experts are inevitably drawn into the political
sphere. Too much trust in them from the "wrong" side reduces their
overall influence. Assuming that experts can maintain some level of
credibility, what types of messages should they deliver? A range of
possibilities exists, including appealing to a desire to

make yourself and others safer (wash your hands to save your
grandparents), aligning with the public's moral values (it's a good
thing to care for others), or reminding people about social norms and
approval (people won't like you unless you practice good social
distancing) (Bavel et al., 2020). As mentioned previously in this
chapter, using emotions like fear to boost the impact of persuasive
messages requires great caution. Unless the public sees a clear action
step that will reduce their fear, they will tune out the messages. ■

David Kawai/Bloomberg/Getty Images

It is difficult to choose among the many topics in this chapter to apply
to the realworld problems raised by a pandemic. From compliance to
social connectivity to cooperation to social norms, the social behaviors
discussed in this chapter all have major impacts on how we respond to
threats (Bavel et al., 2020). Of these many possibilities, we have
chosen to focus on persuasion. While we would hope that most people
would use the central route to persuasion to consider such an important
issue as responses to a pandemic, we cannot assume that is the case.
Regardless of how much attention each person is paying to the pandemic,
what is the best way to persuade people to do what they need to do to
keep themselves and their communities safe? A first consideration is the
credibility of the message source. Credibility results from being
perceived as trustworthy and expert (Bavel et al., 2020). In the case of
a pandemic, we would assume that medical experts would be likely choices
as spokespersons. In today's social media world, these experts face a
whole host of challenges, however (Smith & Wanless, 2020). Gone are the
days when experts delivered information to a passive audience. Social
media allows everyone to be a critic, and the critical voices can often
outnumber or be louder than the expert voices. Scientists are trained to
use evidence to support their recommendations, yet that evidence often
takes time to acquire

The task of providing appropriate guidance to the public regarding
COVID-19 usually falls on medical experts, like Theresa Tam, Chief
Public Health Officer in Canada. Psychological science related to
persuasion can guide this process.

Why Are We Aggressive?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

545

summary 13.4 Cooperation and Competition Cooperation

Competition

What is it?

influential Factors

Working together to reach a goal

●

Individual differences

●

TFT strategy

●

Culture

●

Innate sense of fair play

●

Availability of resources

●

Signals for dominance and submission

●

Number of potential helpers available

●

Relatedness to person needing help

●

Punishment for selfishness

●

Expectations for the future reciprocation

●

Conscious desire to help

●

Sense of personal responsibility to help

A contest for resources

Altruism

Helping others without personal gain or with personal cost

Aggression

Conscious intent to harm another

●

Interactions between genetics and child maltreatment

●

Use of alcohol and other drugs

●

Testosterone and serotonin levels

●

Brain structure and activity

●

Observational learning

Credits: Top row---Gonzalo Fuentes/Reuters/Corbis; Second row---Paul
Wayne Wilson/PhotoStockFile/Alamy Stock Photo; Third row---Michael
Loccisano/Getty Images; Bottom row---Andrew Aitchison/Getty Images.

Key terms The Language of psychological Science Be sure you can define
these terms and use them correctly.

actor--observer bias, p. 506 aggression, p. 539 attitude, p. 509
attribution, p. 505 bystander intervention, p. 538 cognitive
consistency, p. 511 cognitive dissonance, p. 511 compliance, p. 524
conformity, p. 523 correspondence bias, p. 505 deindividuation, p. 528

546

Chapter 13

discrimination, p. 516 dispositional attribution, p. 505
door-in-the-face, p. 524 elaboration likelihood model (eLM), p. 512
foot-in-the-door, p. 524 group polarization, p. 528 groupthink, p. 529
just-world belief, p. 508 low-balling, p. 524 mere exposure effect,
p. 531

obedience, p. 524 persuasion, p. 512 prejudice, p. 516 self-serving
bias, p. 506 situational attribution, p. 505 social facilitation, p. 527
social loafing, p. 528 social norms, p. 522 stereotype, p. 516

The ConneCTed Mind: SoCiAL PSYChoLoGY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

An interactome among genes implicated in autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
with other cellular proteins confirmed links between ASD and several
related conditions and identified new genes that warranted further
study.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

The Troubled Mind

14

PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS Learning Objectives 1. Analyze the general
definition of psychological disorder and discuss its application in the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5).

2.  Debate the diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
    and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), considering
    ways to distinguish symptoms of these disorders from normal
    childhood behavior.

3.  Summarize the symptoms of schizophrenia and their biological and
    environmental correlates.

4.  Discuss the role of bipolar disorder as a bridge between
    schizophrenia and major depressive disorder.

5.  Identify common and differentiating symptoms of the anxiety
    disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, posttraumatic stress
    disorder, and dissociative and somatic symptom disorders.

6.  Assess the psychological mechanisms that may support behavioral
    symptoms of antisocial, borderline, and narcissistic personality
    disorders.

OF ALL THE REASONS TO STUDY PSYCHOLOGY, FINDING ways to improve the
lives of people with psychological disorders might be one of the most
rewarding. This process begins with understanding the features and
possible causes of a disorder. Identifying the causes of psychological
disorders requires us to pull together multiple threads leading from the
genetic, biological, cognitive, developmental, and social aspects of
being human. These causal factors interact with one another in complex
ways, so the same disorder might look one way in one individual and
quite different in another. We do not know what causes children to
develop the symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), discussed in
detail later in this chapter, but at least we know where to start
looking. We have cautioned you on several occasions in this textbook to
avoid the idea that we have "genes for" this trait or the next because
the reality is more complex. As we zoom in to analyze the genetic
contributions to ASD, you will see that we have zoomed way past the
traditional array of 46 human chromosomes featured in Chapter 3.
Instead, we are looking at a visual representation of something that
biologists call an interactome---a map of all interactions among
proteins in a the 539 proteins that formed interactions with proteins
produced by 26 genes already implicated in ASD (Sakai et al., 2011). The
resulting map not only confirmed links between ASD and several

Laura Freberg

cell. In this particular case, the researchers were attempting to
identify the relationships among

related conditions, but also identified genetic relationships that
warranted further study. Further research indicated that individuals
with ASD have many more mutations that affect the hubs in the
interactome than their siblings who do not have ASD (Chen et al., 2018).

A self-portrait by one of the authors' (LF) daughters, who has ASD.

549 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Laura Freberg

We refer to "people with autism spectrum disorder" instead of "autistic
person" because people are so much more than their disorders. Many
individuals with ASD, including author LF's daughter, enjoy varied
interests, including art.

What does an interactome mean for a person with autism? Unfortunately,
understanding more about the sources of ASD has not yet led to improved
treatments. As mentioned in Chapters 8 and 15, the only effective
treatment for ASD today is the use of behavioral therapies. Still, such
discoveries have the potential to improve the lives of individuals with
ASD down the road or to provide information that eventually will help us
prevent further cases. To fully understand the experience of individuals
with ASD requires us to zoom out to consider overall development.
Psychologists point out that we say "a person with autism spectrum
disorder" instead of an "autistic person" for good reason. People are
not their disorders, and much is happening in each individual's life
that has nothing to do with ASD. We could consider the impact of
parents, whose age might have been a risk factor for a child's ASD, or
study their ability to manage their child's behavior. Zooming even
further out, we can investigate the effects of the disorder on the
social connectedness children with ASD experience as they venture out
into the world. In this chapter, you will discover a number of types of
psychological disorders, each with a unique history and set of
characteristics. The next chapter, Chapter 15, will explore the
treatments and therapies that psychologists have developed to address
the challenges to well-being posed by these disorders.

What Does It Mean to Have a Psychological Disorder? Mental health
experts define a psychological disorder as "a syndrome characterized by
clinically significant disturbance in an individual's cognition, emotion
regulation, or behavior that NORMAL NORMAL

MILD

MILD

Emotions Emotions Good alertness Good alertness and positive and
positive emotional emotional state. state. FeelingFeeling sad or down
sad ortemporarily, down temporarily, but not but for long. not for long.

"I'm not"I'm getting not getting the grades the grades I want this I
want this Cognitions Cognitions

"I'm struggling "I'm struggling at school at school this semester. this
semester. I wish II wish I semester, semester, but I'll keep but
I'lltrying keeptotrying do my to best." do my best." could study
couldbetter, study or better, I'll fail." or I'll fail." Going to Going
classes to classes and studying and studying for the next for the
nextGoing to Going classes to classes with some withtrouble some trouble
studying. studying. round of round tests.ofTalking tests. Talking to
professors. to professors. Less contact Less contact with others. with
others.

Behaviors Behaviors

550

Chapter 14

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

reflects a dysfunction in the psychological, biological, or development
processes underlying mental functioning" (american Psychiatric
association \[aPa\], 2013, p. 20). But what does this definition
actually mean? Many behaviors considered abnormal are quite similar to
normal behaviors. We all know what it feels like to be depressed at
times, but how is that different from having major depressive disorder?
this chapter will help you understand the distinctions, but because
those distinctions can be subtle, we also caution you against
"first-year medical student's disease," or the sense that you have all
the disorders that you are studying. the study of psychological
disorders is called abnormal psychology. It is surprisingly difficult,
but necessary, for psychologists to agree on the differences between
typical and abnormal behaviors because deciding that an individual's
behaviors and mental processes are abnormal is the first step toward
labeling that person with a psychological disorder and providing
treatment (see ● Figure 14.1). We can start with the literal meaning of
the word abnormal. In latin, the prefix ab means "away from" and norma
means "the rule." In other words, abnormal behavior is literally
behavior that is not typical, usual, or regular. this meaning implies a
statistical definition of abnormality. By this definition, behaviors
that most people do are normal, whereas behaviors that characterize a
minority of people are abnormal. But is it true that only a minority of
the population experiences psychological disorders? We actually don't
know how many people have psychological disorders. a person can be
diagnosed with comorbid disorders, which means more than one disorder
occurs at the same time, so simply adding up the rates for each type of
disorder is not a solution. statistics can look different for different
time frames. one estimate of the number of people who experience a
psychological disorder during the previous year is around 26% (Kessler
et al., 2005), but estimates of the number of people experiencing a
disorder at least once during their lifetime can be much higher. In one
longitudinal study of individuals from age 19--20 to age 50, the
cumulative probability of experiencing at least one disorder was 73.9%
(angst et al., 2016). these numbers certainly challenge our conceptions
of abnormal behavior as unusual. the statistical approach does have the
advantage of being clear (see ● Figure 14.2). For example, intellectual
disability is one of the categories in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, a handbook for diagnosis that we discuss in
more detail later in the chapter. the diagnosis of intellectual
disability relies heavily on statistics. a score of 70 or below on a
standard IQ test is the typical cutoff for identifying an individual
with intellectual disability (aPa, 2013). even in this relatively clear
situation, however, the statistical approach represents merely a
starting point. a diagnosis of intellectual disability also requires an
individual to demonstrate difficulties with adaptive skills, which
include factors such as communication, self-care, safety, and use of
community resources. a purely statistical approach has several
additional major drawbacks. First, it implies a cultural specificity
that we would like to avoid. Because most members of one culture may
behave in ways different from those of people in another, the purely
statistical approach to abnormality might result in different
definitions of psychological disorder from one culture to the next.
second, a statistical definition fails to capture the distress that
often accompanies a

MODERATE MODERATE

abnormal psychology The study of psychological disorders.

comorbid Two or more disorders in the same individual.

Figure 14.1 A Continuum from Normal to Psychological Disorder.
Psychological disorders can be understood both categorically, which
means that each has its own set of distinct characteristics used for
diagnosis, and as part of a continuum from normal behavior to severely
disordered behavior. The diagnostic criteria discussed in this chapter
guide psychologists in their identification of the types and severity of
disorders their patients and clients might have. Source: Adapted from C.
A. Kearney, & T. J. Trull (2012). Abnormal Psychology and Life: A
Dimensional Approach. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Cengage Learning.

PSYCHOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER---LESS DISORDER---LESS SEVERE
SEVERE PSYCHOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER---MORE DISORDER---MORE
SEVERE SEVERE

Extreme sadness Extreme sadness all of the all time of with the time
greatwith great Feeling sad, Feeling but asad, strong but positive a
strongexperience positive experience Intense sadness Intense sadness
most of the most dayofwith the some day with some trouble concentrating
trouble concentrating and complete and complete loss of loss of such as
asuch goodasgrade a good could grade lift mood. could lift mood. trouble
concentrating trouble concentrating and someand lossome of appetite.
loss of appetite. appetite. appetite. "These bad "These grades badjust
grades showjust what show a failure what Ia failure I "These bad "These
grades badreally grades hurt. really Thishurt. mayThis set me may set
"I'm me so worried "I'm soabout worried these about grades thesethat
grades my that my am at everything. am at everything. There's no There's
hope; no I'mhope; not I'm not back for aback while. forI'm a while.
reallyI'm worried." really worried." stomach stomach hurts. I don't
hurts. know I don't what know to do." what to do." doing anything doing
anything today." today." Skipping Skipping a few classes a fewand
classes feeling and somewhat feeling somewhat Unable toUnable get
outtoofget bed, outeat, of bed, or leave eat, the or leave the Skipping
Skipping most classes mostand classes unable andtounable to unmotivated
unmotivated to study. Avoiding to study. Avoiding contact with contact
with house. Lack house. of energy Lack ofand energy frequent and crying.
frequent crying. maintain maintain eye contact eyewith contact otherwith
people. otherStrong people. Strong professors professors and classmates.
and classmates. lack of motivation. lack of motivation.

What Does It Mean to have a PsychologIcal DIsorDer?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

551

FIGuRE 14.2

2.14%

2.14% 13.59%

0.13% 55

70

34.13%

85

34.13% 100

0.13%

13.59% 115

130

145

Wechsler IQ scores

MARKA/Alamy Stock Photo

Statistical Abnormality. The word abnormal literally means "away from
the rule." Both intellectually gifted individuals, usually defined as
having an IQ over 130, and individuals with intellectual disability,
usually defined as having an IQ below 70, are equally "abnormal" in this
statistical sense of the word. Academy Award--winning producer Quentin
Tarantino (Pulp Fiction, Kill Bill, Django Unchained, The Hateful Eight,
Once Upon a Time in Hollywood) has a reported IQ of 160. Although
neither he nor his films are "typical," we are unlikely to refer to
Tarantino as "abnormal." Statistics alone do not capture what we mean by
abnormal behavior.

Our tolerance for people engaging in acts that are harmful to themselves
is variable. For example, most states in the United States have
prohibitions against committing suicide (the irony in prosecuting under
such laws appears to have been lost on the legislators).

552

Chapter 14

Peter Horree/Alamy Stock Photo

Defining abnormal behavior as a deviation from what is considered ideal
immediately runs into problems of cultural specificity. Behaviors like
hearing voices that others cannot hear might be considered less than
ideal in Western cultures but a gift in others. The ability to hear
voices was considered an advantage for shamans, like the one represented
transforming into his jaguar spirit companion in this Costa Rican piece
from 1000--1500 CE.

psychological disorder, both for the person experiencing the disorder
and for those interacting with that person. To address these concerns,
we might suggest that abnormal behavior deviates from some ideal manner
of behaving. This approach succeeds in capturing the general distress
that most of us experience when observing or experiencing abnormal
behavior. unfortunately, this approach does nothing to avoid
cross-cultural differences in defining disordered behavior. different
cultures are often characterized by diverse ideals. in Western nations,
hearing voices that others cannot hear is generally considered abnormal.
in other cultures, hearing voices may be viewed more positively, as a
sign of religious giftedness (Al-issa, 1977; Kurihara et al., 2000).
More troublesome is the simple fact that it is difficult, if not
impossible, to reach consensus regarding what constitutes ideal
behavior. People, including experts in psychology, have deeply divided
value judgments regarding sexual conduct, recreational drug use, and a
host of other activities. A simple modification of this "deviation from
the ideal" approach can help us to achieve some consensus. behaviors
that cause harm to others are viewed as less than ideal. unless the
person is acting defensively, most of us would agree that such behavior
is negative and undesirable. We are also sympathetic to those who have
conditions that cause harm to themselves. We can combine the best
aspects of each of these approaches to construct a formal definition of
abnormal behavior: Abnormal behavior is distressing and harmful to self
or others. Younger people seem especially vulnerable to psychological
disorders. College students have the same rate of psychological
disorders as their age peers who are not attending college, as shown in
● Figure 14.3. however, the rate of psychological disorders in young
adults is higher than in the general population and appears to be
increasing (hunt & eisenberg, 2010; Twenge et al., 2019). Serious
psychological distress, major depression, suicidal thoughts, and suicide
attempts have increased dramatically among adolescents and young adults,
but not in other age cohorts, in the last 10 years (Twenge et al.,
2019). nearly half of the young adults under the age of 24 who were

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Any diagnosis

Mood disorders

Anxiety disorders

Alcohol use disorders

College Not in college 0

10

20

40 30 Percentage

50

60

Figure 14.3

PeopleImages/Getty Images

Personality disorders

rates of Psychological Disorders in College Students. Based on
face-to-face interviews, college students and their same-age peers who
do not attend college have a high rate (nearly 50%) of meeting the
criteria for at least one psychological disorder over the past 12
months. College students and age peers not in college did not differ
significantly in their rates of psychological disorder, with the
exception of alcohol-use disorders, which were higher among those
attending college. Source: Adapted from C. Blanco et al. (2008). "Mental
Health of College Students and Their Non-CollegeAttending Peers: Results
from the National Epidemiologic Study on Alcohol and Related
Conditions," Archives of General Psychiatry, 65(12), 1429--1437.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.65.12.1429

surveyed met criteria for at least one psychological disorder in the
previous year, including 18% for a personality disorder, 12% for an
anxiety disorder, and 11% for either major depressive disorder or
bipolar disorder (Blanco et al., 2008). each of these categories is
discussed in more detail in this chapter.

How Are Psychological Disorders Diagnosed? when you visit your physician
or student health center complaining of The first official effort in the
United States to a sore throat, your health care provider notes your
symptoms, compares gather data on psychological disorders was the them
to known categories of illness, swabs your throat for a sample, and
recording of a single category, "idiocy/insanity," in then determines
your diagnosis: you have strep throat. Based on that the 1840 census
(APA, 2000). diagnosis, you are given a prescription for an antibiotic.
Unlike medical illnesses, however, psychological disorders are diagnosed
purely on the basis of observable behaviors. There are no blood tests,
brain scans, or other medical diagnostic procedures that can be used to
determine whether a person has a psychological disorder. To promote
consistency in the diagnosis of psychological disorders, mental health
profesDiagnostic and Statistical Manual of sionals typically refer to
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), first
Mental Disorders (DSM) A system for published by the American
Psychiatric Association (APA) in 1952. The current, fifth edition is
classification of psychological disorders known as DSM-5 (APA, 2013). A
second classification system in wide use is the International published
by the American Psychiatric AsStatistical Classification of Diseases and
Related Health Problems, 11th edition (ICD-11), which was sociation.
published by the world Health organization (wHo, 2018). Professionals
responsible for the DSM How Are PsycHologicAl DisorDers DiAgnoseD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

553

Studio 101/Alamy Stock Photo

and ICD-11 classification systems have coordinated their efforts to
reduce the differences between the two systems (APA, 2013). however,
some differences remain. The ICD-11, but not the DSM-5, has a category
for gaming disorder. All categories of personality disorder found in
DSM-5 are grouped together as a single category of personality disorder
in ICD-11. The DSM is not without its critics. beginning with DSM-III in
1980, some normal behaviors have been categorized as abnormal by the
system. Allen Frances, the psychiatrist who chaired the task force in
charge of writing the DSM-IV (published in 1994), expressed concern that
the committee's well-meaning efforts had led to three "false
epidemics"---attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (Adhd), autism,
and childhood bipolar disorder---and that the DSM-5 was even worse
(Frances, 2010). For example, the DSM-5 lists the following (very
normal) behavior as a criterion for Adhd:

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) has
undergone a number of revisions since its first edition in 1952. Over
its history, the DSM has become less Freudian and more sensitive to
cross-cultural issues. The DSM is published by the American Psychiatric
Association. Source: Reprinted with permission from the American
Psychiatric Association (APA).

often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require
sustained mental effort (e.g. schoolwork or homework; for older
adolescents and adults, preparing reports, completing forms, reviewing
lengthy papers). (APA, 2013, p. 59) it is unlikely that many of the
readers of this textbook look forward to opportunities to fill out
forms, but does this mean you have a psychological disorder? Additional
criteria must be considered. despite its flaws, the DSM remains the most
frequently used tool in the united States for the diagnosis of
psychological disorders. our discussion of types of psychological
disorders, therefore, is grounded in the DSM system.

What Do the Psychological Perspectives Tell Us About Disorders?

Philippe Pinel (1745--1826) is often called "the father of modern
psychiatry." After observing the more humane treatment of inmates by a
former patient turned employee named Jean-Baptiste Pussin at Bicêtre
Hospital outside Paris, Pinel followed Pussin's example by removing the
patients' iron shackles. Instead of the usual "treatments" of the
day---bleeding, purging, and blistering---Pinel made a practice of
conversing with the patients regularly.

Philippe Pinel (1745-1826) (oil on canvas)/Merimee, Anna M.
(d.1852)/INDIVISION CHARMET/Musee d'Histoire de la Medecine, Paris,
France/Bridgeman Images

We have seen many examples in this textbook of behaviors that are best
understood when viewed from multiple perspectives. The study of
psychological disorders provides yet another

Philippe Pinel (1745--1826) releasing lunatics from their chains at the
Salpetriere asylum in Paris in 1795 (colour litho)/Robert-Fleury, Tony
(1837-1912) (after)/INDIVISION CHARMET/Bibliotheque des Arts Decoratifs,
Paris, France/Bridgeman Images

554

Chapter 14

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

example of how an integration of multiple perspectives can be useful.
This is particularly the case when considering the possible causes for
abnormal behaviors. What might an integrated approach to psychological
disorder look like? First, we propose that the various perspectives
discussed in this textbook (biological, clinical, developmental,
cognitive, and social/personality) all have a great deal to say about
disorders, but each has more to say about some disorders than about
others. by considering the contributions of factors from multiple
perspectives, we should have a greater appreciation of the complex
interactions that occur among perspectives. in addition, an integrated
perspective helps us understand the reciprocal relationships among
factors leading to psychological disorders. Just as a person who is
diagnosed with depression might show low levels of serotonin activity in
the brain, being in a leadership position boosts a person's serotonin
levels. A simple biological explanation suggesting that chemical
imbalances lead to depression, or a simple psychological explanation
stating that people who feel powerless are more likely to be depressed,
misses the nuances of these reciprocal relationships. The richer
understanding of the causal factors leading to a psychological disorder
pays off in the development of more effective treatments.
Single-perspective thinking usually leads to single-perspective
treatments. if you believe that depression is purely the result of
chemical imbalances of the brain, then a simple prescription might do
the trick. if you believe that hearing voices that others can't hear is
the result of childhood communication patterns, you will miss the
opportunity to provide medication that can effectively end these
troubling symptoms. inclusive models describing the entire range of
causal factors are more likely to result in effective treatments
tailored to the needs of individuals.

Which Disorders Emerge in Childhood? Many disorders have their roots in
childhood but are more typically diagnosed in adolescence and adulthood.
The DSM-5 uses the term neurodevelopmental disorders to refer to
disorders that instead are diagnosed typically in childhood, yet often
continue throughout the life span (APA, 2013). Two of these
neurodevelopmental disorders are examined in this section: ASd and Adhd.

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) The word autism literally means "within
oneself." in 1943, psychiatrist leo Kanner worked with a group of
children who shared problems in social communication and interaction
along with restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or
activities. Kanner's observations form the basis of our current
diagnostic criteria for autism spectrum disorder (ASD; APA, 2013), which
combines previous categories of autism and Asperger's syndrome. ASd
represents a spectrum because the severity of the observed deficits can
vary widely from individual to individual. Adjustment can range from
relatively normal, allowing independent living, to intellectual
disability, requiring living with parents or in institutional settings.
rates of ASd have been increasing rapidly over the last two decades (see
● Figure 14.4). Approximately 1 child out of every 54 has ASd, with boys
diagnosed 4.3 times more frequently than girls (Maenner et al., 2020).
Whether the rates are actually increasing or diagnostic criteria and
awareness are changing remains unknown. in the united States,
individuals can receive a medical diagnosis using the DSM-5 or be
educationally verified by teams of school personnel (ramsey et al.,
2016). These different methods of assessment produce different numbers,
with higher rates of diagnosis in the educational than in the
medical/psychological setting.

Diagnosing ASD Problems with social relatedness are at the core of this
disorder, regardless of the individual's level of intelligence and
adjustment. beginning in infancy, most children with ASd do not make eye
contact or take pleasure in reciprocal games like peekaboo.

autism spectrum disorder (ASD) A disorder characterized by deficits in
social relatedness and communication skills that are often accompanied
by repetitive, ritualistic behavior.

WhiCh diSorderS eMerGe in Childhood?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

555

FIGuRE 14.4

Estimated Autism Prevalence 2020

The Prevalence of ASD Appears to Be Increasing. Rates of ASD continue to
increase, but the reasons for this change remain a source of debate in
the scientific community. It is possible that the rates are truly
increasing, but greater awareness by parents and health care providers,
relaxed applications of the diagnostic criteria, and improved
availability of services might also be contributing to the observed
change. Source: M. J. Maenner et al. (2020). "Prevalence of Autism
Spectrum Disorder among Children Aged 8 Years---Autism and Developmental
Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2016," MMWR
Surveillance Summaries, 69(4), 1.

1 in 166\*

'04

1 in 150\*

'06

1 in 125\*

'08

1 in 110\*

'10

1 in 54\*

'18

'20

1 in 68\*

1 in 88\*

'12

1 in 59\*

'14

'16

\*Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) prevalence estimates
are for 4 years prior to the report date (e.g., 2020 figures are from
2016)

insight into the thoughts and points of view of others is particularly
lacking. As discussed in Chapter 11, children develop a theory of mind
by the time they are 3--4 years of age. A failure to develop a normal
theory of mind might explain many of the social deficits observed in ASd
(baron-Cohen, 1991; Senju et al., 2009). however, adults with ASd show
wide variations in their theory of mind abilities that are not related
to the severity of their condition (brewer et al., 2017). language
skills of individuals with ASd can also vary widely, from having no
language abilities to delayed acquisition of language to normal skills
(ellis Weismer et al., 2010). even when language skills are relatively
normal, though, individuals with ASd usually experience difficulty
maintaining conversations with others because of deficits in social
skills. individuals with ASd often object strenuously to changes in
their environments and show a high level of repetitive, routine
behavior. rituals may include repetitive movements, such as rocking,
hand flapping, head banging, and twirling. other individuals may engage
in extremely limited preoccupations, such as learning all models of cars
ever made by Ford. one possible source of this ritualistic behavior is a
general dysfunction in sensory networks. Most individuals with ASd show
unusually increased or decreased sensitivity to stimuli (lane et al.,
2010). Auditory processing is superior in people with ASd compared to
typical controls (remington & Fairnie, 2017). Absolute pitch, or the
ability to name a musical note without a reference note, is rare in the
general population but relatively common among people with ASd, and many
musicians with absolute pitch have higher levels of autistic traits than
those without absolute pitch (Wenhart et al., 2019). People with ASd may
be relatively insensitive to pain or cold but distressed by normal sound
levels (see ● Figure 14.5). ritualistic behavior may control or override
these troubling sensations.

Causes of ASD Although the causes of ASd remain somewhat mysterious and
probably

show variable patterns from case to case, scientists are making progress
in their understanding. Family and twin studies provide strong evidence
that ASd is influenced by genetics (Frazier et al., 2014). The
concordance rate for ASd between identical twins may be 76% to 88%, and
possibly more (ronald & hoekstra, 2011), which means that if one twin
has ASd, the other twin has between a 76% and an 88% chance of also
having ASd. hundreds of genes are probably involved, and research
attention is focusing on the expression of these genes during brain
development (Sakai et al., 2011; vorstman et al., 2017). Autopsies of
the brains of people with ASd and people with no history of
psychological disorder show dramatic differences (voineagu et al.,
2011). in the typical control brains, 174 genes were expressed
differently in the frontal lobes than in the temporal lobes, but in the
brains of people with ASd, no gene showed evidence of being expressed
differently in these two areas.

556

Chapter 14

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Sensory domains

Touch

33.3

Taste/smell

38.9

Movement

66.7

Underresponsive/ 14.8 seeks sensation

29.6

Low energy/weak

38.9

Visual/auditory

42.6 10

37

9.3

51.9 13

20.4

63

22.2

Auditory filtering 7.4

0

29.6

63 50

11.1 29.6

Same as typical children Mildly different from typical children

27.8

20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Percentage of children with ASD

Substantially different from typical children 100

FIGuRE 14.5 Sensory Sensitivity Is Different in ASD. Children with ASD
often show differences from typical children in their sensitivity to
environmental stimuli. This graph shows the percentage of children with
ASD whose scores on an instrument measuring sensitivity were the same as
those of typical children, mildly different from those of typical
children (between one and two standard deviations from the mean), and
rare compared to those of typical children (more than two standard
deviations from the mean). The domains measured included sensitivity to
touch (tactile), sensitivity to taste and smell, sensitivity to movement
(e.g., fear of falling), underresponsiveness (e.g., touches people),
auditory filtering (e.g., fails to respond to name when called), low
energy (e.g., tires easily), and visual or auditory (e.g., responds
negatively to loud noises or bright lights). Source: Adapted from A.
Lane et al. (2010). "Sensory Processing Subtypes in Autism: Association
with Adaptive Behavior," Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
40(1), 112--122. doi:10.1007/s10803-009-0840-2

Abnormalities in cortical development might lead to unusual miniNarrow
minicolumns similar to those found in columns, vertical arrays of
neurons perpendicular to the surface of the the brains of people with
ASD were observed in cerebral cortex that represent the smallest
processing units of the brain. the brains of three distinguished
scientists, none individuals with ASd have narrower minicolumns
containing normal of whom had ASD symptoms, who donated their numbers of
cells, but spaced farther apart than those found in typical brains for
scientific study. These similarities suggest individuals. These
structural differences are consistent with a pattern of that the
minicolumn structure might account connectivity that favors detailed
focus, which could produce the unusual interests and hobbies of people
with ASd, over more global processing, for the extreme focus of
interests typical in ASD like understanding the social environment
(opris & Casanova, 2014). (Casanova et al., 2007). Outstanding
scientists, Additional structural abnormalities in cases of ASd have
been oblike people with autism, have been known to study served in the
amygdala, hippocampus, and cerebellum (barnea-Goraly minute details for
long periods of time. et al., 2014; Stoodley, 2014). A suggestion that
ASd involved a "broken" mirror system has received little research
support (Schulte-rüther et al., 2017). As we mentioned in Chapter 8,
mirror neurons respond to actions, regardless of who performs them, and
are believed to support our ability to empathize with others.
environmental factors interact with genetic factors associated with ASd
during sensitive periods of brain development (engel & daniels, 2011;
Piven et al., 2017). Parental age is a known risk factor, with older
parents more likely than younger parents to give birth to a child with
ASd. Prenatal exposure to infection, pesticides, nutritional factors,
and drugs increase the risk for ASd. Cannabis use by the mother is
associated with higher rates of ASd in offspring (Corsi et al., 2020). A
number of meta-analyses have suggested that prenatal exposure to
antidepressant medications raises the risk for ASd in offspring, but
others dispute this finding (vega et al., 2020). Prenatal antidepressant
exposure in rodents leads to behavioral deficits similar to autism, even
when maternal stress is controlled, suggesting caution in the use of
antidepressants during pregnancy (Maloney et al., 2018). Markers for
prenatal exposure WhiCh diSorderS eMerGe in Childhood?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

557

(a) Typical controls

Manuel F. Casanova, M.D., Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, University of Louisville

Minicolumns in the cerebral cortex function like the microprocessors in
modern computers by serving as the basic unit that receives input,
processes it, and responds. Individuals with ASD (lower image) have
smaller minicolumns than do typical controls (top image). What does this
difference mean for information processing? Smaller minicolumns favor
the process of discrimination, described in Chapter 8 as distinguishing
among stimuli, while larger minicolumns favor generalization, or
applying a response to similar stimuli. Behavioral domains that are
difficult for people with ASD, such as language, face recognition, and
following another person's gaze, require more generalization than
discrimination.

(b) Individuals with autism

to acetaminophen (e.g., Tylenol) in umbilical cord blood are associated
with higher risk for diagnosis with autism (Ji et al., 2020). one of the
unfortunate consequences of the uncertainty surrounding the causes of
ASd has been the vulnerability of concerned parents seeking answers. in
a paper later retracted by the british medical journal Lancet,
unsubstantiated claims that the routine measles, mumps, and rubella
vaccination caused ASd were published. Similar controversies ensued in
the united States about thimerosal, a mercury-containing preservative
used in some vaccines. in a meta-analysis involving over 1 million
children, no relationship was found between ASd and vaccination in
general, vaccination with the measles-mumps-rubella combination, or
thimerosal (Taylor et al., 2014). despite the clear data and
reassurances from medical experts (see ● Figure 14.6), worried parents
have withheld vaccinations from their children, leading to increasing
numbers of cases of life-threatening, preventable diseases that had
previously been believed to be under control. For example, in the first
half of 2008, measles cases in the united States doubled compared to the
rates observed between 2000 and 2007, and all cases involved
unvaccinated school children (Centers for disease Control \[CdC\],
2008).

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)

attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) A disorder characterized
by either unusual inattentiveness, hyperactivity with impulsivity, or
both.

558

Chapter 14

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is perhaps one of the
most contentious categories described in the DSM-5. The criteria for the
disorder are difficult to distinguish from the behaviors of many typical
young children. because many children diagnosed with Adhd are treated
with medication, the stakes for accurately diagnosing the condition are
high indeed.

Diagnosing ADHD Adhd involves inattention and hyperactivity. Some
individuals show both inattention and hyperactivity, but others show
inattention without hyperactivity or vice versa (APA, 2013). The core
feature of inattention is the inability to maintain sustained

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Birth to 2 years 18,000--18,258 0 15,000--15,258 1 25 25

12,000--12,258 9000--9258 2

3000--3258 201--311

2

5 4 4

Figure 14.6 5 13

176--200

Vaccines and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) Are Not Linked. In spite of
significant scientific evidence to the contrary, many people continue to
believe that vaccination is responsible for recent increases in ASD
diagnoses. There are a number of markers of vaccination influence that
have been investigated, and none has shown evidence of vaccination
effects on ASD. In this example using data from approximately 1,000
children, researchers traced rates of ASD as a function of total
cumulative immunogens (molecules that can provoke an immune response)
from vaccines given over the first two years of life. As you can see in
this figure, children later diagnosed with ASD do not differ from
typical control children.

18 25 25

151--175 126--150 0 0 101--125 1 1 76--100 1 0 51--75 1 0 26--50 0 0
0--25 0 0 0

21

Controls ASD cases 10

20 30 Percent

40

50

Source: F. DeStefano et al. (2013). "Increasing Exposure to
AntibodyStimulating Proteins and Polysaccharides in Vaccines Is Not
Associated with Risk of Autism," The Journal of Pediatrics, 163(2),
561--567. doi: 10.1016/j. peds.2013.02.001

attention or on-task behavior for an age-appropriate length of time.
This problem is evidenced in the diagnostic criteria for inattention,
such as difficulties in following instructions, in organizing and
completing work, and in avoiding careless mistakes. children with
hyperactivity express a high level of motor activity and struggle in
structured activities, such as waiting in line or sitting quietly in
class. These children are noisy, active, and boisterous, and they often
appear to take action without thinking it through. even as adults,
individuals who were diagnosed with ADhD as children have more traffic
accidents than do people without the disorder (Barkley & cox, 2007).
many of these behaviors are also seen in children who do not have
psychological disorders. Although the DSM-5 provides guidelines for
distinguishing between normal and abnormal inattentiveness and
hyperactivity, fewer than 40% of surveyed pediatricians reported using
those criteria to evaluate cases of ADhD (Wasserman et al., 1999). more
than half the children in a large sample who were receiving medication
for ADhD did not meet even relaxed diagnostic criteria for the disorder,
let alone the carefully constructed criteria spelled out in the DSM-5
(Angold et al., 2000). Using the DSM criteria, between 3% and 5% of
children should be diagnosed with ADhD (song et al., 2019). however,

One of the DSM-5 criteria for ADHD is "often fidgets with hands or feet
or squirms in seat." If you have visited an elementary school classroom
lately, you might have noticed that most children are active. At what
point does squirming become a psychological disorder requiring
medication?

All children can be active and noisy, but most usually learn quickly to
restrict those behaviors to the right times and places. Children with
ADHD often have trouble sitting quietly in class or waiting in line.

Suzanne Tucker/Shutterstock.com

Total cumulative immunogens

6000--6258

17

Which DisorDers emerge in chilDhooD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

559

FIGuRE 14.7 Diagnoses of ADHD in the united States. Compared to the
expected rate of 3% to 5% of children being diagnosed with ADHD, the
actual number of children ever diagnosed with ADHD in a 2011 report from
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is much higher.
Rate of diagnosis varied dramatically by region in the United States,
from a low of less than 7% in Nevada to more than 13.1% in parts of the
Midwest and Southeast. Reasons for these regional discrepancies are not
clear, although low socioeconomic status is considered a risk factor for
ADHD. The differences also might represent variations in how the
diagnostic criteria are applied by local health care providers. Source:
CDC (2011). "State-Based Prevalence Data of Parent Reported ADHD
Diagnosis by a Health Care Provider," https://www.cdc.gov
/ncbddd/adhd/data/diagnosis -treatment-data.html

560

Chapter 14

≤7.0% 7.1--9.0% 9.1--11.0% 11.1--13.0% ≥13.1%

clinicians often use relaxed criteria in making diagnostic decisions,
which leads to inflated numbers of cases. in 2011, 11% of children
between the ages of 4 and 17 years had been diagnosed with Adhd in the
united States, representing an increase of 42% over rates of Adhd since
2003 (visser et al., 2014; see ● Figure 14.7). About 2.5% of adults over
17 meet criteria for Adhd. Adhd is diagnosed at least twice as
frequently in males as in females, and females are more likely than
males to be diagnosed with inattentiveness without hyperactivity (APA,
2013).

Causes of ADHD The national institute of Mental health (niMh, 2009,
p. 3) concluded that "scientists are not sure what causes Adhd."
however, twin and adoption studies support a significant role for
genetics in the development of Adhd. heritability is reported to be 70%
or more (Faraone & larsson, 2019). environmental factors might interact
with genetic risk. Known environmental risks for Adhd are lead
contamination, low birth weight, and prenatal exposure to tobacco,
alcohol, and other drugs (banerjee et al., 2007). We observed earlier
that umbilical cord markers for prenatal exposure to acetaminophen were
associated with increased risk of autism, and the same is true of Adhd
(Ji et al., 2020). Adhd is correlated with a number of structural and
functional differences in the brain. The frontal lobes show structural
abnormalities (rubia et al., 2016) and may be underactive in cases of
Adhd (barkley, 1997). because the frontal lobes inhibit unwanted
behavior, lower activity in this part of the brain may lead to
hyperactivity and impulsivity. in addition, smaller volume in the
amygdala, basal ganglia, and hippocampus, and the brain as a whole was
observed in Adhd (hoogman et al., 2017). disruption in the corpus
callosum, a major whitematter pathway connecting the two cerebral
hemispheres, was correlated with the severity of symptoms in Adhd (Ameis
et al., 2016). different patterns of brain maturation have been observed
in Adhd. The frontal lobes, and the prefrontal areas in particular,
appear to mature more slowly in children with Adhd than in healthy
controls (Shaw et al., 2007). Peak cortical thickness, a measure of
brain maturity, occurred in healthy controls around the age of 7.5
years, but not until the age of 10.5 years in children with Adhd.
Patterns of cortical thinning during adolescence predicted which
individuals would continue to experience Adhd symptoms in adulthood and
which would "outgrow" their symptoms (Shaw et al., 2013). White-matter
circuits connecting the basal ganglia and the frontal lobes matured
differently in people with and without Adhd (helpern et al., 2011). A
study of 1,713 individuals between the ages of 4 and 63 years with Adhd
further supported the idea that Adhd involves delays in maturation
(hoogman et al., 2017). The parts of the brain implicated in Adhd, such
as the prefrontal cortex and the basal ganglia, feature large amounts of
dopamine activity. As will be shown in Chapter 15, most of the
medications used to treat Adhd, such as methylphenidate (ritalin),
dextroamphetamine (dexedrine or dextrostat), or amphetamine salts
(Adderall), act by boosting the activity of dopamine, suggesting that
dopamine activity might be lower than usual in cases of Adhd (volkow et
al., 2009).

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Among the many differences observed in the brains of children with ADHD
compared to those of healthy controls is the rate of brain maturity, as
measured by cortical thickening. These images demonstrate areas of the
brain that developed later in children with ADHD than in healthy
controls. Peak cortical thickness occurred around the age of 7.5 years
in healthy children but was not seen in children with ADHD until an
average age of 10.5 years. This finding implies that children with ADHD
can be expected to lag their age peers in some tasks, but will
eventually experience improvement.

Greater than 2 years' delay 0−2 years' delay

Source: From P. Shaw et al. (2007). "Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder Is Characterized by a Delay in Cortical Maturation,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 104(49), 19649--19654. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0707741104. Copyright
2007 National Academy of Sciences. U.S.A.

As in ASd, myths about the causes of Adhd are common. Sugar is often
blamed for hyperactive behavior, but evidence from carefully controlled
studies does not support this belief (Milich, 1986; Wolraich, 1996).
however, one well-controlled study suggested that combinations of common
food additives made children who do not have Adhd demonstrate more
hyperactivity (McCann et al., 2007). it is unlikely that "poor
parenting" is responsible for Adhd symptoms (Schroeder & Kelley, 2009).
Parents, however, can learn new behavioral management techniques that
greatly improve their child's behavior.

summary 14.1 Neurodevelopmental Disorders Disorder

symptoms

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)

●

Problems with social relatedness

●

Genetics

●

Problems with communication

●

Parental age

●

Ritualistic behavior

●

Disruptions in brain development

●

Unknown environmental influences

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)

Possible causal Factors under investigation

●

Inattentiveness

●

Genetics

●

Hyperactivity/Impulsivity

●

Brain development/exposure to toxins

●

Frontal lobe activity

●

Food additives

Credits: Top row---Laura Freberg; Bottom row---Suzanne
Tucker/Shutterstock.com.

What Is Schizophrenia? Schizophrenia is not the most common type of
disorder, affecting approximately 1% of the human population worldwide
(Kessler et al., 2007), but it is one of the most dramatic. This
condition influences and distorts a range of behaviors, including
perception, cognition, movement, and emotion.

schizophrenia A disorder characterized by hallucinations, delusions,
disorganized thought and speech, disorders of movement, restricted
affect, and avolition or asociality.

WhAT iS SChizoPhreniA?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

561

Ray Stubblebine/Reuters

Symptoms of Schizophrenia

Grunnitus Studio/Science Source

Despite having been diagnosed with schizophrenia, John Nash shared the
1994 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences. Nash was the subject of the 2001
film A Beautiful Mind, starring Russell Crowe. Sadly, both Nash and his
wife were killed in a traffic accident in 2015.

Some people with schizophrenia experience catatonia, which means that
they maintain awkward or unusual body positions for hours at a time.

The DSM-5 places schizophrenia within a group of disorders called
schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders (APA, 2013). Among
the symptoms of schizophrenia are delusions, hallucinations,
disorganized speech, and disorders of movement, which together indicate
a state of psychosis. Schizophrenia also features negative symptoms
(APA, 2013). negative symptoms are behaviors that are seen in healthy
people but not in patients. These symptoms include "diminished emotional
expression and avolition" (APA, 2013, p. 88). A person with diminished
emotional expression does not show typical outward signs of emotion,
such as facial expressions and tone of voice, when an emotional response
is expected. Avolition (the a means "lack of ") refers to a patient's
lack of "volition," or goal-oriented behavior. Delusions are defined as
unrealistic beliefs. These may take a number of forms, including
delusions of persecution by others (paranoia), feelings of unrealistic
power or importance (grandiosity), or beliefs that others are directing
one's behavior (control). Hallucinations are false perceptions. Although
hallucinations may occur in several sensory modalities, 64% to 80% of
hallucinations in schizophrenia are auditory (Tien, 1991; McCarthy-Jones
et al., 2017). Patients often report hearing voices, which can be
accusatory or otherwise unpleasant, contributing to the distress
associated with the disorder. Auditory hallucinations are not imaginary;
they are real sensations correlated with increased activity in the
primary auditory cortex of the temporal lobe (dierks et al., 1999;
Jardri et al., 2013). Simply asking patients to remember or imagine
sounds did not produce the type of activity in the auditory cortex seen
during an auditory hallucination, indicating that the hallucination
experience is different from simple memory or imagination. A further
symptom of schizophrenia involves disorganized patterns of speech. The
patient jumps inexplicably from one topic to the next. People with
schizophrenia appear to have difficulty inhibiting secondary meanings
for some words (Titone et al., 2000). For example, the word jam can
refer to either a fruit spread for toast or an impromptu musical
session. Most people would use context (a conversation about food or
music) to decide which meaning was appropriate. Patients with
schizophrenia might not experience this filtering, leading their
thoughts to jump from food to jazz and then on to other atypical
connections. This loosening of associations among ideas might occur
because of the reduced latent inhibition in patients with schizophrenia,
as discussed in Chapter 8. According to this argument, latent inhibition
typically results in fewer associations being made to familiar stimuli.
if you have had a lot of experience connecting jam and food, you are
unlikely to consider other uses of the word jam. The person with
schizophrenia, however, would be less inhibited in making connections
among ideas, leading to trains of thought that seem bizarre to the rest
of us. Schizophrenia also features "grossly disorganized or abnormal
motor behavior" (APA, 2013, p. 88). Some people may be unusually active,
while others may barely move throughout an entire day. unusual behaviors
can occur, including grimaces and gestures. The maintenance of awkward
or unusual body positions for hours at a time is called catatonia.
People experiencing catatonia appear aware of their surroundings, but
they don't move. Most of us would find it difficult to sit for a few
minutes, let alone hours, without shifting position.

Causes of Schizophrenia like many other types of psychological
disorders, schizophrenia has multiple sources of causality. no one
factor alone is sufficient to produce the disorder.

Biological Factors in Schizophrenia Significant evidence points to a
genetic delusion A false, illogical belief. hallucination A false
perception.

562

Chapter 14

vulnerability for schizophrenia. People with close family members who
have been diagnosed with schizophrenia are more likely to develop the
disorder themselves (Gottesman, 1991). if one identical twin is
diagnosed with the disorder, the other twin has nearly a 50% lifetime
risk of developing the disorder (see ● Figure 14.8). Comparisons of
adopted children

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGuRE 14.8

General population

Genetics and Schizophrenia. A person's lifetime risk of developing
schizophrenia increases when closely related family members have been
diagnosed with the disorder, suggesting that genes play a significant
role. Having a spouse with schizophrenia doubles the risk (from 1% to
2%), which probably reflects the tendency for people to marry others
with whom they share similarities.

Spouse of patient First cousin Uncle/aunt Nephew/niece Grandchild Half
sibling Child

Source: Adapted from I. I. Gottesman (1991). Schizophrenia Genesis. New
York: W. H. Freeman & Co.

Sibling Fraternal twin One parent Identical twin Two parents 0

10 20 30 40 Lifetime risk of developing schizophrenia (percentage)

50

Courtesy D. R. Weinberger, NIMH, St. Elizabeth's Hospital

with their biological and adoptive parents also support a role for
genetics (Kety et al., 1968). A large number of genes have been
implicated in the development of schizophrenia and overlap with those
involved with bipolar disorder (Cross-disorder Group of the Psychiatric
Genomics Consortium, 2013; Smeland et al., 2020). in one case of
identical triplets, two of the triplets were diagnosed with
schizophrenia and the third was diagnosed with bipolar disorder
(McGuffin et al., 1982). A possible genetic marker for schizophrenia is
the occurrence of dysfunctional eye movements, first reported over 100
years ago (diefendorf & dodge, 1908). These dysfunctional eye movements
represent difficulties in executive control and inhibition, and are also
found in many healthy relatives of patients with schizophrenia (radant
et al., 2015). These types of behavioral differences between people with
and without a disorder can guide further genetic research. A number of
structural and biochemical features accompany schizophrenia. one
reliable correlate of schizophrenia is the presence of enlarged
ventricles (Yotsutsuji et al., 2003). As discussed in Chapter 4, the
ventricles are fluid-filled spaces in the brain that are not responsible
for any particular behavior. The ventricles enlarge in response to any
condition resulting in a loss of neural tissue in adjacent areas, so we
can assume that schizophrenia is associated with neural degeneration.
Patients with schizophrenia demonstrate differences in brain activity
compared with healthy people. For example, patients with schizophrenia
often show a lower level of frontal lobe activity than that of healthy
controls, both at rest and during effortful cognitive tasks (berman et
al., 1992). The importance of the frontal lobes to higher cognitive
processes and attention suggests that this difference would have
significant influences on behavior, and lower levels of activity might
account for the emotional disturbances and social withdrawal seen in
these patients (Andreasen et al., 1997). Pathways in the brain that
manage olfaction, or the sense of smell, travel through the frontal
lobe. lower overall frontal lobe activity might account for some
difficulties that patients with schizophrenia experience with their
sense of smell. in addition, distortions in the brain's default

Magnetic resonance images of the brains of a pair of identical twins
show the differences in the size of the lateral ventricles (arrows)
found in healthy people (left) and in people with schizophrenia (right).
The ventricles are fluid-filled spaces and enlarge whenever significant
numbers of nearby neurons have died.

WhAT iS SChizoPhreniA?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

563

When the brain activity of these identical twins is observed through
brain imaging, the frontal lobes (arrows) appear to be more active in
the healthy twin (left) than in the twin with schizophrenia (right). Red
and yellow areas indicate greater activity, while green and dark areas
are relatively inactive. Photo courtesy of Daniel R. Weinberger, M.D. E.
Fuller Torrey, M.D. (formerly of NIMH) and Karen Berman, M.D. NIMH
Clinical Brain Disorders Branch Division of Intramural Research
Programs, NIMH 1990.

mode network (see Chapter 6) predict the severity of patients' psychotic
symptoms (Garrity et al., 2007; Pomarol-Clotet et al., 2008).
Schizophrenia might involve abnormal brain development during
adolescence. Teens typically experience a burst of cortical gray matter
growth at puberty, followed by a wave of thinning of the gray matter
extending into their early 20s. healthy teens experience little loss of
gray matter, whereas teens diagnosed with schizophrenia experience a
loss that has been likened to a forest fire (Thompson et al., 2001).
Cortical thinning is generally characteristic of patients with
schizophrenia of all ages compared to healthy controls (van erp et al.,
2018). Abnormalities in dopamine activity might be the major biochemical
culprit in schizophrenia (howes et al., 2017). drugs that boost dopamine
activity, such as amphetamine and the Parkinson's disease treatment
l-dopa, can produce hallucinations and paranoid delusions (Goetz et al.,
2001). Medications that block dopamine activity are usually quite
effective in reducing these same symptoms. however, this dopamine
hypothesis of schizophrenia is not perfect. About one-fourth of patients
with schizophrenia do not respond favorably to drugs that reduce
dopamine activity. in particular, the negative symptoms, such as
diminished emotional expression, are not improved by these drugs (Kane &
Freeman, 1994; Goff & evins, 1998). in addition, medications that
influence neurotransmitters other than dopamine are often effective
(Syvalahti, 1994). Finally, phencyclidine (PCP, or angel dust) produces
a syndrome that is quite similar to schizophrenia, although PCP acts on
synapses using glutamate, not dopamine (Mössner et al., 2008). because
glutamate and dopamine are often important to the same brain circuits,
it is possible that disturbances in one, the other, or both could lead
to similar behavioral outcomes. disturbances in the balance between
brain excitation and inhibition, not related to any one neurochemical
system, might also contribute to symptoms of schizophrenia (Jardri et
al., 2016).

Teens typically experience a burst of gray matter growth at puberty,
followed by a wave of gray matter thinning that extends into their early
20s. Compared with their healthy peers, teens diagnosed with
schizophrenia experience much greater gray matter loss. Purple and red
areas indicate the greatest amount of loss, followed by yellow and green
areas. Source: From P. M. Thompson et al. (2001). "Mapping Adolescent
Brain Changes Reveals Dynamic Wave of Accelerated Gray Matter Loss in
Very Early-Onset Schizophrenia," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 98(20), 11650--11655. doi:
10.1073 /pnas.201243998 Photo Courtesy of Paul Thompson/USC Institute
for Neuroimaging and Informatics.

564

Chapter 14

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Environmental Factors in Schizophrenia The nearly 50% concordance rate
for schizophrenia in identical twins indicates a role for genetics in
the development of the disorder. however, 50% is not 100%, and we need
to account for the remaining causal factors. extreme stress contributes
to the appearance and severity of schizophrenia among genetically
vulnerable people. Schizophrenia appears nearly five times more
frequently in members of lower than in those of higher socioeconomic
groups (Keith et al., 1991). The stress of living in poverty might
trigger schizophrenia in vulnerable individuals. however, others argue
that people who are susceptible to schizophrenia drift into lower-paying
jobs. in other words, the disorder reduces the patients' socioeconomic
status, accounting for the higher rates of the disorder among the poor.
other stresses might accompany a person's minority status in a community
(boydell & Murray, 2003). African immigrants living in london
neighborhoods with the lowest proportions of African immigrants were
twice as likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia as African immigrants
living in neighborhoods with the highest proportion of minorities (see ●
Figure 14.9). The stress of social isolation because of minority status
may have contributed to higher rates of schizophrenia. When we talk
about environmental influences, factors such as stress come to mind (see
Chapter 16). however, environmental influences also include biological
variables such as the prenatal environment, including the pregnant
woman's exposure to viral illness. Another environmental variable that
might trigger schizophrenia in genetically vulnerable individuals is
marijuana use (Kelley et al., 2016; Marconi et al., 2016). A 25-year
longitudinal study concluded that cannabis use nearly doubled the risk
of schizophrenia (Fergusson et al., 2005). As mentioned in Chapter 11,
adolescence is a time of brain growth, and heavy marijuana use during
this period produces a reduction in white matter volume in the frontal
lobes that might interact with a person's genetic vulnerabilities for
schizophrenia (ho et al., 2011).

60

59.0 52.6

50 36.9

40

Janine Wiedel Photolibrary/Alamy Stock Photo

Incidence of schizophrenia per 100,000

70

30 20 10 0

Lowest third (8−22.8%)

Middle third (23−28.1%)

Highest third (28.2−57%)

Proportion of non-White ethnic minorities in neighborhood

FIGuRE 14.9 Stress and Schizophrenia. African immigrants living in South
London were more likely to be diagnosed with schizophrenia if they lived
in a predominantly White neighborhood than if they lived in a primarily
non-White neighborhood; that is, if you divide neighborhoods into thirds
based on the percentage of non-Whites (high, medium, and low),
schizophrenia was more common in the middle and lower groups. An
explanation based on self-selection (people choosing to live in each
type of neighborhood) is unlikely in this case because nearly all the
study participants were assigned to public housing units rather than
choosing where to live. These findings suggest that the stress of
minority status might contribute to higher risk for schizophrenia.
Source: Adapted from J. Boydell et al. (2001). "Incidence of
Schizophrenia in Ethnic Minorities in London: Ecological Study into
Interactions with Environment," British Medical Journal, 323(7325),
1336--1338. doi: 10.1136/bmj.323.7325.1336

WhAT iS SChizoPhreniA?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

565

Thinking Scientifically Does Cannabis Use Increase Risk of
Schizophrenia?

One research group attempted to answer this question by looking at the
patterns of cannabis use and use of psychiatric services for a first
psychotic episode across multiple centers in Europe (Di Forti et al.,
2019). In a novel approach to the question, these researchers also
considered whether high or low potency cannabis was the norm in each
geographical area studied.

What am I BeIng asked to BelIeve or accept?

10 8 Odds Ratio (OR)

As the United States continues a path of decriminalizing cannabis use,
new questions related to public health emerge. As mentioned in this
chapter, researchers have identified an association between cannabis use
and schizophrenia. Can we conclude that this is a causal relationship?
Due to ethical concerns, we are unlikely to randomly assign people to
cannabis and no cannabis groups.

4

0

2.19

0.84

0.96

Rare use of low-potency THC

Rare use of high-potency THC

Used low-potency Used high-potency THC more than once THC more than once
a week a week

Daily use of low-potency THC

Daily use of high-potency THC

Frequency and type of cannabis use

Figure 14.10 Cannabis use and risk for Schizophrenia. Daily use of
high-potency cannabis increased the odds of being diagnosed with
schizophrenia nearly five times. It remains possible that people with a
genetic predisposition to psychosis are also more likely to become heavy
cannabis users. Source: Adapted from M. DiFort et al. (2019). "The
Contribution of Cannabis Use to Variation in the Incidence of Psychotic
Disorder Across Europe (EU-GEI): A Multicentre Control Study," The
Lancet Psychiatry, 6(5), 427--436. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(19)30048-3

What evIdence supports thIs posItIon? DiForti and her colleagues (2019)
reported that daily cannabis use tripled the risk of psychosis compared
to non-users. When only high-potency cannabis was available in an area,
the risk of psychosis in daily users was five times higher than for
nonusers (see ● Figure 14.10). The researchers speculated that about 12%
of psychosis cases over all 11 study sites could be prevented if
high-potency cannabis was no longer available, with a 30% decrease in
London and a 50% decrease in Amsterdam.

Chapter 14

1.36 1.57

2

We are being asked to believe that cannabis use contributes to the risk
of developing schizophrenia.

566

4.78

6

are there other Ways thIs evIdence could Be Interpreted? Genetic studies
have suggested that there is an overlapping genetic risk for both
cannabis use and psychosis (Verweij et al., 2017). In other words, the
same underlying genetic profile might predispose a person to both heavy
cannabis use and schizophrenia. Patients diagnosed with schizophrenia
who have never used cannabis still show abnormalities in their natural,
endogenous cannabinoids, suggesting that use of cannabis can distort
existing problems in people already at risk for psychosis (Van Haren et
al., 2013).

What other evIdence Would I need to evaluate these alternatIves? Further
research is needed to compare the effects of high-potency cannabis,
which is becoming more common, and to identify the characteristics of
individuals who seem to be at higher risk of adverse effects of cannabis
use.

What are the most reasonaBle conclusIons? Sufficient data is available
to support public health messages warning individuals with a family
history of psychosis that daily cannabis use, and use of high-potency
cannabis in particular, is probably not a good idea. ■

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bipolar disorder serves as "a bridge between psychotic disorders, such
as schizophrenia, and depressive disorders with respect to symptoms,
family histories, and genetics" (APA, 2013, p. 123). bipolar disorder
features a period of mania, which may or may not be followed by a period
of depression. The symptoms of depression that can accompany bipolar
disorder are identical to those used to diagnose major depressive
disorder, which is described in the next section of this chapter. A
manic phase consists of "a distinct period of abnormally and
persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood, abnormally and
persistently increased goal-directed activity or energy" (APA, 2013,
p. 124). Patients may demonstrate grandiosity, in which they feel
unrealistically special or important. The person's behavior,
characterized by little need for sleep, rapid speech, difficulty
concentrating, and rapidly shifting ideas, seems to be running at an
abnormally high speed. unlike many other disorders, however, mania
increases productive, goaldirected behavior. however, because of the
person's tendency to meet the DSM-5 criterion for "excessive involvement
in activities that have a high potential for painful consequences,"
hospitalization is often necessary for the patient's protection (APA,
2013, p. 124). Many variations occur in the timing and severity of the
mania and depression observed in bipolar disorder. bipolar disorder
affects approximately 2.6% of American adults each year (Kessler et al.,
2005). Women are more likely to be diagnosed with bipolar disorder than
men, by a ratio of approximately 3:2 (holzman et al., 2016). The average
age of onset for bipolar disorder is 25 years. Children and youth under
the age of 18 years with symptoms of bipolar disorder are diagnosed
instead with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (APA, 2013). Genetic
predispositions play a significant role in bipolar disorder. Concordance
rates between identical twins for bipolar disorder are commonly reported
to be as high as 70% (Craddock & Sklar, 2013). Adoption studies also
support a powerful role for genetics (Taylor et al., 2002). As mentioned
previously, there is considerable overlap between the genes believed to
play a role in bipolar disorder and those implicated in schizophrenia.
not surprisingly because of their genetic overlap, bipolar disorder
shares some of the same abnormalities in brain structure and function as
observed in schizophrenia (ivleva et al., 2016). bipolar disorder is
linked to oxidative stress and accelerated aging (rizzo et al., 2014;
vasconcelos-Moreno et al., 2017). Similar changes in the brain are
observed in patients with bipolar disorder as are seen in dementia.
Fortunately, as we will see in Chapter 15, current treatments for
bipolar disorder demonstrate antioxidant effects that offset these
problems. Among the many possible environmental factors that could
interact with genes associated with bipolar disorder is diet. omega-3
fatty acids, generally found in fish, may provide some protection from
bipolar disorder (noaghiul & hibbeln, 2003). As shown in ● Figure 14.11,
prevalence rates for bipolar disorder are highest in countries where
fish is rarely consumed (such as Germany) and lowest in countries where
fish is an important diet staple (such as iceland). Patients with
bipolar disorder have low levels of omega-3 fatty acids compared to
healthy controls (Mcnamara & Weige, 2016). As you will see in Chapter
15, supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids is being explored as an
aspect of treatment for bipolar disorder. Many unanswered questions
regarding the development of this condition remain. bipolar disorder may
be overrepresented in groups of people with artistic and creative talent
(Jamison, 1993, 1995). based on biographical accounts, the poet William
blake, the composers George Frideric handel and Gustav Mahler, and
visual artists vincent van Gogh and Michelangelo might have had bipolar
disorder. Many noted actors, including Carrie Fisher (Star Wars) and
vivien leigh (Gone with the Wind), have been diagnosed with bipolar
disorder. Comparisons between people with bipolar disorder and major
depressive disorder and healthy people in creative and noncreative
professions support this hypothesis. The patients with bipolar disorder
scored similarly on tests of creativity to healthy people in creative
occupations and higher than people with major depression and healthy
people in noncreative occupations (Santosa et al., 2007). The parts of
the brain that are affected in bipolar disorder are similar to those
seen in cases of frontotemporal dementia. in both conditions, lower
activity in these areas may reduce inhibition, which in turn leads to
more creativity in some individuals (Seeley et al., 2008).

Cpuk/Alamy Stock Photo

What Is Bipolar Disorder?

Actors, poets, painters, and musicians seem to have a disproportionate
risk for bipolar disorder compared to people in other occupations. The
late Carrie Fisher, of Star Wars fame, was outspoken regarding her
challenges with bipolar disorder. We do not know whether having bipolar
disorder allows these creative people to express emotion more
effectively in their art, the arts are simply more welcoming than the
corporate boardroom to those who have psychological disorders, or some
combination of the two is true.

bipolar disorder A mood disorder characterized by alternating periods of
mania and depression. mania A period of unrealistically elevated mood.

WhAT iS biPolAr diSorder?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

567

FIGuRE 14.11

7

Source: Adapted from S. Noaghiul & R. Hibbeln (2003). "CrossNational
Comparisons of Seafood Consumption and Rates of Bipolar Disorders,"
American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(12), 2222--2227.
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.160.12.2222

6 Lifetime prevalence rates (%) of bipolar disorder

Bipolar Rates Are Lower in Nations with High Seafood Consumption. Rates
of bipolar disorder are negatively correlated with a nation's
consumption of seafood, suggesting that the omega-3 fatty acids
contained in seafood might help prevent bipolar disorder.

Germany Hungary Switzerland

5 4 3

New Zealand

2

Canada

1 0

Italy United States Israel

Puerto Rico 0

Iceland Taiwan South Korea 200 250 150 100 50 Seafood consumption
(lbs/person/year)

What Is Major Depressive Disorder (MDD)? Although most of us experience
the occasional "blues," these feelings are not as severe or chronic as
the depressed feelings that characterize major depressive disorder.
According to the DSM-5, major depressive disorder (MDD) is characterized
by depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, for a period of at
least 2 weeks (APA, 2013). Patients with Mdd complain about feeling sad
and empty, and periods of tearfulness are common. The DSM-5 also notes
that Mdd can produce anhedonia, or loss of pleasure. You are probably
already familiar with the term hedonist, which refers to a person who is
a pleasure seeker. Anhedonia refers to a person's disinterest in
activities that previously provided pleasure, such as sex, eating, or
social activities. To be diagnosed with Mdd, a person must show at least
five symptoms, one of which must be either depressed mood or anhedonia.
The remaining symptoms can be divided into physical and cognitive
groups. The physical symptoms of Mdd are related to disturbances in
autonomic function typically found in the presence of high levels of
stress, described in Chapter 16. Appetite and sleep may be disturbed.
Some patients experience a loss of appetite, whereas others begin to eat
too much. As observed in Chapter 6, many patients with depression
experience frequent wakefulness, whereas others experience oversleeping
(more than 9 hours per night). Fatigue or restlessness may occur. Among
the cognitive symptoms of depression are difficulty concentrating,
feelings of hopelessness and worthlessness, and in some cases, thoughts
of suicide (APA, 2013).

Prevalence of MDD major depressive disorder A disorder characterized by
lengthy periods of depressed mood, loss of pleasure in normal
activities, disturbances in sleep and appetite, difficulty
concentrating, feelings of hopelessness, and possible thoughts of
suicide.

568

Chapter 14

Mdd is one of the most frequently diagnosed psychological disorders,
affecting approximately 7% of the adult population each year (APA,
2013). Mdd decreases with age, and people between the ages of 18 and 29
years have rates that are three times as high as those for people over
the age of 60 years. Women experience Mdd more frequently than men do
(nolen-hoeksema, 1987; nolen-hoeksema et al.,1999). This discrepancy
between rates of Mdd in men and those in women has been observed to be
independent of race, ethnicity, social class, and country of residence
(Strickland, 1992; Üstün et al., 2004; see ● Figure 14.12). it is
possible that female hormones participate in mood through some unknown
mechanism. Mood disturbances can

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Africa

Americas

Eastern Mediterranean

Europe

Southeast Asia

FIGuRE 14.12

Wastern Pacific

Worldwide Gender Differences in Depression. Across many cultures, women
are diagnosed with depression more frequently than men.

Total

World

Males Females 0

1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000 Prevelance of major depressive
disorder per 100,000 people per year

Source: Adapted from T. B. Üstün et al. (2004). "Global Burden of
Depressive Disorders in the Year 2000," British Journal of Psychiatry,
184(5), 386--392. doi:10.1192/ bjp.184.5.386

be associated with hormonal changes in women, including postpartum
depression and mood changes accompanying menopause (rapkin et al.,
2002). however, it is also possible that women are more likely than men
to admit feeling depressed to others and to seek help with depression.
Men might mask or cover their depressed mood by engaging in activities
such as drinking alcohol.

Causes of MDD Theories attempting to explain Mdd range from the
learning, social, and cognitive to the strictly biological. it is likely
that some combination of these approaches provides the greatest
understanding of the sources of depression.

Learning Explanations for MDD According to learning theories, Mdd occurs

when a person experiences a reduction in positive reinforcement or an
increase in negative outcomes. The loss of an important relationship can
lead to Mdd because it reduces a person's positive reinforcement. A
variation of the learning approach suggests that Mdd results from
learned helplessness, which is an application of operant conditioning.
Classic research suggested that animals (and people) stop trying to
escape when they learn that they cannot control an aversive situation.
Contemporary research shows that this interpretation is incorrect (Maier
& Seligman, 2016). The unwillingness to escape shock is not learned.
instead, inhibited escape is the default, unlearned response to the
experience of lengthy aversive events. it is the ability to control
aversive events that must be learned, which then leads to escape
attempts. Maier and Seligman (2016) suggest that rather than
demonstrating learned helplessness, these experiments represent learned
hope that future aversive events can be controlled. This research
provides interesting insight into the treatment of Mdd, which we explore
further in Chapter 15.

learned helplessness A state in which experiencing random or
uncontrolled consequences leads to feelings of helplessness and possibly
depression.

WhAT iS MAJor dePreSSive diSorder (Mdd)?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

569

80 70

50 40 30 20 10 0

Rumination Distraction Depressed group

Nondepressed group

Iasha/Shutterstock.com

Error score

60

FIGuRE 14.13 Rumination and Problem Solving. Rumination and distraction
were induced in depressed and nondepressed study participants, who then
completed a problem-solving task. To induce rumination, participants
were instructed to think about "what your feelings mean." To induce
distraction, participants were asked to think about "the shape of a
large black umbrella." Subsequently, all participants were asked to
complete a problem-solving task. More errors occurred in the depressed
ruminating group than in the other groups. These results suggest that
rumination competes with other cognitive processes, possibly
contributing to the problems with concentration experienced by people
with depression. Source: Adapted from E. Watkins and R. G. Brown (2002).
"Rumination and Executive Function in Depression: An Experimental
Study," Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 72,
400--402. doi: 10.1136/ jnnp.72.3.400

Cognitive Explanations for MDD Cognitive theories frame Mdd as the
result of a combination of negative thoughts about the self, the world,
and the future (beck, 1975). For example, students failing an exam might
respond by doubting their academic abilities (self), assuming that they
will fail the course (future), and deciding that they hate the class
(world). The resulting dysfunctional beliefs would lead to depression.
beck's view of the development of depression led directly to the use of
cognitive therapies for depression, which are discussed in Chapter 15.
Another cognitive process that contributes to the development and
maintenance of depressed mood is rumination, which we discussed in the
context of problem solving in Chapter 10 (nolen-hoeksema, 2003). Susan
nolen-hoeksema describes rumination in Mdd as "repetitively focusing on
the fact that one is depressed; on one's symptoms of depression; and on
the causes, meanings, and consequences of symptoms of depression" (1991,
p. 569). rumination can arise from attempts to gain insight into one's
problems (see Chapter 10), but too much rumination interferes with
problem solving (Watkins & brown, 2002). When rumination is encouraged
by asking study participants to focus on their mood, they find it
difficult to solve several types of problems (see ● Figure 14.13). When
the participants are distracted from this inward focus by thinking about
neutral topics (such as "think about the Statue of liberty"), their
problem-solving abilities improve immediately. Typically, rumination is
correlated with negative outcomes, including delaying recovery from Mdd
during treatment (Siegle et al., 1999), predicting Mdd following the
death of a loved one (nolen-hoeksema & Girgus, 1994), and increasing a
person's likelihood to abuse alcohol (nolen-hoeksema, 2003). responding
to problems by either ruminating or distracting oneself might help
explain some gender differences in rates of Mdd. Women are more likely
to ruminate than men, whose coping strategies 570

Chapter 14

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Saviour Mifsud/Alamy Stock Photo

Major depressive disorder might result from more global problems with
circadian or daily biorhythms. Among the candidate genes producing
vulnerability for major depressive disorder are those that contribute to
individual circadian rhythms.

are more likely to consist of finding distractions (nolen-hoeksema,
1987; Rates of both depression and rumination drop nolen-hoeksema et
al., 1999). in middle adulthood. Young adults often find it Mdd might be
influenced by the types of attributions that a person frustrating when
they are trying to ruminate about makes (Abramson et al., 1978). As
mentioned in Chapter 13, an attribution problems with their parents,
only to have their is a belief about causality. Attributions can vary
along several dimensions parents immediately shift into problem-solving
(internal--external, stable--unstable, or global--specific), and making
some mode. The young adult might not feel "ready" to fix types of
attributions might predispose a person to depression. The
internal--external dimension, which is similar to the locus of control
discussed the problem yet. in Chapter 12, represents beliefs that
outcomes occur because of personal effort or because of luck or chance.
The stable--unstable dimension captures beliefs about whether
circumstances can change. People make global attributions (i'm stupid)
or more specific attributions (i'm not great in algebra, but i'm good at
geometry). overall, people who make internal, stable, and global
attributions (what happens to me is my fault, circumstances never
change, and i'm always this way) are more prone to depression. People
with this attributional style earn lower grades in college, perform more
poorly as sales representatives, and experience worse health (Seligman,
1987).

Social Explanations for MDD Mdd reflects feeling generally sad, whereas
loneliness, or perceived social isolation, is a more social process that
reflects not only feelings of sadness but also of being in danger. The
two states are related, yet they can occur independently. loneliness is
a biological signal, much like thirst or hunger. When ignored,
loneliness can trigger depressive symptoms, putting an individual at
risk for Mdd. in older adults, loneliness increased depressive symptoms,
but depression did not increase loneliness (Cacioppo et al., 2010).
Social and evolutionary theories of loneliness suggest that this state
might promote an individual's survival by promoting better relationships
with others (Caccioppo & Cacioppo, 2018). expressions of depression,
such as sad facial expressions and crying, can serve as a safe call to
others for help and comforting responses. even when others do not
respond, the symptoms of Mdd may protect people from additional negative
interactions by reducing their social activities. Biological
Explanations for MDD The biological perspective identifies a number

of factors contributing to Mdd. Twin studies, for example, suggest that
the heritability of Mdd is about 35% (Shi et al., 2011; ormel et al.,
2019). Genome-wide association studies have identified more than 80
genes that are relevant to Mdd. efforts to connect differences in brain
structure and function in depression have produced inconclusive results
(Scheepens et al., 2020). WhAT iS MAJor dePreSSive diSorder (Mdd)?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

571

ConnECTIng to ReSeaRch Recognition of Facial Expression by People with
Depression HOW DOES THE WORLD LOOK to a person who is depressed? Does
the experience of depression affect a person's attention to negative
stimuli? As mentioned in Chapter 7, positive and negative emotions often
serve as guides to approach and avoidance behaviors (Davidson & Irwin,
1999). Because it is usually more important to survival that we avoid
predators and other dangers than that we miss approaching something
positive, such as a tasty food, we have a bias toward noticing the
negative. If we're experiencing an ongoing negative mood, does that have
an effect on our sensitivities to positive and negative stimuli? Among
the important types of positive and negative stimuli that we need to
process are facial expressions, because these are our clues to
navigating the social environment successfully. Few of us would miss
dramatic facial expressions, but the subtle ones require more attention
(Gollan et al., 2010).

depressive disorder but were not treated with medication, observed
photographs of facial expressions on a computer screen. The photographs
depicted four basic emotions: happiness, surprise, sadness, and harsh (a
category that combined photos showing disgust, fear, and anger). The
photos were morphed to present intensities ranging from mostly neutral
to very intense (see ● Figure 14.14). A total of 200 photos were
presented for only 0.5 second each. The participants pushed one of six
keys to identify the emotion being expressed.

The Question: How do people with MDD compare to control participants in
their ability to detect subtle facial expressions of emotion?

reSultS

metHoDS In one study, 88 participants, half of whom had been diagnosed
with major

etHIcS It is unlikely that this procedure would produce distress in any
of the participants. Because some of the participants are identified as
having a psychological disorder, great care should be taken to protect
their confidentiality.

The participants with MDD were more sensitive to sad faces than the
control participants were. Specifically, all participants identified
strong expressions of sadness, but participants with depression were
more accurate in the identification of sadness when the emotion

was expressed at a lower intensity. The groups were equally accurate in
identifying the positive emotions (happiness and surprise) and the harsh
emotions (fear, anger, and disgust). The severity of the participants'
depression was positively correlated with their accuracy in recognizing
sad faces, but not with their accuracy in recognizing other emotional
expressions.

concluSIonS The participants with MDD were more sensitive to subtle
expressions of sadness than the healthy control participants, and they
were more likely to misidentify other emotional facial expressions as
sad. In contrast, they were just as likely as control participants to
misidentify happy, surprised, or harsh facial expressions. These
findings indicate that people with depression not only are more likely
to attend to sadder stimuli, but also might misinterpret neutral facial
stimuli as sad. These tendencies might reinforce a person's depressive
feelings. ■

A large body of research points to a role for serotonin in the
regulation of mood. Genetic studies of Mdd have focused on the serotonin
transporter gene (Shadrina et al., 2018). Serotonin's role in brain
systems responsible for mood, appetite, and sleep corresponds closely to
the symptoms of Mdd outlined in the DSM-5. Most effective medications
for the treatment of depression boost the activity of serotonin at the
synapse. Mdd might be part of a larger disturbance in daily, or
circadian, rhythms (Soria et al., 2010). recall that among the functions
of serotonin is the regulation of sleep as well as mood (see Chapter 4).
Among the genes suspected of being related to Mdd are those involved
with circadian rhythms (see Chapter 6; also see McClung, 2007; buoli et
al., 2018). The DSM-5 criteria for Mdd include sleeping either less than
or more than a normal number of hours per night (7--9 hours) (APA,
2013). People with untreated Mdd spend too much time in rapid eye
movement (reM) sleep, and most medications that are used to treat Mdd
reduce reM sleep (rijnbeek et al., 2003) (see ● Figure 14.16).

572

Chapter 14

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FIGuRE 14.14

0% (neutral)

20%

40%

60%

80%

100% (sadness)

0.7 0.6

Mean accuracy

0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 Depressed 0

Control 10--20%

30--40% 50--60% 70--80% Intensity of sad expression

Overall

Heightened Sensitivity to Sad Expressions in Depression. Study
participants see one photo for only 0.5 second and must determine which
of four emotions (happiness, surprise, sadness, harsh) is being
displayed. Morphed images are made by combining neutral (0%) and
high-intensity (100%) images. Each emotion is easier to identify as its
intensity increases. Participants with MDD needed to see the same amount
of intensity as healthy control participants before correctly
identifying happy, surprised, or harsh facial expressions but needed to
see less intensity than control participants before correctly
identifying sad faces. This heightened sensitivity to the sad moods of
others might reinforce the negative feelings of the person with
depression. Source: J. K. Gollan et al.(2010). "How Do Depressed and
Healthy Adults Interpret Nuanced Facial Expressions?" Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 119(4), 804--810. https://doi.org/10.1037/ a0020234

Stress and MDD The experience of severe stress, whether arising from the
death of a loved one, illness, or frustration of major life goals,
frequently occurs immediately before the onset of a depressive episode
(brown & harris, 1989; Mazure, 1998). The physical and cognitive
responses to high levels of stress, such as difficulty sleeping or
concentrating, are quite similar to the symptoms of Mdd. researchers are
beginning to discover biological bridges between stress and depression
by studying a protein called p11 (Svenningsson et al., 2013; Seo et al.,
2017). both stressed mice and depressed humans have reduced levels of
p11, which rebound when treated with antidepressants. however, most
people exposed to stressors do not respond by becoming depressed,
reinforcing the complexity of the development of this disorder. Absolute
levels of stress hormones, such as cortisol, fail to predict most cases
of Mdd (nandam et al., 2020). instead, Mdd can be viewed within a
diathesis--stress model. "diathesis" means predisposition. it is likely
that biological predispositions for Mdd interact with a person's
experience with stress (zubin & Spring, 1977; Svenningsson et al., 2013;
Seo et al., 2017).

diathesis--stress model A model that suggests that the experience of
stress interacts with an individual's biological predisposition to
produce a psychological disorder.

WhAT iS MAJor dePreSSive diSorder (Mdd)?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

573

Diverse Voices in Psychology Race, Ethnicity, Gender, Sexual
Orientation, and Prevalence of Suicidality 80 Suicide ideation

70

Suicide attempt

60 50 40 30

10

ur e U

ns

al

n

se xu

ia sb Le

ex u

ay / G

et er os H

en sg

Bi

al

r de

e al

e

Tr an

Fe m

al M

Am

e N Ala ric Asi at s an an ive ka I H N ndia aw at n ai ive / ia / n M
ul tir ac ia l

c

ac k Bl

ni pa is

H

W hi

te

0

Figure 14.15 Suicidal ideation and Attempts in College Students. Rates
of suicidal ideation (thinking about possibly attempting suicide) and
suicide attempts varied among college students as a function of race and
ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation. Source: C. H. Liu et
al. (2019). "The Prevalence and Predictors of Mental Health Diagnoses
and Suicide Among US College Students: Implications for Addressing
Disparities in Service Use," Depression and Anxiety, 36(1), 8--17. doi:
10.1002/da.22830

As we have seen in this chapter, stress is a risk factor for a number of
psychological disorders, including MDD. Depression in turn is a risk
factor for suicidal ideation (thinking about suicide) and suicide
attempts. Some groups of people seem to experience more stress than
others, leading to differences in the rates of mental health problems
and suicidal ideation and behavior. As university professors, we are
saddened by data that show that depression, anxiety, and suicidality
rates continue to increase among the students we teach (Liu et al.,
2019). Race and ethnicity form complicated relationships with mental
health and suicidality (Liu et al., 2019). White college students have
higher rates of depression and anxiety than students of other races and
ethnicities, particularly African Americans,

574

Chapter 14

but suicidal ideation and attempts of White students are about the same
or higher among students in racial and ethnic minority groups (see ●
Figure 14.15). In comparisons based on gender and sexual orientation,
bisexual students are at greater risk of mental health problems and
suicidality than are heterosexual or gay/lesbian students, with half
engaging in suicidal ideation and over one quarter reporting a suicide
attempt. Transgender students report significantly higher rates of
mental health problems and suicidality than males or females. It is
important to note that Liu et al. (2019) looked at suicidal ideation and
suicide attempts, but not rates of actual suicides. These numbers, too,
show the influence of race, ethnicity, and gender. Among young

Picture Partners/Alamy Stock Photo

20

Understanding that the combination of depression, impulsivity, alcohol
or substance use, a history of suicide attempts, and a recent breakup or
other traumatic event may increase the risk of suicide can help us offer
support to a person who exhibits these characteristics. adults aged 18
to 24, the Centers for Disease Control reports that young males were far
more likely to commit suicide than females in all racial and ethnic
categories (Jiang et al., 2015). Non-Hispanic Whites and American Indian
or Alaska Native individuals had much higher rates of suicide than other
races and ethnicities. Awareness of the risks of mental health problems
and suicidality among college students should stimulate the
implementation of adequate mental health services and preventive
strategies, with particular attention to groups who typically have lower
rates of utilization of mental health services. We explore the
intersection between diversity and treatment further in Chapter 15. ■

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Typical person

Figure 14.16

0

Major Depressive Disorder Disrupts Sleep. These sleep records show the
normal progression of non-REM and REM sleep (upper row) and the
disrupted sleep of a person with major depressive disorder (bottom row).
Note the lack of Stage 3 and 4 non-REM sleep and the frequent waking
experienced by the person with depression (see Chapter 6 for more
information).

Awake NREM stage

REM 1 2 3 4 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Patient with major depressive disorder Awake NREM stage

REM 1 2 3 4 0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Time (hours) in bed at night Awake REM sleep

NREM stage 3 NREM stage 4

NREM stage 1 NREM stage 2

Periods of wakefulness typical for a person with major depressive
disorder

Source: Adapted from J. C. Gillin and A. A. Borbély (1985). "Sleep: A
Neurobiological Window on Affective Disorders," Trends in Neurosciences,
8, 537--542. doi: 10.1016/0166-2236(85)90191-2

Summary 14.2 Schizophrenia, Bipolar Disorder, and Major Depressive
Disorder Disorder

Symptoms

Schizophrenia

●

Delusions

●

Genetics

●

Hallucinations

●

Reduced frontal lobe activity

●

Disorganized thought and speech

●

Disruption of brain development

●

Movement disorders

●

Dopamine and glutamate abnormalities

●

Restricted affect

●

Stress

●

Avolition or asociality

●

Prenatal environment

●

Marijuana use

Bipolar disorder

Major depressive disorder

Possible Causal Factors under Investigation

●

Elevated mood

●

Genetics

●

Grandiosity

●

Serotonin disturbances

●

Little need for sleep

●

Diet

●

Rapid speech

●

Difficulty concentrating

●

Possible depression

●

Chronic depressed mood

●

Loss of positive reinforcement

●

Lack of pleasure

●

Learned helplessness

●

Sleep disturbances

●

Negative cognitions

●

Appetite disturbances

●

Rumination

●

Difficulty concentrating

●

Depressive attributions

●

Hopelessness

●

Stress

●

Possible suicidal thoughts

●

Genetics

●

Reduced serotonin activity

●

Patterns of brain activity

●

Circadian rhythms

Credits: Top row---Grunnitus Studio/Science Source; Second
row---Cpuk/Alamy Stock Photo; Bottom row---Picture Partners/Alamy Stock
Photo.

What Is Major DepressIve DIsorDer (MDD)?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

575

What Is an Anxiety Disorder? Image Source/Getty Images

Anxiety disorders take many forms, but all share the core characteristic
of unrealistic and counterproductive levels of anxiety. Anxiety has two
major components: (1) strong negative emotions and (2) physical tension
because of the anticipation of danger (barlow, 1988). it is the
anticipation of potential danger (whether real or not) that separates
anxiety from the closely related emotion of fear. When we are afraid,
usually something is happening in the present to produce that feeling,
whereas anxiety occurs when we are worried about the future. Anxiety
disorders represent an exaggeration of what is normally a useful
response. normal levels of anxiety protect us from engaging in risky
activities, such as runAnxiety is the anticipation of danger. Normal
levels of anxiety remind ning up debts, driving recklessly, or failing
to prepare for work or us about the risks of engaging in dangerous
activities, but disordered school, but excessive anxiety can cause a
person to withdraw from anxiety can prevent people from engaging in
everyday activities. positive life experiences and interpersonal
relationships. Approximately 30% of all Americans experience one or more
anxiety disorders during their lifetime, although not all seek treatment
(Kessler et al., 2005). People have genetic vulnerabilities for anxiety
disorders in general, but not for specific types of anxiety disorders
(dilalla et al., 1994; Smoller, 2016). Families with members who are
diagnosed with anxiety disorders are also likely to have members
diagnosed with Mdd because these types of problems appear to share an
underlying genetic basis (Weissman et al., 1997; Micco et al., 2009).
Anxiety disorders differ across gender and ethnicity for reasons that
are not well understood. Women are more likely to be diagnosed with
anxiety disorders than are men, and African Americans and hispanics
living in the united States are less likely to be diagnosed with anxiety
disorders than are White Americans (Kessler et al., 2005). evidence of a
predisposition to anxiety appears early in life (biederman et al., 1990;
Schwartz et al., 1999). As observed in Chapters 11 and 12, children's
initial temperament and reactivity can predispose them to anxiety. in
one study, young infants showed consistent levels of response to novel
stimuli, such as the smell of cotton swabs dipped in alcohol (Kagan,
1997), and 20% of the infants were classified as "high reactives" to
these stimuli because of their increased activity and distress when
novel stimuli were presented. When the high-reactive children were
placed in a novel laboratory environment at the ages of 4--5 years, they
still showed heightened levels of anxiety compared to their peers.
unlike most other types of psychological disorders, anxiety disorders do
not impair a person's ability to think realistically. in most cases,
adults with anxiety disorders recognize that their circumstances do not
warrant their extremely anxious responses, but they feel unable to
control them. A person looking out the window of a skyscraper is well
aware that the likelihood of falling is quite low, but feelings of fear
and anxiety persist. Young children with anxiety disorders are usually
less aware than adults that their feelings are unrealistic.

Specific Phobias

anxiety disorder A disorder featuring anxiety that is not proportional
to a person's circumstances. specific phobia Fears of objects other than
those associated with agoraphobia or social anxiety disorder.

576

Chapter 14

Specific phobias are fears of objects or situations other than those
associated with agoraphobia and social anxiety disorder (see ● Figure
14.17). These fear stimuli may be animals, natural phenomena (water or
earthquakes), blood and injury, or situations (flying, heights, bridges,
and so on). People do not ordinarily form phobias about harmless objects
such as coffee cups and keys (Mineka et al., 2006). The evolutionary
perspective suggests that phobias might be exaggerations of an otherwise
useful sense of caution. The items that become fear stimuli have some
realistic potential relationship to harm, such as snakes, spiders, and
the sight of blood. As noted in Chapter 8, the connections formed in
phobias can arise from classical conditioning. A stimulus (conditioned

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25 21.2

20 Percentage

17.4 15 12.1 10

10.9

8.5 5.4

5

3.3

2.7 3.2

Males

1.5 0

Situations

Animals

Females

Injury

Having at least Having more than one specific phobia one specific phobia
Type of specific phobia reported

FIGuRE 14.17 Prevalence of Different Types of Specific Phobias. In a
large random sample of adults, 21.2% of women and 10.9% of men reported
having at least one specific phobia, as defined by the DSM-5. Gender
differences were seen in the prevalence of situational phobias
(lightning, enclosed spaces, darkness, flying, and heights) and animal
phobias (primarily spiders and snakes). However, no gender differences
occurred in injury phobias (injections, dentists, and injuries). More
than one type of specific phobia was reported by 5.4% of the women and
1.5% of the men. Source: Adapted from M. Fredrikson et al. (1996).
"Gender and Age Differences in the Prevalence of Specific Fears and
Phobias," Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34(1), 33--39.
doi:10.1016/0005-7967(95)00048-3

Social Anxiety Disorder Social anxiety disorder is the fear of being
scrutinized and criticized by others, particularly during public
speaking and when meeting new people. Many of us are a little uneasy in
these situations, but for people with social anxiety disorder, the fear
and anxiety caused by these situations are out of proportion for the
particular situation. in other words, the person with social

social anxiety disorder A disorder characterized by an unrealistic fear
of being scrutinized and criticized by others.

Shane Wilson Link/Shutterstock.com

stimulus, or CS) becomes associated with a negative experience
(unconditioned stimulus, or uCS) that results in fear (unconditioned
response, or uCr), giving the CS the ability to elicit fear (conditioned
response, or Cr). We might be biologically prepared to form connections
between certain stimuli and feelings of fear (Seligman, 1971). learning
also can influence the development of phobias through imitation and
observation, such as when a child sees a parent scream when a spider
creeps across the room. Cognitions influence specific phobias. even
though a spider in your house or garden is simply minding its own
business while doing spider things, people with spider phobias tend to
believe that the spider is intending to attack them or move toward them
(riskind et al., 1995). People who have height phobias misjudge real
physical heights, believing that they are higher than they really are
(Stefanucci & Proffitt, 2009). height phobia, or acrophobia, is somewhat
unusual among the specific phobias due to its probable causality.
Typically, individuals use a combination of vision, vestibular, and body
position cues (see Chapter 5) to maintain balance. People with height
phobias tend to rely more on vision (hüweler et al., 2009), a preference
that might in turn be influenced more by genetics than by experience. As
height increases, visual cues for balance become less helpful, leading
to discomfort and anxiety.

People with spider phobias are often convinced that a spider is intent
on harming them, when spiders are usually just being spiders. WhAT iS An
AnxieTY diSorder?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

577

In Japan, some people experience taijin kyofusho, which is a fear of
offending or embarrassing other people with their odor, eye contact, or
appearance (Tarumi et al., 2004). This condition is significantly
different from the emphasis on a person's own embarrassment that is
typical in social anxiety as experienced in Western cultures.

anxiety disorder feels crippling anxiety while doing things that most
people take in stride, like introducing yourself to others at a party.
in most cases, social anxiety disorder begins during adolescence. As
discussed in Chapter 12, teens experience a spotlight effect, or a
belief that others are scrutinizing them. For an anxious teen, this
spotlight effect might be exaggerated, leading to social anxiety
disorder. Cultural variables influence the development of social
anxiety. in the united States, White and native American individuals
were more likely to experience social anxiety than African American,
Asian, or hispanic individuals (hasin & Grant, 2015). Prevalence is
highest in high income countries, the Americas, and in the Western
Pacific regions and lowest among low to lower-middle income countries
and in the African and eastern Mediterranean regions (Stein et al.,
2017). Social anxiety is frequently less common in collectivistic
cultures due to their greater emphasis on not offending others compared
to embarrassing the self.

Panic Disorder

Morita Masatake (1874--1938) founded the Morita Therapy for the
treatment of anxiety disorders, including the culturebound syndrome
taijin kyofusho, which affects 10% to 20% of the Japanese population.
This condition, recognized in the DSM, is characterized by fear of
offending others by blushing or by having an offensive appearance or
body odor. Morita recommended treating anxiety by accepting your
feelings, knowing your purpose, and doing what needs doing. His therapy
continues to be used today. Source: Reprinted by permission from Morita
Therapy and the True Nature of Anxiety-Based Disorders, by S. Morita,
the State University of New York Press 1998, State University of New
York. All rights reserved.

panic attack The experience of intense fear and autonomic arousal in the
absence of real threat.

panic disorder A disorder characterized by repeated panic attacks and
fear of future attacks.

578

Chapter 14

The DSM-5 distinguishes between the experience of a single panic attack,
characterized by intense fear and autonomic arousal, and the experience
of panic disorder, which features repeated panic attacks and fear of
future attacks (APA, 2013). having a panic attack does not mean that you
should be diagnosed with panic disorder. it is not unusual for people to
experience a few panic attacks in their lifetime. one quarter to one
third of college students report having had at least one panic attack in
the previous year (Asmundson & norton, 1993). however, panic disorder is
much less common, affecting 2.7% of the population in any given year
(Kessler et al., 2005). Women are more likely to experience panic
attacks and panic disorder than are men. More than half of people with
panic disorder also have been diagnosed with Mdd or another type of
anxiety disorder (Kearney et al., 1997). Panic attacks begin to occur in
adolescence and young adulthood (robins & regier, 1991). by all reports,
panic attacks are extremely unpleasant. Symptoms typically last about 10
minutes. Feelings of intense fear or discomfort are accompanied by both
physical and cognitive symptoms. Strong arousal of the sympathetic
nervous system leads to the experience of a pounding heart, sweating,
trembling, shortness of breath, chest pain, nausea, and dizziness or
faintness. not too surprisingly, people experiencing such symptoms may
believe they are dying or going crazy. For some individuals, panic
attacks may be brought on by identifiable stimuli, such as being swept
along in a crowd. For others, the attacks seem to come out of nowhere.
in either case, many people experiencing repeated attacks may begin to
fear leaving their homes, a condition known as agoraphobia, which will
be discussed in a later section.

Biological Explanations for Panic Disorder A clue to the biological
origin of

panic attacks is that they can be produced artificially in people with
panic disorder, but not in people without the disorder, by administering
an injection of sodium lactate (Pitts & McClure, 1967; Papp et al.,
1993). Sodium lactate interacts with orexins, chemical messengers that
were discussed in Chapters 6 and 7. orexins, which are released by cells
in the hypothalamus, play important roles in wakefulness, vigilance, and
appetite. People with panic disorder have larger quantities of orexins
than do people without the disorder (Johnson et al., 2010). it is
possible that disturbances involving the orexins might lead to panic
attacks.

Cognitive Explanations for Panic Disorder Cognitive theories of panic
attacks suggest that the interpretation of body symptoms, such as an
increased heart rate, could lead to increasing anxiety and, ultimately,
to panic (Clark, 1988; bakker et al., 2002; harvey et al., 2004). A
person might interpret increased heart rate and rapid breathing as a
heart attack instead of the result of having walked briskly from a
parking lot. Concern about having a heart attack leads to further
physiological arousal, which leads to more anxiety, and so on until a
full state of panic is reached.

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INTERFOTO/AGE Fotostock

The Scream, a famous series of four paintings by Edvard Munch
(1863--1944), was reportedly based on a panic attack that he suffered
while out with two friends at sunset.

Social Explanations for Panic Disorder Social influences can be seen in
the symptoms of panic disorder. Many people worry about appearing weird
or crazy to other people, which can lead to increased anxiety and more
panic attacks (hicks et al., 2005). Culture plays an important role in
how panic attacks are interpreted. Although the underlying physical
characteristics remain similar from country to country, interesting
variations have been observed. For example, dizziness is an important
aspect of panic attacks in China, constipation and shortness of breath
are common symptoms of panic in rwanda, and gastrointestinal symptoms
signal panic for patients in Thailand (hinton & Good, 2009). Social
factors also influence the development of panic disorder. Panic disorder
is more common in children who have experienced parental loss or
separation and in adults who have recently experienced significant,
stressful life events (Klauke et al., 2010). Integrating the
Perspectives A combination of the factors just discussed is likely to

provide the best explanation for the development and experience of panic
disorder. A panic attack could occur as a result of a chain of events:
(1) A person with a biological predisposition to panic, possibly
involving the orexin systems of the brain, (2) is exposed to social
stressors in the form of parental loss or separation or significant life
stressors, (3) interprets physical symptoms of arousal as threatening or
embarrassing, and finally (4) has cognitions leading to panic that are
modulated by that individual's cultural expectations.

Agoraphobia Agoraphobia is the fear of open spaces and is named after
the ancient Greek agora, or "marketplace." As mentioned previously,
agoraphobia is a common outcome of panic disorder. When people become
afraid of the embarrassment of having panic attacks in public, they
might opt to simply stay home. Fear can occur in a number of situations,
including being outside the home alone, using public transportation,
being in open spaces such as parking lots or in shops, or standing in
line or in a crowd. Agoraphobia often prevents working or engaging in
normal social activities (Kessler et al., 2005).

agoraphobia Unrealistic fear of open spaces, being outside the home
alone, or being in a crowd.

WhAT iS An AnxieTY diSorder?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

579

Ryan McGinnis/Alamy Stock Photo

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

People with agoraphobia or fear of open places often dread being in
crowds, like this one in Times Square in New York City.

Prefrontal cortex

Thalamus

Hypothalamus

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is diagnosed when a person has
experienced excessive anxiety and worry for 6 months that is not
correlated with particular objects or situations (APA, 2013). in other
words, the person experiences a great deal of worry, but the worry is
focused on life in general, not upcoming midterms or spiders. GAd is
associated with physical complaints, including headache, stomachache,
and muscle tension. GAd is often comorbid, or coexisting, with other
anxiety disorders, substance abuse, and Mdd (APA, 2013).

Biological Explanations for GAD like all anxiety disorders, GAd

shows evidence of genetic predisposition (Kendler et al., 1995; Molina
et al., 2011). A reasonable place to start looking for correlates of
anxiety in brain structure and function is the fear circuit involving
the amygdala, which was discussed in Chapters 4 and 7. The amygdala is
particularly rich in receptors for GAbA, a neurotransmitter that
inhibits brain activity. As discussed in Chapter 6, drugs such as
alcohol and the benzodiazepine tranquilizers (e.g., valium) have their
main anxiety-reducing effects at these GAbA receptors. not too
surprisingly, then, people often self-medicate with alcohol and
tranquilizers to reduce their anxiety level, leaving them vulnerable to
substance abuse disorders. The amygdala forms complex connections with
the prefrontal areas of the frontal lobe (see ● Figure 14.18). As
observed in the discussion of aggression in Chapter 13, the prefrontal
cortex coordinates our decisions based on potential dangers identified
by the amygdala. For example, if you see a driver's angry face in your
rearview mirror, your amygdala alerts the prefrontal cortex about a
potential threat or danger, and your prefrontal cortex uses memories of
similar past experiences and reasoning to decide to pull over safely to
the slower lane to let the angry driver go by. it is possible that this
circuit is not responding typically in cases of GAd.

Cognitive Explanations for GAD Several cognitive models of GAd have been

Amygdala

FIGuRE 14.18 Brain Circuits and GAD. People with GAD have higher levels
of activity in the cortex, thalamus, amygdala, and hypothalamus
(Wittchen & Hoyer, 2001). The prefrontal cortex was especially active
when people with GAD saw angry faces, suggesting that this area had to
"work harder" to control incoming danger signals from the amygdala (Monk
et al., 2008).

proposed (beck, 1985). As discussed in Chapters 10 and 11, we often
organize our thinking about the world into schemas, or systems of
belief. if a high-reactive child develops a schema that says "The world
is a dangerous place," even safe experiences begin to look dangerous
through this filter. A different cognitive approach suggests that
worrying can become a coping strategy for anxiety. by examining "what
ifs," people might believe that they are coping, but so many situations
are capable of triggering the coping response that the result is nearly
constant worry (Wells, 2006). bill Murray's character in the 1991 film
What About Bob? expresses this type of worry when he asks his
psychiatrist, "What if my bladder explodes?"

Social Explanations for GAD individuals in lower socioeconomic classes
in the united States are about twice as likely to be diagnosed with GAd
as people in middle or upper socioeconomic classes (Kessler et al.,
2005). disruptions in social connectivity because of divorce,
separation, death of a spouse, or loss of a job also are associated with
higher rates of GAd (Wittchen & hoyer, 2001). Integrating the
Perspectives Pulling these perspectives together into an

generalized anxiety disorder (gAD) A disorder characterized by excessive
anxiety and worry that is not correlated with particular objects or
situations.

580

Chapter 14

integrated model, we might predict that GAd is most likely to occur in
individuals with a high-reactive temperament, possibly because of their
genetic background, who subsequently develop schemas and other cognitive
patterns that maintain high levels of worry. When these individuals
experience unusual amounts of stress because of socioeconomic factors
and disruption of social networks, their risk for developing GAd is
likely to be even higher.

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OCD and Related Disorders the DSM-5 groups obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD), which was formerly an anxiety disorder, with body dysmorphic
disorder, hoarding disorder, and other similar problems (aPa, 2013).

individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) are haunted by
distressing, intrusive thoughts (obsessions); the need to engage in
repetitive, ritualistic behaviors (compulsions); or both. Between 2% and
3% of the U.s. population report experiencing OCD during their lifetime
(Ruscio et al., 2010). Obsessions are distinct from everyday worries,
which usually focus on real-life problems. Common obsessions include
concerns about contamination (catching diseases from shaking hands),
repeated doubts (wondering whether you have hurt somebody), ordering
(needing things arranged in a particular order or configuration),
inappropriate impulses (hurting somebody else or shouting obscenities at
a funeral), and sexual imagery (aPa, 2013). Compulsions appear to be
efforts to ward off the anxiety produced by obsessions or some other
feared event. For example, people troubled by obsessions about
contamination may engage in compulsive hand washing hundreds of times
per day. Other common compulsions include checking (for locked windows
or faucets turned off), counting, ordering objects, and requesting or
demanding assurances.

Biological Explanations for OCD twin studies suggest a strong genetic
vulnerability

Randal Pfizenmaier/Alamy Stock Photo

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD)

Some people with obsessivecompulsive disorder must arrange their
possessions in particular ways; otherwise, they will experience
overwhelming anxiety.

for the disorder (Menzies et al., 2008; Pauls et al., 2014). it is
probable that significant interactions between this genetic
vulnerability and the environment occur. imaging studies provide insight
into the patterns of brain activity that The childhood rhyme "Step on a
crack, break your accompany obsessions and compulsions (see ● Figure
14.19). Frontal lobe mother's back" captures the ineffectiveness of
areas, including the orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate cortices, form
obsessive-compulsive thinking. circuits with the thalamus and basal
ganglia that influence the selection of voluntary behaviors. abnormal
patterns of activity in these circuits is obsessive-compulsive disorder
strongly correlated with obsessions and compulsions (Pauls et al.,
2014). (OCD) A disorder associated with intruthe evolutionary
perspective suggests that OCD might have its roots in normal grooming
sive obsessions and compulsions. and territoriality behaviors that
somehow become overly exaggerated in some cases (Rapoport, obsession An
intrusive, distressing 1989). Humans who anticipated threats like
disease from dirty hands or threats from the pethought. rimeters of
their territories probably benefited from proactive strategies like hand
washing and compulsion Repetitive, ritualistic behavchecking their
surroundings (Brune, 2006). Disordered behavior similar to OCD occurs
elseior associated with high anxiety. where in the animal kingdom. Dogs
may lick and chew their front paws to the point of causing extensive
tissue damage, which can be prevented by giving the dogs the same Basal
ganglia medications used to treat humans with OCD (seksel & lindeman,
2001). Thalamus

Learning Explanations for OCD learning explanations for OCD focus on the
rewarding aspects of compulsions. as pointed out in the previous
discussion of operant conditioning, any behavior that produces a
positive outcome (reducing anxiety associated with an obsession) is
likely

Figure 14.19 Circuits Managing Voluntary Behavior Are Disrupted in
Compulsions. An intention to behave is generated in the frontal lobe and
passed to the basal ganglia for "approval." The basal ganglia either
approves the proposed behavior, sending the message along to the
thalamus, or stops the process. The thalamus sends messages back to the
frontal lobe for implementation. Compulsive behaviors, like too frequent
handwashing, might result from misfiring of these circuits.

Frontal lobe

OCD anD RelateD DisORDeRs

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

581

Carlo Allegri/Getty Images

AP Images/Arne Dedert

Ron Galella/Getty Images

Pop entertainer Michael Jackson was described by his mother as
"addicted" to plastic surgery. She related that during adolescence, her
son became obsessed with his perceived physical flaws. Although Jackson
was never formally diagnosed with body dysmorphic disorder, many people
with this disorder engage in similar types of body dissatisfaction and
repeated requests for plastic surgery.

to be repeated in the future. For example, if hand washing reduced
anxiety about germs and disease, hand washing might become progressively
more frequent to the point where it would be considered abnormal. The
DSM-5 specifies that engaging in compulsive behavior for more than 1
hour per day is considered abnormal (APA, 2013).

Social Explanations for OCD Culture plays a role in how frequently oCd
occurs and what obsessions and compulsions are more likely.
Anthropologists have identified interesting parallels between cultural
rituals and oCd. For example, many normal cultural rituals involve
elements similar to oCd, including washing, special colors, stereotyped
actions, and rigid rules (dulaney & Fiske, 1994). like the evolutionary
perspective, this cultural view suggests that oCd might represent an
exaggerated version of normal behaviors.

Body Dysmorphic Disorder Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) is characterized
by the unrealistic perception of physical flaws. it affects as many as
2% of the population, with slightly more females than males experiencing
the disorder (bjornsson et al., 2010). Suicide rates for bdd are higher
than for related conditions, including oCd and anorexia nervosa
(Angelakis et al., 2016). Many people with this condition undergo
numerous cosmetic surgeries. others continually try to "perfect" their
bodies through bodybuilding activities and other strategies. body
dysmorphic disorder shows a significant influence of heredity (Feusner
et al., 2010). in addition, people with this disorder might not be as
out of touch with reality as you might think. Their visual perception of
subtle facial distortions appears to be better than normal, so they may
be noticing flaws that the rest of us cannot see (reese et al., 2010).
body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) A disorder characterized by the
unrealistic perception of physical flaws. posttraumatic stress disorder
(ptSD) A disorder caused by the experience of trauma, which leads to
flashbacks, dreams, hypervigilance, and avoidance of stimuli associated
with the traumatic event.

582

Chapter 14

What Is Posttraumatic Stress Disorder? Posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) is the current term used to describe a condition formerly known
as shell shock or battle fatigue. PTSd is unique among disorders listed
in the DSM-5 because it is the only one with a specified cause: To be
diagnosed with PTSd, you must

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Getmilitaryphotos/Shutterstock.com

have experienced trauma (APA, 2013). Although combat, especially
hand-tohand combat, is still recognized as one of the most likely
experiences leading to PTSd, we now understand that other types of
trauma may produce the same results (insel, 2007). PTSd may follow the
experience of automobile accidents, assaults, abuse, and natural
disasters. PTSd symptoms include hypervigilance, avoidance of stimuli
associated with the trauma, emotional numbing, and reexperiencing in the
form of repetitive, intrusive thoughts, flashbacks, and dreams about the
traumatic event (APA, 2013). The last thing that a person in this
situation wants to do is to relive the traumatic event, so these
symptoms are upsetting. Children with PTSd often reenact the traumatic
event in their play (Cohen et al., 2010). in other words, they may play
"terrorist attack," "car crash," or "tsunami," possibly in an effort to
reduce their fear. This reenactment play can have either positive or
negative effects on the child. Children whose play included a reworking
of the traumatic event (revenge or a happy ending) were less disturbed
than children whose play was repetitive, without resolution. PTSd
affects between 3% and 4% of the adult population in the united States
every year (Kessler et al., 2007). After large-scale traumatic events,
health workers typically expect about 10% of the population to develop
PTSd (Kessler et al., 1996; Shalev et al., 2019). For example, more than
12% of lower Manhattan residents developed PTSd following the terrorist
attacks of 9/11 (diGrande et al., 2008). Children are more vulnerable
than adults, with 25% developing PTSd following automobile accidents in
which they were injured, compared to 15% of their parents (de vries et
al., 1999). between 8.5% and 14% of combat soldiers serving in iraq and
Afghanistan experienced severe impairment because of symptoms of PTSd
after returning home, and up to 31% experienced some impairment (Thomas
et al., 2010).

Biological Explanations for PTSD Genetic studies in over 20,000
individuals suggests that PTSd is heritable and that its genetic profile
overlaps significantly with schizophrenia (duncan et al., 2018). brain
imaging studies consistently show that PTSd is correlated with smaller
hippocampal volume (bremner et al., 2002; bossini et al., 2008 see ●
Figure 14.20). This leaves us with two competing hypotheses: Are people
with a naturally smaller hippocampus more vulnerable to PTSd? or is
there something about the experience of trauma, such as the effect of
stress hormones, that is toxic to the hippocampus? both hypotheses seem
reasonable. however, current data seem more consistent with the idea
that smaller hippocampal volume is a risk factor for PTSd rather than an
outcome of the disorder (Szeszko et al., 2018). A disturbance in GAbA
activity (the major inhibitory neurochemical in the cortex; see Chapter
4) is associ4700 ated with PTSd (reuveni et al., 2018). naturally
occurring 4500

Hippocampal Volume Is Reduced in PTSD. Volume in the left hippocampus is
reduced in combat veterans with PTSD compared to healthy controls who
have not experienced combat and combat-exposed veterans who do not have
PTSD. Although it is possible that the stress related to PTSD might
damage the hippocampus, it is more likely that smaller hippocampal
volume is a risk factor for PTSD. Source: Adapted from S. Van Rooij et
al. (2015). "Smaller Hippocampal Volume As a Vulnerability Factor for
the Persistence of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder," Psychological
Medicine, 45(13), 2737--2746. doi: 10.1017/S0033291715000707

Volume (mm3)

FIGuRE 14.20

Left hippocampus Right hippocampus

- 

4300

4100

3900

3700

Healthy controls

Veterans without PTSD

PTSD

Healthy controls

Veterans without PTSD

PTSD

WhAT iS PoSTTrAuMATiC STreSS diSorder?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

583

benzodiazepines and benzodiazepine medications (tranquilizers such as
valium) interact with GAbA systems to reduce anxiety. individuals with
PTSd appear to have different responses to benzodiazepines than healthy
controls do (reuveni et al., 2018). disturbed benzodiazepine systems
might explain not only the heightened vigilance seen in PTSd but also
the unfortunate tendency for people to self-medicate for PTSd with
alcohol (Jakupcak et al., 2010). Alcohol reduces anxiety using
biological mechanisms similar to those of the benzodiazepines.

Learning Explanations for PTSD learning, and classical conditioning in
particular, contribute to the symptoms of PTSd. individuals with PTSd
show conditioned responses to stimuli associated with the traumatic
event. Combat veterans with PTSd seem particularly sensitive to smells
such as burning rubber and diesel (rothbaum et al., 2010). individuals
with PTSd show increased generalization to conditioned fear stimuli,
suggesting that over time, they will become responsive to more stimuli,
not less (Kaczkurkin et al., 2016). The effects of prior experience with
trauma depend on the type of trauma involved. risk of PTSd is higher as
a result of the re-occurrence of physical violence, but actually reduced
by the re-occurrence of sectarian violence and combat (Kessler et al.,
2017).

Social and Cultural Explanations for PTSD Social and cultural factors
play significant roles in the development of PTSd. People reporting low
social support in the 6 months before 9/11 were twice as likely to be
diagnosed with PTSd as people who reported strong social support during
this period (Galea et al., 2002). Cultural factors also influence the
likelihood of PTSd. Following 9/11, PTSd was more common in new York
City residents of some ethnicities than others, affecting 13.4% of
hispanics, 9.3% of African Americans, 6.5% of White Americans, and 3.2%
of Asian Americans (Galea et al., 2002).

What Are Dissociative Disorders?

dissociative disorder A disorder characterized by disruptions in a
person's identity, memory, or consciousness.

584

Chapter 14

Dissociative disorders feature disruptions in a person's identity,
memory, or consciousness (APA, 2013). dissociative disorders take
several forms. dissociative amnesia occurs when a person forgets
important information about specific events, often following a
frightening or traumatic event. in dissociative fugue, people become
confused over their identity and often combine this loss of identity
with sudden travel and the assumption of a new identity. These
situations typically last a few hours or days, but not longer periods of
time (Kopelman, 2002). depersonalization or derealization disorder
occurs when a person experiences strong feelings of unreality about
either the self or the surrounding environment (APA, 2013). People might
feel as though they are watching their behavior from outside their
bodies or that the world is dreamlike. however, they retain their
ability to understand that their feelings are not realistic. in other
words, they feel as if they're outside their bodies, but they don't
believe that this is really happening. Possibly the most controversial
of the dissociative disorders is dissociative identity disorder, which
was previously known as multiple personality disorder. According to the
DSM-5, dissociative identity disorder is characterized by the experience
of two distinct "personality states" (APA, 2013). dissociative identity
disorder experienced a spike in popularity as a diagnosis in the
mid-1990s but has since dropped in frequency. Media attention might have
contributed to the frequency with which this disorder was diagnosed.
before the popularization of patients

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Esther Lin/Zuffa LLC/Getty Images

Heisman Trophy winner, NFL star, and mixed martial arts fighter Herschel
Walker has spoken about his experience with dissociative identity
disorder to encourage military veterans to seek help for psychological
disorders.

named Sybil and eve in books and films, few cases of dissociative
identity disorder had ever been described in the scientific literature.
Following this media interest, thousands of cases were diagnosed,
primarily in the united States and Canada. responses to extreme stress
frequently include detachment, numbness, or altered memory and
cognition, but this is quite different from the development of
additional identities. Well-meaning therapists can misinterpret these
stress symptoms as dissociative identity disorder and, worse yet,
suggest this possibility to their clients. People diagnosed with
dissociative identity disorder, like those with other dissociative
disorders, score very high on tests of suggestibility that predict a
person's susceptibility to hypnosis, as well as in measures of being
likely to fantasize (Giesbrecht et al., 2010). These findings imply that
these people may have difficulty distinguishing between reality and
fantasy and might accept a therapist's suggestion without considering it
critically.

What Are Somatic Symptom Disorder and Related Disorders? Somatic symptom
disorder is diagnosed when people are unusually concerned and
preoccupied with chronic somatic symptoms (APA, 2013). The DSM-5 notes
that these patients spend excessive amounts of time thinking about the
seriousness of their symptoms, which is accompanied by a high level of
anxiety. To the patient, the somatic symptoms appear quite serious and
often disabling. Among the different symptoms are vague pain complaints,
gastrointestinal upset, sexual problems, amnesia, breathing problems, or
unexplained sensory or motor problems. People with somatic symptoms
usually visit physicians frequently, report high numbers of physical
complaints, and are at risk of becoming dependent on pain medication.
They can become preoccupied with their health and often insist on
unnecessary medical tests and procedures. At the same time, this
category might raise the risk that people with genuine yet poorly
understood medical conditions might be inappropriately diagnosed with a
psychological disorder (Frances, 2013).

somatic symptom disorder A disorder characterized by having one or more
chronic somatic symptoms about which a person is excessively concerned,
preoccupied or fearful.

WhAT Are SoMATiC SYMPToM diSorder And relATed diSorderS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

585

JON ARE BERG JACOBSEN/AFTENPOSTE/European Pressphoto
Agency/OSLO/Norway/Newscom

Anders Behring Breivik killed 8 people with a bomb before shooting
another 69 people at a nearby youth camp on July 22, 2011. Police told
reporters that during a reenactment of the shootings, Breivik "didn't
show any remorse." Although we don't know whether Breivik has been
diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder, a callous lack of
empathy and remorse is typical of people with this diagnosis.

personality disorder A disorder characterized by impairments in
identity, in personality traits, and in establishment of empathy or
intimacy.

antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) A disorder characterized by an
unusual lack of remorse, empathy, or regard for normal social rules and
conventions.

586

Chapter 14

What Are Personality Disorders? A personality disorder is characterized
by impairments in identity, in personality traits, and in establishment
of empathy or intimacy. Personality disorders cannot be diagnosed in
people under the age of 18. To illustrate this category of disorders, we
will now look at three of the ten types of personality disorders in
greater detail: antisocial personality disorder (ASPd), borderline
personality disorder (bPd), and narcissistic personality disorder (nPd).

Antisocial Personality Disorder (ASPD)

Antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) is characterized by a "pervasive
pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights of others" (APA,
2013, p. 659). individuals with this disorder have little regard for
normal social rules and conventions. Their behavior is frequently risky
and irresponsible, and they form shallow, fleeting relationships with
others. ASPd is quite similar to the term psychopath, which has not been
used by the DSM system since its third edition was published in 1980.
Criteria for ASPd in the DSM system focuses on a person's behaviors,
especially criminal behaviors, whereas the term psychopath implies flaws
in the person's consistent traits or character (hare, 2006). between
0.2% and 3.3% of the population experiences ASPd in a given year (APA,
2013). hare (2006) has estimated the number of psychopaths in the united
States to be approximately 1%. Most individuals with ASPd or psychopathy
do not engage in outright criminal behavior, and not all criminals have
ASPd or psychopathy. noncriminal individuals with ASPd were easily
recruited by placing a newspaper ad calling for "charming, aggressive,
carefree people who are impulsively irresponsible but are good at
handling people and at looking after number one" (Widom, 1978, p. 72).
Antisocial personality disorder has a heritability of approximately 50%
(Ferguson, 2010). A genetic influence on a trait usually implies that
the trait provides some advantage, but how can this be the case for a
tendency toward antisocial behavior? one suggestion is that fearlessness
characterizes both heroes and people with antisocial behavior (lykken,
1982). having heroic people in your population might offset the negative
impact of having some antisocial people. People with ASPd show reduced
volume and activity in the prefrontal cortex (Glenn et al., 2013).
orbitofrontal abnormalities occur at higher rates among murderers and
those diagnosed with ASPd (davidson et al., 2000). As observed in
Chapter 4, damage to the frontal areas of the cortex often leads to poor
judgment and impulsivity. in one representative case, two adults who had
been raised in stable, middle-class homes but who had experienced damage
to the orbitofrontal cortex in infancy both showed a profound inability
to understand the consequences of their negative behavior (Anderson et
al., 1999). They engaged in stealing, lying, and aggressive behavior and
were poor parents. A relative lack of response to emotions, especially
those of others, might also contribute to antisocial behavior disorder.
While undergoing brain imaging, people with ASPd, unlike the control
participants in a study, showed little activation of parts of the brain
that are usually active during emotional processing when listening to
words such as torture, rape, or cancer (Kiehl et al., 2001; hare, 2006).
Participants also were shown neutral scenes and rather gruesome images
of murder scenes. Again, the people with ASPd showed different patterns
of brain activation than did the typical control participants. in
particular, the amygdalae of people with ASPd showed relatively little
activity. As discussed in Chapters 4 and 7, the amygdala normally
participates in the recognition of fear and other negative emotions in
others. other research indicates that children with antisocial
tendencies are impaired in their ability to identify expressions of
sadness and fear in others, a finding consistent with lower activity in
the amygdala (blair et al., 2001). A genetic predisposition is likely to
interact with child maltreatment, especially physical abuse, in cases of
ASPd (delisi et al., 2019). As mentioned previously in this textbook,
child maltreatment interacts with a genetic predisposition to violent
antisocial behavior (Caspi et al., 2003).

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright © 2001, with permission from Elsevier.

(a) 
(b) 

The areas marked in blue showed less activity in criminal psychopaths
than in noncriminal control participants in a study during the
processing of negative emotional words like rape or torture. These areas
are associated with emotional processing and include (a) the cingulate
cortex and basal ganglia and (b) the hippocampus and amygdala. The
failure of negative emotional stimuli to produce normal levels of
arousal might allow the psychopath to engage in harmful behaviors
without experiencing normal remorse or empathy. Source: Reprinted from
K. A. Kiehl et al. (2001). "Limbic Abnormalities in Affective Processing
by Criminal Psychopaths as Revealed by Functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging," Biological Psychiatry, 50(9), 677--684. doi:
10.1016/s0006-3223(01)01222-7

Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) The term borderline personality
disorder (BPD) originated from the idea that the characteristics of this
disorder fell on the "border" between anxiety and psychosis. According
to the DSM-5, bPd is characterized by instability in interpersonal
relationships, self-image, and emotion. individuals with this disorder
are extremely sensitive to perceived interpersonal slights, engage in
frantic efforts to avoid abandonment, either real or imagined, and may
behave in impulsive, self-destructive ways (see ● Figure 14.21). Suicide
and self-mutilating behaviors, which were discussed in Chapter 8, are
more common among people with this disorder. relationships are often
initially intense and idealized, but if the individual perceives any
slight rejection, love can turn to anger quickly. borderline personality
disorder affects about 2% of the population, with women outnumbering men
by a factor of 3 to 1 (Skodol & bender, 2003; Gunderson et al., 2018).
People with bPd appear to be vulnerable to a number of additional
disorders, including bipolar disorder, substance abuse, eating
disorders, and other personality disorders. borderline personality
disorder is five times more common among close relatives with the
disorder than among the general population, suggesting a biological
predisposition (APA, 2013). however, as many as 70% of individuals with
this diagnosis have histories of abandonment, neglect, and physical or
sexual abuse, or both types of abuse (hunt, 2007). These findings
suggest that traumatic experiences interact with a possible genetic
predisposition to produce disordered behavior (Gunderson et al., 2018).

borderline personality disorder (BpD) A disorder characterized by insta-

Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD)

narcissistic personality disorder (npD) A disorder characterized by

As defined by the DSM-5, narcissistic personality disorder (NPD) is
characterized by grandiosity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy
(APA, 2013). renewed interest in nPd has

grandiosity, need for admiration, and low empathy.

bility in interpersonal relationships, selfimage, and emotion.

WhAT Are PerSonAliTY diSorderS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

587

PSychology aS a hub Science AT A 2002 ConvenTion oF lAW enForCeMenT
oFFiCerS in Canada, psychologist robert hare (2002) made a startling
suggestion. With slides in the background depicting convicted WorldCom
chief executive officer bernard ebbers and enron chief financial officer
Andrew Fastow, hare asked his audience why law enforcement personnel are
screened for psychopathy, but not executives responsible for millions of
dollars of people's savings and retirement funds. When we hear the term
psychopath, most of us think of characters like hannibal lecter from The
Silence of the Lambs. however, hare and other psychologists suggest that
psychopaths are more likely to be the people next door, your coworkers,
and maybe even your friends and relatives. Psychopathy is one-third of a
cluster of "dark Triad" characteristics that can be found in people in
important leadership positions, along with narcissism and
Machiavellianism. The latter term refers to coldness, dishonesty, and
calculated manipulation of others in order to meet one's goals (Paulhus
& Williams, 2002). narcissism and Machiavellianism are positively
associated with objective career success, although psychopathy is not
(Furtner et al., 2017). dark Triad leaders do not express the three
traits evenly. Many leadership positions are occupied by primarily
narcissistic leaders, as their narcissism drives them to find
appreciation and acceptance (Maccoby, 2003). narcissistic leaders are
usually perceived to be charismatic. both narcissistic and Machiavellian
leaders embrace power and tend to act in authoritarian ways.
Psychopathic leaders are unpredictable and impulsive, and typically have
a negative impact on members of the organization and its efficacy
(boddy, 2017). From an evolutionary perspective, we can see how the
dominance exerted by dark Triad personalities could lead to some
success. A remaining question, however, is why we confuse these traits
with "leadership" and select leaders personifying dark Triad traits when
they can be so destructive and counterproductive. ■ Low

High

The "Dark Triad" characteristics of Machiavellianism, narcissism, and
psychopathy commonly occur together. We apparently do a pretty good job
of detecting Dark Triad traits in other people simply by viewing their
appearance (Holtzman, 2011).

Elsevier

Psychopathy

588

Bernie Madoff built one of the most successful businesses on Wall Street
and served as the nonexecutive chairman of the NASDAQ stock market
before being convicted of perpetrating one of the largest financial
frauds in U.S. history. Psychologists Paul Babiak and Robert Hare
suggest that it might be difficult to distinguish between tough
corporate leaders and those with antisocial tendencies.

Males High

Narcissism

Machiavallianism

Females Low

Stephen Chernin/Getty Images

The "Dark Side" of Leadership

Chapter 14

Source: From N. S. Holtzman (2011). "Facing a Psychopath: Detecting the
Dark Triad from Emotionally Neutral Faces, Using Prototypes from the
Personality Faceaurus," Journal of Research in Personality, 45(6),
648--654. doi: 19.1016/j. jrp.2011.09.002

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Healthy trustees (n = 38) (low investment -- high investment)

Trustees with borderline personality disorder (n = 55) (low investment
-- high investment)

0.5 Percentage signal change

Percentage signal change

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

\$0

\$4

\$12 \$8 Investment

\$16

\$20

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

\$0

\$4

\$12 \$8 Investment

\$16

\$20

Figure 14.21 Abnormal responses to Trust in Borderline Personality
Disorder. Not only do people with borderline personality disorder
perform differently than healthy controls in experimental activities
measuring trust, but their brain activity during a trust game is also
different. In healthy study participants, activity in the anterior
insula decreases when an offer is higher or fairer. In the participants
with borderline personality disorder, insula activity did not correspond
well with the offers that they received. This inability to respond to
trust normally might explain some difficulties these people experience
in building healthy relationships with others.

occurred in part due to questions about possible intersections between
narcissism and social media use (McCain & Campbell, 2016). other
psychologists are tracking narcissistic traits as a function of age,
with younger individuals showing more narcissism than older adults
(twenge & Campbell, 2009). although the DSM-5 has only one category for
nPD, psychologists continue to debate the relationship between two
apparent subtypes---the grandiose narcissist and the vulnerable
narcissist (Miller et al., 2011, 2017). the grandiose narcissist tends
to show inflated views of self-worth, aggressiveness, and dominance,
while the vulnerable narcissist combines inflated views of self-worth
with insecurity, defensiveness, and negative emotions. according to
Miller et al. (2011, 2017), the DSM emphasizes the grandiose
Narcissistic personality disorder version, which might result in
clinicians being less combines grandiosity, need for aware of the
vulnerable version among their clients. attention, and low empathy. The
one possible solution is to use trait models like the social media
phenomenon of the Big Five traits, described in Chapter 12, to
distinguish selfie is the perfect outlet for people between the two
patterns. For example, the grandiose with narcissistic tendencies
(Weiser, narcissist is extroverted, while the vulnerable narcis2015).
sist is shy and neurotic. What are Personality DisorDers?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chris Rout/Alamy Stock Photo

Source: From B. King-Casa et al. (2008). "The Rupture and Repair of
Cooperation in Borderline Personality Disorder," Science, 321, 806--810.
doi: 10.1126/ science.1156902. Copyright 2008 The American Association
for the Advancement of Science.

589

We are not certain how narcissistic behavior develops. The personality
disorder itself is not to be diagnosed officially until adulthood, but
the roots of narcissism might be found during childhood. disturbances in
attachment between parents and child are common in individuals with nPd
(Yakeley, 2018). narcissism might be the outgrowth of self-esteem
strategies in the child (Thomaes et al., 2009). As such, narcissism
might be simply an extreme version of the impression management and
search for esteem that are considered normal in children and teens.
narcissistic traits have been shown to be somewhat heritable, and they
possibly have their beginnings in basic temperament (Thomaes et al.,
2009). Chapter 12 discussed reactivity, or a child's tendency to either
approach or avoid a stimulus. The pattern of behavior seen in the

ExPERIEnCIng PSychology Assessing Narcissism trait. In addition to the
grandiose behaviors, many individuals show a vulnerable, hypersensitive
quality, which makes them shy and fragile in the face of criticism. As a
result, the many self-report scales for measuring narcissism do not
always agree well with one another. What we present here are two short
scales of narcissism, the Hypersensitive Narcissism Scale (Hendin &
Cheek, 1997) and the Single-Item Narcissism Scale (Konrath et al.,
2014). As you complete the scales, your re-

AS YOU HAVE READ IN THIS CHAPTER, narcissism is characterized by
grandiosity, entitlement, and low empathy. While this doesn't sound very
attractive, people who score high in narcissistic traits are also likely
to score high on measures of creativity, happiness, and self-esteem,
while scoring low on measures of anxiety and depression (Konrath et al.,
2014). Measuring narcissism is difficult because of the possible dual
nature of this

sults are more likely to be meaningful to you if you answer the items as
honestly as possible (attempting to avoid social desirability effects).
See if the two scales provide you with consistent results. Do you think
these scales are valid?

Hypersensitive Narcissism Scale Place a check in the appropriate box,
and then add your scores for the 10 items.

Very uncharacteristic or untrue; strongly disagree 1

Very characteristic or true; strongly agree

2

3

4

5

I can become entirely absorbed in thinking about my personal affairs, my
health, my cares, or my relations to others. My feelings are easily hurt
by ridicule or by the slighting remarks of others. When I enter a room,
I often become selfconscious and feel that the eyes of others are upon
me. I dislike sharing the credit of an achievement with others.

590

Chapter 14

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

grandiose narcissist is consistent with approach, while the vulnerable
narcissist seems to show both approach and avoidant tendencies. As
discussed in Chapter 12, temperament quickly interacts with
environmental factors, particularly those in the surrounding social
setting. Parents who overpraise their children might produce habituation
to praise, leading a child to seek constantly higher levels of positive
feedback. Cold parents with very high expectations for their children
might also stimulate narcissistic behaviors as children attempt to
protect themselves while craving positive feedback from others as
compensation. understanding the roots of narcissistic behavior will help
clinicians develop more effective interventions, which will be discussed
in more detail in Chapter 15 on treatments. in the meantime, you have
the opportunity to assess yourself for narcissism using several
standardized instruments.

Very uncharacteristic or untrue; strongly disagree

Very characteristic or true; strongly agree

2

1

3

4

5

I am appreciated by at least one of those present. I feel that I am
temperamentally different from most people. I often interpret the
remarks of others in a personal way. I easily become wrapped up in my
own interests and forget the existence of others. I feel that I have
enough on my hands without worrying about other people's troubles. I am
secretly ''put out'' when other people come to me with their troubles,
asking me for my time and sympathy. Add up all your scores. The totals
can range from 5 to 50. There are no "right" or "wrong" answers on these
types of scales, nor do we have a cutoff value that absolutely
determines a person's status as a narcissist.

1 Not very true of me

The mean reported for college students is generally about 29.

statement: "I am a narcissist." (Note: The word narcissist means an
egotistical, selffocused, and vain person.) ■

The Single-Item Narcissism Scale To what extent do you agree with this

2

3

4

5

6

7 Very true of me

WhAT Are PerSonAliTY diSorderS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

591

interpersonal Relationships The Clinical Perspective

Paul Burns/Getty Images

HoW DoeS ptSD Affect fAmIlIeS? THERE ARE HIDDEN COSTS IN WAR. Soldiers,
most of whom are about the same ages as those of you reading this
textbook, are permanently changed by their experiences in ways that are
often difficult for those of us who have not shared those experiences to
understand. They have faced the fear of death and the realities of
injury, held dying friends in their arms, and felt guilty that their
lives were spared. Some cope with these challenges better than others.
As stated earlier in this chapter, between 8.5% and 14% of u.S. veterans
serving in iraq and Afghanistan experience severe PTSd, and up to 31%
experience some impairment (Thomas et al., 2010). veterans usually come
home to their loved ones and families, who are also affected by the
soldiers' combat experiences in what has been called secondary
traumatization (Galovski & lyons, 2004). Although not directly
threatened, the soldiers' families have had challenges of their own as
they cope with their helpless fear of loss. understanding that bad news
comes to the front door in the person of a military chaplain makes each
Fedex delivery or visit by a neighbor a heart-pounding experience. The
spouses who have learned over the course of a year to run households
independently and balance the checkbook might not want to share some of
these responsibilities with their returning partners. Among the biggest
challenges for veterans with PTSd and their families are the results of
having symptoms of hyperarousal, emotional numbing, and stimulus
avoidance (Monson et al., 2009). Although veterans without PTSd have the
same rates of intimate aggression as the general population, the risk of
intimate aggression is much higher in those with PTSd, and the severity
of symptoms predicts the likelihood of aggression. because of the
emotional numbing and avoidance symptoms of PTSd, returning veterans do
not engage in much self-disclosure, or discussion of their thoughts,
feelings, and experiences. As discussed in Chapter 13, self-disclosure
is an important component of intimacy. A soldier's existing level of
social support is one of the strongest protections against the initial
development of PTSd (brewin et al., 2000). After trauma, a person with
PTSd recovers more quickly with strong social support. unfortunately,
with ongoing PTSd, that social support tends to diminish as the symptoms
of PTSd take their toll on relationships (Kaniasty & norris, 2008). by
recognizing the importance of the larger social network to PTSd,
psychologists can begin to develop more effective preventions and
interventions that take the entire social system into account, not just
the individual with PTSd symptoms. ■

Both soldiers and their families are changed by war, and their reunions,
while happy, are not always smooth. Strong social support is a critical
variable in the development and course of PTSD resulting from combat.

592

Chapter 14

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology takes on Real-World Problems Is COVID-19 Making Cases of OCD
Worse? gradually worsening symptoms (Banerjee, 2020). Messages about
hand washing can lead to increased frequency, while descriptions of
"proper" washing technique can promote more ritualistic behavior. The
patient might start justifying hand washing behavior as due to
recommendations rather than due to the disorder. Media reports of the
spread of the disease and concern from family and friends can lead to
further fears of contamination. Stocking up on soaps and

sanitizers could lead to the closely related hoarding disorder. What
policies might need to be adjusted in response to this issue? Banerjee
(2020) recommends that health care providers be educated about the
increased risk of OCD and how to recognize its symptoms. It might also
be useful for the public to be made more aware of OCD and symptoms that
indicate the need for counseling. ■

katunes pcnok/Shutterstock.com

The most common form of obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD) combines
obsessions about contamination and compulsive hand washing. In addition,
patients with this disorder often relapse at times of stress. How are
these patients coping during the COVID-19 pandemic? Many of the
preventive measures recommended by public health officials might
interact with OCD, leading to

Frequent reminders to engage in important preventive measures for coping
with COVID-19, like handwashing, might contribute to the worsening of
symptoms for some individuals with OCD.

WhAT Are PerSonAliTY diSorderS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

593

summary 14.3 Anxiety Disorders, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD),
Body Dysmorphic Disorder, and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)

Disorder

symptoms

Phobia

●

Panic disorder

●

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)

●

Thalamus

Prefrontal cortex

Excessive fear of an object or situation

Repeated panic attacks, accompanied by excessive worry about having more
panic attacks

Excessive anxiety for six months that is not correlated with specific
objects or situations

Hypothalamus

Possible causal Factors under investigation ●

Exaggeration of normal caution

●

Classical conditioning

●

Cognitions about fear stimulus

●

Collectivist cultures emphasizing shame

●

Possible abnormality in orexin function

●

Cognitions regarding symptoms

●

Expectations and embarrassment

●

Cultural influences

●

Genetic predisposition

●

Stress

●

Fearful schemas

●

Low socioeconomic status

●

Disruptions in social connectivity

●

Genetic predisposition

●

Low serotonin activity

●

Prefrontal and basal ganglia activity

Amygdala

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)

●

Intrusive, repetitious, and anxietyproducing thoughts and behaviors

●

Body dysmorphic disorder

Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

●

●

Unrealistic perception of physical flaws

Exposure to a traumatic event, followed by flashbacks, hypervigilance,
and nightmares

Extension of grooming and territorial behaviors

●

Rewarding aspects of compulsions

●

Extension of cultural rituals

●

Genetic predisposition

●

Superior perception of facial distortions

●

Hippocampus and prefrontal cortex

●

Benzodiazepine receptors

●

Classical conditioning

●

Social support

Credits: Top row---Shane Wilson Link/Shutterstock.com; Second row---Ryan
McGinnis/Alamy Stock Photo; Fourth row---Randal Pfizenmaier/Alamy Stock
Photo; Fifth row---Left to right: Ron Galella/Getty Images, AP
Images/Arne Dedert, Carlo Allegri/Getty Images; Bottom
row---Getmilitaryphotos/Shutterstock.com.

594

Chapter 14

The Troubled Mind: PSYCholoGiCAl diSorderS

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Key terms The Language of Psychological Science be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

abnormal psychology, p. 551 agoraphobia, p. 579 antisocial personality
disorder (ASPd), p. 586 anxiety disorder, p. 576 attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (Adhd), p. 558 autism spectrum disorder (ASd),
p. 555 bipolar disorder, p. 567 body dysmorphic disorder (bdd), p. 582
borderline personality disorder (bPd), p. 587

comorbid, p. 551 compulsion, p. 581 delusion, p. 562 Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), p. 553 diathesis--stress
model, p. 573 dissociative disorder, p. 584 generalized anxiety disorder
(GAd), p. 580 hallucination, p. 562 learned helplessness, p. 569 major
depressive disorder (Mdd), p. 568 mania, p. 567

narcissistic personality disorder (nPd), p. 587 obsession, p. 581
obsessive-compulsive disorder (oCd), p. 581 panic attack, p. 578 panic
disorder, p. 578 personality disorder, p. 586 posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSd), p. 582 schizophrenia, p. 561 social anxiety disorder,
p. 577 somatic symptom disorder, p. 585 specific phobia, p. 576

WhAT Are PerSonAliTY diSorderS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

595

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Both medication and behavioral treatments reduce abnormal activity in
the basal ganglia that is associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15

Healing the Troubled Mind THERAPY Learning Objectives 1. Summarize the
core principles of evidencebased practice in psychotherapy. 2.
Differentiate the training and licensure required for, and the types of
care offered by, psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, counselors,
hypnotherapists, and life coaches.

3.  Analyze the key principles of psychoanalytic, humanistic,
    behavioral, and cognitive psychotherapy techniques.

4.  Explain the biological mechanisms by which medication,
    electroconvulsive therapy, psychosurgery, deep brain and magnetic
    stimulation, and neurofeedback are thought to alleviate symptoms of
    disorder.

5.  Integrate biological and psychotherapeutic approaches to treating
    neurodevelopmental disorders, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major
    depressive disorder (MDD), anxiety disorders, obsessivecompulsive
    disorder (OCD), posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and
    personality disorders.

WE HAVE ALL BEEN TOLD HOW IMPORTANT IT IS to wash our hands to avoid
illness, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic or the flu season. But
people with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) might wash their hands
several hundred times each day. Why do people with OCD behave this way?
Chapter 14 highlighted some possible causes of OCD, including genetic
vulnerability and the presence of too much activity in several brain
structures, including the basal ganglia. This chapter will discuss how
psychotherapists can improve the situations of people with OCD and the
other disorders discussed in Chapter 14. The two most common approaches
to treating OCD are cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), covered in
detail in this chapter, and medications. CBT was developed based on the
principles of classical and operant conditioning that were discussed in
Chapter 8. In the case of OCD, a woman with hand-washing compulsions
could be trained to anticipate when she might feel like washing out to
her garden to pull some weeds or pick some flowers. Finally, she would
reward herself for resisting the temptation to wash her hands too much.
Is it possible to show differences in brain activity resulting from CBT?
The answer is "yes" (Baxter et al., 1992). Zooming in, we can see what
happens to a person's brain by using a positron emission tomography
(PET) scan following therapy for OCD. A PET scan provides a measure of
brain

Yuri Arcurs/Shutterstock.com

her hands inappropriately. Then, she would engage in some competing
activity---perhaps going

597 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

activity. The red and yellow areas are considerably more active than the
green, blue, and dark areas. When people with OCD who have been treated
with CBT are compared to people treated with medication, their PET scans
show the same decrease in activity in the basal ganglia. Because
medication can produce unwanted side effects and is not effective for
all people, it is fortunate that alternate therapies are available.

TAGSTOCK1/Shutterstock.com

This chapter will explore a number of approaches that have been used to
improve the situations of people with psychological disorders. Some
represent a variety of psychological treatments, like the behavioral
approach to OCD discussed here, while others take the form of medication
and other biological treatments. The effects of these treatments might
have more in common than you think, as in the case of the changes in
brain activity that result from the psychological and biological
treatments of OCD. Just as we have argued for the advantages of
integrating psychological perspectives to understand behavior and mental
processes, the field of clinical psychology is recognizing the benefits
of applying multiple perspectives to the treatment of psychological
disorders.

How Do Psychologists Provide Therapy?

Many People with Psychological Disorders Do Not receive Care. As
symptoms of depression become more severe, people become more likely to
obtain treatment from a psychiatrist or mental health professional,
which would include clinical psychologists. It is difficult to tell
whether the remaining individuals receive no care or are seen by their
family physicians or other health care providers. Source: Adapted from
L. A. Pratt & D. J. Brody (2008). "Depression in the United States
Household Population, 2005--2006," NCHS Data Brief No. 7. Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov /nchs/data/databriefs/db07 .pdf.

598

Chapter 15

None

5.8%

Mild

15.6%

Moderate

24.3% 39%

Severe

0

10 40 20 30 Percentage contacting psychiatrist or other mental health
professional

photo: Thinkstock/Photos.com

Figure 15.1

Depression severity

Chapter 14 explored a diverse range of problems that can contribute to
personal and interpersonal distress. once considered virtually
untreatable, many of these disorders respond positively to the
treatments available today. unfortunately, many people with disorders
still do not seek help, possibly because of stigma related to having a
psychological problem or a lack of awareness that effective help is
available (see ● Figure 15.1). Many people diagnosed with schizophrenia
60 years ago faced a discouraging future of institutionalization and
little improvement (see ● Figure 15.2). about 30% of contemporary
patients with schizophrenia do not seem to respond to available
treatments, but the other 70% experience some relief from their
troubling symptoms (bobo & Meltzer, 2010). at the same time, significant
challenges remain. an analysis of data from australia, Canada, the
united Kingdom, and the united States between 1990 and 2015 showed that
in spite of substantial increases in the provision of treatment,
primarily in the form of antidepressant medication, rates of major
depressive disorder (Mdd) and anxiety disorders did not decrease (Jorm
et al., 2017). this lack of progress might result from a failure to
provide quality care to those in greatest need, as well as a lack of
attention to preventive strategies. the researchers report no evidence
suggesting an increase in risk factors or the effects of greater public
awareness. given the implications of psychological disorders in terms of
lost functionality and quality of life, improving preventive and
treatment strategies should be given high priority.

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Percentage of patients in recovery

80 70 60 50 40

Control group (patients with major depressive disorder)

30

Nondeficit (schizophrenia plus fewer emotional disturbances)

20 10 0

Deficit (schizophrenia plus more emotional disturbances) 2 years 4.5
years 7.5 years 10 years 15 years 20 years Follow--up interval

FiguRE 15.2 Recovery in Schizophrenia. Scientists are making progress in
identifying which patients with schizophrenia are more responsive to
current treatments. A deficit group of patients differed from a
nondeficit group primarily in having more emotional disturbances.
Recovery was defined strictly in this study as no psychiatric
hospitalizations, no major symptoms, and at least half-time work or the
equivalent level of functioning. In a 20-year study of the patients'
outcomes, using a group of patients diagnosed with depression as a
comparison group, the nondeficit group made more progress than the
deficit group. Identifying which patients respond to existing treatments
will help researchers and health care providers develop more effective
treatment plans for individuals. Source: Adapted from G. P. Strauss et
al. (2010). "Periods of Recovery in Deficit Syndrome Schizophrenia: A
20-Year Multi--Follow-up Longitudinal Study," Schizophrenia Bulletin,
36(4), 788--799. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbn167

Approaches to Treatment Psychological treatments, or psychotherapies,
which generally involve a conversation between the professional
providing the therapy and the person seeking help, are often combined
with biological treatments, such as the medications described in detail
in later sections of this chapter. For example, a person who is
terrified of being part of a crowd might benefit from a combination of
psychotherapy and medication for anxiety. as will be shown in this
chapter, different combinations of methods can be tailored to different
types of problems and to the individuals being treated.

Biological Approaches biological approaches to treatment have their
roots in our

understanding of the biological factors that contribute to psychological
disorders. along with the overall burst of scientific and medical
knowledge beginning in the 18th century, scientists began to learn more
about psychological disorders and their causes. this knowledge in turn
set the stage for the discovery of more effective biological treatments.
improved medical knowledge made psychological disorders less mysterious.
when untreated, syphilis (a common type of sexually transmitted disease
caused by a bacterial infection) can produce a characteristic set of
abnormal behaviors, including hallucinations, delusions, and changes in
mood and personality. as noted in Chapter 14, these behaviors are
characteristic of a number of psychological disorders, including
schizophrenia. the discovery that behaviors like hallucinations could
have a biological cause led to the recognition that abnormal behavior
can result from infection or other medical conditions. in these cases,
the abnormal behaviors should disappear when the underlying medical
condition is treated. the use of one biological approach to treatment,
medication, revolutionized the care of people with many types of
psychological disorder. in 1949, an australian psychiatrist named John
Cade discovered that lithium salts could produce remarkable improvements
in the behavior of patients with bipolar disorder. Cade's discovery was
followed quickly by breakthroughs in the use of medication to treat
schizophrenia. bolstered by these successes with some of the most
troubling psychological conditions, the pharmaceutical industry quickly

psychotherapy A treatment designed to improve symptoms of psychological
disorder through conversation between the therapist and the patient or
client.

How do PSYCHologiStS Provide tHeraPY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

599

Phil Degginger/Science Source

Australian psychiatrist John Cade searched for alternatives to the ECT,
lobotomies, and psychoanalysis that were commonly used to treat
psychological disorders in the 1940s. After observing that lithium salts
had a sedating effect on guinea pigs, he tried lithium on himself to
test for side effects. He then tried lithium on his patients and noticed
that those with bipolar disorder appeared to respond favorably. Lithium
is an element, so it could not be patented, providing little financial
incentive for the pharmaceutical industry. However, lithium was approved
for use in the United States in 1970. Lithium salts continue to be used
extensively to treat bipolar disorder, although we now understand that
this treatment has serious side effects.

introduced medications for depression and anxiety. these successes not
only led to better outcomes for many patients, but also strengthened the
credibility of using biological approaches to treat abnormal behaviors.

Science Source

Psychological Approaches running parallel to the successes of scientists
engaged in biological approaches to disorders were significant
contributions from those who focused on the psychological and emotional
underpinnings of disorders. during the 19th century, psychologists and
psychiatrists were interested in hysteria, a condition that would be
diagnosed today as somatic symptom disorder (see Chapter 14). Hysteria
did not seem to have any biological basis and did not respond to the
medical treatFranz Anton Mesmer (1734--1815), ments of the day. among
the first efforts to treat hysteria through nonmedical means was the
whose name gives us the term use of hypnosis by Franz anton Mesmer
(1734--1815), whose name gives us an alternative mesmerized, attempted
to use term for being hypnotized---mesmerized. Mesmer attempted to treat
hysteria by inducing a hypnosis to treat people with hysteria, hypnotic
state, which was described in Chapter 6. in many cases, people with
hysteria no lonwhich would now fall into the ger experienced their
symptoms under hypnosis and, following Mesmer's suggestions made somatic
symptom disorders category. during hypnosis, continued to be symptom
free even after they left the hypnotic state. Mesmer's practices
inspired Sigmund despite skepticism regarding Mesmer and his techniques,
other scientists continued to Freud to use hypnosis, although he explore
hypnosis, suggestion, and hysteria. when positive outcomes were reported
by the eventually abandoned the technique noted French neurologist
Jean-Martin Charcot (1825--1893), hypnosis and suggestion took on in
favor of other approaches. a new legitimacy in the scientific community.
among the admirers of Charcot and his work were Josef breuer
(1842--1925) and his more famous colleague, Sigmund Freud (1856--1939).
as will be discussed later in this chapter, Freud eventually abandoned
his interest in hypnosis in favor of other approaches, which eventually
gave rise to psychoanalysis. instead of hypnotizing people, Freud
encouraged them to speak freely about whatever came to mind. during the
20th century, psychological approaches to treatment reflected the rise
of the behavioral and humanistic perspectives, described in Chapters 1,
8, Franz Anton Mesmer's methods for using and 12. the behaviorist
perspective, unlike the biological and Freudian hypnosis to treat
hysteria were quite theatrical approaches, focused exclusively on
observable behavior and approached the treatment of abnormal behavior
using the principles of classical conand were denounced as fraudulent by
none other ditioning, operant conditioning, and observational learning,
described in than Benjamin Franklin, who was serving as the Chapter 8.
the cognitive revolution of the second half of the 20th century U.S.
ambassador to France at the time. added a recognition of the role of
cognitions in abnormal behavior, leading to the development of cognitive
behavioral therapy (Cbt). later in this chapter, the use of Cbt for
disorders such as phobias and depression will be explored. 600

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Evidence-Based Practice the beginning of the 21st century has featured
greater demands to tie clinical practice to research on the outcomes of
treatment. as shown in ● Figure 15.3, evidence-based practice (ebP)
combines research evidence, clinical expertise, and individual values to
provide the best outcome for a patient or client (Straus et al., 2005;
american Psychological association Presidential task Force on
evidence-based Practice, 2006). the movement toward ebP began in
medicine, but it has since spread throughout the helping professions,
including psychology. ebP combines five steps (thyer, 2004). the first
is to construct an answerable question, such as "which treatments
produce the best outcomes in cases of PtSd?" next, clinicians conduct a
search for the most current scientific literature related to the
question. in other words, doing something "because i've always done it
this way in my practice" is no longer an option. third, clinicians
critically evaluate the relevant literature, using the standards for
good science discussed in Chapter 2. this information is then integrated
with data regarding particular cases, including the patients' values and
circumstances. Finally, clinicians evaluate their performance based on
the patients' outcomes and make any necessary adjustments. if you think
that these ebP steps sound like the problem-solving system introduced in
Chapter 10, you're right. You might have assumed that your health care
provider would take this approach automatically, but historically, many
clinicians have been convinced that science can do little to assist them
with an individual case and that clinical practice was more art than
science. large numbers of clinicians have traditionally valued their
"clinical expertise" over the body of knowledge represented by science
(baker et al., 2008). given the demanding financial realities of health
care in the 21st century, however, a logical, scientific evidence--based
approach to the delivery of health care services is not just the most
effective approach, but also the necessary one.

Individual clinical expertise

Michael Rougier/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images

the rise of humanistic psychology in the second half of the 20th century
also led to new humanistic therapies. as discussed in Chapter 1, the
humanistic psychologists specifically rebelled against psychodynamic
thinking and the practice of psychoanalysis. Humanistic therapist Carl
rogers (1942) wished to separate his procedures, described in greater
detail later in this chapter, from the more traditional Freudian
psychotherapies of his time by referring to treatment as counseling
rather than psychotherapy or psychoanalysis. today's field of counseling
psychology mirrors the more positive view of human nature held by the
humanistic psychologists by focusing on personal strengths and
development.

Carl Rogers and the humanistic psychologists rebelled against the
practice of psychoanalysis and established new approaches of counseling
psychology.

humanistic therapy A therapy approach patterned after the theories
proposed by humanistic psychologists.

counseling A treatment originally proposed by humanistic therapists that
includes a focus on personal strengths and development; the term is now
used to refer to treatment for adjustment problems, as opposed to
treatment for severe psychological disorders.

Best scientific evidence

Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com

EBP

Patient values and expectations

FiguRE 15.3 EBP. Evidence-based practice (EBP) began in medicine and
spread to psychotherapy and other helping professions. EBP combines the
personal experience of the clinician, the best scientific evidence, and
a consideration of patient values and expectations to tailor
scientifically valid treatments to the individual. How do PSYCHologiStS
Provide tHeraPY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

601

Stock Montage/Getty Images

Clinical Assessment before therapists can provide any type of useful
treatment, they need to understand the problems presented by the person
to be treated. the choice of assessment methods is guided by the
training and experience of the clinician, but it usually includes the
methods described in Chapter 12: interviews, observations, and
standardized tests (groth-Marnat, 2009).

The Therapists

Everett Collection Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

a range of professionals, including general medical practitioners,
psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, nurses, and religious
leaders, provide counseling and psychotherapy. the licensing of these
professionals to provide treatment for psychological disorders is
administered by state governments in the united States and provincial
governments in Canada. requirements for licensing can vary widely from
state to state and can result in a bewildering array of titles. For
example, the simple term therapist is not regulated consistently across
the united States. we will use the term psychotherapist to refer to any
of the many types of licensed professionals described in this section
who provide psychotherapy. Psychiatrists first obtain a standard medical
doctor (Md) degree and then spend an additional three to four years
specializing in psychiatry. because of their training and licensure as
physicians, psychiatrists are allowed to perform the medical procedures
reviewed later in this chapter, particularly the prescribing of
medication. it is difficult to generalize across the entire profession,
but psychiatrists are more likely to look for the causes of disorder in
biological factors than in learned or environmental factors and to
assume that a biological treatment such as medication will be most
effective. in addition, the medical model does not see treatment as
taking place within a relationship of equals. instead, expertise is
simply transmitted from the doctor to the patient, and little input is
expected from the patient. we will see alternatives to this model in the
procedures conducted by other types of therapists. the word psychologist
is used to describe professionals who have completed advanced degrees in
psychology, including those who become psychotherapists. Most
psychologists, including the professors teaching your introductory
course, earn the traditional academic doctor of Philosophy (Phd) degree
in psychology, but not all choose career paths as licensed
psychotherapists. Clinical psychology is the path taken by psychology
graduate students who wish to study, teach, or practice psychotherapy.
in addition to completing the academic requirements for a Phd degree,
clinical psychology students must spend an additional year providing
treatment in a supervised internship. beginning in the 1970s, an
alternative route to becoming a clinical psychologist arose from
suggestions that the practice of psychology could be modeled after
dental and medical schools (norcross & Castle, 2002). the doctor of
Psychology (Psyd) degree was developed to train students to provide
services without undergoing the extensive training in research methods
that characterizes the Phd degree. both Phd and Psyd programs can earn
accreditation by the american Psychological association (aPa). Psyd
programs are becoming increasingly popular with students (see ● Figure
15.4). However, the lack of emphasis on research that is characteristic
of the Psyd degree has led to concerns about the ability of these
graduates to think scientifically about their choice of methods (baker
et al., 2008). For example, without a solid background in science,
objective evaluation of and adherence to the ebP model could be quite
difficult. of the faculty members in institutions granting the
traditional Phd degree, 65% teach scientifically supported Cbt
techniques (norcross & Castle, 2002). in contrast, only about 30% of
faculty members in Psyd programs teach Cbt techniques. How do clinical
psychologists and psychiatrists differ, other than that they earn
different degrees? one of the traditional distinctions has been
psychiatrists' ability to prescribe medication, but

Benjamin Rush (1749--1813), "the father of American psychiatry,"
believed that psychological disorders were caused by the "irritation" of
the blood vessels in the brain. He invented the tranquilizer chair for
patients and wrote a textbook published in 1812, Medical Inquiries and
Observations Upon Diseases of the Mind, which was the standard in the
field for the next 50 years.

psychotherapist A licensed professional who provides psychotherapy.

psychiatrist A medical doctor who specializes in psychiatry and can use
medical procedures, such as the prescribing of medication, to treat
psychological disorders.

602

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Figure 15.4

Number of degrees awarded

1,600 1,400

PsyD Degrees Are Becoming More Common. While PhD degrees awarded in
psychology have remained fairly constant, the number of PsyD degrees has
grown dramatically since 1988. There are now approximately equal numbers
of clinical PhD and PsyD degrees awarded each year.

1,200 1,000 800 600 400 200

PhD PsyD

2 19 94 19 96 19 98 20 00 20 02 20 04 20 06 20 07 20 08

0 19 9

19 9

8 19 8

0

Source: B. Hart & W. E. Pate (2011). Salaries, Student Debt, and
Employment Opportunities in Psychology. Paper presented at the
Midwestern Psychological Association Convention, Chicago, IL.

that difference is gradually disappearing. in 2002, New Mexico became
the first state to allow select psychologists to prescribe medication,
followed by louisiana in 2004 (Daly, 2006), illinois in 2014, iowa in
2016, and idaho in 2017 (american Psychological association, 2017). the
requirements for already-licensed clinical psychologists to gain
prescription privileges are quite rigorous. Prescribing psychologists in
these states must go through additional neuroscience coursework and many
hours of clinical practicum and physician-supervised hours of care with
patients. in addition to treating people with diagnosed psychological
disorders, clinical psychologists often provide marriage and family
counseling, substance abuse counseling, vocational counseling, grief
counseling, rehabilitation counseling, and prison counseling. However,
these types of services are also provided by counselors, who typically
do not provide services for psychological disorders such as
schizophrenia. in other words, a couple experiencing marital conflict
might seek either a counselor or a clinical psychologist, whereas a
person experiencing hallucinations and delusions is more likely to be
treated by a clinical psychologist or a psychiatrist. counselors hold
master's or doctoral degrees in psychology and related fields, such as
education and social work. students pursuing undergraduate psychology
degrees frequently ask what they can do in the mental health field
without a graduate degree. about one-third of undergraduates in
psychology obtain jobs that are closely related to the field (see ●
Figure 15.5). students completing an undergraduate degree in psychology
often work in group homes and camps for troubled youth or in hospital or
outpatient settings under supervision. Many others seek work in
"people"-related professions, including human resources, sales, and
teaching (see chapter 1). in recognition of the historical role of
religious leaders in providing counseling to members of their
congregations, most states allow religious leaders to provide this
service without further licensure. the Master of Divinity (MDiv) degree
typically includes human

Primary job (in percent)

90 80

Figure 15.5

79

70 60 50

50

40 30 20

31

10

12

0 Closely related

Somewhat related

11 7

Unrelated

Bachelors Masters

Job Opportunities for Workers with Bachelor's or Master's Degrees in
Psychology. More workers with master's degrees in psychology are
employed in degree-relevant fields than are workers with bachelor's
degrees. Closely related fields include professional services, teaching,
and research. Somewhat related fields include management, sales,
accounting, and employee relations. Source: K. Stamm et al. (2016).
"Datapoint: What Do People Do With Their Psychology Degrees?" Monitor on
Psychology, 47(6), 12. http://apa.org/monitor/2016/06/datapoint

How Do PsycHologists ProviDe tHeraPy?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

603

Matej Kastelic/Shutterstock.com

development and counseling courses taught at schools of divinity. Some
universities offer Mdiv degrees that prepare students to be either
religious leaders or licensed counselors in the outside community. among
the least frequently regulated practitioners in the united States are
hypnotherapists, although nine states now regulate hypnotism in some
manner (Hypnotherapists union local 472, 2019). the national guild of
Hypnotists cautions practitioners who are not also licensed health care
professionals to use the title "Consulting Hypnotist" and to avoid using
the terms therapy, depression, anxiety, compulsive, phobia,
psychological, medical, clinical, and counseling (national guild of
Hypnotists, 2016). as mentioned in Chapter 6, there are many legitimate
uses of hypnosis in therapy, and there are many legitimate therapists
who use the technique. but that chapter also recounted the example of
Zoe d. Katze, who is a hypnotherapist certified by the national guild of
Hypnotists, the american board of Hypnotherapy, and the international
Medical and dental Hypnotherapy association. She is a professional
member of the american association of Professional Hypnotherapists. as
you may recall, Zoe also happens to be a cat, owned by a psychotherapist
named Steve eichel, who obtained the credentials for her to make a point
about the weaknesses of accreditation in this area (eichel, 2002).
another unregulated area in the provision of psychological services is
the field of life coaching, which requires no licensing. according to
the international Coach Federation (iCF, n.d.), coaching is defined as
"partnering with clients in a thought-provoking and creative process
that inspires them to maximize their personal and professional
potential." Substitute psychotherapy for coaching in this definition,
and few would disagree with the resulting statement. Coaches seem to
perform the same duties as psychotherapists and counselors. Some
licensed psychotherapists have found that referring to themselves as
coaches expands their practices, possibly because of the reduced stigma
of seeing a coach rather than a therapist in the minds of some clients.
life coaching also provides the advantage of being more appealing to
men, who generally seek more traditional psychotherapy in much smaller
numbers than do women (liddon et al., 2018). However, the lack of
preparation required to refer to yourself as a life coach raises that
specter that people with psychological disorders will trust their care
to unqualified individuals, resulting in significant harm (aboujaoude,
2020). Few studies have attempted to evaluate the effectiveness of
coaching, but those that have done so note a positive effect (burt &
talati, 2017). Many studies appear in journals that are essentially
trade publications, such as the International Journal of Evidence-Based
Coaching & Mentoring, the International Coaching Psychology Review, and
Coaching: An International Journal. Carefully controlled, objective
research is badly needed. in spite of the lack of regulation and
licensure, life coaching is becoming a big part of the delivery of
psychotherapeutic services, even within health care settings (ammentorp
et al., 2013). Corporations, including google and many Fortune 500
firms, spend in the vicinity of \$1.5 billion per year on workplace
coaching services provided by the over 50,000 professional coaches who
are active globally (iCF, 2016). although licensure provides significant
protection for the public, any consumer of psychological services must
thoroughly investigate prospective psychotherapists. Zoe d. Katze may be
an extreme example, but we suspect that she is not unique. Credentials
are not always what they seem. For example, the author of the 1992
bestseller Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus lists himself as "dr.
John gray" ("John gray's Professional bio," 2017), but provides no
information on his educational background or licensure. gray spent nine
years as a monk under the leadership of the beatles' guru, Maharishi
Mahesh Yogi. He earned bachelor's and master's degrees in the Science of
Creative intelligence from the unaccredited Maharishi european research
institute in Switzerland, and a Phd degree from the now-defunct and

Although unlicensed, life coaches perform many of the same tasks as
psychotherapists and counselors. Corporations are spending close to \$12
billion per year for coaching services.

604

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Ned Redway/ZUMAPRESS/Newscom

unaccredited Columbia Pacific university in California, which was
described by the state government as a "diploma mill." because of his
experience as a monk, the state of California recognizes him as a
"spiritual counselor," which technically allows him to provide advice.
More recently, gray has been joined by his daughter lauren, who also
provides no educational or licensing material about herself on the
website. So far, we have focused our discussion on credentialing
practices in the united States. worldwide, an even greater variety of
professionals perform psychotherapy and counseling under diverse
licensure and oversight practices. the united Kingdom, australia, and
Canada provide systems that are similar to those in the united States
for delivering psychotherapy (Priebe, 2006). in these countries,
psychotherapy is conducted by a number of professionals, including
physicians, psychologists, social workers, nurses, and others in similar
professions. in each case, performing psychotherapy requires training
beyond that needed to simply obtain the appropriate professional degree.
germany and russia are particularly strict in their accreditation rules.
because of the prevalence of state-run health systems in europe,
assessments of treatment outcomes are regularly conducted (Priebe,
2006). in the united States, treatment outcomes are a question of
interest to academic researchers but are rarely assessed as
comprehensively as in many other nations, although that circumstance is
likely to change with any further government involvement in health care.

Delivering Psychotherapy Many people imagining a session of
psychotherapy think of a stereotypical Freudian scenario. the patient
reclines on a couch, while a bearded man sitting in a chair scribbles
copious notes. although some therapy continues to take place in such a
setting (though perhaps the therapist isn't bearded---or a man), many
more options are available.

Variations in Length of Treatment Most psychotherapy occurs in the form
of individual

Alternatives to Individual Therapy in addition to

brief therapy Psychotherapy provided over a short time frame, usually
between three and five sessions.

group therapy Psychotherapy conducted with a group of people rather than
individually.

LightField Studios/Shutterstock.com

therapy involving face-to-face, hourlong meetings between the therapist
and the patient or client (as a subsequent section will demonstrate,
terminology varies among practitioners). in traditional psychoanalysis,
such meetings are quite frequent (four to five times per week) and take
place over the course of years. in Cbt, described in detail in a later
section, sessions might occur once per week for about six weeks. given
rates of \$150 or more per hour for individual therapy, insurance
providers are pressuring psychotherapists to find faster, cheaper, and
more efficient ways to provide treatment. Many insurance plans limit
psychotherapy sessions to 10 per calendar year. Brief therapy, another
treatment regime, specifically avoids spending long periods searching
for the historical basis of a person's problems. instead, therapists
using this approach focus on "solutionbuilding rather than
problem-solving" (iveson, 2002, p. 149). Consequently, practitioners
argue that only three to five sessions are necessary. Many brief therapy
interventions involve only one session, and no cases require more than
eight.

Celebrity psychologists like "Dr. Phil" McGraw are often criticized by
the profession for offering overly simple versions of psychological
advice to the public.

individual sessions, psychotherapy can take place with groups of
patients or clients in group therapy. group therapy does not imply a
particular type of treatment approach. although some treatment
approaches seem better suited for group work than others, therapists of
all persuasions are known to use groups in their work. the groups formed
by the therapist can be homogeneous, in the sense that the group members
share a common problem, or heterogeneous, in which the group members
have diverse diagnoses. in most cases, groups are limited to between 6
and 12 individuals.

Many people thinking about psychotherapy imagine a bearded man
scribbling notes next to a client reclining on a couch, but this
stereotype is usually far from the truth.

How do PSYCHologiStS Provide tHeraPY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

605

iStock.com/Alina555

People participating in group therapy benefit from reduced feelings of
isolation. Seeing the progress of others with the same condition raises
hope and provides opportunities to model successful strategies.

family therapy A type of therapy in

which family members participate individually and in combination with
other family members.

Frank Pedrick/The Image Works

couples therapy A type of family therapy that focuses on intimate
relationships.

People with severe conditions, such as psychotic, suicidal, or
antisocial tendencies, are usually excluded from groups until they
progress sufficiently to behave as good group members. although many
groups are organized and supervised by a licensed psychotherapist,
leaderless self-help groups are also quite popular. weight watchers,
alcoholics anonymous (aa), and other groups modeled after aa have become
popular sources of support and self-improvement. these groups often
operate with a member--leader who is not a psychotherapist, and they
function outside the realm of government licensure and supervision. in
addition to the obvious cost-effectiveness of having a group split the
therapist's fee, group therapy offers a number of other advantages
(Yalom, 1995). For example, group therapy offers hope to the
participants, who benefit from seeing others who have made more progress
with their condition. group members also benefit from knowing that
others share their condition, decreasing their sense of isolation.
although practitioners generally believe that group therapy is
effective, research on group therapy outcomes is difficult to conduct
because of the large number of variables that must be considered. the
need to control for such factors as different disorders and previous
treatment history makes this area challenging for researchers. Family
therapy, in which various family members participate in therapy
individually and in combination with other family members, is another
alternative to the purely individual provision of treatment. Couples
therapy is a type of family therapy that focuses on intimate
relationships. Family therapy is frequently used when a child or teen is
experiencing problems, because these problems typically affect and are
affected by the behavior of other family members. Family therapists face
a number of significant challenges. in some cases, the member who seems
to need treatment the most refuses to participate. in others,
maintaining the confidentiality of all participants can be difficult. a
teen might disclose information that will help the parents do their job
better, but sharing this information with the parents could interrupt
the trust that the therapist has built up with the teen.

Family therapy combines individual sessions with sessions that include
some combination of family members, like these parents and their young
daughter.

606

Chapter 15

Innovative Delivery Systems an emerging delivery system for
psychotherapy is online therapy. when "online psychotherapy" is used as
a google search term, more than 66,100,000 results are returned.
although a necessity during the Covid-19 pandemic, online therapy has
benefits that are likely to continue its popularity into the future.

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the benefits of privacy, engaging in therapy from home, and the ability
to choose a suitable therapist regardless of location provide
significant advantages for some clients. in its early days, online
therapy was conducted through e-mail or chat services. because the
written word conveys less information than a therapist obtains face to
face, this method could be less desirable. However, many online
therapists have taken advantage of Zoom, Facetime, and other voice and
video technologies. online delivery of Cbt has been shown to be as
effective as face-to-face Cbt for a number of psychological conditions,
including major depressive disorder (ahern et al., 2018). other
technologies have influenced the delivery of psychotherapy. therapists
can buy products such as wiley's theraScribe, a computer program that
includes more than 2,500 prewritten interventions, goals, objectives,
and suggested diagnoses. the program generates reports catering to
Medicare and other managed care organizations. the time savings provided
by these technologies can be useful in controlling costs, but receiving
a prewritten evaluation might seem somewhat impersonal to individuals
seeking therapy. if you receive a treatment plan from your campus health
center that is nearly identical to a friend's, you might not feel that
the counselor cared about you as an individual.

Diverse Voices in Psychology Psychotherapy with Native Americans In a
study of psychotherapy techniques in clinics serving Native Americans in
Arizona, Minnesota, and Wisconsin, therapists were found to employ a
wide range of methods tailored to the individual clients. The therapists
emphasized a very warm, supportive environment, and more confrontational
approaches to therapy were absent. In one example of an adaptation to
cultural norms, the use of cognitive-

behavioral therapy (CBT) was less common with older clients. In a
culture where elders are treated with respect and deference, the
"teaching/leading" role for the therapist in CBT might seem
inappropriate. Cultural adaptations in psychotherapy remain relatively
under-studied, and much additional research is needed to support
evidence-based practice in diverse communities. ■

gillmar/Shutterstock.com

AMONG THE BARRIERS to obtaining counseling and psychotherapy services
faced by racial and ethnic minority individuals in the United States are
cultural distrust, racial and ethnic norms related to self-reliance and
privacy, and concerns about culturally sensitive providers (Hayes et
al., 2016). Psychologists have begun to identify interventions that
might address these barriers by offering greater cultural competency.
Among the recommendations for more culturally competent therapy are
using interventions that are consistent with the client's values,
communicating in culturally sensitive ways (such as in the client's
native language), expressing empathy and high regard, and avoiding
equating cultural differences with deficits. Compared to members of
other races and ethnicities, Native Americans experience higher risk of
medical disease and psychological disorders, including substance abuse
disorders (Beitel et al., 2018). Compared to White clients, members of
other ethnicities, including Native Americans, are more likely to quit
psychotherapy after an initial session, raising the concern that the
counseling process was unsatisfactory.

Psychologists are recognizing the need to tailor methods to individuals
in diverse communities for best results.

How do PSYCHologiStS Provide tHeraPY?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

607

Agenturfotografin/Shutterstock.com

Contemporary Challenges in Treatment

The benefits of privacy, engaging in therapy from home, frequent 24-7
coverage, video interactions using Zoom or similar technologies, and the
ability to choose a suitable therapist regardless of location provide
significant advantages for some clients. Online delivery of cognitive
behavioral therapy has been shown to be as effective as face-to-face
delivery (Ruwaard, Lange, Schrieken, Dolan, & Emmelkamp, 2012).

Providing treatment for psychological disorders has changed dramatically
since the days of Freud. originally, therapy was provided by individual
professionals in small private practices. However, this model became
increasingly rare in the latter part of the 20th century, as
psychological treatments became more likely to be managed by large
organizations, including insurance companies. Many of the concerns about
these new models of managed psychological treatment echo complaints from
the medical community regarding contemporary medical treatment.
decisions formerly made by the therapist about the types of disorders
that warranted treatment and the length, frequency, and type of
treatment to be offered are now more likely to be made by insurance
company personnel who lack medical or psychological training and focus
more on costs (baker et al., 2008). in addition to the need to adapt to
the managed care of psychological disorders, psychotherapy faces many of
the same challenges as medicine in providing scientifically valid
treatments. Just as we would expect a physician to provide a
scientifically supported treatment for cancer, we should expect a
psychotherapist to provide equally well-documented treatments for
depression. in the earlier section on ebP, we joined most research
clinical psychologists and psychiatrists in endorsing the use of science
in selecting, implementing, and evaluating psychological treatments.
However, as demonstrated in the discussion of the rorschach inkblot test
in Chapter 12, lack of scientific support does not always prevent an
approach from being widely used. Frustration over the lack of emphasis
on science in psychotherapy has led to considerable debate. the american
Psychological association has the primary responsibility for accrediting
programs that train clinical psychologists with either Phd or Psyd
degrees in the united States. this system has been challenged by a new
accreditation body, the Psychological Clinical Science accreditation
System (PCSaS, 2020), which specifically aims to increase the scientific
basis of clinical treatment and research literacy among clinical
psychologists. Since 2007, the PCSaS has accredited 43 programs, with
several more under review (PCSaS, 2020). time will tell whether PCSaS
will be able to nudge the clinical psychology community into greater
reliance on research-based methods.

summary 15.1 The Psychotherapists title

Degrees

specialties

Psychiatrist

Medical doctor (MD)

●

Treats psychological disorders

●

Prescribes medication

Clinical psychologist

Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) or Doctor of Psychology (PsyD)

●

●

Counselor

PhD, PsyD, Doctor of Education (EdD), or one of a number of master's
degrees

●

Treats psychological disorders and problems with adjustment If specially
licensed, prescribes medication Specializes in problems with adjustment

Credits: Top row. Stock Montage/Getty Images. Second row. Frank
Pedrick/The Image Works. Bottom row. Michael Rougier/The LIFE Picture
Collection/Getty Images.

608

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

because Freud is typically credited with being the first person to use
"talk therapy" in his efforts to improve his patients' psychological
symptoms, we begin our discussion of specific treatment approaches with
psychoanalysis. a psychotherapist who uses psychoanalysis is typically
known as a psychoanalyst.

Psychoanalysis

Bjanka Kadic/Alamy Stock Photo

Historical Approaches to Psychotherapy

Freud's study featured not only the famous couch, but also Persian rugs
and a sample of Freud's collection of antiquities.

Freud's approach to psychotherapy reflected several key themes from his
theory of personality (see Chapter 12). in particular, Freud emphasized
the importance of conflict among the self (ego), the aggressive energy
of the id, Freud called his slips "faulty actions." For example, and the
restrictions supplied by society (superego). Freud's view of the a man
texting his partner "I wish you were her" ability of the unconscious
mind to affect behavior is also central to his therapeutic approach.
because of Freud's training as a physician, psychoinstead of "I wish you
were here" would have a analysts take a directive role, which means that
they are in charge of the great deal of explaining to do. Modern
cognitive session. like your physician, the psychoanalyst does not
expect contribupsychologists are more likely to blame slips on tions
from you other than information about your symptoms. conflicts between
grammar sequences than Freud's psychoanalysis is a classic example of an
insight therapy. between the unconscious and the conscious minds.
insight therapies assume that people will improve once they understand
their problems. For Freud, many psychological disorders arose from
probpsychoanalysis The treatment aplems that resided in the unconscious
mind, unavailable to conscious awareness. although proach developed by
Freud and practiced the person might not be consciously aware of these
continuing conflicts, the conflicts exert by those who believe in
psychodynamic their influence on behavior and through dreams. For
example, a patient might arrive at the theories. therapist's office
complaining about her inability to enjoy a satisfactory sex life with a
beloved insight therapy A therapy that improves spouse. although many
factors could contribute to such problems, the psychoanalyst is likely
symptoms of psychological disorder by to suspect the influence of some
traumatic experience that is relatively unavailable to the building
people's understanding of their patient's conscious thoughts. Perhaps
the patient is the victim of childhood sexual abuse, or situation. she
might be experiencing a conflict between the ultrastrict morality that
she learned from free association The psychoanalytic technique of
encouraging a patient to say her parents and her current desire to have
a fulfilling relationship with her partner. For the whatever comes to
mind, without attemptpsychoanalyst, the "cure" lies in uncovering the
unconscious contributions to the patient's ing to censor the content.
problems. once she understands the source of her problems (the insight),
her situation should improve. How does one go about uncovering
unconscious material? although Freud experimented with the use of
hypnosis to access the unconscious mind, he became dissatisfied with the
results and abandoned the procedure. instead, Freud decided to use the
technique of free association. Free association occurs when a person
says whatever comes to mind. as we mature, most of us become aware that
we do not literally "speak our mind" out of consideration for our fellow
humans. although small children might tell a person, "You're fat," such
comments, although they may be true, are not the type that most adults
consider polite. we learn to think before we speak. to engage in free
association, this self-censor must be turned off, allowing the patient
to verbalize those thoughts that are typically withheld. without the
self-censor, the famous "Freudian slips" might occur and are assumed to
reflect unconscious wishes. In free association, the patient says
whatever comes to mind. not all psychoanalysts engage in dream analysis,
but it is likely Freud believed that we normally censor thoughts before
speaking, that therapists interested in dream analysis are
psychoanalysts. For but we wonder if he would think the same is true of
conversations Freud, dreaming represented a reflection of unconscious
wishes and, on social media. In response to some comments on social
media, therefore, a potential source of useful insight into the
unconscious we shake our heads and ask, "what were they thinking?" mind.
if patients are undergoing dream analysis, they are encouraged Source:
The UPS Store HiStoriCal aPProaCHeS to PSYCHotHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

609

Courtesy of Wordsworth Editions Ltd

The Interpretation of Dreams, by Sigmund Freud, was originally published
in German in 1900. The 600 copies of the first edition sold slowly, and
the publisher did not issue a second edition until 1909. Nonetheless,
this book is considered one of Freud's most influential.

transference A psychoanalytic technique in which the therapist uses the
responses of the patient to the therapist to understand the patient's
approach to authority figures in general.

to awaken following a dream to jot some notes that can later be reviewed
with the therapist, who will attempt to interpret the dream's symbolic
meanings. in addition to reviewing the content of free association,
dreams, and Freudian slips, the analyst looks for signs of transference
and resistance. Transference occurs when a patient uses an earlier
relationship, usually with a parent or other authority figure, as a
prototype for a current relationship, such as that between the patient
and the therapist. if the patient begins yelling at the therapist, the
therapist might infer that the patient reacted similarly to parents and
others in authority under similar circumstances in the past. Resistance
occurs when the patient is getting closer to insight. Freud believed
that we have unconscious wishes to maintain infantile fantasies and
avoid punishment, and that therefore, a patient will resist efforts to
uncover this material. resistance, for the psychoanalyst, can be
expressed in many forms. when a patient changes the subject, disagrees
with the analyst's interpretation, or even misses an appointment because
of a flat tire, the analyst might suspect that the patient is getting
closer to the uncomfortable truth. in recent years, psychoanalysis has
changed in the length and frequency of treatment. driven by demands from
insurance providers, psychoanalysts have developed new, briefer
treatments. these briefer approaches tend to be less past-oriented as
well. in other words, the psychoanalyst might ask a person about recent
experiences at work, rather than about experiences as a toddler. does
psychoanalysis work? Some published meta-analyses suggest that
psychoanalysis produces better results than no treatment and
occasionally produces results comparable to more modern approaches to
therapy (leichsenring & rabung, 2008; Shedler, 2012; lichtenberg et al.,
2013). However, many of these studies have been criticized on the basis
of their methods, such as including rorschach inkblot results as
measures of patient improvement (McKay, 2011). regardless of its current
standing, however, psychoanalysis taught psychiatrists about the
importance of patients' life histories and the benefits of listening
attentively (Paris, 2017).

Humanistic Therapies

Catchlight Visual Services/Alamy Stock Photo

as mentioned in Chapter 12, humanistic approaches developed in direct
opposition to the theories and techniques of Freud and his followers.
where Freud believed that humans are inherently selfish and aggressive,
the humanistic psychologists believed that humans are inherresistance A
psychoanalytic technique in which the patient's reluctance to accept
ently good, possessing natural drives to grow and improve. Society, for
Freud, had a beneficial the interpretations of the therapist indieffect
on behavior by providing controls on our selfish and aggressive
tendencies. For the hucates that the interpretations are correct.
manistic psychologists, society can interfere with growth by providing
judgmental feedback. person-centered therapy A humannot too
surprisingly, this conflict in theory led to an equal opposition in
treatment apistic therapy approach developed by Carl proaches. as
mentioned previously in this chapter, the psychoanalyst takes a
powerful, direcRogers to help clients achieve congruence, tive role
reminiscent of an Md. the individual seeking therapy is identified as a
patient. as or an alignment of the real and ideal selves. in the medical
setting, the therapist identifies the nature of the patient's problems
and prescribes a course of action. other than supplying information, the
patient plays a relatively passive role in the process. in contrast, the
humanistic therapist is nondirective and treats the person seeking
therapy, called a "client" instead of a patient, as more of an equal in
the process. Clients are expected to take an active role in helping to
identify their problems and develop a positive course of action. Primary
among the humanistic approaches to treatment is the person-centered
therapy of Carl rogers (1942). in place of the psychoanalytic goal of
uncovering unconscious sources of problems, person-centered therapy aims
to achieve congruence, which was discussed in Chapter 12. For rogers,
discrepancies between the ideal and the real selves, such as when we
fail to live up to our ideals, can lead to psychological disorders.
therapy techniques that bring the selves into alignment should treat the
disorders effectively. among the techniques used to achieve this
congruence are empathy, unconAlthough we think that dressing and sitting
like your ditional positive regard, and the reflection and clarification
of feelings. empathic client is not necessary to demonstrate empathy,
therapists attempt to see the world through the eyes of the client, as
opposed to attempting to see situations through the client's imposing
their own worldviews. allowing the client to feel understood in this
eyes is an important part of humanistic therapies.

610

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

wincott/Shutterstock.com

manner contributes to the establishment of a safe, supportive
environment Reflecting feelings takes practice to avoid sounding where
natural growth can occur. Unconditional positive regard, discussed silly
or reverting to the cliché "I hear what you're in chapter 12, also
contributes to the safety of the therapeutic setting. saying," but you
might give it a try the next time rogers believed that much human
unhappiness resulted from conditional someone confronts you. Reflecting
on the other regard, in which children learn that they have value only
when their person's feelings instead of focusing on your own behavior is
pleasing to an authority figure. the nonjudgmental, uncondihelps you
stay calm, and it's hard to carry on a tional positive regard of the
therapy setting is designed to compensate for those earlier, potentially
damaging experiences. one-sided argument with a calm person. reflection
techniques consist of the therapist restating some of the client's
comments in a way that conveys understanding. as such, reflection
contributes to empathy and the client's sense of being fully understood.
For example, a client might state that he felt helpless when his boss
reprimanded him for losing an important account. the therapist might
simply comment, "you sound like you were very angry and frustrated when
your boss yelled at you." clarification allows the therapist to point
out important insights that the client might have reached. the therapist
might clarify the situation with the boss by pointing out its
similarities with the feelings that we have as children when we are
corrected by an adult. even when psychotherapists use therapy techniques
other than a person-centered approach, they frequently incorporate some
or all of rogers's communication strategies, such as reflection. these
strategies also have become quite popular in programs designed to
improve interpersonal communication and group process. For example, it
is not uncommon for teens to stomp into the house and declare that they
"hate" their parents. the typical response of the parents at that point
is to become hurt and angry. the argument escalates as one of the
parents retaliates with a hurtful statement, perhaps "i wish you were
never born!" rogers suggests that such immature battles are easily
avoided. instead of retaliating, the parent might say, "i know it makes
you very angry when i restrict your privileges, but we had a deal, you
broke it, and that means there will be consequences." reflecting
another's emotions in this way may increase the chances of defusing
needless hostility and of coming to a mutual understanding because
people will know more concretely that they are "being heard." like
psychoanalysis, humanistic approaches to therapy work better in some
instances than in others. rogers referred to his approach as
"counseling," and his techniques are better suited to problems of
adjustment than cases of serious disorders, such as schizophrenia.
efforts to assess the outcomes of humanistic therapy scientifically have
been rejected by its followers. For example, one group of proponents
argued that "natural science methodology should not be privileged over
human science methodology" (Bohart et al., 1998, p. 141). By now, you
probably understand that we would reject this suggestion and argue
instead that science is science, regardless of the phenomenon being
examined.

According to the humanistic psychologists, people who learn they have
value only when their behavior is pleasing to authority figures can
benefit from a therapy setting that features unconditional positive
regard. Historical approacHes to psycHotHerapy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

611

Contemporary Approaches to Psychotherapy although a small minority of
psychotherapists continue to use Freudian or humanistic approaches, most
contemporary therapists use other methods.

Behavioral Therapies

behavior therapy Applications of clas-

Bettmann/Getty Images

sical and operant conditioning principles to the treatment of symptoms
of psychological disorder and adjustment problems.

The subject of Freud's famous case study of "Little Hans" was actually
named Herbert Graf. Graf grew up to be a successful opera producer at
New York's Metropolitan Opera and the Salzburg Festival in Austria. He
is shown here directing the great Marion Anderson as she rehearses for
her operatic debut in Giuseppe Verdi's Masked Ball in 1954.

612

Chapter 15

Freud's psychodynamic theory, humanistic theory, and behaviorism were
among the most dominant influences in psychology during the 20th
century. we have seen how psychodynamic and humanistic theories were
applied to psychotherapy in the form of psychoanalysis and rogers's
person-centered therapy, so it should come as no surprise to find that
behaviorism has similar applications. given our formal definition of
learning as "a relatively permanent change in behavior or the capacity
for behavior due to experience," it seems logical to use learning as a
way to increase the frequency of desirable behaviors and decrease
unwanted behaviors in the therapy setting. Behavior therapies represent
applications of classical and operant conditioning to problems of
adjustment and psychological disorders. these techniques have proved
helpful in both reducing unwanted behaviors and increasing the frequency
of desirable behaviors over a range of psychological conditions,
including autism spectrum disorder (aSd) and schizophrenia. the first
book to use the term behavior modification in its title was leonard
ullman and leonard Krasner's Case Studies in Behavior Modification,
published in 1965. the public initially distrusted behavioral treatment
methods because they were based on animal research and assumed that
human behavior was relatively simple. the mysticism of the
psychoanalysts' unconscious drives and impulses seemed far more
romantic. However, when behavior modification produced successful
results in cases that were previously considered untreatable, such as in
aSd, respect for the approach grew. like behaviorism in general,
behavior modification, now known as applied behavior analysis (aba),
focuses on what can be observed and makes few assumptions about such
unseen factors as the unconscious mind. we can contrast the way that
Freud and a therapist using aba might approach Freud's case of little
Hans, a 5-year-old boy who had a phobia of horses (Freud, 1909/1976).
For Freud, Hans's phobia resulted from the oedipus complex issues that
were supposedly at their height at his age. Horses, Freud argued,
symbolized Hans's father. the boy had noted that he was especially
frightened of horses with black bits in their mouths, which Freud
suggested represented the father's mustache. Freud concluded that Hans's
fear of horses resulted from his unconscious fear of retaliation by the
father for sexual fantasies about his mother and would disappear with
the resolution of Hans's oedipus complex. now it is the behaviorist's
turn. according to classical conditioning theory, phobias can result
from conditioned fears. in Hans's day, horses were the most frequently
used means of transportation, especially in large cities. accidents
involving horses were frequent and quite serious. Hans related that he
was frightened of horses falling---and with good reason, because it is
likely that viewing such accidents would be quite traumatic. Horses
could become classically conditioned fear stimuli through their
association with accidents and the resulting fear. to reduce the fear,
Hans could be gradually exposed to horses in a safe environment
(desensitization), rewarded for approaching horses
(counterconditioning), or allowed to play with a group of children
interacting with a horse (peer modeling). it is not necessary to know
why Hans fears the horses to apply behavioral treatment successfully.
aba has been used frequently to reduce unwanted habits. For example, let
us suppose that Jennifer would like to stop smoking. the behavior
therapist begins by evaluating Jennifer's current behavior by observing
the circumstances in which she smokes. based on these observations, the
therapist might note that Jennifer rarely smokes alone. instead, her
smoking is quite social. if she is at a party or with friends who are
smoking, she smokes. the therapist also takes notes of reinforcers or
punishers that might be influencing the behavior. Perhaps Jennifer's
friends praise her when she smokes, but her parents get angry when they
notice evidence

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Photo by Stephen Dagadakis, copyright Hunter Hoffman www.vrpain .com,
World built by Firsthand Inc.

Behavioral treatments for phobias have been improved with the
development of virtual reality for exposing clients to fear-producing
stimuli. Researchers at the University of Washington have developed
SpiderWorld and successfully demonstrated that participants could reduce
their fear of real spiders after undergoing three treatment sessions.

of her smoking. Jennifer's dentist also might warn her about the poor
state of her oral hygiene, which smoking only worsens. Based on these
observations, the behavior therapist might attempt a number of
techniques that will separate Jennifer from high-risk situations for
smoking. she might be encouraged either to gain the support of her
friends for her efforts to quit smoking or to spend more time with her
nonsmoking friends. Jennifer's parents might be willing to provide some
incentives for her to quit smoking. she could set aside the money that
she normally spends on cigarettes for some special treat.
Counterconditioning, in the form of asking Jennifer to smoke until she
feels sick, is an unpleasant but effective strategy (Lichtenstein et
al., 1973). the effectiveness of behavior therapies is not restricted to
changing negative habits such as tobacco use. as discussed in Chapter 8,
token economies, in which reward tokens are later exchanged for
preferred rewards, have been shown to increase the frequency of
desirable behaviors across a variety of settings, including classrooms,
prisons, and institutions (hackenberg, 2018).

Cognitive Therapies cognitive restructuring A technique used in
cognitive therapies in which new, rational beliefs replace earlier,
irrational beliefs held by the client.

Serhiy Kobyakov/Shutterstock.com

as the name implies, cognitive therapies are based on the notion that
the way that we think about our circumstances is essential to our health
and adjustment. according to this view, situations do not cause abnormal
behavior, but the way that we think about situations might do so. one of
the earliest versions of cognitive therapy was developed beginning in
the 1940s by aaron Beck (see ● Figure 15.6). according to Beck (1975),
people run into psychological trouble when they adopt irrational,
self-defeating ways of thinking. For example, it is unrealistic to think
that other people will always treat you fairly and kindly, or that you
must be perfect to be loved. an important aspect of the therapy process
occurs when the therapist attempts to change the irrational beliefs of
the client. For example, let's assume that a therapist is trying to help
a group of students who suffer from test anxiety. each student has an
irrational belief that he or she is going to flunk out of school,
despite having an adequate grade point average. to help the students
realize that this belief is irrational, the therapist might ask each one
to provide evidence of the likelihood of flunking out or to identify the
worst possible outcome of giving up the belief. Faced with logic, each
student begins to substitute a new, rational belief for the old,
irrational belief. this substitution of rational for irrational beliefs
is termed cognitive restructuring. a variation of cognitive therapy
emerged from work by albert ellis, beginning in the 1950s. ellis's
version of cognitive therapy is known as rational emotive behavioral
therapy

Behavior therapies have helped many people change negative habits.

Contemporary approaChes to psyChotherapy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

613

Number of peer-reviewed papers

16,000 14,000 12,000 10,000 8,000 6,000 4,000

FiguRE 15.6

2,000

Clem Murray/MCT/Newscom

Aaron Beck (1921--) developed one of the earliest types of cognitive
therapies. Beck's approach featured cognitive restructuring, in which
irrational beliefs, such as "Everyone must love me or I can't be happy,"
are replaced with more rational beliefs, such as "I can be happy because
I have some people in my life who love me." cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT) A combination of cognitive restructuring with behavioral
treatments that has been shown to be effective in reducing symptoms of
many psychological disorders.

biopsychosocial approach An integrated approach to therapy that combines
treatments addressing the biological, personal, and social underpinnings
of psychological disorders.

614

Chapter 15

20 14

20 10 --

20

05

--2

00 9

--2 00 4 00

20

19 9

5--

19 99

19 94 0--

19 9

--1 98 9

19 85

19 8

0--

19 84

0

CBT in the Scientific Literature. Increasing interest in CBT is
reflected in the number of scholarly articles published on this topic,
which has grown substantially over the past few decades. Source: D.
Dobson, & K. S. Dobson (2016). Evidence-Based Practice of
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy. Guilford Publications.

(rebt; ellis, 1975). Compared to many other types of psychotherapy, rebt
is somewhat confrontational because the therapist is more openly
critical of a client's thinking. ellis retained the need to produce
cognitive restructuring but deemphasized the supportive role of the
therapist. as cognitive therapy expanded further, therapists began to
use the term cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). in addition to
promoting cognitive restructuring, therapists wanted to help clients
initiate behavioral changes. For example, a person with major depressive
disorder (Mdd), as described in Chapter 14, can have irrational beliefs
about hopelessness and worthlessness, coupled with behavior that is
counterproductive to good mood, such as staying at home in bed watching
television. not only can the irrational beliefs be addressed by Cbt, but
behavioral methods can be used to encourage the client to take a brisk
walk and to provide self-rewards for using more positive, rational
patterns of thought. Cbt has an excellent record of success,
particularly in the treatment of Mdd (dobson & dobson, 2016). because
Cbt typically requires fewer than 16 sessions and can be used for a
variety of conditions, it is a favorite among insurance providers.

Biopsychosocial Approaches Patient characteristics, the type of problems
being addressed, and other variables influence the success of any
particular treatment. Consequently, many therapists use the
biopsychosocial approach, which combines elements of therapies designed
to address the biological, psychological, and social underpinnings of an
individual case. the therapist focuses on what works for an individual
client, without adopting a single theoretical orientation (lazarus,
2005). For example, a therapist might find that relaxation training
seems to help one client, while roleplaying is more effective with
another.

What Are Biological Therapies? the major types of biological treatments
for psychological disorders include medication, electroconvulsive
therapy (eCt), psychosurgery, brain stimulation, and neurofeedback.

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Medication is the most commonly used of the medical therapies.
Particularly in the last 60 years, the discovery of medications that
effectively treated psychological disorders has dramatically shaped the
outcomes of millions of patients. a comprehensive review of psychoactive
medications is clearly beyond the scope of this text, but we will
discuss the use of medication for some specific disorders later in this
chapter. the frequent use of medication is not consistent with patient
preference. in a meta-analysis of patient treatment preferences for
psychological disorders, 75% of the participants preferred psychological
treatment to medication (McHugh et al., 2013). this preference was
particularly strong in younger patients and in women.

Will McIntyre/Science Source

Medication

A patient is shown being prepared for ECT for serious depression. The
patient is anesthetized before electricity is applied through electrodes
to the head, inducing seizures.

Electroconvulsive Therapy

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is used in some severe cases of
depression that do not respond to other treatments. in eCt, the patient
is anesthetized and given a muscle relaxant before the induction of
general seizures, which are produced by electricity applied through
electrodes on the head. between 6 and 12 treatments, at a rate of 3
treatments per week, are typically given. over one million patients
worldwide are treated with eCt each year (leiknes et al., 2012).
ladislas Meduna (1896--1964) recommended eCt for patients with
schizophrenia after observing that people who had epilepsy had unusually
high numbers of glia and people with schizophrenia had low numbers of
glia (Kalinowsky, 1986). eCt was first used with patients with
schizophrenia in the 1930s, with poor results. However, observations of
improved mood in these patients following eCt led to further use with
patients diagnosed with major depressive or bipolar disorder. this
procedure is used primarily with patients who do not respond to
conventional treatments with medication (Medda et al., 2009). although
the exact mode of action of eCt is unknown, some patients experience an
increase in responsiveness to dopamine and norepinephrine, along with
the desired reduction in subjective feelings of depression. although
many people have a negative view of eCt (perhaps as a Trepanation has
made a bizarre modern comeback result of reading Ken Kesey's One Flew
Over the Cuckoo's Nest or seeing in the form of an alternative medicine
or elective the film or play of the same name), eCt is considered as
safe as any minor procedure. People are doing this in their own surgery
conducted under general anesthesia (Kellner et al., 2020). Critics
homes, in a possible variation of the self-injurious continue to
question the efficacy of eCt, citing the poor quality of research
evaluating its outcomes (read et al., 2020). Further concerns center
behavior discussed in Chapter 8. They argue that on the side effects of
the procedure. approximately one-third of patients the procedure
improves brain circulation and experience persistent memory loss
following eCt (rose et al., 2003). this metabolism, but research support
for such claims memory loss specifically affects autobiographical
memory, discussed in is lacking (Moskalenko et al., 2008). Chapter 9,
which can be impaired for at least six months following treatment
(Sackeim, 2014).

Psychosurgery as observed in Chapter 1, the drilling of holes in the
skull by ancient people might represent the first effort to use
psychosurgery. although particular functions might be localized to parts
of the brain, it is a giant leap of faith from our current understanding
of localization and brain networking to the idea that someone can use
psychosurgery to treat psychological disorders. Historically, one of the
most frequent types of psychosurgery aimed at changing behavior was the
frontal lobotomy, which was discussed in Chapter 4. after hearing about
the calm that resulted following the procedure in chimpanzees, egas
Moniz encouraged his colleagues

electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)

A biological treatment in which seizures are induced in an anesthetized
patient; it is used primarily in the treatment of mood disorders that
have not responded to medication or other treatments.

psychosurgery The attempt to improve symptoms of psychological disorders
through operating on the brain.

wHat are biologiCal tHeraPieS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

615

AP Images/MW

Walter Freeman (1895--1972) performed more than 3,400 lobotomies at \$25
per procedure, despite having no formal training in surgery. Although
this procedure is considered barbaric today, Freeman enjoyed the respect
of many of his colleagues, serving as cofounder and president of the
American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology from 1946 to 1947. He
nominated his mentor, Egas Moniz (1874--1955), for the Nobel Prize in
Physiology and Medicine, which Moniz won in 1949.

to try the procedure on psychotic patients in the 1930s (valenstein,
1986). between 40,000 and 50,000 patients received the procedure between
the 1930s and the 1950s, sometimes for vague problems such as mild
depression in housewives or misbehavior in children (Sabatini, 1997).
walter Freeman popularized the procedure in the united States, traveling
in a vehicle that he called his "lobotomobile." John Fulton, whose
research with chimpanzees had formed the basis for Freeman's operation,
was horrified. "what are these terrible things i hear about you doing
lobotomies in your office with an ice pick?" he asked Freeman. "why not
use a shotgun?" (Kopell et al., 2005, p. 192). as we have emphasized in
several contexts in this textbook, the frontal lobes participate in some
of the highest-order cognitive functions carried out by the human brain.
Consequently, the deliberate damage to the frontal lobes and their
connections to other parts of the brain involved with the lobotomy
procedure has harmful effects on a person's judgment, personality,
initiative, social behavior, and sense of self. despite the outrage
among many in the medical community, frontal lobotomies were performed
well into the 1960s, until the use of medications for psychological
disorders became an established practice (Sabatini, 1997). today's
psychosurgery is far removed from the lobotomy procedure. For example,
high-intensity focused ultrasound has been used to reduce muscular
tremor in patients with Parkinson's disease by causing precise damage to
pathways connecting the cerebellum and thalamus (Mahoney & green, 2020).

Brain Stimulation

John B. Carnett/Bonnier Corp./Getty Images

brain stimulation has a number of advantages over psychosurgery. Most
importantly, the effects are usually reversible. in contrast, once the
brain has been damaged by psychosurgery, there is no going back.
Following observations of mood changes in people undergoing deep brain
stimulation through surgically implanted electrodes for the relief of
Parkinson's disease, physicians attempted to use stimulation to address
oCd and Mdd. Microelectrodes are surgically inserted into specific parts
of the brain, and in many cases, the patient controls the application of
any current (Mayberg et al., 2005). a total of 50% of patients with
severe depression who had not responded to more conventional treatments
achieved improvements in mood following stimulation of the nucleus
accumbens (bewernick et al., 2010). in Chapter 4, we indicated that the
nucleus accumbens was part of a circuit that processes feelings of
reward. deep brain stimulation Electrical Stimulating this area improved
patients' mood and led to their engagement in more pleasurstimulation
applied through surgically able activities. Most studies of deep brain
stimulation for psychological disorders involve implanted electrodes
that is used to treat some anxiety and mood disorders. very small
numbers of patients, however, so firm conclusions about the overall
effectiveness of this approach awaits further research (Mahoney & green,
2020). deep brain stimulation requires surgery to implant the
microelectrodes. repeated transcranial magnetic stimulation (rtMS)
provides an alternative way to stimulate the brain without surgery. when
applied through a handheld device touching the scalp, low-frequency
magnetic pulses change activity in underlying cortical regions. this
technique has shown promise in treating Mdd and mixed results in
treating schizophrenia (guo et al., 2017; also see ● Figure 15.7).
negative outcomes have been reported for the use of rtMS in cases of oCd
(Slotema et al., 2010). electrical stimulation applied through surface
electrodes (transcranial direct current stimulation or tdCS) has
produced improvement in patients with auditory hallucinations,
addictions, and Mdd (guo et al., 2017). low cost and the After the
successful use of deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's ability of
patients to administer treatment at home has made disease, the method
was used to treat people with depression. The tdCS an attractive option.
image on the right shows where an electrode was implanted in this
woman's brain.

616

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

BSIP SA/Alamy Stock Photo

Change in severity of depression

0 --1 --2 --3 --4 --5 --6 --7 −8

Active rTMS Sham rTMS Week 2

Week 4

Week 6

Time in treatment

FiguRE 15.7 Effects of rTMS on Depression. Compared to participants with
depression undergoing a placebo version of rTMS (sham rTMS),
participants receiving active rTMS showed significantly reduced scores
on the standard Hamilton Depression Rating Scales. Participants showed
rather strong placebo effects in the sham condition (note the drop in
depression at week 2), which emphasizes the need for placebo-controlled
studies in assessing the effectiveness of all types of treatment.
Source: Adapted from J. P. O'Reardon et al. (2007). "Efficacy and Safety
of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation in the Acute Treatment of Major
Depression: A Multisite Randomized Controlled Trial," Biological
Psychiatry, 62(11), 1208--1216. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.01.018

neurofeedback A type of biofeedback used to treat attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and seizures by teaching the client to
keep measures of brain activity within a certain range.

as mentioned in Chapter 4, biofeedback training allows participants to
gain some conscious control over some otherwise unattended physical
functions. For example, people can be taught to overcome "white coat
hypertension," or the classically conditioned spike in blood pressure
that occurs when a nurse or doctor (in a white lab coat) takes a
measurement. by learning to relax instead of becoming tense in this
situation, people can reduce their blood pressure, which is not a
process that we typically try to control. Neurofeedback is a type of
biofeedback that concentrates on the activity of the brain. recordings
of brain activity, usually obtained from electroencephalography (eeg)
but increasingly from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMri), are
usually displayed for the participant, who is trained to keep readings
in a desired range. in most cases, people are not consciously aware of
what they are doing to comply. So far, however, rigorous studies have
not provided strong support for the efficacy of eeg neurofeedback in the
treatment of adHd, aSd, oCd, generalized anxiety disorder (gad), and Mdd
(begemann et al., 2016; riesco-Matías et al., 2019). Consequently, few
insurance providers will cover this type of treatment.

Dr. Lise' DeLong/cognitive-connections.com

Neurofeedback

Neurofeedback, a type of biofeedback training that focuses on brain
activity, has been used to treat ADHD in children. wHat are biologiCal
tHeraPieS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

617

summary 15.2 Approaches to Treating Psychological Disorders type of
therapy

theoretical Perspective

Psychoanalysis

●

Humanistic therapy

Behavior therapy

●

●

Psychodynamic theory

Humanistic theory

Behaviorism

Defining Features ●

Directive therapy

●

Free association

●

Dream analysis

●

Analysis of resistance

●

Analysis of transference

●

Nondirective therapy

●

Unconditional positive regard

●

Reflection

●

Empathy

●

●

Cognitive therapy

●

Cognition

● ●

Biological treatments

●

Biology

Application of classical and operant learning principles in behavior
modification Therapy based only on observed behavior Cognitive
restructuring Combination of restructuring with applied behavior
analysis in CBT

●

Medication

●

Electroconvulsive therapy

●

Psychosurgery

●

Brain stimulation

●

Neurofeedback

Credits: Top row---Bjanka Kadic/Alamy Stock Photo; Second
row---Catchlight Visual Services/Alamy Stock Photo; Third row---Photo by
Stephen Dagadakis, copyright Hunter Hoffman www.vrpain.com, World built
by Firsthand Inc.; Fourth row---Clem Murray/MCT/Newscom; Bottom
row---John B. Carnett/Bonnier Corp./Getty Images.

How Are Specific Disorders Treated? as mentioned previously, approaches
to treatment have differing success rates when applied to specific types
of disorders. this section will outline the typical approaches to the
psychological disorders discussed in Chapter 14.

Treating Neurodevelopmental Disorders all therapy approaches discussed
previously in this chapter have been applied to the treatment of
children and adolescents. However, special care must be given to the use
of biological therapies in childhood and adolescence because of the
possible adverse effects of these treatments on the development of the
nervous system.

Treating ASD although aSd is accompanied by abnormalities in the
neurotransmitters

serotonin, gaba, and glutamate, no medications have proved effective in
alleviating core symptoms of the disorder (deFilippis & wagner, 2016).
this lack of a beneficial result

618

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Thinking Scientifically Should Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) Be
Treated?

What am I BeIng asked to BelIeve or accept? We are being asked to
believe that ASD is more appropriately viewed as an example of
neurodiversity, not in need of treatment or change, rather than a
disability that requires treatment.

What evIdence supports thIs posItIon? Many of the dissenting voices
regarding the treatment of ASD with ABA come from individuals with ASD
who actually experienced ABA. However, these individuals have been
joined by a number of leading researchers in ASD, who embrace the
concept of neurodiversity (den Houting, 2019). A neurodiversity view
advocates for interventions aimed at building strengths and addressing
issues of importance

to individuals with ASD as opposed to "normalizing" behavior.

are there other Ways thIs evIdence could Be Interpreted? Critics of the
neurodiversity approach argue that for many individuals with ASD, the
condition is definitely disabling. The neurodiversity approach might be
appropriate for higher functioning individuals with ASD, but not
necessarily for all. Critics express concern that viewing ASD as a
"difference" will result in withdrawal of needed support, such as
insurance coverage for ABA.

iadams/Shutterstock.com

This might seem like a strange heading to find in a textbook on
introductory psychology, especially given the fact that as we noted in
Chapter 14, one of your authors is the parent of a daughter with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD). We have learned in this chapter that applied
behavior analysis (ABA) is the most effective treatment for ASD, so why
wouldn't you take advantage of that? While many parents rely on ABA to
help their children, others believe that ASD represents a type of
neurodiversity rather than a problem to be fixed. They worry that the 40
hours or more per week that a child spends in ABA is actually cruel.

What other evIdence Would I need to evaluate these alternatIves?

Proponents of the concept of neurodiversity liken the

As respected ASD researcher Simon BaronCohen states, "There is no single
way for a brain to be normal" (Baron-Cohen, 2017, p. 746). He advocates
for a thorough reevaluation of the terms disorder, disability,
difference, and disease, as these are used rather inconsistently across
medicine and psychology. Research aimed at identifying interactions
between client characteristics and treatment methods that produce the
best outcomes would be helpful. This is unlikely to be a "one size fits
all" approach.

behavior itself that is the problem. Instead, the behavior

What are the most reasonaBle conclusIons? Our evidence-based practice
model is useful here in the sense that messages are emerging

experience of a person with autism spectrum disorder to being a "fish
out of water." In other words, it is not the is simply inappropriate for
the circumstances surrounding the person.

from communities of individuals with ASD who want something different
from traditional approaches to treatment. The desire for recognition of
strengths as well as weaknesses is legitimate, as is the insistence that
it is not just the personal characteristics of an individual with ASD
that causes problems, but rather the existence of these characteristics
within an environment to which they are not well-suited. As one
individual with ASD stated, "We are fresh water fish in salt water"
(Baron-Cohen, 2017, p. 746).

does not mean that medications are not prescribed in cases of ASD. Two
antipsychotic medications have been approved by the U.S. food and Drug
Administration (fDA) for use in ASD and appear helpful in severe cases
involving "irritability," which includes aggression, tantrums, and
self-injury (fung et al., 2016). Unfortunately, children treated with
antipsychotic drugs experience the same side effects as adults,
including weight gain, diabetes, motor dysfunction, and immune system
problems. Antidepressants and several other types of drugs are commonly
prescribed for children with ASD off-label, which means that the drugs
have not been officially approved for this purpose on the basis of
research demonstrating effectiveness (see ● figure 15.8). The most
commonly used psychological treatment for ASD is applied behavior
analysis (ABA), which builds on the principles of operant conditioning
outlined in chapter 8 (Smith & Lovaas, 1998). ABA focuses on observable,
socially important behavior such as language How Are Specific DiSorDerS
TreATeD?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

619

FiguRE 15.8 Stimulants

15.4

Antipsychotic medication

15

Antidepressant

13.6

Anticonvulsant/ mood stabilizer

Medications and ASD. Although only two medications (antipsychotic
medications typically used to treat schizophrenia and bipolar disorder)
have been approved by the FDA for use in treating ASD, large-scale
studies show that many other medications are routinely prescribed by
physicians for children with ASD. Alpha agonists are usually prescribed
for high blood pressure and have a sedative effect. In this sample,
35.3% of the children had at least one prescription, and 9% had three or
more drugs that they were taking simultaneously.

6.6 7.7

Alpha agonist

35.3

Any medication 9

More than 3 medications 0

5

10

15 20 25 30 Percentage reporting use

35

40

Source: Adapted from R. Rosenberg et al. (2010). "Psychotropic
Medication Use Among Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders Enrolled in
a National Registry, 2007--2008," Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 40(3), 342--351. doi:10.1007/s10803-009-0878-1

and should produce lasting improvements that generalize to settings
outside the therapy setting (baer et al., 1968). aba in the treatment of
aSd often involves therapy that takes up most of a child's waking hours,
which is a large investment for families in terms of time and resources.
although studies are complicated by the child's initial level of
functioning and many other variables, meta-analyses of the outcome of
intensive, early-childhood behavioral interventions show positive
effects of treatment on verbal iQ and language acquisition, but more
moderate effects on social skills and daily functioning (see ● Figure
15.9; Makrygianni et al., 2010). because of the severity and lifelong
nature of aSd, parents of children with this disorder are especially
vulnerable to so-called cures that have little research support. dietary
interventions have become popular in recent years, but these appear to
have few benefits. People with aSd show evidence of excess peptides from
gluten (found in wheat) and casein (found in dairy products), but
controlled studies do not demonstrate benefits from restricting these
foods (Millward et al., 2008). "Chelation" treatments designed to remove
heavy metals from the body are also popular but lack research support
(weber & newmark, 2007). even worse, at least one child died from this
type of treatment because a physician substituted a toxic chemical for
the correct one with a similar name (Sinha et al., 2006). Hyperbaric
oxygen therapy, usually used to treat the bends in scuba divers, has not
been shown to improve aSd symptoms in spite of internet claims to the
contrary (granpeesheh et al., 2010; Xiong et al., 2016). among
treatments often advertised to parents are sensory integration
treatment, massage, music, special diets, and animal-assisted therapies.
while these latter approaches are unlikely to cause harm, with the
possible exception of special diets, they are expensive and distract
families from therapies with known efficacy, such as aba.

Treating ADHD Many children with a diagnosis of adHd are treated with
medication, either alone or in combination with behavior therapy
(Storebø et al., 2016). the use of medications for attention problems
resulted from an accidental discovery. in 1937, Charles bradley used a
stimulant (benzedrine sulfate) to treat a group of children hospitalized
for learning and behavior problems. He noted that during the week that
the children used the drug, half demonstrated "a spectacular improvement
in school performance" and became emotionally subdued (bradley, 1937,
p. 584). the most commonly prescribed drugs for adHd are the closely
related stimulants methylphenidate (ritalin), dextroamphetamine
(dexedrine or dextrostat), and a combination of amphetamine salts
(adderall). these drugs increase the activity of dopamine

620

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Intensity (hours/week)

50

IQ scores

Language

Daily living

IQ scores

Language

Daily living

40 30 20 10 0

Duration (weeks)

300

200

100

0 0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

0

1

2

3

Effect size

FiguRE 15.9 Outcomes for Early Behavioral intervention in ASD. A
meta-analysis demonstrated that early behavioral intervention in ASD
produced measurable improvements in IQ scores, language, and daily
living. High-intensity treatment (measured by hours per week) seemed to
have the greatest effects on IQ, but duration of treatment seemed to
have the biggest impact on language. Most clinical psychologists suggest
that an effect size of 1 for a treatment means that the treatment is
very effective. Source: Adapted from J. Virués-Ortega (2010). "Applied
Behavior Analytic Intervention for Autism in Early Childhood:
MetaAnalysis, Meta-Regression and Dose-Response Meta-Analysis of
Multiple Outcomes," Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 387--399. doi:
10.1016/j.cpr.2010.01.008

Charles Bradley observed the behavior of 30 institutionalized children,
who had a variety of problem behaviors, after they were administered a
type of amphetamine used at the time for asthma and other breathing
problems. Bradley's observations about the children's "spectacular
improvement in school performance," as well as their becoming
"emotionally subdued," led to the modern treatment of ADHD with
stimulant medication, including other types of amphetamine. Courtesy of
Bradley Hospital

and norepinephrine. Most patients tolerate these medications well, but
side effects of weight loss, sleep disturbance, and higher heart rate
and blood pressure can occur. if children take the medications
continuously for long periods, growth can also be suppressed.
Methylphenidate does produce tolerance, and patients should stop the
drug under medical supervision rather than on their own (ross et al.,
2002). although it is chemically quite similar to amphetamine,
methylphenidate is not considered an addictive drug, given its slower
action on the brain (volkow et al., 2005). individuals who do not
respond well to the stimulant drugs are often treated with nonstimulant
drugs that increase norepinephrine activity (Prasad & Steer, 2008). it
might appear odd to treat a disorder that often features hyperactivity,
or high

How are SPeCiFiC diSorderS treated?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

621

FiguRE 15.10 use of Medication for Treating ADHD. This map of medication
use for ADHD from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
shows the same regional variations that were observed in Chapter 14 for
the prevalence of ADHD diagnoses. Together, these data suggest that
about half of all children diagnosed with ADHD are prescribed
medication. The use of medication produces short-term improvements in
about 75%--80% of children with ADHD. However, children with ADHD who
are treated with medication are no better off in adolescence or
adulthood than children with ADHD who were not treated with medication.

2%--5% 5.1%--6.5% 6.5%--7.5% 7.7%--10.4%

levels of impulsive behavior, with a stimulant. wouldn't it make more
sense to try medications that have a calming effect? the rationale for
stimulant treatment of adHd sugSource: Adapted from CDC (2020). gests
that impulsive hyperactivity occurs if the parts of the brain
responsible for planned, "State-Based Prevalence of ADHD thoughtful
behavior, such as the basal ganglia and frontal lobes, are not active
enough. raisDiagnosis and Treatment," retrieved ing the activity in
these areas theoretically should reduce impulsive behavior. one of the
from https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/ common myths about medications for
adHd, however, is that they have different effects
adhd/data/diagnosis-treatment-data. on people who do and do not have the
disorder. in other words, people mistakenly believe html that the
medications calm people with adHd but stimulate those who do not have
the disorder. this is not the case, as all individuals respond in
similar ways with greater focus and alertness (arnsten, 2006). not
surprisingly, then, medications prescribed for adHd are commonly abused
by those without the disorder. the use of medication for adHd in the
united States is five times higher than in any other nation, leading to
criticism of the practice (see ● Figure 15.10). an unusual percentage of
published research reports on the efficacy of medication for adHd has
been sponsored directly by the pharmaceutical industry, leading to
conCollege students are not the only ones using cerns about possible
bias (Storebø et al., 2016). using the "gold standard" ADHD medications
inappropriately. A survey in of the double-blind, placebo-controlled
design, approximately 75%--80% the prestigious scientific journal Nature
found of children treated with medication alone experience significant
shortthat 65% of the scientists who responded knew term improvement on
ratings of social compliance and sustained attention a colleague who
used methylphenidate or similar (barkley, 1995). However, two large
meta-analyses in the prestigious Cochrane reviews found support for the
use of stimulant drugs to be "incondrugs without a prescription for the
purpose of clusive" (Storebà, 2019). in spite of the use of
"double-blind" procedures, improving focus and concentration (Maher,
2008). it is unlikely that children are truly "blind" to their treatment
condition, as stimulant medications have immediate and obvious effects
on heart rate. research has not demonstrated long-term benefits of
stimulant use on later outcomes in adolescence and adulthood (loe &
Feldman, 2007). in other words, children with adHd treated with
medication do not enjoy superior outcomes later in life compared to
children with adHd who do not receive medication. although two-thirds of
children diagnosed with adHd receive medication, fewer than half receive
behavioral treatments (danielson et al., 2018). behavioral parent
training, which builds the skills of parents of children with adHd to
use operant conditioning methods effectively, and behavioral classroom
management, which applies learning principles in the school setting, are
especially effective (Pelham & Fabiano, 2008). unfortunately, it is
often difficult to maintain the consistency needed for successful
behavioral intervention without a great deal of cooperation among
teachers, parents, and others working with the child.

622

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Treating Schizophrenia

tardive dyskinesia A movement syndrome that results from the use of
medications used to treat symptoms of schizophrenia.

0.35% 0.30% 0.25% 0.20%

FiguRE 15.11

0.15% 0.10% 0.05% 0.00%

1945

1957 Year

1970

littleny/Shutterstock.com

Percentage of U.S. population institutionalized for psychological
disorders

before the 1950s, effective treatment for schizophrenia was virtually
nonexistent. Patients were often subjected to odd "treatments" that had
no basis in any scientific understanding of their condition and that
were frankly dangerous in some cases. they were forcibly restrained in
lukewarm baths with canvas covers that prevented their escape. insulin
shock therapy, in which injections of insulin were used to place
patients in daily comas, enjoyed a brief fad status, as did the frontal
lobotomy, discussed earlier in this chapter. the discovery of effective
medications for schizophrenia was accidental. a French surgeon, Henri
laborit, was impressed by the calming effects of the phenothiazines. He
experimented with one of these drugs, chlorpromazine (thorazine), to
reduce stress and shock in his surgical patients. based on his promising
results, laborit encouraged his psychiatric colleagues to try the drug
on their psychotic patients, which they did with dramatic success. a new
era of treatment began. largely as a result of this new type of
treatment, institutionalized populations dropped by about 50% in the
united States between 1955 and 2000 (see ● Figure 15.11). People
responding well to medication could now return to their communities
instead of living in institutions. initially, nobody understood how
phenothiazines reduced psychosis. one clue came from the fact that high
doses of the drug produced symptoms similar to those of Parkinson's
disease, such as muscular tremor. Parkinson's disease was known to
result from the degeneration of motor neurons that used dopamine as
their primary neurotransmitter. Further research indicated that
phenothiazines acted as dopamine antagonists, blocking dopamine at the
receptor site. Phenothiazines are not without their share of problems,
though. nearly one-quarter of patients with schizophrenia do not respond
to these drugs (Kane & Freeman, 1994). the drugs successfully reduce
psychotic symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions, but are often
less effective in reducing negative symptoms, such as social withdrawal
and emotional disturbance (buchanan et al., 1995). to address these
deficits of phenothiazines, often called "typical" or "first-generation"
antipsychotic medications, newer "atypical" or "second-generation"
antipsychotic medications, such as clozapine (Clozaril), were
introduced. increasing numbers of patients with schizophrenia are
prescribed the atypical antipsychotics (Meltzer et al., 2010). to reduce
psychosis, a medication must influence dopamine activity. However, the
newer drugs are often more effective than phenothiazines in treating the
negative symptoms of schizophrenia because they affect a wide range of
neurotransmitters in addition to dopamine, including serotonin. all
antipsychotic medications produce significant side effects. Tardive
dyskinesia, (tardive means "slow" and dyskinesia means "difficulty
moving") is a syndrome that results from the use of antipsychotic
medications by some patients. the syndrome produces tremors and
involuntary movements, especially of the face and tongue. these problems
often continue even when medication stops. although risk of tardive
dyskinesia seems lower with the second-generation antipsychotics (leucht
et al., 2013), these drugs have their own set of side effects, including
diabetes, weight gain, reductions in white blood cell count, aggravation
of existing cancers, and seizure disorders.

The Discovery of Effective Medications for Schizophrenia Had Dramatic
Effects. The percentage of the U.S. population that was
institutionalized in asylums because of mental disorders was cut almost
in half in the years following the discovery of antipsychotic
medications. How are SPeCiFiC diSorderS treated?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

623

Art Directors & TRIP/Alamy Stock Photo

Most individuals with schizophrenia are treated with medication, but
psychosocial treatments still have much to offer. the world Health
organization (wHo) noted that people with schizophrenia in developing
countries, such as nigeria, india, and Colombia, were recovering more
frequently than patients in the united States and europe (Hopper et al.,
2007). Further research suggested that improved outcomes occur when
patients remained in their homes and were given opportunities to do
meaningful work. these observations led to the increased use of
psychosocial rehabilitation for patients with schizophrenia (bustillo et
al., 2001). this approach emphasizes providing opportunities to do
meaningful work, social skills training, education about schizophrenia
and the importance of medication, affordable housing linked to services,
and information about symptom management.

Treating Bipolar Disorder

Sofiaworld/Shutterstock.com

the primary method of treating bipolar disorder is the use of
medication. the most commonly prescribed medication is a simple salt,
lithium carbonate. not only does Medications used for schizophrenia
often lithium prevent recurrences of mania, but it is uniquely
preventive of suicidal beproduce a movement disorder known as tardive
havior (alda, 2015). lithium's actions remain poorly understood. in
general, lithium dyskinesia. This patient is experiencing the appears to
protect individuals from further neurodegeneration (alda, 2015),
reverses intrusive, involuntary movements and tremors and repairs
oxidative stress, and resets circadian rhythms (Malhi & outhred, 2016).
that characterize this condition, which is usually administration of
lithium in patients with bipolar disorder results in increased gray
permanent. Newer medications for schizophrenia matter relative to
patients who are not treated with lithium (see ● Figure 15.12). are
somewhat less likely to produce tardive unfortunately, lithium carbonate
has a number of unpleasant and potentially dyskinesia but have their own
side effects, dangerous side effects. toxic levels of lithium produce
nausea, vomiting, muscular including diabetes, weight gain, reductions
in tremor, coma, and seizures. because of these risks, patients must
have regular blood immune system functioning, aggravation of tests to
monitor their lithium levels. the unpleasantness of these side effects
also conexisting cancers, and seizure disorders. tributes to the poor
compliance with their treatment plan that characterizes patients with
bipolar disorder. these patients are less likely to follow treatment
instructions than any other kind of patient on any other type of
medication (Sajatovic et al., 2007). other medications, including
antipsychotics, are used in treating bipolar disorder but do not appear
to be as effective as lithium in reducing hospital admissions (Joas et
al., 2017). research demonstrating that bipolar disorder is more common
in nations in which consumption of seafood is low, discussed in Chapter
14, has led to suggestions that omega-3 fatty acids in the diet might
provide some protection from bipolar disorder (noaghiul & Hibbeln,
2003). lower levels of omega-3 fatty acids have been observed in
patients with bipolar disorder, and levels following supplementation
correlate with the severity of the patients' symptoms (Saunders et al.,
2016). while not a substitute for treatment with lithium, the benefits
of omega-3 fatty acids are obtained without side effects. You have
probably noticed that this discussion of treating bipolar disorder has
not emphasized psychotherapy. Most individuals with bipolar disorder,
like those with schizophrenia, appear to require medication for the
alleviation of their symptoms, and psychotherapy alone is not typically
considered an option. However, psychotherapy aimed at assisting
individuals and their families with coping with bipolar disorder and
adhering to treatment is often beneficial. even in conditions like
bipolar disorder that have strong bases in biology, integrating several
perspectives when selecting treatment approaches can produce superior
outcomes.

Psychosocial rehabilitation for schizophrenia includes opportunities to
do useful work. Socializing with peers, engaging in healthy outdoor
physical activity, and earning a paycheck contribute to the clients'
personal growth.

624

Chapter 15

Treating Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) given the range of suspected
causal factors in Mdd, it should not surprise you that treatment
approaches are diverse. treatments range from medical, to cognitive, to
behavioral, to simple aerobic exercise, and combinations of these
approaches are common.

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FiguRE 15.12

Percentage change in gray matter volume

4.0

2.0

0.0

−2.0 Lithium Valproic acid

−4.0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Weeks of treatment

the most popular method for treating Mdd today is the use of medication.
Antidepressant medications are the third most common prescription drug
taken by americans (Pratt, brody, & gu, 2011). as shown in ● Figure
15.13, about 10% of americans over the age of 12 years use
antidepressants. rates of antidepressant use in the united States
increased nearly 400% between 1988 and 2008 (Pratt et al., 2011). Keep
in mind that antidepressant medications are often prescribed for
conditions other than Mdd, such as anxiety disorders. this is still a
remarkable number of prescriptions and raises the distinct possibility
that, like barbiturates and benzodiazepines before them, antidepressants
are being overprescribed. Controversy over the benefits of
antidepressants over placebo as well as the relationship of benefits to
side effects continues. a large meta-analysis of over 117,000
participants demonstrated modest, positive advantages of antidepressant
medications over placebos in terms of effectiveness (Cipriani et al.,
2018). However, the authors note that it was difficult to find studies
that had not been funded by pharmaceutical organizations, suggesting the
possibility of bias. the most widely prescribed antidepressant
medications are the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSris),
which include popular brands like Prozac and Zoloft. as their name
implies, these medications increase serotonin activity at the synapse by
interfering with reuptake of the neurotransmitter, a process discussed
in Chapter 4. as a result, more serotonin is available in the synapse
(see ● Figure 15.14). the use of SSris is based on a belief that Mdd
results from unusually low serotonin activity and that therefore,
boosting serotonin activity should improve mood. in addition to
inhibiting the reuptake of neurotransmitters at the synapse,
antidepressants provide further benefit by increasing the number of
neurons in the hippocampus (anacker et al., 2011). Stress and depression
both appear to reduce the number of neurons found in the hippocampus,
and the administration of antidepressants may not only halt this loss,
but also promote the birth of new neurons in this area (Micheli et al.,
2018). these medications have their share of risks and side effects too.
increases in thinking about suicide following use of SSris, especially
in people under the age of 30, have prompted

Effects of Lithium Treatment on gray Matter Volume. Newly diagnosed
participants with bipolar disorder were randomly assigned to groups
treated with lithium or valproic acid, which is also used to treat
bipolar disorder. Over the next 16 weeks, these groups were compared to
healthy controls using no medications. Gray matter volume increased in
the group treated with lithium but did not change in the healthy
controls or in the group treated with valproic acid. These results
support the ability of lithium to increase neural growth, which might
also explain its effectiveness in treating bipolar disorder. Source:
Adapted from I. K. Lyoo et al. (2010). "Lithium-Induced Gray Matter
Volume Increase as a Neural Correlate of Treatment Response in Bipolar
Disorder: A Longitudinal Brain Imaging Study," Neuropsychopharmacology,
35(8), 1743--1750. doi: 10.1038/npp.2010.41

antidepressant medication A medication designed to alleviate symptoms of
depression, but often prescribed for other types of conditions.

35 30

FiguRE 15.13 22.8

20

18.6 15.9 14.5

15

15.4

10.8

10

8.5 6.1

5 0

3.7

6.0 2.8 3.0

12 years and over

9.4

9.2

12--17 18--39

4.6

40--59 60 and over

Total

Males

Females

Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com

Percent

25

Antidepressant use in the united States. Use of antidepressant
medication in the United States is high, with one in ten over the age of
12 years and more than one in five 40- to 59-year-old females using
these medications. Source: Adapted from Data Brief No. 76.
Antidepressant Use in Persons Aged 12 and Over: United States,
2005--2008. Retrieved June 15, 2017, from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
data/databriefs/db76_tables.pdf#1

How are SPeCiFiC diSorderS treated?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

625

Serotonin molecule SSRI

Serotonin transporter

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Serotonin receptor

FiguRE 15.14 SSRIs increase the amount of serotonin in the synaptic gap
that is available to interact with serotonin receptors. These drugs
achieve this effect by interacting with the serotonin transporters
located in the membrane of the neuron releasing the serotonin. This
interaction slows the rate of reuptake, or the process by which the
neuron retrieves and repackages the molecules of serotonin that it has
just released.

stronger warnings for close supervision by attending physicians (Courtet
& lopez-Castroman, 2017). other side effects of SSris include nausea,
reduction of rapid eye movement (reM) sleep, headache, weight gain, and
sexual dysfunction. antidepressants are responsible for problems with
sexual activity in about 40% of the patients who are using them (lorenz
et al., 2016). when patients fail to respond to medication, other
biological treatments might be used to treat Mdd, such as eCt, deep
brain stimulation, or rtMS. in addition to biological treatment options,
a number of psychotherapy alternatives are quite successful in
alleviating depression and have the added benefit of producing no
adverse side effects. one of the most popular approaches is the use of
Cbt. as described previously, this approach combines the restructuring
of negative cognitions ("nobody loves me" becomes "not everybody loves
me, but some people do") and behavioral techniques aimed at increasing
the person's activity level and social skills (beck et al., 1979).
between 40% and 60% of people with Mdd treated with Cbt not only
experience relief from their symptoms, but also appear to be less
susceptible to repeated bouts of depression than people who use
medication alone (Hollon et al., 2002). People who are depressed also
benefit from adding aerobic exercise to their routine (see ● Figure
15.15; Morres et al., 2019). For cases of mild to moderate depression,
exercise produces effects comparable to medication and psychotherapy,
and it complements these treatments in cases of severe depression.
because people who are depressed face higher risks of cardiovascular
disease and type 2 diabetes, exercise is a valuable addition in terms of
patients' physical health as well.

626

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18

12

6

Before treatment After treatment Medication Exercise Combination
Treatment group

Jupiterimages/Photos.com

Beck Depression Inventory score

FiguRE 15.15

24

Exercise and MDD. Participants with MDD who had not been previously
treated were randomly assigned to medication alone, exercise alone, and
medication plus exercise groups for a 12-week study. Because the
participants were randomly assigned to groups, there were no
statistically significant differences in the severity of their
depression before treatment. All three treatment groups experienced
improvement in their symptoms, as shown by their reduced scores on the
Beck Depression Inventory. Although it appears that the medication group
might have improved more than the exercise and combination groups, the
differences between these three groups were not statistically
significant. Therefore, we can conclude that exercise alone was equally
effective in reducing symptoms of depression as medication alone or
medication in combination with exercise. Source: Adapted from J. A.
Blumenthal et al. (1999). "Effects of Exercise Training on Older
Patients with Major Depression," Archives of Internal Medicine, 159(19),
2349--2356. doi: 10.1001/archinte.159.19.2349

ConneCTing to ReSeaRch Mindfulness and the Prevention of Relapse in
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) ALTHOUGH OUR METHODS FOR TREATING MDD
are typically effective, there is a significant risk of recurrence. Some
individuals experience low rates of recurrence when continuing to take
antidepressant medications, even when their depressive symptoms are
gone. However, these medications produce significant side effects,
making this approach undesirable for many people. Continuation of CBT
after recovery is typically more helpful than continuing to take
medication, but many health plans pay for only limited numbers of
sessions. Recurrences of depression might occur because people who have
experienced episodes of MDD think differently than people with no
history of depression when a mildly negative mood state occurs (Teasdale
et al., 2000). A technique known as mindfulnessbased cognitive therapy
(MBCT) combines aspects of CBT and mindfulness-based stress reduction.
The idea of MBCT is to teach people to "detach" from depression-related
thoughts and feelings by endorsing statements like "Thoughts are not
facts" and "I am not my thoughts." How well does this approach work to
prevent repeated episodes of MDD?

The Question: Does the addition of MBCT to MDD treatment produce better
outcomes than treatment as usual alone?

meThods In one study, 145 patients in recovery from MDD were randomly
assigned to continue with their treatments as usual or to receive
additional MBCT training (Teasdale et al., 2000). Their progress at a
1-year follow-up was assessed. Treatment as usual meant that the
patients would seek help as they normally would, perhaps from a family
doctor, if they experienced mood difficulties. Participants assigned to
receive MBCT training attended eight weekly 2-hour group training
sessions and completed daily homework exercises. Key themes included
empowerment, freedom of choice, and awareness of experience in the
moment.

eThICs

untreated. Referrals to appropriate services should be provided to all
participants, and confidentiality should be maintained with great care.

resulTs Among participants with three or more previous episodes of
depression, who made up 77% of the sample, the addition of MBCT reduced
recurrence rates by nearly 50% compared to treatment as usual alone.

ConClusIons This study indicated that MBCT provides a powerful tool for
preventing further episodes of depression---a finding that has since
been replicated and supported by a significant amount of research
(Khoury et al., 2013; Warren et al., 2016; Tickell et al., 2020). The
use of MBCT has been extended successfully from the treatment of MDD to
the treatment of anxiety and stress (Khoury et al., 2013). ■

Patients as participants require additional protections. Making
treatment as usual available ensures that no participants are left

How are SPeCiFiC diSorderS treated?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

627

Treating Anxiety Disorders anxiety disorders, including gad, phobias,
and panic disorder, are typically treated by using medication, Cbt, or a
combination of the two (see ● Figure 15.16). as discussed in Chapter 14,
anxiety is associated with a heightened level of brain activity because
of anticipated danger. Consequently, most efforts to medicate anxiety
attempt to reduce brain activity, or produce a "tranquilizing" effect.
because gaba is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, a
common method for slowing brain activity is to enhance its effects. as
described in Chapter 6, many substances, including alcohol,
barbiturates, and benzodiazepines, interact with the gaba receptor to
produce stronger inhibition in the brain. each of these types of
substances produces a tranquilizing effect on the brain. because these
drugs have additive effects with one another and work at the same
receptor site, taking combinations of these drugs is frequently fatal
because of a life-threatening level of brain inhibition. barbiturates,
developed in 1903, continue to be quite useful in the treatment of
seizures, but their use as a treatment for anxiety is no longer
considered desirable. they were one of the first of several medications
used for psychological treatments to become vastly overprescribed. by
the mid-1960s, enough Knowing that one of the motivations for alcohol
use might barbiturates were being made to provide every american be to
reduce the anxiety resulting from social events and man, woman, and
child with 40 to 50 doses per year (regan, other stressors can be
helpful in avoiding problem drinking. If 2000). the addictive properties
of barbiturates, as well as a person feels like she "can't face" a
situation without being their frequent use in suicides, were definite
drawbacks. the discovery of benzodiazepines after world war ii drunk, it
would be more positive to seek professional help changed the treatment
of anxiety dramatically, but like the than to continue drinking. 24

22 21 20 19 18

0

Medication alone Medication plus exposure Exposure alone Placebo
Baseline

24 weeks Time

52 weeks

Liquidlibrary/Photos.com

Social functioning score

23

FiguRE 15.16 Comparisons of Treatments in Social Anxiety Disorder.
Medication, exposure therapy (in which the individual is gradually
introduced to anxiety-producing situations), and combined medication and
exposure therapy appear to produce approximately equal improvement in
the functioning of people with social anxiety disorder. Scores of social
functioning of people randomly assigned to these treatment conditions
were significantly better than scores of the placebo group after 24
weeks of treatment. However, when treatment was discontinued after 24
weeks, the functioning of the groups that received medication and
medication combined with exposure therapy deteriorated at the 1-year
follow-up assessment, whereas the exposure-alone group continued to
improve. These results suggest that patients choosing to use medication
should continue treatment to maintain gains in functioning. Source:
Adapted from T. T. Haug et al. (2003). "Exposure Therapy and Sertraline
in Social Phobia: 1-year Follow-up of a Randomised Controlled Trial,"
British Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 312--318. doi: 10.1192/bjp.02.229

628

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

barbiturates, the benzodiazepines became overused. by the 1970s,
chlordiazepoxide (librium) and diazepam (valium) were the most
frequently prescribed drugs of their day. alprazolam (Xanax) remains a
widely used benzodiazepine, typically prescribed for panic disorder,
gad, and premenstrual syndrome. in some cases, alprazolam seems to be
helpful in treating Mdd, but its mechanism for doing so is not
understood. You might think that tranquilizers would be a logical
medication for treating anxiety disorders. although these drugs are used
occasionally, the antidepressants discussed in a previous section of
this chapter are typically more effective. this result might reflect a
common underlying cause for both depression and anxiety. behavioral and
cognitive behavioral techniques are commonly used to treat anxiety
disorders and have the advantage over medication of having no side
effects. Phobias, for instance, can be treated with exposure therapy, in
which the person is gradually exposed to the fear stimulus or to other
people interacting harmlessly with the fear stimulus while the person
relaxes. Medication and psychological treatments produce similar levels
of improvement for cases of anxiety (baldwin et al., 2014).

Treating OCD oCd can be treated with antidepressant medication, Cbt, or
a combination of both. Cbt for oCd involves training the person to
anticipate compulsive behavior and then to engage in a competing
behavior. as mentioned earlier, a compulsive hand-washer could go
outside, away from faucets and soap, to do some gardening. Meta-analyses
show that Cbt is a highly effective approach to treating oCd (olatunji
et al., 2013).

exPerienCing PSychology Progressive Relaxation of 20 seconds, during
which you relax the muscle group and think of tension "draining" from
that part of the body. The procedure can be repeated for more dramatic
relaxation. With practice, you should be able to "will" yourself into a
relaxed state rather easily. Here is the order of muscle groups to tense
and relax: 1. Tense the muscles of your head and face. 2. Tense the
muscles of your neck (gently). 3. Tense your elbows and biceps for 5
seconds, and then relax and straighten your arms. 4. Clench your fists
tightly. 5. Tense the muscles of your chest. 6. Tense the muscles of
your stomach. 7. Tense the muscles of your calves. 8. Tense the muscles
of your feet and toes (gently, to avoid cramping). 9. If you are
successful in achieving deep relaxation, someone should be able to pick
up your arm or leg and it will be limp and unresisting. ■

Anan Kaewkhammul/Shutterstock.com

AS YOU HAVE SEEN in this chapter, administering therapies for
psychological disorders and problems with adjustment is typically the
domain of highly trained professionals. However, there are a few
activities that people can do safely on their own to reduce stress and
change habits. Chapter 8 outlined a method that you could use to change
unwanted habits based on behavioral therapies. This box reviews a
progressive relaxation technique that you can use to reduce stress.
These same techniques are often implemented to produce relaxation during
exposure therapy. To enhance your ability to relax, it is often
beneficial to make an audio recording of the instructions. To begin, put
on some loose, comfortable clothing and either lie down on your back or
sit in a chair with your head supported. Breathe slowly and deeply. Each
muscle group is tensed for 5 seconds (silently count "one--one thousand"
at a normal speaking pace), followed by a pause

Tensing and then relaxing each muscle group in the body leads to a deep
state of relaxation.

How are SPeCiFiC diSorderS treated?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

629

Treating Body Dysmorphic Disorder Cbt is particularly helpful in cases
of body dysmorphic disorder (allen & woolfolk, 2010). Cognitive
restructuring can help the individual think more realistically about
perceived physical flaws. Many individuals with this disorder, however,
insist on continued treatment by cosmetic surgeons and resist
suggestions that they should obtain psychotherapy.

Treating PTSD the american Psychological association and the u.S.
veteran's administration strongly recommend three similar types of
psychotherapy for PtSd: prolonged exposure therapy, cognitive processing
therapy, and trauma-focused Cbt (watkins et al., 2018). Prolonged
exposure

PSychology aS a hub Science Using Virtual Reality (VR) to Treat Anxiety
and PTSD

Defense Dept. photo by John J. Kruzel

YOU MIGHT EXPECT virtual reality (VR), the presentation of realistic
stimuli through a device worn on the head, to be more exciting to video
gamers than to therapists. However, this new technology is showing
remarkable promise for the treatment of phobias and PTSD. As discussed
in this chapter and in Chapter 8, one of the best ways to address these
stressand fear-related problems is to combine relaxation with a
controlled exposure to the fear-producing stimuli. This application of
classical conditioning was popularized by Joseph Wolpe in the 1950s
(Wolpe, 1958). For example, people who are afraid of heights could
imagine progressively more stressful situations (climbing a ladder or
visiting the Empire State Building) while remaining relaxed. Eventually,
the fear of heights should be reduced. Imagination is a wonderful
capability of the mind, but it has its limitations. This is where VR
comes in. Instead of asking a client to imagine a situation, the
scenario can be presented in a realistic way through the use of VR
technology. As our height-phobic client maneuvers through elevators,
construction sites, and other high places, wind, vibration, and sound
can be added to make the visual experience even more realistic. In
addition to treating phobias, VR is being used to help combat veterans
recover from PTSD (Spira et al., 2006). In these cases, odors from
diesel fuel and gunpowder can be added to enhance the reality of the
virtual experience. Research comparing the effectiveness of VR
therapies, alone or in conjunction with traditional CBT, suggests that
VR therapy alone is about as effective as CBT alone in treating phobias,
but the former The U.S. Army is testing "Virtual Iraq," a 360-degree,
interactive, might have an advantage in certain situations, such as fear
of flying computer-generated environment, as a treatment for soldiers
with (Krijn et al., 2007). VR also performed well in comparisons with
PTSD. Soldiers are able to relate their traumatic experiences to the CBT
in cases of PTSD (Baños et al., 2011). In particular, VR therapy
therapist, who can then program the environment to reproduce appealed to
people with PTSD who were unwilling to undergo more weather conditions,
terrain, helicopter flyovers, types of attacks, traditional treatments.
People who grew up playing video games and sound. Soldiers treated with
VR are being compared with might find the VR approach more effective and
comfortable. Techsoldiers treated with other traditional psychotherapy
approaches nological advances allowing a shared VR experience for
therapists and a control group of soldiers on the waiting list for
treatment. and clients show further promise (Wiederhold & Riva, 2019). ■

630

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

therapy is based on the assumption that confronting the trauma rather
than avoiding it can produce benefits. Cognitive processing therapy
addresses inaccurate attributions and selfblame associated with the
traumatic events. trauma-focused Cbt combines exposure and correction of
guilt and other flawed cognitions.

Treating Dissociative Identity Disorder the treatment of dissociative
identity disorder can be quite controversial, as is the diagnosis of
this condition, explained in Chapter 14. Some psychotherapists work on
the assumption that dissociative identity disorder is a valid diagnostic
category that often results from serious trauma (childhood sexual abuse
in particular). treatment is aimed toward integrating the various
personalities by first identifying and "working through" the traumatic
memories related to the disorder (international Society for the Study of
trauma and dissociation, 2015). Hypnosis is commonly used by these
therapists to assist in the recovery and resolution of traumatic
memories, but this practice is not supported by scientific research.
under hypnosis, a suggestible person might be vulnerable to the
manufacture of false memories, and individuals identified as having
dissociative identity disorder appear to be more suggestible than the
general public. in one notable case study, a woman sought therapy to
cope with a traumatic event involving her daughter. Her psychiatrist
employed hypnosis and convinced her that she had experienced horrific
abuse as a child and now had more than 120 separate personalities
(including one that was a duck), thereby illustrating the influence that
therapists can have on the "memories" that they help recover (loftus,
1997). a particularly damaging finding regarding the state of treatment
for dissociative identity disorder is the suggestion that individuals
labeled with the disorder subsequently show even worse symptoms (Piper &
Merskey, 2004). treatments for dissociative identity disorders have been
described as not "empirically supported" or supported by research
results (Maxwell et al., 2018). Critics of the dissociative identity
disorder classification suggest that psychotherapists should restrict
their actions to resolving the stress, anxiety, and depression of the
individual, without referring to dissociation.

Kim Noble 2012

Kim Noble 2012

Kim Noble 2012

Rex Features/Shutterstock.com

British painter Kim Noble has been diagnosed with dissociative identity
disorder. This disorder is characterized by the experience of two or
more "personality states." Noble paints quite differently when she feels
that she is in a particular personality state as opposed to others and
believes that she has improved her wellbeing by expressing her perceived
personalities through her art.

How are SPeCiFiC diSorderS treated?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

631

Treating Somatic Symptom Disorders both biological and psychological
treatments are commonly used to treat somatic symptom disorders, which
involve unusual concerns about chronic somatic symptoms. among the
biological treatments for somatic symptom disorders are medication with
antidepressants and increased physical activity. Psychological
treatments usually take the form of Cbt (allen & woolfolk, 2010).
Complicating the treatment of these disorders, most of these patients
are seen by their primary physicians, and relatively few are willing to
pursue psychotherapy. between 50% and 80% of patients referred for
psychological treatment by their physicians do not comply, possibly
because of their continued belief that their problems are purely medical
rather than psychological (allen & woolfolk, 2010).

Treating ASPD Finding effective treatments for antisocial personality
disorder (aSPd) has a high priority, given the extent of harm that
individuals in this category can inflict on the rest of society.
unfortunately, effective treatments remain elusive (bateman et al.,
2015). no known medications specifically reduce antisocial behavior,
although many incarcerated individuals are treated with tranquilizing
drugs, including antipsychotic and anticonvulsant medications (such as
barbiturates), to make their aggressive, violent behavior more
manageable. even if effective medications are eventually discovered,
individuals with aSPd tend to view themselves as "oK" and not in need of
treatment. Compliance with effective treatments is likely to remain a
problem. Psychological treatments for aSPd include Cbt and learning
models that emphasize anger control, social skills, and moral reasoning
(Frick et al., 2014). these treatments appear to be modestly effective
in reducing antisocial behavior in children and youth, but they do not
appear to have much benefit for individuals who show evidence of true
psychopathy, or lack of guilt and empathy (brazil et al., 2018). despite
the efforts of psychotherapists, many nations consider this condition
untreatable and rely on incarceration of criminals with aSPd to protect
the public.

Treating Borderline Personality Disorder no medications are currently
approved specifically for the treatment of borderline personality
disorder, but medications are frequently prescribed. among the commonly
prescribed medications are antidepressants, antipsychotic medications,
mood stabilizers (e.g., lithium), antianxiety medications (e.g.,
benzodiazepines), and anticonvulsants. because of the potential for
self-destructive behavior and serious depression, individuals with
borderline personality disorder are occasionally hospitalized for a few
days for their own safety. Psychotherapy for borderline personality
disorder often takes the form of Cbt. in this case, the individual
learns to manage stress, emotions, and relationships. in particular,
psychotherapists emphasize skills aimed at reducing the individual's
potential for suicidal thinking and behavior. an approach specifically
designed for individuals with borderline personality disorder,
dialectical behavior therapy (dbt), attempts to address symptoms in the
order of their importance: reducing suicidal thoughts, reducing
behaviors that interfere with therapy, and finally reducing behaviors
that interfere with the quality of life (linehan et al., 1991). outcomes
using dbt for borderline personality disorder appear superior to those
produced by more conventional treatments with Cbt (linehan et al.,
2006).

Treating NPD narcissistic personality disorder (nPd), while potentially
disabling, is often accompanied by high overall levels of functioning
(ronningstam, 2014). in addition, many traits associated with this
disorder (hypersensitivity, defensiveness, inability to see one's own
role in

632

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

problems) might reduce the likelihood that a person with it will seek
treatment. Finally, lower-functioning individuals with nPd are likely to
have other serious psychological problems that motivate them to seek
treatment, such as depression, substance abuse, or suicidality, which
take precedence over the narcissistic behaviors themselves. as a result,
the scientific literature provides fewer details about treating nPd
compared to some of the other personality disorders. therapists
generally employ Cbt with an emphasis on carefully building an alliance
with the client (Kealy et al., 2017). Psychotherapy for nPd is likely to
be most effective when the therapist is aware of the traits that might
interfere with the process, such as defensiveness. Clarifying the
difference between pathological and protective behaviors and reviewing
situations and experiences that trigger narcissistic reactions can be
particularly helpful (ronningstam, 2014).

Integration of Specific Treatments Perhaps after reading about the
variations in both the biological and psychological treatments available
for specific types of disorders, you will better appreciate why people
who want to be therapists spend such a long time in school perfecting
their skills and learning about their options. although some disorders
seem to defy the available treatment methods, we do not want to leave
you with the impression that therapy is somehow ineffective. Quite the
contrary is true. Compared to the state of available therapies as
recently as 60 years ago, psychologists and psychiatrists have made
great strides in their ability to alleviate the distress of many
millions of people. as we learn more about the causal factors underlying
these disorders, as we surely will by pursuing integrative approaches,
our abilities to help will expand. at the same time, we are making
significant progress in our understanding about the prevention of many
of these disorders, which we hope will make these problems a thing of
the past.

Rate emotional level

The use of DBT for borderline personality disorder has been simplified
by the development of a smartphone app, which takes the place of keeping
diary cards of emotions, events, and problem behaviors.

How intense is your guilt at this moment? Welcome, Mandy

10

What emotion is causing you the most distress right now?

5

Anger Fear Sadness

Source: Adapted from S. L. Rizvi et al. (2011). "A Pilot Study of the
DBT Coach: An Interactive Mobile Phone Application for Individuals with
Borderline Personality Disorder and Substance Use Disorder," Behavior
Therapy, 42, 589--600. doi: 10.1016/j. beth.2011.01.003 Copyright © 2011
Elsevier.

1

Shame

BACK

DBT Coach

Try to repair the imagined harm or make amends Ask for forgiveness or
apologize Other action urge

BACK

Viktoria Kurpas/Shutterstock.com

Seems like Opposite Action is a good option. Let's figure it out. What
is your strongest action urge right now?

How are SPeCiFiC diSorderS treated?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

633

Interpersonal Relationships The Treatment Perspective TREATMENT BASED ON
SOUND PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE is the goal not only of those working with
individuals who have diagnosed psychological disorders, but also
counselors working with people who simply want to improve their
relationships and wellbeing. decades of careful research has informed
the recommendations of John and Julie gottman (2017). their research
method of assessing correlations between physiological arousal and
behaviors as couples discuss areas of personal conflict now guides their
approach to counseling (see ● Figure 15.17). these methods have
predicted which couples will divorce within 5 years. the gottmans are
fond of observing couples in states of conflict, which they consider to
be normal regardless of the couples' reported happiness. Most couples
get along during the good times---it's often the tough times that test
the quality of the relationship. the gottmans equip couples with simple
measures of heart rate as they discuss areas of conflict. this approach
is based on their observations that unhappy couples experience much
higher levels of sympathetic arousal than happy The sound couples do
during conflict. if the measures get too high, the couple is
relationship house instructed to take a break in the discussion. the
general idea is that you can't solve problems if your levels of arousal
are too high, and continuing Create conflict under these circumstances
is destructive. shared meaning the first step asks the couple to
postpone any efforts at persuasion Make life dreams until each person
has clarified his or her position. the focus is on selfcome true
disclosure, not "attack--defend." a second step involves "reprocessing"
past Manage conflict emotional injuries. Couples are guided through five
steps with regard to Accept your partner's influence processing past
hurts: feelings they had, subjective realities, triggers, takC Dialogue
about problems ing responsibility and apologizing, and constructive
plans. Finally, in the O Practice self-soothing M gottmans' lab work,
they realized that couples raised the same conflicts T The positive
perspective M at 3-year, 6-year, and 9-year intervals. to integrate this
concept with their R I counseling, they worked with couples to accept
each partner's personality U Turn toward instead of away T S (often the
source of long-term conflict) and the ideal solutions imagined M T Share
fondness and admiration E by each partner. While not removing the
problem, the couples could learn N to live with it. Build love maps T
the gottmans' work in the lab has provided them with unique, scienKnow
one another's world tific tools for helping people build more effective
relationships with their partners, and even their children. observations
a few months after a wedding predicted the couple's happiness with their
first-born. data from the Figure 15.17 last trimester of pregnancy
predicted the frequency of a baby's laughing, smiling, or crying. a
10-hour seminar over 2 days reversed relationship Psychological Science
informs Marriage dissatisfaction in 77% of last-trimester couples, an
effect replicated now Therapy. Research by John and Julie Gottman has
identified in 24 countries. it is hard to imagine a better use of
psychological science a number of principles that they believe should
guide than to intervene positively in the happiness of these couples and
their marriage counseling, which they incorporate into their children. ■
"Sound Relationship House" model.

634

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology takes on Real-World Problems Online Therapy During the
COVID-19 Pandemic with online therapy as positive and many expressed
interest in continuing to use online therapy in the future. Like many of
your professors, the psychotherapists experienced a variety of technical
difficulties during sessions. As long as they perceived their clients as
having a good experience, though, they were not concerned about these
glitches. The type of therapy provided by the psychotherapists had an
impact on their attitudes toward online delivery. The most positive
attitudes were held by psychotherapists who provided
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and

the least positive attitudes were held by psychoanalysts. This might
reflect the dependence of the psychoanalyst on factors that are harder
to perceive online, such as nonverbal communication. It will be some
time before we fully appreciate the impact that COVID-19 has had on the
delivery of services, whether that is coursework or psychotherapy, via
online technologies. It is possible that greater exposure to online
delivery will increase its acceptance by both providers and consumers. ■

venimo/Shutterstock.com

You might have heard your professors comment that doing online courses
when you plan to do them is quite different from being forced to offer
courses online due to COVID-19 social distancing. The reactions of
psychotherapists to taking their practices online sounds quite similar.
Psychotherapists from North America and Europe were asked to evaluate
their experience with online therapy during COVID-19 (Békés & Aafjes-van
Doorn, 2020). About half of the psychotherapists in this sample had no
previous experience with online therapy. Overall, however, the
psychotherapists reported their experiences

How are SPeCiFiC diSorderS treated?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

635

summary 15.3 Common Treatments for Psychological Disorders Disorder

Psychological treatment

biological treatment

ASD

●

Applied behavior analysis

●

Antipsychotic medications for self-injury

ADHD

●

Behavior therapy

●

Stimulant medications

●

Medication with antipsychotic drugs

●

Medication with lithium carbonate

●

ECT for depression

●

Medication with antidepressant drugs

24

●

ECT

18

●

Exercise

2%--5% 5.1%--6.5% 6.5%--7.5% 7.7%--10.4%

Schizophrenia

Bipolar disorder

●

Psychosocial rehabilitation

●

Evaluation of expressed emotion

●

Supportive CBT

Percentage change in gray matter volume

4.0

2.0

0.0

−2.0 Lithium Valproic acid

−4.0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Weeks of treatment

Beck Depression Inventory score

MDD

●

CBT

12 Before treatment After treatment

6

Medication Exercise Combination Treatment group

Anxiety, OCD, Body Dysmorphic Disorder, and PTSD

Personality disorders Rate emotional level How intense is your guilt at
this moment? Welcome, Mandy

●

CBT

●

●

Learning models for ASPD

●

●

DBT for borderline personality disorder

●

CBT for NPD

10

What emotion is causing you the most distress right now?

5

Anger Fear Sadness

1

Shame

BACK

Medication with antidepressant or antianxiety drugs

No effective biological treatments, although medications are sometimes
prescribed

DBT Coach Seems like Opposite Action is a good option. Let's figure it
out. What is your strongest action urge right now?

Try to repair the imagined harm or make amends Ask for forgiveness or
apologize Other action urge

BACK

Credits: Top row---iadams/Shutterstock.com; Third
row---Sofiaworld/Shutterstock.com; Fourth row---Copyright © 2007 Society
of Biological Psychiatry/Elsevier, Inc.; Fifth
row---Jupiterimages/Photos.com; Sixth row---Defense Dept. photo by John
J. Kruzel; Bottom row---Viktoria Kurpas/Shutterstock.com.

636

Chapter 15

Healing tHe troubled Mind: tHeraPY

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Key terms The Language of Psychological Science be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

antidepressant medication, p. 625 behavior therapy, p. 612
biopsychosocial approach, p. 614 brief therapy, p. 605 cognitive
behavioral therapy (Cbt), p. 614 cognitive restructuring, p. 613
counseling, p. 601 couples therapy, p. 606

deep brain stimulation, p. 616 electroconvulsive therapy (eCt), p. 615
family therapy, p. 606 free association, p. 609 group therapy, p. 605
humanistic therapy, p. 601 insight therapy, p. 609 neurofeedback, p. 617

person-centered therapy, p. 610 psychiatrist, p. 602 psychoanalysis,
p. 609 psychosurgery, p. 615 psychotherapist, p. 602 psychotherapy,
p. 599 resistance, p. 610 tardive dyskinesia, p. 623 transference,
p. 610

How are SPeCiFiC diSorderS treated?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

637

Argosy Publishing, Inc.

The adrenal glands are the source of several important hormones that are
released into the bloodstream at times of stress.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16

The Healthy Mind

STRESS AND COPING, HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY, AND POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY Learning
Objectives 1. Define stress, identifying key neural and hormonal aspects
of Hans Selye's general adaptation syndrome (GAS). 2. Distinguish among
adaptive elements of the short-term stress response and health problems
linked to chronic stress.

3.  Compare and contrast strategies for coping with stress, including
    problem-, emotion-, and relationshipfocused strategies.

4.  Summarize the psychosocial factors associated with smoking,
    nutrition, alcohol use, and lack of exercise, and propose behavioral
    interventions for these problems.

5.  Differentiate the aims and principles of positive psychology from
    those of other major movements in psychology, as described in
    Chapter 1.

6.  Distinguish among meanings of happiness (pleasant, good, and
    meaningful lives), and analyze the research evidence on what makes
    people happy.

WE HAVE ALL HAD DAYS LIKE THE WOMAN IN THIS PHOTO. Whether it comes in
relatively minor forms (losing your keys, getting a traffic ticket, or
doing poorly on an exam) or in large forms (death of a loved one or
serious illness), stress is a fact of life. We don't know what kind of
stress is producing this woman's reactions, but we know a great deal
about what is happening to her physically and psychologically in
response to her stress. Zooming in, we look at one of her adrenal
glands, shown in the larger image. Your adrenal glands are located on
top of your kidneys in your lower back, and they are the source of
hormones that are dumped into your bloodstream at times of stress. How
does feeling stressed get translated into activity by a gland? Here is
how the system works. First, the woman must identify something as a
threat to her. Making that to either run (flight) or fight. Messages
from her amygdala to her hypothalamus result in the activation of
hormones that tell the adrenal glands to release a hormone called
cortisol. In Chapter 6, we noted that cortisol levels are naturally high
in the morning. In other words, circulating cortisol wakes you up. In
response to the cortisol released by the adrenal glands, the body is
mobilized for action. We also have had enough stress in our lives to
understand that too much is not a good thing. Again, if we zoom in, we
can understand that our bodies are usually protected from too much

Cultura Creative (RF)/Alamy Stock Photo

cognitive appraisal, or judgment, of her situation begins a cascade of
processes designed to mobilize her

639 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cortisol by a feedback loop that reduces cortisol release once
circulating levels reach a certain point. It is likely that this
feedback loop malfunctions in stress-related disorders, such as
depression (see Chapter 14). While still at the microscopic level, we
might also see that one person's genetic makeup might predispose that
individual to have a more or less dramatic response to perceived
stressors. By now, you can probably anticipate that we have to zoom back
out again to fully understand this situation. These genetic differences
among individuals interact with developmental and social factors, such
as the possibility that this woman was maltreated as a child or now
enjoys a strong social network of family and friends. We can't make your
stress go away, and it is probably not in your best interests for us to
do so. Some stress, such as the stress associated with exercise or even
surviving a traumatic experience, actually can have quite beneficial
effects on your overall health. Instead, we can acquaint you with
research findings

REUTERS/Alamy Stock Photo

on coping and resilience that might help you deal with life's inevitable
challenges.

Professional athletes like Lydia Ko of New Zealand have learned to cope
with stress to perform their best.

stress An unpleasant emotional state that results from the perception of
danger.

stressor A stimulus that serves as a source of stress.

640

Chapter 16

What Is Stress? College students rarely need much introduction to the
concept of stress. They are no strangers to the stress that accompanies
worrying about assignments and grades, money matters, world affairs, and
relationships. Stress is an unpleasant emotional state that results from
the perception of danger. The source of stress is called a stressor. The
key to our definition is the word perception. no one set of stressors
reliably produces stress in everybody. People's stressors are highly
individual and idiosyncratic. The object of one person's phobia may be
another person's beloved (although scaly and slithery) pet. Regardless
of the stressor responsible for feelings of stress, once people perceive
that they are in some kind of danger, a common and predictable set of
responses to the stressor is set in motion. Stressors vary along a
number of dimensions (Segerstrom & Miller, 2004). Brief stressors
involve facing a short-term challenge, such as an exam, job interview,
or close call on the highway. Chronic stressors are ongoing and
long-lasting, and usually require us to rethink our identities and
social roles. Chronic stressors are stable. We don't know if or when
they will be gone. Stressors can arrive in sequence. For example, the
loss of a loved one or a natural disaster leads to a train of related
stressors. Psychologists have identified positive outcomes of our
responses to stress (Selye, 1975). Stress, by its nature, is a powerful
adaptive response that mobilizes the body's resources to enhance
survival in dangerous situations (Meaney, 2010). although sometimes
unpleasant, stress can motivate us to perform well and makes us
healthier in the long run (Crum et al., 2013). The exercise we do at the
gym is undeniably stressful, but it produces significant benefits down
the road. Many of us do some of our best work under time pressure and
are not too much the worse for the wear as a result. Stress might have
additional positive impacts on groups of people, not just individuals.
People experiencing stress are actually more prosocial, at least with
people they know well (Buchanan & Preston, 2014; Margittai et al.,
2015). Stress increases our ability to empathize with others in pain
(Tomova et al., 2016). While personally unpleasant, these advantages of
stress for our social networks could produce enormous benefits. however,
in other cases, stress can be counterproductive and interfere with our
performance and well-being. in extreme cases, as observed in Chapter 14,
a diathesis--stress model predicts that stress can contribute to the
development of major depressive disorder (Mdd), schizophrenia,
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSd), and other serious conditions.
These negative outcomes are more likely when we are unable to cope with
or adapt to a stressor. We will be focusing most of our discussion on
coping more effectively with these negative situations.

The Stress Response Walter Cannon, whom we met in Chapter 7,
demonstrated the ability of a number of stressors to activate the
sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system, described in
Chapters 4

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

and 7. Cannon (1929) reported that extreme cold, lack of oxygen, and
emotional experiences all had the capacity to initiate a fight-or-flight
response. during such a response, heart rate, blood pressure, and
respiration all increase, while nonessential functions, like digesting
food, are inhibited. Stored energy is released, and blood is shunted
from the surface of the body to the muscles needed for exertion. These
physical responses reflect a process that has been finely tuned through
evolution to maximize our survival in emergencies.

ExpErIEncIng Psychology What Is Your Stress Mindset? USE THE SCALE in ●
Table 16.1 to respond to the items listed. Select the number that best
describes you in the space provided. To obtain your overall mindset
score, (1) add up your scores for items 1, 3, 5, and 7 and subtract this
amount from 16, (2) add your scores for items 2, 4, 6, and 8, (3) add

this total to the final number that you produced in step 1, and finally
(4) divide the total by 8 to produce your mean Stress Mindset Measure
(SMM) score. The higher the score, the more likely you are to believe
that the effects of stress are enhancing. Among the college students
participating in the

study by Crum et al. (2013), the mean SMM was 1.6, or on the "Stress is
debilitating" side of the scale. How does that mean compare with your
score and your classmates' scores? What factors in your life do you
think influence your score? ■

table 16.1 The Stress Mindset Measure The effects of stress are negative
and should be avoided. 0

1

2

3

4

Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Neither Agree nor Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

Experiencing stress facilitates my learning and growth. 0

1

2

3

4

Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Neither Agree nor Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

Experiencing stress depletes my health and vitality. 0

1

2

3

4

Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Neither Agree nor Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

Experiencing stress enhances my performance and productivity. 0

1

2

3

4

Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Neither Agree nor Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

2

3

4

Neither Agree nor Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

Experiencing stress inhibits my learning and growth. 0 1 Strongly
Disagree

Disagree

Experiencing stress improves my health and vitality. 0

1

2

3

4

Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Neither Agree nor Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

Experiencing stress debilitates my performance and productivity. 0

1

2

3

4

Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Neither Agree nor Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

The effects of stress are positive and should be utilized. 0

1

2

3

4

Strongly Disagree

Disagree

Neither Agree nor Disagree

Agree

Strongly Agree

WhaT iS STReSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

641

Resistance to stress

John Olson/Getty Images

hans Selye, in a research career lasting more than 40 years, extended
Cannon's findings by studying the effects of stronger, longer-lasting
stressors. Selye worked primarily with rats, exposing them to a variety
of stressors and measuring the amount of time that they could
subsequently swim before giving up. (They were then rescued.) Cold
water, restraint, electric shock, surgery, and having their whiskers cut
off were some of Selye's stressors that greatly reduced the amount of
time the rats would swim before giving up. Regardless of the nature of
the stressor, Selye (1946) found that the rats responded with a
consistent pattern of behavior, which he labeled the general adaptation
syndrome (GAS). The GaS occurs in three stages (see ● Figure 16.1). an
alarm reaction is initiated when a stressor is first perceived and
identified. Selye's alarm reaction is essentially the same process as
Cannon's fight-or-flight response. all possible resources are deployed
to survive the danger, and all nonessential systems are inhibited. Hans
Selye identified a general it is likely that you have had at least one
close call while driving a car, and you can adaptation syndrome (GAS),
which is our probably remember how that felt. your heart pounds, you
breathe rapidly, you feel characteristic set of responses to stressors.
unusually mentally alert and focused, and your hands may be sweaty. This
is precisely the way that your autonomic nervous system is supposed to
react in an emergency. Some sources of danger do not go away as quickly
as your close call on the freeway. Many general adaptation syndrome
students think, "Oh, if only i survive this term---everything else will
be easy," only to find (GAS) Hans Selye's three-stage model for an
organism's response to stressors. themselves facing the same problems
next term, along with some new ones. One of the challenges of modern
living that our ancestors did not face is the need to worry about many
future events. For the hunter--gatherer, the challenge was usually
surviving that day. in contrast, today's college students may be
concerned not only with fairly immediate problems, such as paying the
rent and passing a midterm, but also more disDuring extended periods of
stress, judgment tant problems of future job markets, world events,
climate change, and the can suffer. You might have had the experience
future of Social Security. if these uncertainties are perceived as
threatening of looking back at the decisions that you made or dangerous,
they will act as stressors with the ability to initiate the GaS. When
stressors are prolonged, Selye suggests that we enter a stage of during
a stressful time, scratching your head, and resistance. during this
stage, we continue to experience ongoing stress, asking, "What was I
thinking?" which requires us to adapt and cope as well as possible.
although resistance is not as dramatic as the briefer and more intense
alarm reaction, it can still take its toll. Under normal High
circumstances, we alternate between periods of calm and periods of
relative arousal. you might calmly enjoy your lunch on the lawn between
classes but feel aroused while taking a quiz in a later class. during
the calm periods, we have an opportunity to store nutrients and rest and
repair the body. during periods of arousal, such as during the quiz, we
expend energy instead of Stressor storing it. in the resistance phase of
the GaS, we atoccurs tempt to take care of both arousal and resting
functions simultaneously. neither function operates as smoothly under
these circumstances as when it is operating Normal alone. you might get
an upset stomach when digesting resistance your lunch is combined with
the excitement of giving an oral presentation to your classmates. in
contrast to the mental clarity that typically accompanies the brief
Alarm Resistance Exhaustion alarm reaction, judgment during the longer
periods of Low resistance may not be as good. Time if stressors are
severe and last long enough, a Figure 16.1 person might reach Selye's
exhaustion stage, where strength and energy drop to very low levels. as
menthe general adaptation Syndrome (gaS). Hans Selye's GAS has three
tioned in Chapter 14, stress is a risk factor for Mdd, stages: alarm,
resistance, and exhaustion. During the alarm stage, all and the
exhaustion stage has much in common with resources are mobilized for
fight or flight. If stress is prolonged, we enter the criteria for this
disorder. exhaustion can even lead the resistance stage, where we adapt
and cope as well as possible. Finally, to death. Forced marches during
war produce higher resources are depleted when we reach the exhaustion
stage. rates of death than the rate that might be expected

642

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

to occur because of injuries and lack of food. Similar observations of
stress, exhaustion, and death have been made among baboons in Kenya
(Sapolsky, 2001). Under normal circumstances, lower-status baboons avoid
higher-status baboons whenever possible. Unfortunately, because of fears
of losing their crops, the Kenyan villagers caged the local baboons one
year. While caged, the lower-status baboons had no way to escape the
higher-status animals, and many died as a result. They did not die, as
you might have guessed, from battle wounds resulting from fights with
the higher-status animals. instead, the baboons died from stress-related
medical conditions, such as cardiovascular disease.

Sources of Stress

alarm reaction The first stage of the general adaptation syndrome (GAS),
characterized by sympathetic arousal and mental clarity.

resistance The second stage of the general adaptation syndrome (GAS),
characterized by coping with ongoing stress. exhaustion The third and
last stage of the general adaptation syndrome (GAS), characterized by
depletion of physical and psychological resources.

Stressors exist in the eye of the beholder. Stressing over an exam might
seem reasonable to many students, but this behavior might look silly to
people stressed by war, poverty, and disease, who would probably be
thrilled to have the opportunity to attend college. Cognitive appraisal
models help us to predict when a particular stimulus or event is likely
to be a stressor for an individual person (lazarus, 1966). according to
this approach, we make appraisals, or rapid initial assessments, of
potential stressors to determine whether they are irrelevant or
harmless, positive or negative. Because people appraise situations from
the vantage point of their own strengths and experiences, we would
expect that a single potential stressor might produce different amounts
and intensity of stress for different people. despite this variability
in response to stressors, we can identify several types of events that
are likely to produce significant stress in most people (see ● Figure
16.2). natural and human-made disasters, such as hurricanes, civil
unrest, and COVid-19, typically produce

Designated worst trauma events experienced by respondents

Unexpected death of someone close

Illness/injury of someone close

Figure 16.2

Sexual assault

Worst traumatic exposures and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PtSD).
Approximately 30,000 people with and without PTSD were asked to identify
the "worst trauma they had ever experienced." Among those who did not
have PTSD, the unexpected death, illness, or injury of someone close and
indirect exposure (television and other news reports) to the 9/11
terrorist attacks were the most commonly named "worst traumas." Among
those with PTSD, unexpected death, illness, or injury were also commonly
noted traumatic experiences, but people with PTSD were more likely than
healthy controls to identify sexual assault, intimate partner violence,
and combat as their worst traumatic experiences.

Seeing someone injured or dead

Military combat

Beaten by intimate partner

Indirect exposure to 9/11

Own serious accident

Other trauma to self

Other trauma to someone close

No PTSD PTSD 0

5

10 15 20 Percentage

25

30

Source: Adapted from R. H. Pietrzak et al. (2011). "Prevalence and Axis
I Comorbidity of Full and Partial Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in the
United States: Results From Wave 2 of the National Epidemiologic Survey
on Alcohol and Related Conditions," Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25(3),
456--465. doi:10.1016/j. janxdis.2010.11.010

WhaT iS STReSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

643

AP Images

This man is obviously stressed. Is somebody being injured? Is he in
danger? No---he is witnessing a tense moment during a baseball game.
Cognitive appraisal theories of stress suggest that different people are
likely to respond to stimuli with varying levels of stress based on
their individual appraisals of a situation.

644

Chapter 16

maratr/Shutterstock.com

Photocase Addicts GmbH/Alamy Stock Photo

Older zoos featured cages that often contributed to stress and illness
among the animals. Modern zoos go to great lengths to provide more
natural, less stressful habitats for their animals, in recognition of
the stress that often accompanies captivity.

stress in large numbers of people. in the three to five days following
the 9/11 terrorist attacks, 90% of americans reported feeling unusually
stressed (Schuster et al., 2002). as this book goes to press, much work
remains to be done to assess the impact of COVid-19 on stress, but early
reports suggest that somewhere between one-quarter to one-third of the
population is experiencing higher levels of stress than normal (Cooke et
al., 2020; Salari et al., 2020). Stress because of disasters can produce
long-range and cross-generational effects. Researchers identified women
who witnessed the 9/11 attacks in new york while pregnant and who
subsequently developed PTSd (yehuda et al., 2005). One year later, the
women and their infants showed indications of long-term, chronic stress.
as preschoolers, the children born to the women who were diagnosed with
both PTSd and Mdd following 9/11 showed evidence of higher reactivity to
stimuli and more aggressive behavior than did children of
terrorismexposed mothers who did not develop these disorders (Chemtob et
al., 2010). The ability of cortisol and other stress hormones to cross
the placenta probably accounts for the effects of stress beginning in
the prenatal environment (Weinstock, 2005; Galbally et al., 2019). as
mentioned in Chapter 14, children are especially susceptible to PTSd.
Three weeks after a 2004 tsunami, prevalence of PTSd among children in
areas of Sri lanka ranged between 14% and 39% and could be predicted by
variables such as family loss and severity of exposure (neuner et al.,
2006). To put these high numbers of cases into perspective, we would
expect about 10% of the general population to experience PTSd after most
large disasters (Kessler et al., 1996). automobile accidents are a major
source of PTSd in childhood, with as many as half of those injured in an
accident going on to develop the disorder (de Vries et al., 1999;
Pervanidou et al., 2007). although disasters are dramatic, they are not
the only sources of stress that we face. Changes, including some changes
for the better, can also trigger stress. holmes and Rahe (1967) compiled
a list of life events (good and bad) that they believed might be
correlated with stress and then surveyed participants about the amount
of adjustment that each event required. Subsequently, researchers used
the holmes and Rahe Social Readjustment Rating Scale (SRRS) to predict
vulnerability to physical illness and psychological disorder because of
different stressors (derogatis & Coons, 1993; Scully et al., 2000).
according to the scales, Christmas is more stressful than minor
violations of the law. Getting married is more stressful than being
fired from your job. Research results from studies using the SRRS
suggest that we should consider spreading out controllable changes over
time. in other words, it may not be the best strategy to graduate from
college, get married, move to a new city, and start a new job all at the
same time. not all psychologists are convinced that so-called good life
events are as stressful as bad ones, nor are they convinced that change
per se is a reliable predictor of stress. Critics of the SRRS argue that
most items are quite negative and that these negative items are
responsible for more stress (Mclean & link, 1994). it is likely that
stress associated with good changes occurs when the anticipated event
does not live up to the person's expectations. Vacations and holidays
may not be inherently stressful, but trying to fulfill unrealistic
fantasies about what vacations and holidays should be like is probably
stressful indeed. Relatively insignificant sources of stress, often
called hassles, also can contribute to a person's overall level of
stress. Waiting in long lines, losing your keys, getting a parking
ticket, and oversleeping on the day of an important exam are not
life-threatening events. however, if enough of these hassles occur
within a short period, people begin to react as if something larger had
occurred. The number of hassles that people report experiencing predicts

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Tetra Images/Aurora

goodluz/Shutterstock.com

According to Holmes and Rahe (1967), positive life events, such as
weddings and holidays, can be equally or even more stressful than some
negative events, such as flunking an important assignment.

psychological symptoms of stress, even when the impact of major life
events is factored out (Kanner et al., 1981). you might hear advice to
avoid "sweating the little stuff " because enough little stuff happening
at the same time can still affect your well-being. Some individuals,
such as first responders and those serving in the military, deal with
major stressors as part of their job. Concerns regarding stress and
consequent mental health problems in the military have grown since the
wars in iraq and afghanistan. Soldiers serving in these conflicts have
experienced especially high rates of mental health disorders and suicide
(Ramsawh et al., 2014). about 38% of living U.S. veterans have been
exposed to combat (Thomas et al., 2017). younger combat veterans had
higher rates of lifetime (30.6%) and current (19.2%) PTSd and suicidal
ideation (18.6%) than older combat veterans. as in studies of civilians,
research on military personnel suggests that feeling socially isolated
(loneliness) may be an early warning sign of, if not a contributing
factor to, these mental health disturbances (Solomon et al., 1986).
Combat experiences do not lead directly to suicidal ideation and
behaviors, but they might do so indirectly by producing symptoms of PTSd
(see Chapter 14) and negative states including loneliness, sadness,
anger, and frustration (Griffith, 2012, 2015). leaving military service
might disrupt the strong bonds that sustained veterans during combat,
and many veterans feel alienated from others who cannot comprehend their
experiences (Wilson et al., 2018). Soldiers who committed suicide had
previously reported being lonelier and more depressed and tended to
think in more catastrophic terms than soldiers who did not commit
suicide (lester et al., 2011; Cacioppo et al., 2015).

Regardless of the identity of a stressor, once you appraise a stimulus
as a danger, you initiate Selye's GaS. The first stage, the alarm
reaction, is accompanied by a coordinated reaction including physical,
cognitive, and behavioral responses to perceived danger. imagine for a
moment that one of your ancient ancestors was out hunting and suddenly
found himself face to face with a hungry lion. Physically, the autonomic
nervous system prepared him for fight or flight. The brainstem,
described in Chapter 4, initiated the release of the neurotransmitter
norepinephrine, which increased vigilance and fear. Cognitively, your
ancestor accessed his memory for information about lions, which he hoped
would include ideas about how similar situations were handled in the
past. Behaviorally, your ancestor carried out his plan for escape. We
assume that given your presence today, your ancestor was successful.

Stress and the Amygdala We can trace the neural pathways that coordinate
these responses to potentially hazardous stimuli. Sensory pathways
provide information to higher cognitive centers in the cerebral

oliveromg/Shutterstock.com

What Are the Biological and Social correlates of Stress?

Feeling socially isolated makes us feel unsafe, which triggers stress
responses. Loneliness makes people behave in ways that make them
difficult to be around, such as displaying greater pessimism, anxiety,
and hostility, beginning a loop of self-fulfilling prophesies and more
loneliness.

WhaT aRe The BiOlOGiCal and SOCial CORRelaTeS OF STReSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

645

cortex, letting our hunter know that the object in front of him is a
lion. Memories of lion behavior, including eating habits, contribute to
accurately identifying the lion as a danger, and hence a stressor.
Simultaneously, sensory input travels from the thalamus to the amygdala,
which plays an important role in the identification of dangerous
stimuli, as discussed in Chapters 4 and 7. The amygdala participates in
a "fear circuit" that provides a rapid assessment of a stimulus or
situation as potentially dangerous (ledoux, 2000, 2014). if the amygdala
is lesioned, animals no longer respond with conditioned fear to
previously learned classically conditioned associations between a
stimulus (perhaps a tone or light) and an electric shock, an example of
classical conditioning discussed in Chapter 8 (see ● Figure 16.3).
animals with lesions in the amygdala are also unable to learn to respond
appropriately to unfamiliar dangerous stimuli (Wilensky et al., 2006).
Because sensory information can reach the amygdala along routes that are
separate from the pathways for information going to the cortex, we might
find ourselves frightened by stimuli that we don't immediately
understand or consciously view as dangerous (Knight et al., 2003). as
mentioned in Chapter 4, a man who was blind because of damage to his
visual cortex still showed a normal response in his amygdala when shown
faces expressing anger (Pegna et al., 2005). you might have found
yourself feeling anxious while returning to your car after an evening
class without knowing why you are reacting this way, but it is probably
a good idea to listen to your amygdala until further information becomes
available. Once the amygdala has identified a stimulus as potentially
dangerous, it communicates with the hypothalamus. as mentioned in
Chapter 4, the hypothalamus most directly commands the autonomic nervous
system, particularly the sympathetic division. This part of the
autonomic nervous system is responsible for our fight-or-flight response
to danger.

Figure 16.3 The Amygdala and Fear. The amygdala participates in a "fear
circuit" that provides a rapid response to a potentially dangerous
stimulus. After rats learn a classically conditioned association of a
tone (a conditioned stimulus, or CS) that signals the arrival of an
electric shock (an unconditioned stimulus, or UCS), they freeze whenever
they hear the tone. If the amygdala is lesioned, the rat no longer
freezes when it hears the tone, and it is unable to learn about new
signals for shocks.

CS Pathway Tone

UCS Pathway Shock

Thalamus (auditory part)

Thalamus (somatosensory part)

Auditory cortex

Somatosensory cortex

Amygdala

Freezing

646

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Stress, the Sympathetic Adrenal--Medullary System, and the
Hypothalamic--Pituitary-- Adrenal Axis Perceiving a potential source of
danger mobilizes the body's resources using two systems---the
sympathetic adrenal--medullary (SAM) system and the
hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal (HPA) axis. The SaM system initiates
the release of adrenaline (also known as epinephrine) and norepinephrine
into the bloodstream from the adrenal glands, located above the kidneys
in your lower back. These chemical messengers circulate to many organs,
including the brain, producing many of the immediate, short-lived,
fight-or-flight responses to stress, such as a pounding heart and rapid
breathing (see ● Figure 16.4). Simultaneously, activation of the hPa
axis sets an entirely different system in motion. here's how the circuit
works. The hypothalamus (h) communicates with the pituitary gland (P),
located just above the roof of your mouth, which in turn tells the
adrenal glands (a) to release a hormone known as cortisol into the
bloodstream. Circulating cortisol boosts the energy available for
dealing with a stressor. The hPa axis response to stress can continue
longer than the SaM response, which explains many of the outcomes of
chronic stress. One of the possible outcomes of chronic stress is
prolonged high levels of circulating cortisol. long-term exposure to
cortisol can produce a number of harmful effects, including the death of
neurons. When rats received daily injections of the rat equivalent of
cortisol, neural

Sympathetic adrenal-medullary (SAM) system (faster) Cerebral cortex

Stressor

Hypothalamus Hippocampus

Sympathetic nerve

Pituitary gland

Heart

Adrenal glands

Suppresses Enhances IMMUNE SYSTEM Cortisol

Norepinephrine

Norepinephrine and epinephrine (adrenalin)

perceived stressors by initiating the release of epinephrine and
norepinephrine into the bloodstream.

hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal (HPA) axis A circuit that responds to
perceived stressors by initiating the release of cortisol into the
bloodstream.

cortisol A hormone released into the bloodstream from the adrenal
glands.

Figure 16.4 Two Systems Respond to a Stressor. In response to the
appraisal of a stimulus as a stressor, two systems mobilize the body's
resources. The sympathetic adrenal--medullary (SAM) system responds
quickly by initiating the release of epinephrine (adrenaline) and
norepinephrine into the bloodstream by the adrenal glands. These
chemical messengers initiate many immediate, short-lived responses, such
as a pounding heart and rapid breathing. Simultaneously, activation of
the hypothalamic-- pituitary--adrenal (HPA) axis results in the release
of cortisol into the bloodstream by the adrenal glands. Cortisol acts to
boost the energy available for dealing with the stress. Cortisol
receptors in the hippocampus serve as a feedback loop to keep the system
from overreacting. The effects of HPA axis activity are slower to
develop and last longer than those of the SAM response. HPA axis
activity is associated with more of the effects of chronic stress, such
as suppression of the immune system.

© Argosy Publishing, Inc.

Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis (slower)

sympathetic adrenal--medullary (SAM) system A circuit that responds to

WhaT aRe The BiOlOGiCal and SOCial CORRelaTeS OF STReSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

647

death began to occur in just a few weeks (Stein-Behrens et al., 1994).
identical amounts of neural death occurred if the rats were stressed
daily instead of receiving the injections, suggesting that the action of
cortisol is responsible for most of the neural damage observed to result
from stress. Cushing's disease, a medical condition that causes
unusually high cortisol levels, results in reduced hippocampus volume,
memory problems, abnormal sleep patterns, and depression (langenecker et
al., 2012). not only can high levels of cortisol damage neurons, but
these same levels appear to inhibit neurogenesis, or the birth of
neurons, which might help to offset the damage (Cowen, 2010; Borsini et
al., 2020). normally, activity of the hPa axis is regulated by a
feedback loop involving the hippocampus (Stokes, 1995). The hippocampus
works like a rev limiter in an automobile engine that prevents the
driver from going over a certain speed. The hippocampus contains large
numbers of receptors for cortisol and other stress hormones. When the
hippocampus detects high levels of these hormones, it signals the
hypothalamus, which in turn tells the adrenal glands to reduce the
release of cortisol, and arousal dissipates. The role of the hippocampus
as the rev limiter of the hPa axis might be the bridge between stress
and Mdd. as observed in Chapter 14, many cases of Mdd are preceded by
unusually stressful events. Consistently elevated levels of cortisol
because of stress can overwhelm the hippocampus's feedback loop, leading
instead to the continuous release of cortisol and constant arousal.
Without the regulation of cortisol usually provided by the hippocampus
acting as a rev limiter, a person can begin to experience depression
(Stokes, 1995). People who are treated with cortisol and similar stress
hormones for medical conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis are often
troubled by deep depression, reinforcing the role of excess cortisol in
depressed mood. not only can the hippocampus fail to regulate cortisol
release under conditions of extreme stress, but continued stress can
damage the hippocampus further. The stressed baboons mentioned earlier
in this chapter experienced neural death, particularly in the
hippocampus, in addition to their other medical problems (Sapolsky,
2001). People with PTSd, discussed in Chapter 14, also show evidence of
having a smaller hippocampus than trauma-exposed people who do not
develop PTSd (logue et al., 2018). however, it remains unclear whether
reduced hippocampal volume precedes the onset of PTSd (making it a risk
factor), results from PTSd, or both (hayes et al., 2017).

The Epigenetics of Stress FCG/Shutterstock.com

in Chapter 3, we discussed the significant role played by the
environment in determining whether and when a particular gene is
expressed. We defined epigenetics as the influence on traits by factors
that determine how genes perform. The field of epigenetics explores
gene--environment interactions. For example, we observed how both rats
and human children who were well nurtured The first 1,000 days after
conception (until about age 2 years) by their mothers showed more
resilience to stress later in life. The strongly influences individual
vulnerability to chronic disease and nurture received from the mother
had influenced how the genes life expectancy. While low birth weight
indicates stress during responsible for producing and reacting to stress
hormones bepregnancy, the 280 days or so between conception and birth
are haved during later stressful experiences (Champagne et al., 2003;
only a fraction of the first 1,000 days. Having an asymmetrical neigh et
al., 2009). lower face, however, appears to be a reliable biomarker of
stress Severe stress early in life produces lasting challenges,
includduring this early stage of childhood. The misalignment of this
man's ing increased hPa axis responses to stress, hyperactivity of the
upper and lower front teeth illustrates this effect of prenatal stress.
norepinephrine system, reduced volume in the hippocampus, and heightened
responses by the amygdala to threat stimuli, such as negative facial
expressions (Osório et al., 2016). Genes and life stress also interact
to produce Mdd. The rate of expression of genes linked to Mdd interacts
with an individual's quality of social experience, from adversity to
support (logue et al., 2018). These gene-- stress interactions help
explain why some people are more vulnerable to life stress, while others
seem relatively well protected against it.

648

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Gender Differences in the Stress Response although psychologists
typically discuss fight-or-flight as the common response to stressors,
an alternative response has been suggested that might be more typical of
female responses to stressors. noting that from an evolutionary
standpoint, a mother with small children is unlikely to find either
fight or flight easy to do, Taylor (2006) suggested that women are more
likely to tend-and-befriend in response to stressors. Soothing
frightened children, hiding, and forming social alliances for further
protection might be more effective strategies. Research support for
tend-and-befriend includes a study showing that after being stressed,
women, but not men, demonstrated an increase in caretaking motivation in
response to videos showing crying infants (Probst et al., 2017). instead
of the traditional hormones associated with fight-or-flight, a
tend-and-befriend response is more closely associated with the release
of oxytocin, a hormone related to social bonding discussed in Chapters 4
and 7.

tend-and-befriend An alternative to fight-or-flight as a response to
stressors, characterized by soothing and building social connections,
which is possibly more characteristic of females.

Beginning with initial observations that death rates were negatively
correlated with increases in occupational grades among British civil
servants (Marmot et al., 1978; Marmot et al., 1984), scientists have
become aware that health disparities exist worldwide as a function of
wealth. People with lower socioeconomic status (SeS) experience worse
health. absolute wealth is not the only factor here. People's subjective
estimation of their own status in the community also predicts
susceptibility to disease (Cohen et al., 2008). What processes can
explain SeS effects on health disparities? The poor experience more
noise, more toxins, more carcinogens, more violence, fewer resources,
less health care, higher levels of drugs and alcohol abuse, less
exercise, more anger, less control, and less trust (adler, 2013). The
items on this long list have something in common---all of these factors
are associated with high stress. Residents of low-income neighborhoods
reported higher rates of perceived stress, which in turn was related to
more risky health-related behaviors, such as smoking and lower physical
activity (algren et al., 2018).

Sgt. Jessika Malott, 8th MP Bde. Public Affairs/photo courtesy of U.S.
Army

Socioeconomic Status and Stress

Visions of America, LLC/Alamy Stock Photo

As this family faces the stress of the father's overseas deployment, the
mother responds with a tend-and-befriend approach by comforting her
daughter.

Health disparities, or the differences between the health of wealthy and
that of poor individuals, can result from the greater exposure of poor
people to significant stressors.

WhaT aRe The BiOlOGiCal and SOCial CORRelaTeS OF STReSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

649

How Does Stress Affect Our Health? Our stress response was forged by the
challenges that our hunter--gatherer ancestors were most likely to face.
The result is a system that has beneficial effects in the short term but
can lead to negative effects when stress becomes chronic (Cacioppo &
Berntson, 2011). after all, it would not take your ancestors hours,
days, months, or years to figure out what to do to escape a hungry lion.
For better or for worse, the outcome would be decided quickly. in
contrast, many of the stressors that we face in modern living are not
brief, and as a result, we are fairly constantly experiencing Selye's
resistance phase, which combines stress and coping. you might be worried
about finding a job after you graduate from college, which might be
years away. any long-term, chronic stress has the potential to affect
health in negative ways. not only does responding to stress require
large amounts of energy, but while in the resistance stage, you do a
less efficient job of storing nutrients and giving your body the rest
and repair that it needs. Chronic stress accelerates the aging process,
including the shortening of telomeres, the "caps" found at the end of
chromosomes (needham et al., 2013). improved understanding of the
relationships between modern stress and health can guide our quest for
physical and psychological well-being.

Stress and the Immune System immune system The body system that defends
against infection and cancer.

hans Selye believed that any stress produced a global reduction in
immune response, but this turns out to be overly simplistic. instead,
short-term bursts of stress can have a beneficial effect on many
biological systems, including the immune system, your body's frontline
defense against infection and cancer (Segerstrom & Miller, 2004). after
all, this is the type of stress that characterized the hunter--gatherer
experience, so it is unlikely we would evolve a response to it that
didn't work well. Participating in a stressful memory task was
correlated with an improvement in the response of the immune system, as
measured by markers of immune system activity in the saliva of
volunteers (Bosch et al., 2001). however, the immune system does not
perform as well in the face of long-term, chronic sources of stress (see
● Figure 16.5). if stressors persist long enough, an overall reduction
in immune response occurs. as a result, stress can lead to greater
frequency and severity of viral illnesses, as you may have noticed
immediately following final exam periods (Wadee et al., 2001). numerous
studies indicate that people experiencing chronic stress are more Type
of Stressor

Figure 16.5 Types of Stress Predict Immune Response. Acute, short-lived
stress enhances our immune response in adaptive ways, promoting healing
and resistance to infections. In contrast, chronic stressors reduce
immune responses, delaying healing and inhibiting protection from
infections like COVID-19.

Immune Response

Health Improved wound healing Protection against bacterial and viral
infections

Acute Stress

Reduced wound healing Reduced protection against bacterial and viral
infections Chronic Stress

650

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Blend Images/Alamy Stock Photo

Alex Dissanayake/Getty Images

vulnerable to infectious diseases, like colds and the flu (Cohen et al.,
1991). White blood cells, or lymphocytes, protect us from invading
organisms. Unfortunately, stress hormones directly suppress the activity
of lymphocytes (Calcagni & elenkov, 2006). Flare-ups of both oral and
genital herpes are most likely to occur when a person is experiencing
unusual stress (Cohen & herbert, 1996). The progression of hiV infection
to aidS is influenced by the person's level of stress (harper et al.,
2006). Stressed students show greater vulnerability to the virus
responsible for mononucleosis, which normally is kept in check by a
robust immune system (Cacioppo & Berntson, 2011). Unfortunately,
knowledge of these relationships can place an even greater burden on
sick people, who may be led to believe that their illness wouldn't be so
bad if they were somehow better at managing stress. Stress related to
our social relationships seems to be especially harmful to our ability
to stay healthy. a meta-analysis of almost 300 studies and about 20,000
participants demonstrated that chronic stressors affecting people's
social roles (e.g., death of a loved one or divorce) produce the
greatest suppression of the immune system (Segerstrom & Miller, 2004).
in particular, stressors that are outside a person's sense of control
and lead to little hope for improvement have the most damaging effects.
Those who are older and already ill are especially susceptible to
adverse consequences of stress.

Many of the dangers faced by these San hunters in South Africa are
likely to arise and resolve quickly. Our responses to stress are better
suited for short-term stressors than for many of the ongoing, chronic
sources of stress that we face.

lymphocyte White blood cells that are products of the immune system.

Type A personality A competitive, workaholic, and in some cases hostile
personality type.

Type B personality A mellow, laid-back personality type.

Meyer Friedman and Ray Rosenman (1974) stimulated a large quantity of
research by suggesting that highly competitive workaholics, whom they
called Type A personalities, were more susceptible to heart disease than
the mellower, laid-back people they called Type B personalities. Further
study, however, showed that simply being competitive had little to do
with increased risk of heart disease. instead, the Type as who did
develop heart problems exhibited a pattern of interpersonal hostility.
The Type as most at risk for heart disease were frequently suspicious,
angry, and resentful of other people. it is possible that their own
hostile behavior provoked more hostile situations and reactions from
others, confirming their worldview and maintaining their negative
behavior. in addition, hostile people are not likely to build up
networks of friends and loved ones, who are often our best protectors
from the untoward effects of stress (Jackson et al., 2007). in
middle-aged adults, frequent conflict with members of a person's social
network raised the risk of death 200% to 300% (lund et al., 2014).
Stress puts the cardiovascular system at risk by affecting the ability
of blood vessels to expand when necessary. People whose arteries are
already stiff or clogged because of age, poor fitness, or disease often
suffer from high blood pressure and might be especially susceptible to
heart attacks following stress. in a heart attack, interruptions of
blood flow to the heart trigger death of a part of the cardiac muscle.
Flexible blood vessels maintain blood flow and blood pressure and lessen
the chances of a heart attack. To test the effects of stress on blood
flow, healthy participants were given a standardized mental stress task
in which colored buttons were to be pushed as quickly as possible in
response to flashing lights of the same color (Spieker, 2002). For the
following 45 minutes, the ability of the participants' blood vessels to
expand was reduced by a factor of 50%. a participant's change in blood
pressure in response to a stressful situation was predictive of a later
diagnosis with hypertension, or high blood pressure, which can lead to
heart attacks or stroke (Spieker et al., 2002).

Ollyy/Shutterstock.com

Stress and Heart Disease

Research shows that in middle-aged adults, frequent conflict with
members of a person's social network increased the risk of death by 200%
to 300%.

hOW dOeS STReSS aFFeCT OUR healTh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

651

ConneCting to ReseaRch Social Challenges Early in Life Affect the
Developing Immune System

The Question: How does adverse early life experience affect later
health?

METHODS In Chapter 11, we reviewed work by Harry Harlow in which infant
rhesus monkeys were raised by cloth and wire surrogate "mothers" to
investigate questions about attachment. Steven Cole and his colleagues
(2012) also exposed infant rhesus monkeys to surrogate mothers, other
peers, or both instead of their real mothers. The researchers then
conducted analyses of genetic changes in the infant monkeys' immune
systems.

ETHICS Some would object to the removal of an infant monkey from its
parent because we know from other research that this can have long-term
negative effects. The researchers would need to demonstrate "necessity,"
which means that they cannot answer their research question with other
methods and that the importance of their research question justifies the
harm being done to the animals.

expressed. Their results were similar to genetic studies of adults who
had experienced adverse childhood events. These changes help to explain
why people with early social challenges have a more difficult time
responding to diseases caused by bacteria or viruses. ■

RESULTS When the monkeys were only 4 months old, the researchers
identified changes in the expression of genes in the monkeys' developing
immune systems. Genes that were related to inflammation and activation
of the immune system were more active in monkeys raised by peers or by
peers plus a surrogate mother than in monkeys raised by their biological
mothers. Genes involved in basic defenses against bacteria and viruses
were less active in these monkeys than in the monkeys raised by their
biological mothers.

CONCLUSIONS The researchers believed that sympathetic nervous system
responses to the stress of being raised by peers or a surrogate mother
and peers changed the basic way in which genes important to the immune
system were

stevenku/Shutterstock.com

IN THIS TEXTBOOK, WE HAVE explored a number of examples of interactions
between people's genetic makeup and their life experiences that predict
psychological and physical health. We have also seen how some early life
experiences, such as child maltreatment, seem to have especially
pronounced effects on people's outcomes throughout the rest of their
life. What is there about experiences early in life that is so
important? How does the experience of stress early in life affect health
later? To examine these questions, researchers evaluated the effects of
early stress on genetic pathways that shape the immune system (Cole et
al., 2012).

Rhesus infants raised by surrogate mothers or peers experienced changes
in the expression of genes related to their immune systems. These
results help explain the connection between adverse childhood
experiences and poor adult health outcomes.

Stress, Mood, Sleep, and Obesity as discussed in Chapters 4 and 14,
mood, sleep, and appetite are closely intertwined. a change in one of
these behaviors usually results in changes in the others. long-term,
chronic stress can begin a cascade of changes in mood, sleep, and
appetite that compromise wellbeing. disruptions of sleep because of
stress are particularly hazardous to health because we need sleep to
restore our bodies after the challenges of the day. Both sleep quantity
and sleep quality are associated with both overall health and cognitive
outcomes (hawkley & Cacioppo, 2010). Stress frequently serves as a
trigger for a depressed mood. Self-reports of daily stressors, like
having an argument with a friend, were correlated with the participants'
mood (Stader & hokanson, 1998). The ability of stress to alter levels of
circulating cortisol, discussed earlier in this chapter, might form the
basis for this connection between stress and depressed mood. as

652

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

observed in Chapter 14, many people diagnosed with Mdd show signs of
abnormal cortisol function (aihara et al., 2007). Cortisol is not
released just in response to perceived stressors. as observed in Chapter
6, it also plays a role in maintaining our natural cycles of sleep and
waking. Cortisol is released in large quantities early in the morning,
contributing to wakefulness. as the day progresses, cortisol levels drop
off, reducing wakefulness and setting the stage for sleep. if you
experience a big jolt of cortisol because of a stressor late in the
evening, getting to sleep is going to be difficult, even when you're
tired. even when you do get to sleep, high levels of cortisol interfere
with good sleep quality (Van Cauter et al., 2000). high levels of stress
and Mdd can both produce sleep disturbances, especially the experience
of waking frequently Long before vaccinations and antibiotics were
throughout the night (Koenigsberg et al., 2004). Mood and sleep can both
affect appetite. among the criteria for Mdd available, death rates
because of infectious are changes in appetite. Some people who are
depressed lose weight without diseases began to drop in the United
States. dieting, while others gain weight. By now, it shouldn't surprise
you to learn Improved wages and nutrition, coupled with that stress,
along with depression, also can contribute to obesity. in response more
rest time away from work, allowed people to stress-related hormones, fat
cells behave differently, growing in both size to recover from their
daily stresses (Cacioppo & and number (Kuo et al., 2009). Stressed mice
gained more weight than mice Berntson, 2011). that were not stressed,
even when both were fed the same high-fat, highsugar diet. in addition
to this direct effect of stress on appetite, stress can produce indirect
effects on obesity by interfering with sleep. dieters who enjoyed a full
night's sleep lost the same amount of weight as dieters who slept less,
but there was a difference in the kind of weight that was lost
(nedeltcheva et al., 2010). dieters who slept well lost a healthy amount
of fat, while sleep-deprived dieters lost only half as much fat as the
sleeping dieters, and three-quarters of their weight loss consisted of
precious bone and muscle tissue instead of fat (see ● Figure 16.6).

3.5

Weight loss in kilograms

3 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0

5.5 hours of sleep 8.5 hours of sleep Total weight lost

Body fat lost

Lean body mass lost

Weight loss

Figure 16.6 Sleep and Diet Interact. Participants who slept 8.5 hours
per night lost about the same amount of weight during a treatment
program as participants who slept 5.5 hours per night, but the two
groups differed in the amount of body fat and lean body mass that was
lost. The group that slept 8.5 hours per night lost more body fat and
less lean body mass, which is characteristic of desirable weight loss,
than the group that slept 5.5 hours per night. These results remind us
that many of our health habits are intimately interconnected, and that
changing one can have a large effect on others. Source: Adapted from A.
V. Nedeltcheva et al. (2010). "Insufficient Sleep Undermines Dietary
Efforts to Reduce Adiposity," Annals of Internal Medicine, 153,
435--441. doi: 10.1059/0003-4819-153-7-201010050-00006

hOW dOeS STReSS aFFeCT OUR healTh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

653

An Integrated View of Stress and Health We have reviewed a number of
studies in this section that demonstrate the adverse effects that
chronic, prolonged stress can have on our health. Popular wisdom
suggests that people with the highest levels of stress should therefore
experience the worst health. however, we have already seen one example,
the healthy Type as, in which this was not the case. in another study,
5,000 men reported their stress levels, which were then compared 20
years later to their medical records. Surprisingly, the men who had
reported the highest levels of stress had experienced the least amount
of heart disease (Macleod et al., 2002). how can we explain these
apparently contradictory results? One approach to reconciling the good
health enjoyed by some stressed people with data demonstrating the
harmful effects of stress in others is to step back and look at whole
persons within their environments over the entire life span. health can
be described as not just the absence of disease, but also as the ability
to respond to the challenges of being alive (Juster et al., 2010).
Personal factors, including your genes, interact with the parental care
that you receive, as discussed previously in this chapter. Other
protective factors, such as your social networks and sense of meaning or
purpose in life, contribute to your resilience in the face of the
negative and cumulative effects of a lifetime of responding to stressors
(Cacioppo & Berntson, 2011). These protective factors occur at critical
periods, such as the impact of parenting in early childhood, so a
complete understanding of protective mechanisms should be examined
within the context of life-span development. Once we fully understand
these protective processes, psychologists should be in the exciting
position of being able to design effective interventions for improving
health and well-being (see ● Figure 16.7).

Figure 16.7 ms ste y ls ca s il ti ce rvi se d an

MICRO

Family

Wo r

k

M i c ro s y t e m i n te rc onnections

Mass media

ni ca tio ns

l

u m m o C

on

ic sy ste ms

oo

Legal systems

S

p ns Tra

or ta tio n

Neighborhood

t agencies ernmen Gov

Go od s

MESO

rou Peer g ps

Race/ethnicity

Soc ial no rm Soc s ial ne tw or ks

EXO

ch

om on Ec

Source: Adapted from R.-P. Juster et al. (2010). "Allostatic Load
Biomarkers of Chronic Stress and Impact on Health and Cognition,"
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(1), 2--16. doi:10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2009.10.002

Po

MACRO

An Interactive View of Stress and Health. Individuals do not experience
stress in a vacuum. Personal factors, like genes and everyday
experiences, influence outcomes within an environment consisting of
ever-larger circles of social connectivity. The relationships between
social environment and personal factors are reciprocal. Individual
actions influence the social environment, which in turn influences
individual factors.

i at uc d E

Culture

654

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology as a hub science Belongingness, Stress, Achievement, and
Health WE DON'T NEED TO TELL YOU that being in college can be stressful.
For many students, college can mean new environments, new rules and
routines, new social interactions, less sleep, not-so-great eating
habits, and more sitting than exercising. Can the application of
psychological research make the transition into college easier and less
stressful? We can't make many of these stressors go away, but a simple,
one-time intervention at the beginning of the first year of college made
a large difference in the academic performance and health of a group of
students in one study (Walton & Cohen, 2011). incoming first-year
students at Stanford University were randomly assigned to a control
group or a social-belonging group. The social-belonging group read what
they thought were the results of a survey of older students, who said
that they had worried about fitting in during their first year but had
grown more confident over time. Participants were asked to write an
essay comparing their own first-year experiences with the survey results
and then deliver a speech based on their essay to a video camera for use
with future students. at no time were the participants aware that they
were actually experiencing a "treatment" designed to make them see the
social stressors of college life as typical of all students and of short
duration. Over the next three years, the participants' grade point
averages (GPas) and health were monitored. The "belongingness"
intervention had little impact on the health and grades of White
students, but it had significant and positive effects on african
american students. Compared to african american students in the control
group, the students who had received the one-time reassurance that their
concerns about fitting in were normal and were not permanent had higher
grades, fewer visits to the doctor, and higher subjective happiness (see
● Figure 16.8). While further research is necessary to know how far
these results can be generalized to other students, the results
emphasize the importance to your overall performance, health, and
well-being of how you interpret your situation and whether you feel like
you belong. ■

Subjective happiness

7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Randomized control group Social-belonging treatment White students

African American students

Figure 16.8 a belongingness intervention improved the Performance and
Health of african american College Students. A one-time treatment aimed
at framing the stress of fitting in to the college experience as common
to most students and limited in duration significantly improved the
grade point averages, happiness ratings, and health of African American
students at Stanford University three years later. White students did
not experience the same treatment-related differences, with both treated
and nontreated White students experiencing the same health and
subjective happiness as the treated African American students. This
result suggests that "fitting in" was already framed by White students
in positive ways. Source: Adapted from G. M. Walton & G. L. Cohen
(2011). "A Brief Social-Belonging Intervention Improves Academic and
Health Outcomes of Minority Students," Science, 331(6023), 1447--1451.
doi:10.1126/science.1198364

hOW dOeS STReSS aFFeCT OUR healTh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

655

How Can We Cope Effectively With Stress? Steven
Errico/DigitalVision/Getty Images

Stress is inevitable. That simple statement does not imply that there is
nothing you can do about stress. Psychologists have identified a number
of strategies that people can use to effectively reduce the negative
impacts of stress on their happiness and health. One of the most
positive aspects of stress is that we adapt to it over time. Take a
minute to jot down the things that you found most stressful five years
ago and then make a list of the stressors that you face today. Would you
trade today's list for the one from five years ago? Most people would do
so in a heartbeat. life gets more complicated and often more stressful,
but our skills for coping improve at the same time. People tend to
report less stress as they get older (Shields, 2004). earlier in this
chapter, we described the role of cognitive appraisal in identifying a
stimulus or event as a stressor. appraisal plays an important role in
coping with identified stressors as well. Once a stressor has been
identified, a second set of appraisals occurs that guides our coping
responses (lazarus, 1966). What harm has already occurred? What threats
remain? What resources do we need to overcome the challenge? Taking
conscious control of our appraisals can contribute to our ability to
cope.

The stress of middle school, such as attending school dances, is real to
students at the time, but as we get older and more experienced, our
capacity to manage stress improves. With age, people report feeling less
stress, even though stressors tend to become more complicated and
numerous at the same time.

Managing Stress

Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com

an obvious starting place for keeping your levels of stress low is to
ask whether stressors can be eliminated. if you feel stressed about
having too much to do and too little time to do it, it might be possible
to reduce your workload or practice better time management skills. if
money is tight, a visit to your camEven when a stressor takes us by
surprise, we can regain pus's financial aid office might provide you
with solutions a sense of control. Viktor Frankl (1959, p. 161), a
Holocaust that you had not considered. The worst possible approach is
survivor, developed what he described as "tragic optimism" to withdraw
and avoid stressors in the vain hope that they for coping with
unforeseen disasters. Instead of asking why will go away. your latest
credit card statement is not going to get better magically if you ignore
it. in fact, your emotional these disasters should happen to us, Frankl
recommends that people exert a sense of control by asking, "How can I
face this response to seeing the statement on your desk every day is
likely to get a lot worse over time. disaster with courage and
responsibility?" a major variable that predicts our response to stress
is the sense of control. Feeling surprised by life or out of control can
lead to significant stress. Some of the worst stressors are those that
seem to strike randomly, such as being diagnosed with lung cancer when
you never smoked (Pietrzak et al., 2011). These seemingly random events
undercut our sense of control, countering the belief that "if i don't
smoke, i am ensuring that my lungs will stay healthy." Many stressors
are out of our control, however. We can't wish our cancer away or
magically ensure that enough money appears in our bank accounts to pay
this month's bills. however, we can respond to our stressors in ways
that reduce our overall stress. This approach is consistent with the
elements of positive psychology, which we review later in this chapter.
even if you are struggling with a life-threatening disease, stress can
be reduced by educating yourself as much as possible about your
condition and participating fully in decisions about your treatment.
Residents of nursing homes who have more control over their choice of
daily activities live longer than those who are not given such choices
(Rodin, 1986). We observed in Chapter 12 that stressors have less effect
on people who experience an internal locus of control, which means that
they believe that most of their outcomes result from their personal
efforts, as opposed to luck, chance, opportunities, or other external
forces. Because of the inevitability of stress, people cope best when
they keep themselves as Patients who educate themselves healthy as
possible. if you follow good health habits, stress might still deplete
your reserves about their conditions and participate and inhibit your
immune system, but a healthy body can take more abuse than an unhealthy
fully in treatment decisions one. Students are more likely to get sick
during final exams if they have neglected good eating, experience less
stress. exercise, and sleeping habits all term long.

656

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Figure 16.9

20

Exercise Reduces Mortality in Stressed Cardiac Patients. People with
cardiovascular disease were assessed for psychosocial stress levels
during a rehabilitation program that included exercise. A control group
did not have a formal exercise program. Based on their improvement in
physical measures following the exercise program, the study participants
were divided into low and high exercise change groups. In a follow-up
five years later, high levels of physical improvement because of
exercise did not affect the mortality of the low psychosocial stress
group but significantly reduced mortality in the high-stress group.

15 10 5 Low stress 0

High stress No exercise

Little improvement due to exercise

Greater improvement due to exercise

Exercise group

Regular aerobic exercise appears to be especially helpful. in one
experiment, people with heart disease were observed as they engaged in
exercise as part of their rehabilitation programs. The exercise reduced
the overall stress levels of all participants (Milani & lavie, 2009).
exercise seemed particularly beneficial for the participants who also
scored high on psychosocial stress. none of the high-stress participants
who showed the greatest physical benefits from exercise (such as
increased oxygen uptake) died in the follow-up period, compared to 19%
of the high-stress participants who showed relatively low physical
benefits from exercise (see ● Figure 16.9). Students would be wise to
engage in some level of activity to offset the effects of increased
stress. in Chapter 15, we discussed the use of mindfulness in the
treatment of anxiety and Mdd. Mindfulness, or the trained awareness of
our current thoughts, emotions, and actions, has also been shown to be
an effective method for reducing stress (Tang & Posner, 2009). in
Chapter 6, we explored the effects of the altered state of consciousness
produced through meditation. although many people meditate within a
religious context, a large meta-analysis indicated that meditation is an
effective strategy for reducing psychological stress (Goyal et al.,
2014). One of the most powerful antidotes to unhealthy effects of stress
is social connectedness and support. Social support from friends and
family and belief systems that allow a person to make sense of the world
provide powerful buffers against stress (Montpetit et al., 2010). as we
have argued on many occasions in this textbook, people with good social
relationships and support are far less vulnerable to adverse health and
psychological conditions than are people who are lonely and isolated
(hostinar et al., 2013; Cacioppo et al., 2015). in times of distress,
people frequently turn to others in an effort to cope. according to a
study of responses to the terrorist attacks of 9/11, nearly 100% of the
participants reported sharing their thoughts and feelings about the
attacks with other people (Schuster et al., 2002). More than 90%
reported either praying or engaging in spiritual contemplation
appropriate to their faith. More than 60% engaged in relevant public
activities. nearly 40% focused on the needs of others by donating money
or blood to relief efforts. Understanding the importance of social
support for coping helps to explain why people living in poor
neighborhoods often experience more stress and have higher rates of Mdd.
living in a neighborhood where few people know one another or help one
another with tasks like child care increases the risk of developing Mdd
(Russell & Cutrona, 2010). These socially disconnected neighborhoods
become more prevalent as the income of the residents decreases, making
people living below the poverty line especially vulnerable to stress and
depression. although it is ideal to receive your social support from
other people, having a pet can also provide benefits to your health.
Stockbrokers with high blood pressure who lived alone were selected to
receive a cat or dog from a local shelter (allen, 2003). When stressed,
the pet owners experienced a much lower increase in blood pressure than
their petless counterparts. The effect was most obvious among
participants who listed few social connections with other people. among
individuals with alzheimer's disease in residential care, the use of
robotic pets was not only associated with reduced anxiety and stress,
but also with reduced need for pain medication and psychoactive
medications (Petersen et al., 2017).

Source: Adapted from R. V. Milani & C. J. Lavie (2009). "Reducing
Psychosocial Stress: A Novel Mechanism of Improving Survival from
Exercise Training," American Journal of Medicine, 122(10), 931--938.
doi:10.1016/ j.amjmed.2009.03.028

Spc. Terence Ewings, 4th AAB PAO, 1st Cav. Div., USD-N/photo courtesy of
U.S. Army

Alexander Raths/Photos.com

Percentage mortality

25

Specialist Lawrence Shipman and Sergeant First Class Jonathan Zeke, a
combat stress--relief dog, received an award for their work in reducing
the stress of soldiers deployed in Iraq. Shipman notes that Zeke acts as
an icebreaker, encouraging soldiers to talk to the behavioral health
counselors.

hOW Can We COPe eFFeCTiVely WiTh STReSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

657

Fiona Hanson/PA Images/Alamy Stock Photo

to stress designed to address specific problems by finding solutions.

emotion-focused coping A response to stress that targets the negative
emotions arising from the situation.

relationship-focused coping A response to stress designed to maintain
and protect social relationships.

Coping with a stressor can take three forms: problem-focused,
emotion-focused, and relationship-focused (O'Brien & delongis, 1996). in
each case, positive and negative versions of each style can be observed.
Problem-focused coping is designed to address an issue head-on. if you
just flunked an important exam, positive problem-focused coping
strategies might include making an appointment with your professor to
discuss your options, hiring a tutor, taking a study skills seminar, or
joining a study group formed by your classmates. negative
problem-focused coping can include escape and avoidance. instead of
confronting the problem, a student might stop going to class.
Problem-focused coping is more frequently used for work-related
stressors, which would include schoolwork, than for interpersonal
stressors like the breakup of an important relationship (Terry, 1994).
Emotion-focused coping helps you deal with the negative emotions
associated with a stressor. Flunking an exam might make you feel sad,
discouraged, and depressed. Positive coping with these negative emotions
might involve sharing your concerns with your friends or family, taking
a break from your studies to enjoy a movie or go for a jog, or, when the
negative emotions seem overwhelming, visiting your campus's counseling
center for advice. negative emotion-focused coping, such as eating food
that you do not need or using alcohol to dull your stress, might simply
add to your problems and increase your overall levels of stress.
Relationship-focused coping helps you maintain and protect social
relationships in response to stress (O'Brien & delongis, 1996). This
type of coping has both positive and negative aspects. For example,
people caring for alzheimer's patients, which can be stressful,
exhibited both positive coping, including empathy, support, and
compromise; and negative coping, including confronting, ignoring,
blaming, and withdrawal (Kramer, 1993). as we have seen so frequently in
our discussions of human behavior, the choice of a coping approach
results from interactions between people and the situation in question
(aldwin, 1994). For example, people who score high on the Big Five trait
of neuroticism (discussed in Chapter 12) tend to experience more
distress than people with low neuroticism scores (Bolger & Schilling,
1991). When responding to stressors in the work situation, people high
in neuroticism are more likely to engage in negative problem-focused
coping, such as escaping the situation (O'Brien & delongis, 1996). When
dealing with interpersonal stress, however, people with high neuroticism
use the negative relationship-focused coping strategy of confrontation.

At times of stress, we often engage in three types of coping. (a)
Problemfocused coping is usually used to solve problems at work. (b)
Emotionfocused coping helps us deal with the negative emotions of
stress. The use of strategies like overeating, however, can lead to more
problems. (c) Relationship-focused coping helps us maintain and
strengthen social networks at times of stress.

658

Chapter 16

(b) 

Lucky Business/Shutterstock.com

(a) 
(b) 

suhendri/Shutterstock.com

problem-focused coping A response

Three Types of Coping

Image navi - QxQ images/Alamy Stock Photo

Owning a pet confers many advantages, but individuals with dementia
usually cannot care for a pet properly. The PARO robotic seal has
produced such positive effects that many insurance companies are willing
to pay the over \$6,000 required to provide this "pet" to patients.

Many people find that having religious beliefs helps them cope with
stress. People who report having religious beliefs appear to withstand
the challenges of unemployment, low income, and widowhood better than
people who report no religious beliefs (diener & Seligman, 2004). in a
sample of middle-aged and older adults with higher than average numbers
of serious life stressors, religious service attendance was associated
with lower levels of inflammation (ironson et al., 2018). across a
number of nations practicing different forms of religion, a higher rate
of belief in a god predicts higher ratings of life satisfaction and
lower rates of suicide (helliwell, 2003).

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cover d esi Books/E gned by Two A bury Pu blishing ssociates/Court esy
Ride r

Resilience: Individual Differences in Response to Stress

Katharina Vesely/Imagno/Getty Images

People with high neuroticism also cope differently with stress involving
close relationships (significant others, family members, and close
friends) than with stress involving distant relationships (coworkers and
neighbors). They are more likely to use a positive relationship-focused
coping method, empathy, when dealing with distant relationships than
when dealing with close relationships (O'Brien & delongis, 1996).

Austrian psychiatrist Viktor Frankl you might have observed that under
the same stressful circumstances, such as an upcoming (1905--1997) was
sent to the dreaded exam, some students seem calm and others appear to
be in a state of panic. What determines Nazi concentration camp
Auschwitz, these individual differences in coping? where he lost his
pregnant wife, We have already seen how epigenetic interactions between
genes and nurturing can influparents, and brother. Frankl used his ence
later responses to stress. in addition, people differ in resilience, or
the ability to adapt experiences in developing his theories to life's
challenges in positive ways. early research in resilience focused on
children's ability of logotherapy, after logos, the Greek to thrive even
in conditions of poverty, neglect, and abuse (Masten et al., 1999). low
resilient word for "meaning." The ability to find people have higher
levels of perceived stress (García-león et al., 2019). Resilient people
do not meaning even in the depths of despair ignore feelings of sadness
or stress, but like holocaust survivor Viktor Frankl, they remain opby
recalling pleasant memories or timistic and confident about their
abilities to cope with adversity. in contrast, when people lack helping
a suicidal inmate helped resilience, they feel overwhelmed, helpless,
and victimized. They become more vulnerable to the Frankl survive the
stress and horror use of negative coping strategies, including
alcoholism and drug abuse, to escape their problems. surrounding him.
The personality trait of hardiness contributes to resilience (Maddi,
2006). as mentioned in Chapter 12, a personality trait is likely to be
stable and enduring over time. Compared to less hardy people, people
with high hardiness experience less threat or People who write "scripts"
for how their life disruption in response to the normal stressors of
life. hardiness combines "should" happen, such as thinking that everyone
commitment, control, and challenge (Bartone, 2000). People with high
commitment see the world as interesting and seek involvement rather than
should enjoy a set schedule of activities over a withdrawal. Control
refers to individuals' belief in their ability to influence holiday,
often experience high stress levels when events. Challenge is a state of
mind that sees change and new experiences events take an unexpected
turn. Maintaining a not as negative stressors, but as opportunities for
learning and personal flexible approach to meeting your life's goals is
far growth. among college students, hardiness did not predict grades,
but it less likely to create stress. was negatively correlated with
health complaints and stress related to academic work (hystad et al.,
2009; also see ● Figure 16.10). resilience The ability to adapt to
life's challenges in positive ways.

10

Number of health complaints

9 8 7

Figure 16.10

6 5

Hardiness Protects Students From the Health Impacts of Stress. The
personality trait of hardiness, which combines commitment, a sense of
control, and the appraisal of stressors as challenges, seems to protect
college students from the health consequences of high academic stress.

4 3 2 1 0

Low hardiness High hardiness Low academic stress

High academic stress

Source: Adapted from S. W. Hystad et al. (2009). "Academic Stress and
Health: Exploring the Moderating Role of Personality Hardiness,"
Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 53(5), 421--429.
doi:10.1080/00313830903180349

hOW Can We COPe eFFeCTiVely WiTh STReSS?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

659

Other protective factors contributing to individual differences in
resilience are cognitive skills, social skills, and flexibility in
response to new situations (Garmezy, 1991). individual differences in
resilience might also have their roots in emotion. People who are
generally more positive in mood tend to build the resources that they
need, including strong social networks, to sustain them at difficult
times (Cohn et al., 2009).

summary 16.1 Stages in Hans Selye's General Adaptation Syndrome stage

What's Happening?

Alarm

Mobilization of resources for fight-or-flight

Resistance

Continued coping with chronic stress

Exhaustion

Systems begin to fail

Credits: Top row---AP Images; Second row---Sgt. Jessika Malott, 8th MP
Bde. Public Affairs/photo courtesy of U.S. Army; Bottom
row---oliveromg/Shutterstock.com

What Is the relationship Between psychology and Health?

health psychology A branch of psychology that investigates the
relationships between psychological variables and health.
biopsychosocial model A model that sees health as the result of
biological, psychological, and social factors.

660

Chapter 16

you might be surprised to see a section about health psychology in your
psychology textbook. isn't health the exclusive domain of medical
personnel rather than of psychologists? it all depends on how you define
health. For most of its history, the field of medicine viewed health as
a lack of disease (Juster et al., 2010). Treatments were designed to
make sick people feel better. in more recent years, however, health has
been more commonly defined as the attainment of a positive state of
well-being rather than simply the absence of disease. Medicine today is
more likely to use a biopsychosocial model of health, in which health is
viewed as the sum of biological (such as genetics, infection, and
injury), psychological (such as lifestyle, stress, and health beliefs),
and social factors (such as culture, family, and social support; Mcewen
& Gianaros, 2011) (see ● Figure 16.11). in 1948, the World health
Organization (WhO) proposed a definition that reflects this more
contemporary model of health: "a state of complete physical, mental, and
social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity"
(World health Organization \[WhO\], 2003, para. 1). in addition to
making sick people feel better, which is an important

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ENVIRONMENTAL STRESSORS

MAJOR LIFE EVENTS

Figure 16.11

TRAUMA, ABUSE

Perceived stress (threats, helplessness, vigilance)

Individual differences (genes, development, experience)

A Biopsychosocial Model of Health. Health today is viewed as the product
of interactions among individual characteristics, life experiences,
cognitions, and behavior. Source: Adapted from R.-P. Juster et al.
(2010). "Allostatic Load Biomarkers of Chronic Stress and Impact on
Health and Cognition," Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(1),
2--16. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.10.002

Behavioral responses \[fight-or-flight, personal behavior (e.g, diet,
smoking, drinking, exercise)\]

forestpath/Shutterstock.com

Physical responses

Adaptation

HEALTH OUTCOMES

function of medicine, this new view of health seeks to improve the
well-being of people who are not currently sick. One reason for this
transition from the biomedical model to the biopsychosocial model is the
changing face of health and medicine over the last 100 years or so.
Because of improved sanitation and vaccination, the threats to health
faced today are quite different from those faced by earlier generations.
in 1900, the leading causes of death in the United States were
pneumonia, influenza, and tuberculosis, but by 2005, the leading causes
of death were heart disease, cancer, lung disease, and stroke (see ●
Figure 16.12). in other words, we have gone from facing major threats
from infectious, short-duration conditions to noninfectious, long-term
conditions. Perhaps this is one of the reasons why the threat of
COVid-19 has been difficult to grasp---it is not typical of the health
threats we normally face today. in the last few decades, considerable
progress was made in the treatment of heart disease, cancer, and stroke.
This improvement in turn has resulted in a larger number of americans
who are living long enough to be diagnosed with age-related conditions
such as alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

Figure 16.12

Suicide Kidney disease

Leading Causes of Death in the United States. Over the last 100 years,
infectious diseases had been replaced as the leading causes of death in
the United States until the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Influenza and pneumonia

Cause of death

Diabetes Alzheimer's disease Stroke

Source: Adapted from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC; 2020). "Leading Causes of Death." Retrieved from https://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/leading-causes-of -death.htm

Chronic lower respiratory disease Accidents COVID-19 Cancer Heart
disease 0

100

200 300 400 500 Deaths per year (thousands)

600

700

WhaT iS The RelaTiOnShiP BeTWeen PSyChOlOGy and healTh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

661

The contemporary leading causes of death just listed (heart disease,
cancer, lung disease, and stroke) form significant interactions with
behavior because their risk factors include obesity, smoking, lack of
exercise, and alcohol consumption. even when we consider infectious
diseases, we see evidence of strong behavioral components, such as the
amount of stress that you're experiencing (Cohen et al., 1991) or the
likelihood that you practice prevention by social distancing, washing
your hands, or wearing a mask. in addition, lifestyle factors and
adherence to treatment plans can be extremely important to achieving and
maintaining wellness. health psychologists are interested in helping
people to better prevent and recover from disease and to cope with the
stress of chronic health problems and pain. When we discuss the
contributions of behavior to health, by no means do we want to "blame
the victims" of poor health. People who have never smoked still get lung
cancer, and thin, fit people get heart disease. The relationships
between lifestyle factors and health are derived from the statistical
analyses of large populations, not single individuals. at the same time,
understanding that most people who engage in particular behaviors have
certain health outcomes can provide us with clues for maintaining the
healthiest lifestyles possible.

Behavior and Health Consumer Reports conducted a survey of 1,000
americans to see how many engaged in everyday prevention behaviors
(Consumerreports.com, 2009). as shown in ● Table 16.2, the respondents
did rather well in a number of categories (91% read the warnings that
come with a prescription drug, and 87% report not drinking beer while
using a power tool or mower) but neglected some obvious preventive steps
(58% never wear a bike helmet, 24% report being in a car without using a
seat belt, and 27% do not use sunscreen when outdoors for an extended
period). We do worry about those 13% who are drinking beer while using
power tools or mowing the lawn, but the point is that many of our
choices contribute to the prevention of accidents and disease. Behaviors
that contribute to our major causes of death include smoking, poor
nutrition, alcohol use, lack of exercise, and loneliness (see ● Figure
16.13), which are discussed in more detail in the following sections.

table 16.2 Americans' Safety Practices behavior

yes

no

Use cotton swabs to clean ears

73%

26%

Let your kids play on a trampoline

43%

56%

Eat raw dough when making cookies

39%

61%

Use the top step of a ladder

31%

69%

Fail to use the car's seat belt

24%

75%

Drink beer while using a power tool or mower

13%

87%

Have a rubber mat in the shower

39%

61%

Have a carbon-monoxide detector in home

51%

48%

Eat burgers only well done

67%

32%

Change batteries in the smoke alarm annually

79%

21%

Clean lint trap in the dryer after each use

81%

18%

Read warnings on prescription medicines

91%

9%

Wear a bike helmet

42%

58%

Wear sunscreen when outside for an extended time

73%

27%

Source: Adapted from ConsumerReports.com (2009). "Risky Business."
Retrieved from http://www.consumerreports.org
/cro/magazine-archive/march-2009/money/risk-taking/overview/risk-taking-ov.htm

662

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90

Figure 16.13

84.3

70 60 50

50.0

48.1

40

35.4

31.8

27.8

30

23.7

20 9.1

10 0

4.0 Never smoked

BMI \< 30

Physical activity ≥ 3.5 hours/week

Health habits

Diet index \> median

0

1

2

3

Number of health habits followed

4

Julian Rovagnati/Shutterstock.com

Percentage of participants

80

Four Simple Habits Make Major Contributions to Health. Following four
simple health habits---never smoking, exercising 30 minutes per day,
maintaining a nonobese weight, and eating a healthy diet including
fruits and vegetables---reduced overall risk of chronic disease by 78%.
Unfortunately, only 9.1% of a sample of more than 20,000 adults between
35 and 65 years of age had all four habits. Most people reported
following only one to three of the four health habits. Source: Adapted
from E. S. Ford et al. (2009). "Healthy Living Is the Best Revenge:
Findings from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and
Nutrition--Potsdam Study," Archives of Internal Medicine, 169(15),
1355--1362. doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2009.237

Prevalence (%)

Tobacco Use Cigarette smoking is considered to be the leading
preventable cause of death in the United States, with a direct
responsibility in one of five deaths each year (Centers for disease
Control and Prevention \[CdC\], 2020c). Over 8 million people worldwide
die due to tobacco each year (WhO, 2020b). On average, smokers die
13--14 years earlier than nonsmokers. Tobacco use can lead to additional
health problems. nicotine is a well-established gateway drug, capable of
producing epigenetic changes that 35 increase the likelihood of
addiction to cocaine (li et al., 2014). 2017 2007 Tobacco's effects are
not restricted to its users either. in the 30 United States, exposure of
nonsmokers to secondhand smoke 27.0 causes 7,300 lung cancer deaths,
34,000 premature deaths 25 from heart disease, 8,000 deaths in
nonsmokers from stroke, 22.5 22.1 21.6 higher rates of SidS, and asthma
attacks and ear infections in 19.5 19.2 20 children (CdC, 2020b).
Cigarette smokers in the United States dropped from 13.9 15 21% of
adults in 2005 to just 13.7% in 2018 (CdC, 2019; 11.2 Jamal et al.,
2016). Worldwide rates also continue to drop (see 10 ● Figure 16.14;
WhO, 2020b). Gender, race, ethnicity, education, mental health, and in5
come are strong determinants of the likelihood of smoking. in the United
States, men are more likely to smoke than women 0 (15.6%, as opposed to
12%). american indians or alaska High-income Middle-income Low-income
Global natives reported the highest incidence of smoking (22.6%),
countries countries countries followed by non-hispanic multirace
individuals (19.1%), nonhispanic Whites (15%), non-hispanic Blacks
(14.6%), hispanics (9.8%), and Figure 16.14 asians (7.1%).
lesbian/gay/bisexual individuals were more likely to smoke cigarettes
(20.6%) than heterosexual individuals (13.5%). Smoking drops with Fewer
People Are Smoking Cigarettes. Between increasing education, from 36% of
individuals with a general equivalency 2007 and 2017, global rates of
smoking among adults diploma (Ged) certificate to 3.7% of adults with a
graduate degree. Poverty dropped from 22.5% to 19.2%. At the same time,
plays a strong role in smoking; 26.1% of adults living below the poverty
line however, use of e-cigarettes and heated tobacco compared to 13.9%
living at or above the poverty line report smoking. increased. It is
unclear how much of the drop in you might be wondering how trends
regarding e-cigarettes (i.e., vaping) cigarette smoking is related to
these alternate might influence these numbers. it is unclear how much of
the overall decline patterns of use. in cigarette use is related to
e-cigarette use. in 2020, 3.2% of U.S. adults used Source: World Health
Organization (WHO; 2019). WHO report e-cigarettes, and 58% of these were
also current cigarette smokers (CdC, on the global tobacco epidemic,
2019. Geneva: World Health 2020a). however, among e-cigarette users aged
18--45, 40% have never used Organization. WhaT iS The RelaTiOnShiP
BeTWeen PSyChOlOGy and healTh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

663

Carlos Barria/Reuters/Newscom

regular cigarettes, suggesting that rates of e-cigarettes and cigarettes
do not always overlap. Many people use e-cigarettes to consume cannabis
alone or both cannabis and tobacco. Rates of use of e-cigarettes among
middle (4.7%) and high school students (19.6%) are dropping. Serious
lung injury attributed to e-cigarettes has resulted in legal
restrictions on the sale of some items (Blagev et al., 2019). Given the
carnage produced by tobacco, why do people start smoking and then
continue? an understanding of the initiation of tobacco use requires
combining the perspectives discussed in this textbook---development,
biological psychology, cognitive, clinical, and social/personality
psychology. Most tobacco users begin smoking in childhood or early
adolescence, long before decision-making abilities are mature. Because
of the addictive nature of nicotine, about half of those who experiment
with tobacco continue to use it. in addition to its action on synapses
where the neurotransmitter acetylcholine is released, as discussed in
Chapter 6, nicotine has the ability to stimulate the dopamine reward
circuits of the brain and to produce a particularly unpleasant set of
withdrawal symptoms. as discussed in Chapter 11, adolescence is also a
time when people try out new roles and learn important skills for
getting along with peers, frequently making them susceptible to peer
pressure. Teens often overestimate how many other people are using
tobacco, so they might begin using it to avoid looking "different"
(institute of Medicine \[iOM\], 1994). Finally, most smokers have
friends and parents who also smoke, suggesting a role for social
learning (Biglan et al., 1995). it is also possible, however, that
prenatal exposure to tobacco raises the likelihood that a child will
smoke. a troubling aspect of the initiation of smoking is the prevalence
of tobacco use among people with diagnosed psychological disorders (see
● Figure 16.15). Of the approximately 20% of american adults diagnosed
with any mental disorder (see Chapter 14), 40.6% were current
smokers---a much higher rate than that found in the general population
(Jamal et al., 2016). adults diagnosed with mental disorders smoke 31.6%
of all cigarettes consumed by adults in the United States (CdC, 2019).
Tobacco use among people with schizophrenia and other severe mental
illnesses is as high as 88%, many times higher than the approximately
14% of users in the general population as reported by the CdC (lucatch
et al., 2018). in addition, the severity of smoking, which includes such
factors as how many cigarettes are smoked per day, appears to be much
higher among people with psychological disorders than in the general
population. in a large-scale study of more than 50,000 adults who did
not live in mental institutions, individuals with serious psychological
distress (a global measure of psychological disorder) were more likely
to smoke currently and heavily and were less likely to quit than
individuals without serious psychological distress (Sung et al., 2011).
although

China is the world's largest consumer and producer of tobacco. Over 350
million Chinese smoke. Sixty percent of male Chinese physicians smoke,
compared to 3.3% of physicians in the United States. The 2011 ban on
smoking in bars, in restaurants, and on transportation does not apply to
offices and factories. The ban was required when China signed the World
Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. Public
health officials fear that the lack of an awareness program and
penalties will encourage the population to ignore the ban.

50

Figure 16.15 Psychological Distress Is Related to Higher Rates of
Smoking. Individuals identified as having high levels of psychological
distress, including being diagnosed with severe psychological disorders
such as schizophrenia, are more than three times as likely to smoke
cigarettes as people with low or no psychological distress. This might
represent efforts to self-medicate, but a causal role for tobacco in a
number of psychological disorders has not been ruled out. Source:
Adapted from A. Jamal et al. (2016). "Current Cigarette Smoking Among
Adults---United States, 2005--2015," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 65(44), 1205--1211. doi:10.15585/ mmwr.mm6544a2

664

Chapter 16

Percentage Who Smoke

40

30

20

10

High psychological distress Moderate psychological distress Low
psychological distress

0

No psychological distress

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

NeydtStock/Shutterstock.com

many smokers with psychological disorders report using cigarettes to
feel better, most began smoking long before their symptoms emerged and
they were diagnosed with a disorder (sacco et al., 2005). people do quit
smoking, although many find it difficult. again, the social nature of
our species plays a role in this process. a person's chances of
successfully quitting are reduced by 67% if a spouse smokes, 25% if a
sibling smokes, 36% if a friend smokes, and 34% if a coworker smokes
(schroeder, 2008). We are not advocating that a prospective quitter
abandon the essential social support needed at a difficult time; rather,
we are suggesting that people trying to quit smoking might benefit from
physically separating themselves when friends and family light up. as
noted in chapter 8, being exposed to conditioned stimuli, such as the
smell of tobacco, can initiate a variety of conditioned behaviors that
might make refusing a cigarette difficult for the person trying to quit.
smoking cessation programs also can take advantage of the selfreference
effect, discussed in chapter 12. this effect explains the superior
recall for information relevant to the self by suggesting that the self
serves as an important schema for organizing information. participants
experiencing interventions for smoking that were tailored to their own
lives, needs, interests, and obstacles not only were more successful at
quitting smoking, but also showed brain activity in parts of the
prefrontal cortex that are believed to participate in thinking about the
self (chua et al., 2011). the benefits of quitting smoking appear within
minutes to hours as the body begins to repair itself. after 5 years of
abstention from smoking, risk of stroke is the same for ex-smokers and
nonsmokers. after 10 years of abstention, the risk of lung cancer is cut
in half. If the smoker quits before the age of 30 years, life expectancy
remains the same as for someone who has never smoked (doll et al.,
2004).

Chuck Franklin/Alamy Stock Photo

One of the challenges that we face today is the high cost of eating a
healthy diet. If you have \$1.50 in your pocket, you can buy about 1,100
calories at McDonald's (breakfast of pancakes and sausage) or 250
calories of fresh apples. We can guess which choice financially
struggling parents with hungry children are likely to make.

iStock.com/Arsgera; istock. com/assalve

Nutrition nutrition plays a significant part in overall physical
development, including brain development, and is believed to be
responsible for many differences in psychological and health outcomes
related to ses (Rosales et al., 2009). prenatally, the maternal diet can
have long-lasting epigenetic effects on a child's later risk for disease
(Randunu & Bertolo, 2020). people need the right amount and quality of
nutrients to support optimum health and brain functioning, and being
either underweight or obese is associated with reduced health. obesity
increases the rates of many chronic conditions, including heart disease,
stroke, diabetes, arthritis, and breast and colon cancers. as noted
previously, maintaining a body mass index (BMI) below 30 (nonobese) was
one of the four protective factors associated with much lower risk of
disease. Returning the U.s. population to normal weight (a BMI of
between 18.5 and 24.9) would produce about the same improvement in
overall life expectancy as the elimination of smoking (stewart et al.,
2009). as mentioned in chapter 7, not only do we face problems in the
form of eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa,
but the world also has experienced an unprecedented obesity epidemic
over the last 30 years (see ● Figure 16.16). In the United states, the
percentage of obese adults rose from 12% in 1991 to 42% in 2018 (cdc,
2020). It is likely that multiple factors have contributed to this
change, including our sedentary lifestyle, increases in caloric intake,
changes in the types of food that we eat, changes in sleep patterns, and
social factors. Who (2020a) describes low- and middle-income countries
as facing a "double burden" of disease because undernutrition and
obesity occur at the same time, often in the same households. a
combination of inadequate nutrition prenatally and in childhood,
followed by exposure to high-calorie but nutrient-poor foods, sets the
stage for a lifetime of poor health, possibly because of epigenetic
factors (haemer et al., 2009). as was the case with smoking, we can see
evidence of social factors that maintain our eating habits and weight.
our recent history of eating cheap, fatty, and sugary foods interacts
with poverty. nutritionists have raised the alarm that eating healthy
foods is becoming more expensive than ever. gender, ethnicity, and age
also interact with obesity (hales et al., 2020). obesity is highest cilo
/A om c in non-hispanic Black adults (49.6%), followed by hispanic
adults . ock iSt (44.8%) and non-hispanic White adults (44.7%). obesity
is lowest among non-hispanic asian adults (17.4%).

In the United States, ex-smokers outnumber smokers (Chapman & MacKenzie,
2010). Smokers use a variety of techniques to quit, including simply
stopping all use abruptly (cold turkey), gradually reducing intake,
using nicotine patches and gum or other nicotine replacement tools,
participating in counseling and support groups, or some combination of
these.

What Is the RelatIonshIp BetWeen psychology and health?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

665

60

40 Percent

Obesity1

Ljupco Smokovski/Shutterstock.com

20

Severe obesity1 0

1999-- 2000

2001-- 2002

2003-- 2004

2005-- 2006

2007-- 2009-- 2008 2010 Survey years

2011-- 2012

2013-- 2014

2015-- 2016

2017-- 2018

Figure 16.16 The Obesity Epidemic. In 1960, fewer than 15% of American
adults were obese (body mass index, or BMI, \> 30), but today about 42%
are obese. The number of people who are severely obese (BMI \> 40) also
has climbed during this period. The reasons for the obesity epidemic are
not well understood and are likely to be complex. Source: C. M. Hales et
al. (2020). "Prevalence of Obesity and Severe Obesity Among Adults:
United States, 2017--2018." NCHS Data Brief No. 360. Hyattsville, MD:
National Center for Health Statistics.
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db360.htm

as observed in Chapter 7, there are no quick fixes for obesity and poor
nutrition. Many of the same challenges face people who want to lose
weight that we observed among people attempting to quit smoking. One
advantage that would-be ex-smokers enjoy, however, is the option of
complete abstinence. in contrast, we cannot abstain from eating;
instead, we must choose to eat differently. in addition to addressing
concerns about obesity, current research in nutrition is focusing on the
specific nutrients needed for healthy development and psychological
well-being. as mentioned in Chapter 14, prevalence of bipolar disorder
is much lower in countries consuming large amounts of seafood than in
countries where seafood consumption is rare (noaghiul & hibbeln, 2003).
although much remains to be explored in this area, a further
understanding of the consequences of changes in our modern diet should
help us achieve a healthier lifestyle.

Alcohol alcohol is widely used in the United States and in many other
countries around the world. according to the national institute on
alcohol abuse and alcoholism (niaaa, 2020), 86.3% of american adults
consumed alcohol at some point in their lifetime, 70% consumed alcohol
in the past year, and 55.3% consumed alcohol in the past month. about
26% of the adult population engaged in binge drinking (five or more
alcoholic beverages on the same occasion) during the past month, and 7%
reported heavy drinking (five or more alcoholic beverages on one
occasion on each of five or more days in the past month); 6% of adults
and 1.6% of adolescents meet criteria for alcohol use disorder. alcohol
use is the third-leading preventable cause of death in the United States
(number one is tobacco and number two is poor diet and inactivity).
Globally, alcohol contributes to 5.3% of deaths, but as shown in ●
Figure 16.17, the contribution of alcohol to death varies by age (WhO,
2020). The largest threats to health from alcohol use are to the liver,
which is responsible for clearing the body of toxins, but alcohol use
also contributes to lower life spans because of stroke, high blood
pressure, and some cancers (breast, digestive, and liver). in the United
States alone, excessive alcohol consumption leads to approximately
88,000 deaths annually, at a cost of \$249 billion (niaaa, 2020).
alcoholimpaired driving accounts for 31% of all driving fatalities in
the United States. in addition, alcohol poses a risk of abuse and
dependence for many people. Psychologists define alcohol abuse as
repeated use despite adverse consequences and alcohol dependence 666

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Africa

Americas

Western Pacific

Europe

World

Total 35.0 30.0 25.0 20.0 15.0 10.0 5.0

4 85 ol and de r

--8

9 80

--7 75

9

--7 4 70

--6

4 65

--6

9 60

--5

4 55

9

--5 50

--4

4 45

--4 40

--3

9

4 35

--3

9 30

--2

4 25

19

--2 20

15 --

14

0.0

0--

Percentage (%) of deaths attributable to alcohol consumption

Southeast Asia

Eastern Mediterranean

Age (years)

Figure 16.17 Alcohol Contributes to Death and Disability. The World
Health Organization (WHO) reports that worldwide, alcohol causes more
deaths than tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, and diabetes. In addition, alcohol
is responsible for 5.1% of all disability-adjusted life years (DALYs).
Alcohol accounts for more deaths of young and middle-aged adults
compared to children, adolescents, and older adults. Source: adapted
from World Health Organization (WHO; 2018). Global Status Report on
Alcohol and Health 2018. Geneva, Switzerland: Author.

Diverse Images/Univer/AGE Fotostock

as alcohol abuse accompanied by tolerance, withdrawal, and a compulsive
urge to drink more (aPa, 2013). as observed in Chapter 4, tolerance is
defined as the need to administer greater quantities of a drug to
maintain the same subjective effect, and withdrawal refers to symptoms
that occur when a habitually used drug is no longer used. as we have
seen in so many other domains of human behavior, complex interactions
between biological and environmental factors lead to alcohol abuse and
dependence. Genes related to the body's ability to break down alcohol in
the liver are not evenly distributed across the world's populations.
Certain types of genes found primarily in asians are correlated with
lower rates of alcohol dependence (eng et al., 2007). as usual, genes
are not the whole story. Consider the example of native americans. This
ethnic group has much higher rates of alcohol dependence than do many
others, despite a high prevalence of the supposedly "protective" genes
(ehlers, 2007). among the environmental influences on problem drinking
is the age of first intoxication (newton-howes et al., 2019). age of
first intoxication is more predictive of later drinking problems than
the frequently used age at first drink measure. Many of the same factors
that encourage teens to begin smoking also encourage drinking. Peer
pressure, the need to fit in or look cool, overestimates of "everybody's
doing it," modeling the behavior of parents and other family members,
and the teen's characteristic sense of being immune to harm from risky
behavior can contribute to decisions to begin drinking. Because alcohol
reduces anxiety, socially anxious teens are especially at risk for
problem drinking. if teens feel more socially competent while drinking,
they are likely to continue this practice because of operant
conditioning, as described in Chapter 8. Reduced feelings of anxiety are
rewarding, so a person is likely to repeat the behavior (alcohol
consumption, in this case) associated with this reward. Treatment for
very heavy drinkers often requires medical supervision because
withdrawal from alcohol can produce life-threatening seizures. Recall
from Chapter 4 that alcohol boosts the inhibition produced by GaBa,
leading to alcohol's classification as a central nervous system
depressant. Because withdrawal symptoms are usually the opposite of drug
effects, withdrawing from a depressant produces excitation, and too much
excitation leads to seizures.

People who are exposed to alcohol at younger ages have the highest risk
for alcohol abuse.

WhaT iS The RelaTiOnShiP BeTWeen PSyChOlOGy and healTh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

667

MBI/Alamy Stock Photo

One of the remaining controversies in the treatment of alcohol
dependence is whether a person can safely return to moderate drinking.
Most psychologists do not believe that it is possible for recovered
problem drinkers to resume alcohol consumption without relapse. in one
60-year longitudinal study of men with problem drinking, few returned to
moderate drinking without experiencing a relapse (Vaillant, 2003). Other
researchers suggest that relapsing individuals with occasional heavy
drinking days show similar outcomes as those who completely abstain
(Witkiewitz et al., 2020).

Exercise exercise was not a choice for our hunter--gatherer ancestors,

for whom physical work meant the difference between death and survival.
in today's sedentary world, however, in which many workers spend hours
commuting in cars to sit for more hours in front of computers, exercise
becomes something that we must consciously remember to do. Children in
In contrast to previous generations, who simply "played," previous
generations would dash from school to play outdoors, but social it is
not uncommon today to find children as young as changes, including lack
of supervision at home and safety concerns, have led 3 to 5 years of age
involved with adult-organized formal to much less spontaneous outdoor
activity. Parents might prefer that their sports. Further research is
necessary to determine the children stay indoors playing video games
rather than ride their bicycles in long-term impacts of this social
trend on adult patterns of the neighborhood. For many middle-aged and
older adults, loneliness might play and exercising. lead to less
physical activity (hawkley et al., 2009; hawkley & Cacioppo, 2010). lack
of exercise and sitting are related but different issues. Children and
adults in the United States spend an average of 55% of their day sitting
while riding in cars, watching television, doing work or attending
school, and playing video games or doing other computer work (Matthews
et al., 2008). a person's amount of sitting time is correlated with risk
of death (see ● Figure 16.18). however, high levels of moderately
intense activity (60--75 minutes per day) seems to offset some of this
risk (ekelund et al., 2016). although the highest risk of death occurs
in obese individuals

Percentage of cumulative survival

Rex Features/Shutterstock.com

100 95 90 85 Time spent sitting: 80

Almost none of the time 1/4 of the time

75

1/2 of the time 3/4 of the time

70

Almost all of the time 0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Follow-up years

Figure 16.18 Time Spent Sitting and Mortality. Data showing decreased
survival as a function of the amount of your day spent sitting have led
to a market for "standing desks." If you find these desks comfortable,
by all means use them, but recall that again, the sitting data are
correlational, and we cannot conclude that sitting causes death. We are
not randomly assigning people to sitting groups. People who sit all day
are likely to be obese or have other health problems that contribute to
their higher risk of mortality. Source: Adapted from P. T. Katzmarzyk et
al. (2009). "Sitting Time and Mortality from All Causes, Cardiovascular
Disease, and Cancer," Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise,
41(5), 998--1005. doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181930355

668

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

who spend nearly all their time sitting, the amount of time spent
sitting also predicts mortality within a group of active individuals
(Katzmarzyk et al., 2009). exercise not only benefits our bodies by
keeping our muscles and cardiovascular systems in good shape, but also
benefits our psychological well-being. a brisk 30-minute walk has
emerged as an effective way to treat Mdd, as discussed in Chapter 15
(Blumenthal et al., 1999). in addition to improving mood, exercise
increases cognitive performance (hogan et al., 2013; Raichlen &
alexander, 2017). One mechanism for this improvement could be the
increased delivery of oxygen to the brain resulting from a fit
cardiovascular system. Other research suggests that exercise also has
the capacity to boost neurogenesis, particularly in the hippocampus of
the brain (Gibbons et al., 2014). as you learned in Chapter 4, the
hippocampus plays important roles in learning and memory. We mentioned
in an earlier section that stress can be detrimental to the functioning
of the immune system. exercise can be stressful as well; so what effect
could it have? not too surprisingly, we find complex relationships
between the amount and type of exercise that a person performs and the
response of the immune system. Compared to sedentary people, those who
engage in regular moderate exercise enjoy a lower rate of infection
(Gleeson, 2007). however, too much of a good thing, in the form of
continuous, prolonged, and high-intensity exercise such as preparation
for and competition in marathons and triathlons, can produce a temporary
decrease in immune system function for about a day. elite athletes,
because of their constant and intense training schedules, often
experience more minor illnesses, such as sniffles and colds, but the
long-term benefits of exercise far outweigh these small vulnerabilities.

Loneliness and Health loneliness, or a perceived deficit in social
connectivity, has

long been understood as a risk factor for psychological disorders, but
now it is understood to contribute to mortality in older adults as well
(Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2018). even when other factors are controlled,
loneliness produces a 26% increase in the odds of early death. Given the
growing number of older adults and high prevalence of loneliness among
them (20%--60% report being lonely some of the time, and 5%--10% feel
lonely frequently or always), this presents a significant risk to health
and well-being. loneliness produces risk for death along a number of
pathways that are familiar to you by now: poor sleep quality, increased
activity in the hPa axis, increased sympathetic activity relative to
parasympathetic activity, altered gene expression in immune system
cells, decreased immunity to viruses, increased inflammation, decreased
impulse control, and increased symptoms of depression (Cacioppo &
Cacioppo, 2018). While the amount of harm from changes in each of these
pathways might be small, the combined and cumulative changes due to
loneliness can produce significant damage to health and well-being (see
● Figure 16.19).

Figure 16.19

Sleep Environment

Gene--environment interactions

HPA axis Loneliness (Perceived social isolation)

Sympathetic NS activity Altered gene expression Immunity

Jesada Sabai/Shutterstock.com

Inflammation Genes

Impulse control Depression

Premature mortality

Loneliness Is a Risk Factor for Mortality. Loneliness, or perceived
social isolation, does not directly reduce life expectancy. Instead,
loneliness exerts its influence on mortality through complex
interactions between genetics and environment, which in turn affect
important health factors like inflammation. Source: Adapted from J. T.
Cacioppo & S. Cacioppo (2018), "Loneliness in the Modern Age: An
Evolutionary Theory of Loneliness (ETL)." Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, 58, 127--197. doi: 10.1016/ bs.aesp.2018.03.003

WhaT iS The RelaTiOnShiP BeTWeen PSyChOlOGy and healTh?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

669

Fortunately, loneliness can be reduced by several simple interventions.
First, understanding loneliness can help people avoid the selfish,
unattractive behaviors that can result from self-preservation (see
Chapter 13). although we often feel lonely in the absence of strong,
significant relationships like having a romantic partner, daily small
interactions, such as having a conversation with the barista making your
coffee, can also do a good job of alleviating feelings of loneliness.

Culture and Health Many health-related variables, including poverty,
education, access to medical care, nutrition, and substance abuse, vary
widely from country to country and within ethnic groups living in the
United States. The United States, despite its high standard of living,
ranks 36th among countries of the world in terms of life expectancy,
suggesting that wealth alone is insufficient to guarantee good health
(United nations, 2020; also see ● Figure 16.20). however, within the
United States, life expectancy increases continuously with income
(Chetty et al., 2016). life expectancy gaps between the highest and
lowest 1% of income were 15 years for males and 10 years for females. in
the United States, death rates for all ethnic groups have declined over
the last decade, but ethnic differences remain. Risk of death is lowest
among asians and Pacific islanders and highest among the non-hispanic
Black population (Kochanek et al., 2017). although life expectancy for
White and Black americans differs, the gap continues to narrow. in 2000,
life expectancy for Whites was 5.5 years more than life expectancy for
Blacks, but this gap was reduced to 3.8 years by 2010. increases in life
expectancy across all ethnic groups resulted from reductions in the rate
of death from leading causes, including heart disease, cancer, chronic
respiratory diseases, and stroke. however, COVid-19 has
disproportionately impacted non-hispanic Blacks, potentially widening
the life expectancy gap back to previous levels. in addition to ethnic
and cultural differences in overall health and health habits,
discrepancies occur in mental health. Minorities living in the United
States have less access to mental health services, are less likely to
receive needed services, receive a poorer quality of care, and are
underrepresented in mental health research (U.S. department of health
and human

Life expectancy at birth (years) 85 to 90 80 to 85 75 to 80 70 to 75 65
to 70 60 to 65 55 to 60 50 to 55 No data

Figure 16.20 Culture and Health Interact to Predict Life Expectancy.
Many health-related variables, including poverty, education, access to
medical care, nutrition, and substance abuse, vary widely from country
to country and interact to determine average life expectancy. Source:
adapted from https://population.un.org/wpp/Maps/

670

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Distinctive Images/Shutterstock.com

services; U.s. public health service, 2007). among possible variables
accounting for increased mental health problems among minorities are
poverty, discrimination, and violence. poverty, in particular, is an
important risk factor for psychological disorders, with people living at
the lowest levels of the socioeconomic scale experiencing two to three
times greater rates of psychological disorder (U.s. department of health
and human services, U.s. public health service, 2007). the exact
prevalence remains unknown because many people living in poverty do not
have access to care. stress from poverty, discrimination, and violence
might contribute to higher rates of stress-related health problems and
disorders. distrust of clinicians who might seem to be disrespectful or
whose approach is culturally insensitive also might deter people from
obtaining the treatment that they need.

An Integrated Understanding of Health Behaviors

Poverty is a significant risk factor for many types of psychopathology.

If you haven't already noticed during our discussions of stress, sleep,
nutrition, smoking, alcohol use, and exercise, let us highlight the fact
that these variables interact. stress can lead to poor sleep, additional
consumption of calories, more smoking, more drinking, and less exercise.
people who eat poorly are unlikely to sleep well or feel like going to
the gym. smoking reduces weight (naming a cigarette marketed to women
"Virginia slims" was no accident), but of course, it has negative
effects on health that far outweigh that advantage. problem drinkers
either cut back on nutritious food or become obese (Breslow & smothers,
2005). college students engage in drunkorexia, or the deliberate
restriction of calories before planned alcohol consumption for the
purpose of avoiding weight gain (Burke et al., 2010). Most of if not all
these behaviors are affected by our social context. We eat, drink, and
smoke but also exercise more in the company of our fellow humans. these
interactions in health behaviors remind us of the need to zoom out to
look at the whole picture of individuals within their social contexts
when we attempt to apply interventions leading to better health (see ●
Figure 16.21). We have amassed a significant amount of data on why
people engage in a particular problem behavior, whether that is smoking,
drinking, or overeating, and we are now in a better position to identify
the overlapping patterns of epigenesis, stress, child maltreatment, peer
pressure, and motivation that underlie these behaviors.

Death

Figure 16.21

Whole life perspective

Early death

Disease, disability, and social problems Adoption of health-risk
behaviors

Scientific gaps

Social, emotional, and cognitive impairment

Adverse childhood experiences Conception

The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study: An Integrated Model of
Health. An example of contemporary research that uses an integrated
model of health is the ACE Study, being undertaken by researchers
affiliated with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
The study plans to address identified gaps in our understanding about
the relationships between adverse childhood experiences, such as abuse
and neglect, and later social, emotional, and cognitive impairments,
which in turn could influence the adoption of risky health behaviors.
Source: Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC,
2010a). "Pyramid: Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study."
http://www.cdc.gov/ace/pyramid.htm

What Is the RelatIonshIp BetWeen psychology and health?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

671

summary 16.2 Five Domains of Health Behavior Domain

correlates

Tobacco Use

• Smoking is the leading preventable cause of death in the United
States.

Nutrition

• Obesity increases rates of many chronic diseases, including heart
disease, stroke, diabetes, arthritis, and some cancers. • Specific
nutrients, not just calories, are necessary for optimum functioning.

Alcohol

• Alcohol's main effect on life span is its contribution to accidents,
but use is also correlated with liver disease, stroke, high blood
pressure, and some cancers.

Exercise

• Exercise improves overall health, mood, and cognition.

Loneliness

• Loneliness produces indirect effects on health by affecting sleep,
immunity, HPA axis function, sympathetic nervous system function, gene
expression, inflammation, impulse control, and depression.

Loneliness (Perceived social isolation)

Credits: Top row---Carlos Barria/Reuters/Newscom; Second
row---iStock.com/Acilo, iStock.com/Arsgera, Chuck Franklin/Alamy Stock
Photo, iStock.com/assalve; Third row---Diverse Images/Univer/AGE
Fotostock; Fourth row---MBI/Alamy Stock Photo; Fifth row---Jesada
Sabai/Shutterstock.com.

What Is positive psychology?

positive psychology An approach to psychology that emphasizes normal
behavior and human strengths.

672

Chapter 16

although helping people with problems is an important part of
psychology, some psychologists have pointed out that there are
differences between making people less uncomfortable and helping them
live happier, more fulfilling lives. The interventions explored in
Chapter 15 are designed to alleviate psychological pain, but these
treatments are not intended to make people who do not have psychological
disorders happier. at the same time, we know a great deal about people
with psychological problems, whom we described in Chapter 14 as
representing a minority of the population. What about those who lead
relatively untroubled, typical lives? as observed in Chapter 10, we
quite possibly know the least about people with unusual strengths, such
as talent and genius. The field of positive psychology focuses on these
relatively neglected areas of behavior and mental processes by using
scientific methods to understand positive human experiences and
adjustment. a new set of interventions should emerge from this
understanding that will guide individuals, families, and communities in
their attempts to maximize their potential (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi,
2000). William James foreshadowed positive psychology in his 1902 book
The Varieties of Religious Experience. in this book, James discussed
people who achieve "healthy mindedness"

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Positive Emotions

Mary Evans Picture Library/The Image Works

as having an understanding of the "goodness of life" and a soul (a word
often used by people in James's era as synonymous with mind) with "a
sky-blue tint" (James, 1905, pp. 79--80). James goes further to
speculate about the origins of healthy mindedness. For the lucky few,
healthy mindedness occurs naturally and effortlessly. For others, it
must be achieved through effort. despite James's efforts, psychology
continued its fascination with the abnormal and the unhealthy into the
20th century and did not direct the same energy toward understanding the
normal and healthy. Voices of dissent arose from among the humanistic
psychologists, including abraham Maslow, discussed in Chapters 7 and 12.
Maslow argued that psychologists could learn more about human behavior
by studying outstanding individuals than by studying people with severe
problems. as part of Maslow's thinking about self-actualization, the
pinnacle of social motivation in his theory, he took detailed notes on
people he admired in a "GhB (Good human Being) notebook" that he kept
between 1945 and 1949 (lowry, 1973). in addition to making observations
of living people whom he admired, Maslow combed through biographies and
autobiographies of famous people in search of common features of healthy
mindedness. Running parallel to the humanistic psychologists' rejection
of a negative, sickness model of human behavior were innovations among
cognitive and behavioral approaches. as mentioned in Chapter 15, albert
ellis and aaron Beck were achieving excellent results with cognitive
restructuring around the same time that the humanistic psychologists
began reconsidering Freud. ellis and Beck were able to help their
clients with Mdd see a glass of water as half full as opposed to half
empty, improving their mood and optimism in the process. One of the most
significant voices leading to contemporary positive psychology
approaches is that of Martin Seligman (2019). (We discussed his concept
of learned helplessness in Chapter 14.) if people's outcomes do not seem
connected to their behaviors, the resulting feelings of helplessness and
lack of control could result in depression. Based on his investigations
of learned helplessness, Seligman proposed that optimism, or thinking
positively about the future, can be learned, just as helplessness can
(Seligman, 1990). Positive psychology embraces humanistic emphases on
human growth and fulfillment yet applies the scientific reasoning and
research characteristic of cognitive and behavioral psychology. Positive
psychology incorporates five elements of well-being into a PeRMa model:
positive emotion, engagement, relationships, meaning, and accomplishment
(Seligman, 2012).

The Varieties of Religious Experience WILLIAM JAMES In his book The
Varieties of Religious Experience, William James foreshadowed the
development of positive psychology by considering what makes some people
healthy minded and what gives others a "sick soul."

optimism Thinking positively about the

Positive emotions and the experiences that produce them, including
happiness, love, gratitude, contentment, and hope, contribute to our
well-being. For our social species, it is not an accident that many of
the situations that produce these positive feelings, such as promotions
at work, marriage, and other successes, involve people who are important
to us.

future.

Gaye Gerard/Getty Images

Martin Seligman (right) and the Dalai Lama (left), spiritual leader of
Tibetan Buddhism, discussed the important role of positive emotions at a
"Mind and Its Potential" conference in 2009.

WhaT iS POSiTiVe PSyChOlOGy?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

673

What Is Happiness? We all know happiness when we experience it, and most
people prefer the state of happiness to the alternatives of unhappiness
and depression. happiness is associated with a long list of positive
outcomes, including longevity (diener & Chan, 2011), advancement at work
(de neve et al., 2013), and staying married (lyubomirsky et al., 2005).
Psychologists approach happiness from two different perspectives (Ryan &
deci, 2001). a hedonic approach focuses on obtaining pleasure and
avoiding pain. a eudaimonic approach focuses on meaningfulness and
self-realization. happiness often seems fleeting or transient. The
primary reason for this elusiveness is that happiness is typically
relative. We quickly adapt to our current circumstances, and it is only
change in those circumstances that provokes feelings of happiness or
unhappiness. Research with identical twins suggests that we have a
happiness "set point" that is largely influenced by genetics (lykken &
Tellegen, 1996). Changes in circumstances might raise or lower happiness
from the set point, but the effect would be temporary. however, having a
genetic predisposition to being happy or to being cranky does not mean
that a person's behavior has no influence. instead, people can do a
great deal to improve their happiness. Rather than looking for external
things to boost happiness, such as a new car or a new nose, looking
within is more effective. happiness can be improved by thinking
carefully about what things interfere

Diverse Voices in Psychology Optimism Across Race and Ethnicity

Outcome expectancy score

It is likely that concepts that are is needed regarding racial and
ethnic LIKE MOST OF AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGY, as value-oriented as those
studied by differences in optimism within the United positive psychology
has been criticized as positive psychologists will show nuanced States,
lack of hope was shown to be a being overly influenced by the values of
the variations across different groups, and our risk factor for suicidal
ideation for Hispanic White majority. To what extent are concepts
understanding of these concepts would be and African American students,
but not for like happiness the same or different enriched by further
investigation into these White students (Davidson et al., 2010;
depending on race, ethnicity, or culture? To similarities and
differences. ■ Chang et al., 2013). what extent are such values simply
"human"? Optimism, or a positive 27 expectation for the future, is
linked with both physical and 25 psychological well-being (Carver et
al., 2010). Previous studies have 23 shown little variability in the
level of 21 optimism across cultures, although some differences seem to
be 19 associated with the individualistic-- collectivistic dimension of
cultures 17 Optimism (Jeglic et al., 2016). While Asian Pessimism and
Asian American individuals 15 Asian White report similar levels of
optimism compared to White Americans, they Figure report higher levels
of pessimism Optimism and Pessimism Vary Across Cultures. White and
Asian college students demonstrate at the same time (Chang, 1996;
similar levels of optimism, but the Asian students show much higher
levels of pessimism. These see ● Figure 16.22). Comparisons perspectives
appear to have different implications for White and Asian students,
however. High levels between American and Ghanaian of pessimism were
associated with better problem-solving performance in Asian students,
but worse college students found that the performance in White students.
Ghanaian students demonstrated Source: E. C. Chang (1996). "Cultural
Differences in Optimism, Pessimism, and Coping: Predictors of Subsequent
higher optimism and hope, while Adjustment in Asian American and
Caucasian American College Students," Journal of Counseling Psychology,
43(1), expressing less suicidal ideation (Eshun, 1999). While more
research 113---123. doi: 10.1037/0022-0167.43.1.113

16.22

674

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

with our happiness, such as allowing ourselves to stay mad at a partner
following an argument, and working to avoid these things. One critical
factor in people's happiness is the strength of their interpersonal
relationships. When participants are asked, "What is necessary for your
happiness?" or "Tell me what makes your life meaningful," nearly
everybody talks about their close relationships first---family, friends,
and romantic partners (Berscheid & Peplau, 1983). happiness is also
contagious, spreading out along networks of social contact (Fowler &
Christakis, 2008). This finding is consistent with one of the ongoing
themes of this text: our social environment plays a central role in
human behavior.

Happiness and Marriage among interpersonal relationships, the
institution of

Mean subjective well-being score

marriage is particularly likely to contribute to happiness (see ● Figure
16.23). in a study of more than 42,000 americans beginning in 1972, 40%
of married adults, but only 22% of never-married adults, report that
they are "very happy" (davis et al., 2006). also, 18% of divorced adults
report being "very happy," and remarriage increases happiness only in a
minority of cases. in a large-scale study that followed 13,000 adults
for five years, people who remained married experienced higher
well-being than those who separated or divorced (Waite et al., 2009;
Waite & Gallagher, 2001). among the benefits of marriage are reduced
infidelity, longer-lasting relationships, and longer life (Waite &
Gallagher, 2001). People who are married and living with their spouse
enjoy a significantly lower death rate than those who are unmarried.
People who have never married, particularly males, experience an
especially high risk for premature death (Kaplan & Kronick, 2006).
Married individuals have lower cortisol levels compared to never married
or previously married individuals (Chin et al., 2017). as we observed
earlier, cortisol release is correlated with stress. Why would marriage
make people happy? One possibility is that the relationship between
marriage and happiness is a false one because of the likelihood that
happy people produce happy marriages instead of the other way around.
however, careful research that controls for premarital happiness does
not support this hypothesis (horwitz et al., 1997; Grover & helliwell,
2019). Regardless of how happy people are before marrying, on average
being married makes them happier. The positive effects of marriage on
happiness are about twice as large for couples who consider their spouse
to be their best friend (Grover & helliwell, 2019). if you're thinking
of cases that you know in which mar5.8 ried couples are miserable, time
together seems to help. among the unhappiest couples, only 12% report
being unhappy five years later, and 70% of the formerly 5.6 unhappy
partners report being "very" or "quite" happy (horwitz et al., 1997).
5.4 What is the source of this marital happiness? Traditionally,
psychologists have 5.2 suggested that marital happiness results from the
perceptions that one partner has of the other. But more sophisticated
analyses have shown that the factors associated 5.0 with marital
happiness are more complicated (luo et al. 2010). While it's true that
4.8 perceptions of your partner influence how satisfied you are in a
relationship ("i'm with a great person"), it is also true that your
overall satisfaction with the relation4.6 ship affects how you see your
partner ("i'm happy, so i must be with a great person"). Then, what is
the source of that satisfaction? a major factor in satisfaction with a
relationship is how you think your partner sees you ("My partner thinks
i'm terrific, which makes me happy, and because i'm happy, i must be
with a great person").

Happiness and Wealth another common-sense notion about happiness is that
wealth

can make you happy. after all, we see frequent images of ecstatic
lottery winners and smiling sports superstars who have signed megabuck
contracts. at both national and individual levels, being poor does
appear to be correlated with being unhappy. however, once basic needs
are met, additional money does not guarantee happiness (see ● Figure
16.24). interviews with the 100 richest people in the United States
indicated that they were only slightly happier than average (diener et
al., 1985). in addition, how people use their wealth can influence
happiness. People who are less materialistic report being happier than
people who are materialistic (Tsang et al., 2014). People who spend
money on experiences rather than materialistic goods experience improved
well-being (howell & hill, 2009).

Single

Dating Cohabiting Married Relationship status

Figure 16.23 Relationship Status and Happiness. Many studies have
pointed to a strong relationship between being married and subjective
well-being. Source: Adapted from J. P. M. Soons et al. (2009). "The
Long-Term Consequences of Relationship Formation for Subjective
Well-Being," Journal of Marriage and Family, 71(5), 1254--1270.
doi:10.1111/j.1741 -3737.2009.00667.x

WhaT iS POSiTiVe PSyChOlOGy?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

675

Wealth and Happiness. When adjusted for inflation, Americans' after-tax
disposable income grew dramatically between 1946 and 1989, but measures
of subjective well-being remained flat. Increases in income above a
certain point where basic needs can be met tend to have mild, if any,
long-term impact on happiness. Source: Adapted from E. Diener et
al. (1999). "Subjective Well-Being: Three Decades of Progress,"
Psychological Bulletin, 125(2), Figure 1. doi:10.1037/0033
-2909.125.2.276

Percentage of after-tax disposable personal income (adjusted for
inflation)

Figure 16.24

240 220 200 180 160 140 120 100

Income Subjective well-being

80

47 52 57 64 66 71 73 75 78 82 84 86 88 1946 48 56 63 65 70 72 74 76 80
83 85 87 1989 Year

now we return to the idea that happiness occurs because of changing
circumstances. Perhaps the 100 richest americans had simply adapted to
their wealthy lifestyles. What about people who suddenly become wealthy?
The Camelot Group, which manages the national lottery in the United
Kingdom, reported that winning the lottery did have an impact on
happiness (Camelot Group, 2004). according to these findings, 65% of
winners reported that they

THInkIng scientifically Does Parenting Increase Happiness? IN CHAPTER 7,
we noted that an update of Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of needs pyramid
featured parenting at the top to represent this role's importance from
an evolutionary perspective (Kenrick et al., 2010). If parenting is such
an important motivation, do we feel happier when we fulfill it?

marriages has less to do today with financial survival or raising
families than it has with meeting partners' emotional needs (Dew &
Wilcox, 2011). A major predictor of marital satisfaction is time spent
with a partner, so where does that need fit with the challenges of
meeting the demands of a family of young children?

WHAT AM I BEING ASkED TO BELIEVE OR ACCEPT?

Some research suggests that parenting results in reductions in marital
satisfaction, which increase with the number of children (Twenge et al.,
2003). This result is most pronounced among younger, higherincome
mothers of infants. Even in the 21st century, the arrival of the first
child has a tendency to "traditionalize" the gender roles of the new
parents. Fathers begin to take on more of the income-earning
responsibilities and mothers take on more of the childcare and
housework. Her chang-

We are being asked to believe that being a parent makes people happier
than they would be if they were not parents.

WHAT EVIDENCE SUPPORTS THIS POSITION? Parenting in the 21st century
probably shares little similarity with the way parenting was for our
hunter--gatherer ancestors. The goal of contemporary

676

Chapter 16

ing roles might make the new mother less happy with her circumstances
(Dew & Wilcox, 2011). Other researchers disagree. In another set of
studies, parents evaluated their lives more positively than nonparents,
felt better than nonparents from day to day, and found more satisfaction
in caring for their children than in other daily activities (Nelson et
al., 2013, 2014). Parenting contributed to more positive emotions on a
daily basis and to the sense of having a meaningful life--- concepts
consistent with the approach to happiness held by some positive
psychologists.

ARE THERE OTHER WAYS THIS EVIDENCE COULD BE INTERPRETED? What might be
the source of these conflicting findings? One possibility is

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

John Tlumacki/The Boston Globe/Getty Images

were happier following the win because of financial security and
increased freedom; 35% said that they were about as happy after winning
as before; and none reported feeling less happy than before the win.
although the winners traded up in terms of lifestyle (most had bought
new cars and new homes), 92% of those who were married when they won
were still married to the same spouse. the correlation between happiness
and income has been assumed to reflect the effect of money on happiness.
however, longitudinal research suggests that happiness may influence
income (cacioppo et al., 2008). as in prior studies, happiness and
income in middle-age and older adults were correlated. however,
happiness predicted bigger increases in income, whereas higher income
did not predict increases in happiness. happy people form better
relationships, and these better relationships contribute to larger
increases in income, perhaps because of improved job performance, better
performance reviews and promotions, and better networking opportunities
that lead in financially productive directions. the World happiness
Report, now in its eighth edition, looks at measures of happiness in
over 150 countries (helliwell et al., 2020). the variables used to
assess happiness did include financial measures, but also measures of
positive and negative emotions, social support, freedom to make life
choices, generosity, health, and perceptions of corruption. Based on
these measures, scandinavian countries appear to be very happy places,
occupying the five top slots, including number 1 (Finland). the United
states, ranked number 1 in the world in gross domestic product (gDP), is
ranked number 18 in happiness. to be fair, the differences in happiness
among the top 20 countries are quite slim. at the bottom of the list are
Zimbabwe, south sudan, and coming in last, afghanistan (see ● Figure
16.25).

What Other evidence WOuld i need tO evaluate these alternatives? It is
likely that we need further research outlining the characteristics,
perhaps at the individual, family, and community levels, that predict
happiness during parenting. This would

also require some investigation of cohort effects (see Chapter 2).

What are the MOst reasOnable cOnclusiOns? William James's concept of
functionalism, described in Chapter 1, would predict that becoming a
parent is likely to be highly motivating for many people. Nonetheless,

insights from the different perspectives of psychology (biological,
cognitive, developmental, social, and clinical) are needed to completely
understand the circumstances leading to a happy parenting experience for
any one individual. ■

Mint Images Limited/Alamy Stock Photo

that parents as a group are highly diverse. Parenting under some
circumstances can be more stressful than others. Young, unpartnered
parents, not too surprisingly, reported less happiness and satisfaction
than their nonparent age peers, yet they still indicated that they felt
their lives were meaningful (Nelson et al., 2013). Parents may
experience differing levels of support from governments, employers,
communities, and families. Globally, institutional policies such as paid
time off and child-care subsidies for parents are associated with less
unhappiness on the part of parents (Glass et al., 2016).

Lottery winners experience an increase in happiness, but they tend to be
cautious about changing their lifestyles. Most continue working and
attempt to maintain as normal a life as possible.

Evolutionary theories view parenting as an important motivation for
human behavior, yet contemporary psychologists debate whether parents
are truly happier than nonparents.

What Is PosItIve Psychology?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

677

Figure 16.25 Happiness Across the Globe. Happiness across the globe does
reflect financial measures, but also varies according to positive and
negative emotions, social support, freedom to make life choices,
generosity, health, and perceptions of corruption. The 20 happiest
countries appear in green and the 20 unhappiest countries appear in red.
Source: J. F. Helliwell et al. (2020). "Social Environments for World
Happiness." In J. F. Helliwell, R. Layard, J. D. Sachs, & J.-E. De Neve
(Eds.), World happiness report (pp. 13--46). New York: Sustainable
Development Solutions Network.

Can We Increase Happiness? Some psychologists have moved past research

identifying the causes and correlates of happiness to make
recommendations for how to increase individual happiness. among the
steps recommended for improving happiness are practicing time
management, exercising regularly, sleeping well, finding interesting
work to do, nurturing close relationships, and following a chosen
religious faith (Myers, 1993). Methods for increasing happiness can be
tailored to three types of happiness: the pleasant life (hedonics) and
two sources of eudaimonic happiness---the good life and the meaningful
life (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi, 2000; Seligman, 2002). The pleasant
life describes the pleasures that we enjoy from moment to moment.
enjoying a great meal or a beautiful sunset enhances our daily
experiences. The good life occurs when we are maximizing our strengths
in our work, hobbies, and other activities, making time subjectively
slow down. The meaningful life describes our ability to focus away from
the self to serve others or participate in something more permanent and
larger than ourselves. in general, people taking tests designed to
assess their involvement with these three types of happiness are
happiest overall if either their good life or their meaningful life
score is high. if the score in one of these aspects is high, then a high
score on the pleasant life can raise overall happiness, like having a
cherry on top of an already-delicious ice cream sundae. Unfortunately,
those who score highest on the pleasant life, without comparable scoring
in either the good or the meaningful life category or both, tend to be
less happy (Seligman, 2002). Two reasons help explain why isolated
pleasant life scores fail to greatly affect overall happiness. First,
these scores tend to be highly heritable, which means that you can't do
much to improve your sense of pleasure. Some people seem to respond more
intensely than others to pleasurable experiences. Second, these feelings
do not last long and habituate quickly. Think about the last time you
had a delicious dessert. The first few bites are fantastic, but the last
ones are usually less so. a short time later, you might have forgotten
how delicious the dessert even was.

678

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

aslysun/Shutterstock.com

BlueOrange Studio/Shutterstock.com

even if heritability affects our ability to experience pleasure,
positive psychology has some suggestions for enhancing our experiences.
how often have you eaten your meals while watching television, reading,
or working on your computer? If you try to multitask in this way, it is
unlikely that you will derive much pleasure or satisfaction from your
food, which can lead to overeating. learning to "savor" pleasurable
experiences by paying more attention to them can make them more
memorable and enjoyable (Bryant & veroff, 2007). the good life is
somewhat easier to modify than the pleasant life. to enhance your
happiness from the good life, all you have to do is identify your
strengths and find ways to use them in your important work and hobby
activities. During activities that contribute to the good life, people
experience flow, in which they are absorbed in their current activity,
usually related to work, problem solving, or creativity
(csikszentmihalyi, 1990, 1996). the word flow was chosen to describe
this experience on the basis of interviews in which people spontaneously
used the metaphor to explain their own experiences. these experiences
may qualify as altered states of consciousness and are usually perceived
as highly positive. time appears Researchers studying happiness identify
to stand still for people who are immersed in flow. three types. The
pleasant life consists People who do not play video games are often
astonished by the nearly compulsive atof pleasures, like ice cream, that
are tractiveness of the activity for those who do play. however, video
games meet many of the enjoyed from moment to moment. criteria for a
flow experience (csikszentmihalyi, 1990). the games have clear goals
(reaching The good life features "flow" and a the next level or beating
a dungeon boss), they provide the opportunity to focus, they encoursense
that time is standing still. The age a merging of action and awareness
(as opposed to self-consciousness), and players genermeaningful life
describes the positive ally experience a distortion of subjective time.
In addition, games provide instant and precise emotions obtained by
helping others. feedback (you succeed or not), a balance between ability
and difficulty (gamers reject games that are either too easy or too
challenging), and a sense of personal control (you're the one flow A
state characterized by complete making the moves). Finally, gaming, like
other flow activities, is intrinsically reinforcing. Many absorption in
a current activity, such as a parent has diabolically used access to
gaming as a reinforcer for other desired behaviors, work, problem
solving, or creativity. such as chores or homework. It is likely that
video games, at least for some people, tap into a predisposition to find
activities that meet these flow criteria to be highly reinforcing. the
meaningful life can take multiple forms and provides numerous
opportunities to boost happiness. as we've already seen, many people
find meaningfulness within religious practice, but that is not the only
approach that works. People who perform acts of kindness toward others
experience a boost in well-being (layous et We are not suggesting that
happiness can be al., 2012). volunteering for a cause that is close to
your heart not only im- found by spending all your time playing video
proves well-being but might also reduce feelings of depression
(Jenkinson games; instead, we recommend that you seek this et al.,
2013). spending money on other people results in increased happiness
type of flow in the work and hobbies that you (Dunn et al., 2014).
Reminding us of the complexity of many psychological enjoy. processes,
we find that a strong personal identity, or the expression of an
authentic self, gives people a sense of meaningfulness, but does not
always correlate with happiness (Baumeister et al., 2013).

According to Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, video games can be compelling
because they meet many of the criteria required of a flow-inducing
experience, such as clear goals, the opportunity to focus, the merging
of action and awareness, and the experience of distortion of time for
the player. The popularity of team e-sports suggests that even watching
others play can be reinforcing. What Is PosItIve Psychology?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

679

Positive Traits

Masterfile

in an effort to further understand the sources of well-being, positive
psychologists have built upon the trait theories discussed in Chapter
12. among the traits that contribute to well-being are hope, resilience,
spirituality, and gratitude. hope refers to an expectation that your
goals will be met in the future. you are probably hopeful that you will
complete your college education and find a good job. The trait of hope
is tightly linked to feelings of optimism. hope in turn is determined by
motivation and planning (Snyder, 1994). your expectations for a college
degree are based on beliefs that you can achieve a degree through hard
work and that following your plans will give you the results that you
desire. Being a hopeful person provides a number of benefits to
well-being. hopeful people can withstand more pain and stress because
they believe that the future will be better (Snyder et al., 2005).
hopeful people are more capable problem solvers because they are likely
to consider alternative pathways for meeting their goals instead of
giving up at the first obstacle. Finally, hopeful people usually enjoy
strong social networks because other people find hope attractive (Snyder
et al., 2002). We discussed resilience in an earlier section of this
chapter. Resilience not only serves as a buffer for stress but can lead
to growth following a traumatic experience (davis & nolenhoeksema,
2009). none of us likes being traumatized, but when we look back on
difficult episodes of our lives, we often feel like a traumatic
experience led to growth and improved strength. among the positive
changes associated with posttraumatic growth are perceptions of the self
as a survivor rather than a victim, increased self-confidence and
self-efficacy, and greater appreciation for the fragile nature of life.
Many people respond to prior trauma with increased compassion for
others, closer bonds with family and friends, and enhanced willingness
to share emotions. Trauma also can lead people to reduce the value that
they place on material aspects of life, such as money and possessions,
while increasing their sense of what is truly meaningful about life. a
resilience program developed by Martin Seligman and his colleagues for
the U.S. army resulted in lower rates among deployed soldiers of
posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety, and depression, and reduced the
rate of substance abuse by half (harms et al., 2013). as we mentioned in
a previous section, the experience of a meaningful life enhances
well-being and happiness. although finding meaning simply encompasses
recognizing things that are bigger than one's personal existence, some
people achieve meaningfulness through spirituality and religious
practice (Myers, 1993). Religious beliefs and practice also have been
associated with a long list of health benefits because most major world
religions promote healthier lifestyles (emmons et al., 2008). Many
people find religious prohibitions to be a helpful tool for resisting
the temptation to engage in risky, unhealthy behaviors. although
participation in religious or spiritual activities is a behavior, it is
strongly predicted by a person's need for deeper meaning, or trait
spirituality (Pargament & Krumrei, 2009). The idea of individual traits
related to well-being has been extended to include shared social values
and experiences, resulting in values or virtues. a value can be defined
as "an enduring belief that a specific mode of conduct or end state of
existence is personally or socially preferable to an opposite or
converse mode of conduct or end state of existence" (Rokeach,
1968--1969, p. 5). The voluntary nature of values is stressed by many
psychologists, including Gordon allport, who defines a value as "a
belief upon which a man acts by preference" (allport, 1961, p. 454). One
effort to identify values combined those listed by major world religions
and such organizations as the Boy Scouts, Rotary international, and
alcoholics anonymous with data from major personality tests (Franken,
2002). The resulting values are social, cheerful, peaceful, tolerant,
kind, generous, trusting, assertive, self-control, self-confidence,
communication, leading, and autonomous. additional lists have added some
interesting items, such as awe and forgiving (Peterson & Seligman,
2004).

Hopeful people are capable problem solvers who believe that their goals
can be met in the future.

680

Chapter 16

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ZUMA Press Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

one interesting difference between the positive psychologist's
discussion of values and the personality psychologist's discussion of
traits is the judgmental approach to values. In discussing personality
traits, we don't want to think of traits as necessarily good or bad. a
variety of personalities, such as the introverted computer programmer
and the extroverted salesperson, helps meet the needs of society. In
contrast, the values discussed by positive psychologists are good, and
to be without them is not so good. this deviation from being
nonjudgmental represents a significant departure by the positive
psychologists from the humanistic psychologists, who argue strongly
against any type of outward judgment of others. Do values matter in
everyday life? as we saw in chapter 13, attitudes and behavior may or
may not correlate. however, possessing certain values seems to correlate
with a number of positive outcomes. Participants' self-ratings on the 13
values mentioned earlier are positively correlated with measures of
self-esteem (Franken, 2002). In addition, explosiveness, or a propensity
to violence, was negatively correlated with a person's values ratings.
as ratings on the values increased, a person's potential for violent
behavior decreased. People with high values scores were the least likely
to experience alcohol or tobacco addictions or to experience anxiety and
depression.

Positive Institutions

Rotary International

Positive psychologists study the roles of institutions such as
workplaces, schools, and families in promoting well-being in the
community. What characteristics should we strive for in our institutions
to raise the likelihood that members of the community will lead
satisfying lives? Positive institutions share several features
(Peterson, 2006). they share a purpose in the form of institutional
goals. their rules and consequences are fair. they feature a reciprocal
caring by the institution for its members and by the members for the
institution. a positive institution provides safety for its members and
treats them with respect. one of your goals in completing a college
education is probably related to the type of work you'll be able to do
as a result. your future working conditions will have significant
influence on your overall well-being. Positive psychologists have
identified three ways that people feel about their work (Wrzesniewski et
al., 1997). some people just have jobs. a job is viewed as a way of
supporting your family, and workers with jobs emphasize this role
without asking more of their work life. a career not only pays the bills
but also fulfills workers' needs for status and achievement. Finally, a
calling satisfies both personal and cooperative goals. the worker pays
the bills while gaining both personal achievement and a sense of
contributing to the community. When workers view their employment as a
calling, they are less concerned with work conditions, salary, benefits,
and status. Positive workplaces facilitate the workers' abilities to
meet their personal work-related goals. schools from kindergarten
through college are particularly important to the health and future of a
community. In a manner similar to psychology's emphasis on disorders,
most of the research in education has focused on what goes wrong in
schools rather than on what schools are doing well. Positive schools
promote growth and produce a sense of satisfaction

Nobody wants to experience trauma, but some survivors report
experiencing posttraumatic growth. Mike Atherton lost both legs and his
left arm in a boating accident, but he has returned to performing with
the Tampa Bay Water Ski Show Team and reports feeling optimistic about
his future.

Organizations such as Rotary International often reinforce the values of
their members, such as "service above self." Source: Service Above Self
and the Service Above Self logo are trademarks of Rotary International
and used herein with permission.

Forbes America's Best Employers 1. Trader Joe's

6.  Google

7.  Southwest Airlines

8.  Stanford University

9.  Lilly

10. SC Johnson

11. Costco Wholesale

12. Mayo Clinic

13. Garmin

14. Michelin Group

Forbes rankings of "best employers" for 2019 cover a wide variety of
industries. Positive psychologists attempt to find common features of
organizations that make them positive institutions. What Is PosItIve
Psychology?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

681

in students. although this area is sparsely studied, student
satisfaction with schools predicts a number of positive outcomes,
including higher grades and fewer problem behaviors, even as early as
kindergarten (ladd et al., 2000). Significant challenges face today's
families, and identifying what works could provide guidance for many.
Family-centered positive psychology (FCPP) focuses on the
characteristics of positive families (Sheridan & Burt, 2009). Consistent
with the general approach of positive psychology, FCPP identifies the
strengths of families rather than emphasizing their failures and
weaknesses.

Positive Psychology and the Future Positive psychology is not without
its critics. among the weaknesses seen in positive psychology are its
unintended negative effects on people who face medical and psychological
challenges (held, 2004). although research indicates that optimism and
health are linked, this finding might give sick people the unfortunate
impression that all they have to do to cure their illness is to maintain
a positive attitude. a second criticism is related to the integration
theme that we have featured in this textbook. Positive strengths are
valuable, but they are best studied within the entire context of
individuals interacting in environments. Positive and negative emotions
can coexist, and we cannot fully understand one type of experience
without considering the other (Cacioppo et al., 2011). it is unlikely
that psychology will ever abandon its goal of helping troubled people
feel better, but positive psychology's emphasis on what goes right is
also illuminating. We do not know at this time whether the label of
positive psychology will drop out of favor, like Wilhelm Wundt's
structuralism, or enjoy the fate of William James's functionalism by
becoming so integrated into mainstream psychology that a label is no
longer necessary. By applying the same evidence-based criteria that we
have described for evaluating interventions for "negative" behaviors to
interventions based on positive psychology, we will figure out the role
that positive psychology should play in our continued search for
understanding the human mind.

Interpersonal Relationships How Do Investment anD experIences of
GratItuDe affect relatIonsHIps? WE HAVE STUDIED RELATIONSHIPS from the
vantage points of 15 psychological perspectives so far in this textbook,
and we end the journey with an analysis of the role of a positive
emotion---gratitude---on relationship building. Psychologists
traditionally have focused on how an individual invests in relationships
and report that individuals' perceptions of how much they have already
invested (time, energy, and other resources) influence how committed
they feel. however, researchers know relatively little about how our
perceptions of our partner's investment in the relationship influence
our commitment. When a partner invests in a relationship, the typical
response is the experience of the positive emotion of gratitude.
Gratitude includes the feelings of thankfulness and appreciation felt
for the partner, which in turn affects the perception of who the partner
is as a person (Joel et al., 2013). When people experience gratitude for
a partner, it stimulates further commitment. The amount of commitment
that an individual experiences is linked to the perceived investment in
the relationship on the part of the partner. What types of investment
promote more gratitude, and through those feelings, greater commitment?
you might guess that financial investments would be important, but
research has shown that intangible investments, like emotional
involvement, have a greater impact on commitment (Goodfriend & agnew,
2008). This is reminiscent of the finding discussed earlier that it is
not wealth that makes us happy, but rather our social connectivity. ■

682

Chapter 16

Matthias Tunger/Corbis

The Health Psychology Perspective

It's often the little things that people do for their partners that
result in gratitude and a stronger commitment to the relationship.

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychology Takes On Real-World Problems Resilience in the Face of a
Pandemic increased understanding of human elements in the causes and
solutions of problems is empowering. Just as our ancestors benefited
from scientific explanations of lightning bolts, our contemporary
understanding of psychology makes the world a less fearsome and more
logical place. We see areas where our policies and interventions can
make real differences in the lives of many. We can face the inevitable
big problems around the corner with optimism, hope, and resilience.
Thank you for accompanying us on this journey, and we hope you continue
exploring the world of psychology. ■

make ourselves more resilient. Chen and Bonano (2020) note the following
ways that individuals can promote resilience: ● ● ● ● ●

Nurture optimism Build social support and bonding Stay informed without
over-indulging in media consumption Employ distraction strategies,
including having fun and laughing Reduce isolation by using online
communication technologies

Mild moderate severe

This section of each chapter also focuses on policy development, and
resilience can be promoted at both the family and community level
through careful policies. Resilience at the family level has not been
thoroughly investigated, but Chronic cohesion, adaptability, Delayed
communication, and financial management appear to contribute to
family-level resilience. Resilient communities feature higher social
cohesion, lower Recovery crime rates, and less disaster exposure.
Resilience Socioeconomic status and access to health Event 1 year 2 year
care are essential variables in community Figure resilience. It is
likely that individual, family, Posttraumatic Responses Are Diverse.
Following a traumatic and community experience, people respond in one of
four different ways. Some characteristics interact may experience
chronic distress (blue line), potentially leading in important ways to
to a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). A second
influence resilience. group gradually recovers functioning over time
(green line). A As we come to the third responds well initially but
experiences more disruption later end of our textbook on (orange line).
Finally, resilience, which is the most frequent and conclude this
reaction, is characterized by relatively little disruption in ongoing
exploration of how functioning (purple line). psychological science
Source: G. A. Bonanno (2004). "Loss, Trauma, and Human Resilience: can
address some of the Have We Underestimated the Human Capacity to Thrive
After big problems of the day, Extremely Aversive Events?" American
Psychologist, 59(1), 20--28. doi: our hope is that your
10.1037/0003-066X.59.1.20 Disruptions in normal functioning

Across the 15 previous chapters, we have explored ways that
psychological science can help us understand the human elements involved
with a pandemic. In this last entry, we will explore a concept central
to positive psychology---resilience---and how we can maintain resilience
in the face of high stress levels. To recap, resilience refers to our
ability to maintain coping in the face of strong stressors. Violent and
life-threatening experiences are sadly not rare. As many as 70% of the
population have one such experience during their lifetimes (Ozer et al.,
2003). Some percentage of these individuals will go on to develop
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD; see Chapter 14), but other patterns
of response also occur. Following trauma, some individuals experience
short term and less intense distress. Others recover quickly but then
experience a decrease in their ability to cope. Finally, some people do
not experience much disruption at all (see ● Figure 16.26; Bonanno,
2004). It is this latter group that displays resilience. Prior research
shows that this is not a small group. Following most types of trauma,
the resilient group makes up about two-thirds of those affected (Chen &
Bonanno, 2020). We are still too close to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic
to be able to make firm conclusions about how many people remain
resilient, but we can use past pandemics to make some educated
predictions. The 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic
in Hong Kong can provide insight. SARS was more lethal than COVID-19,
killing 14% to 15% of infected persons overall and more than 50% of
those over the age of 64 years with infections. Nonetheless, at least
half of the survivors demonstrated resilience (Chen & Bonnanno, 2020).
While resilience often occurs based on a variety of pre-existing
factors, including personality and other individual differences, family
context, and community characteristics, we can still take action to

16.26

What Is PosItIve Psychology?

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

683

summary 16.3 Types of Happiness source of Happiness

How to get it

examples

The pleasant life

Savor your experience without trying to multitask.

Avoid distractions from technology (television, smartphone, etc.) when
you're trying to enjoy a meal.

The good life

Find ways to incorporate your key strengths into your activities.

Choose an occupation that you truly enjoy, not just one that pays the
bills.

The meaningful life

Focus on something bigger than yourself.

Volunteer for a cause that's important to you.

Credits: Top row---BlueOrange Studio/Shutterstock.com; Second
row---aslysun/Shutterstock.com; Bottom row---Rotary International.

Key terms The Language of psychological Science Be sure that you can
define these terms and use them correctly.

alarm reaction, p. 642 biopsychosocial model, p. 660 cortisol, p. 647
emotion-focused coping, p. 658 exhaustion, p. 642 flow, p. 679 general
adaptation syndrome (GaS), p. 642 health psychology, p. 660

684

Chapter 16

hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal (hPa) axis, p. 647 immune system,
p. 650 lymphocyte, p. 651 optimism, p. 673 positive psychology, p. 672
problem-focused coping, p. 658 relationship-focused coping, p. 658
resilience, p. 659

resistance, p. 642 stress, p. 640 stressor, p. 640 sympathetic
adrenal--medullary (SaM) system, p. 647 tend and befriend, p. 649 Type a
personality, p. 651 Type B personality, p. 651

The healThy Mind: STReSS and COPinG, healTh PSyChOlOGy, and POSiTiVe
PSyChOlOGy

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

References Abdo, H., Calvo-Enrique, L., Lopez, J. M., Song, J., Zhang,
M.-D., Usoskin, D., El Manira, A., Adameyko, I., Hjerling-Leffler, J., &
Ernfors, P. (2019). Specialized cutaneous Schwann cells initiate pain
sensation. Science, 365(6454), 695--699. doi:10.1126/science.aax6452
Abdolmaleky, H. M., Zhou, J.-R., & Thiagalingam, S. (2015). An update on
the epigenetics of psychotic diseases and autism. Epigenomics, 7(3),
427--449. doi:10.2217/epi.14.85 Aberson, C. L., Healy, M., & Robero, V.
(2000). Ingroup bias and self-esteem: A meta-analysis. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 4, 157--173. doi:10.1207/S15327957PSPR0402_04
Aboujaoude, E. (2020). Where life coaching ends and therapy begins:
Toward a less confusing treatment landscape. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 15(4), 973--977. doi:10.1177/1745691620904962
Abraham, G. E. (1974). Ovarian and adrenal contribution to peripheral
androgens during the menstrual cycle. The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology & Metabolism, 39(2), 340--346. doi:10.1210/jcem-39-2-340
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Learned
helplessness in humans: Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 87, 49--74. doi:10.1037/0021--843X.87.1.49 Abramzon, Y. A.,
Fratta, P., Traynor, B. J., & Chia, R. (2020). The overlapping genetics
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Frontiers
in Neuroscience, 14(42). doi:10.3389/fnins.2020.00042 Adapted from A.
Martin et al. (1996). "Neural Correlates of Category-specific
Knowledge." Nature, 379, 649--652. doi:10.1038/379649a0 Adler, A.
(1956). The individual psychology of Alfred Adler: A systematic
presentation in selections from his writings. H. L. Ansbacher & R. R.
Ansbacher (Eds.). New York: Harper Torchbooks. Adler, N. E. (2013).
Health disparities: Taking on the challenge. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 8(6), 679--681. doi:10.1177/1745691613506909
Adolph, K. E., & Hoch, J. E. (2019). Motor development: Embodied,
embedded, enculturated, and enabling. Annual Review of Psychology, 70,
141--164. doi:10.1146/ annurev-psych-010418-102836 Adolphs, R. (2007).
Looking at other people: Mechanisms for social perception revealed in
subjects with focal amygdala damage. Novartis Foundation Symposia, 278,
146--159; discussion 160--144, 216--121.

Adolphs, R. (2008). Fear, faces, and the human amygdala. Current Opinion
in Neurobiology, 18(2), 166--172. doi:10.1016/j. conb.2008.06.006
Adolphs, R. (2016). How should neuroscience study emotions? By
distinguishing emotion states, concepts, and experiences. Social
Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 12(1), 24--31.
doi:10.1093/scan/nsw153 Adolphs, R. (2018). Social cognition, the
amygdala, and autism. In K. Shigemasu, S. Kuwano, T. Sato, & T.
Matsuzawa (Eds.), Diversity in Harmony -- Insights from Psychology
(pp. 1--18). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Adolphs, R., Gosselin, F., Buchanan, T.
W., Tranel, D., Schyns, P., & Damasio, A. R. (2005). A mechanism for
impaired fear recognition after amygdala damage. Nature, 433, 68--72.
doi:10.1038/nature03086 Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R.
(1998). The human amygdala in social judgment. Nature, 393, 470--474.
doi:10.1038/30982 Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A.
(1994). Impaired recognition of emotion in facial expressions following
bilateral damage to the human amygdala. Nature, 372, 669--672.
doi:10.1038/372669a0 Adrián-Ventura, J., Costumero, V., Parcet, M. A., &
Ávila, C. (2019). Linking personality and brain anatomy: A structural
MRI approach to Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory. Social Cognitive and
Affective Neuroscience, 14(3), 329--338. doi:10.1093/ scan/nsz011 Agay,
N., Yechiam, E., Carmel, Z., & Levkovitz, Y. (2010). Non-specific
effects of methylphenidate (Ritalin) on cognitive ability and
decision-making of ADHD and healthy adults. Psychopharmacology, 210(4),
511--519. doi:10.1007/s00213-010-1853-4 Ahadi, S. A., & Rothbart, M. K.
(1994). Temperament, development, and the Big Five. In G. Kohnstamm, C.
Halverson, & R. P. Martin (Eds.), The developing structure of
temperament and personality from infancy to adulthood (pp. 189--207).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Aharoni, E., Vincent, G. M.,
Harenski, C. L., Calhoun, V. D., Sinnott-Armstrong, W., Gazzaniga, M.
S., & Kiehl, K. A. (2013). Neuroprediction of future rearrest.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 110(15), 6223--6228. doi:10.1073/pnas.1219302110 Ahern, E.,
Kinsella, S., & Semkovska, M. (2018). Clinical efficacy and economic
evaluation of online cognitive behavioral

therapy for major depressive disorder: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Expert Review of Pharmacoeconomics & Outcomes Research,
18(1), 25--41. doi:10.1080/ 14737167.2018.1407245 Aihara, M., Ida, I.,
Yuuki, N., Oshima, A., Kumano, H., Takahashi, K., Fukuda, M., Oriuchi,
N., Endo, K., Matsuda, H., & Mikuni, M. (2007). HPA axis dysfunction in
unmedicated major depressive disorder and its normalization by
pharmacotherapy correlates with alteration of neural activity in
prefrontal cortex and limbic/paralimbic regions. Psychiatry Research,
155(3), 245--256. doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2006.11.002 Ainsworth, M., &
Bowlby, J. (1965). Child care and the growth of love. London, UK:
Penguin. Ainswoth, M., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).
Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the strange situation.
Potomac, MD: Erlbaum. Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50(2), 179--211.
doi:10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-t Akane, A. (1998). Sex determination by
PCR analysis of the X-Y amelogenin gene. In P. J. Lincoln & J. Thomson
(Eds.), Forensic DNA profiling protocols (pp. 245--249). Totowa, NJ:
Humana Press. Akers, K. G., Chérasse, Y., Fujita, Y., Srinivasan, S.,
Sakurai, T., & Sakaguchi, M. (2018). Concise review: Regulatory
influence of sleep and epigenetics on adult hippocampal neurogenesis and
cognitive and emotional function. Stem Cells, 36(7), 969--976.
doi:10.1002/stem.2815 Åkerstedt, T., & Fröberg, J. E. (1976).
Interindividual differences in circadian patterns of catecholamine
excretion, body temperature, performance, and subjective arousal.
Biological Psychology, 4(4), 277--292. doi:10.1016/0301-0511(76)90019-3
Al-Issa, I. (1977). Social and cultural aspects of hallucinations.
Psychological Bulletin, 84(3), 570--587. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.84.3.570
Alcock, J. (2011, 2011--01-06). Back from the future: Parapsychology and
the Bem affair. Skeptical Inquirer. https://skepticalinquirer
.org/exclusive/back_from_the_future/ Alda, M. (2015). Lithium in the
treatment of bipolar disorder: Pharmacology and pharmacogenetics.
Molecular Psychiatry, 20(6), 661--670. doi:10.1038/mp.2015.4 Aldwin, C.
(1994). Stress, coping, and development: An integrative perspective. New
York: Guilford.

R-1 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Alexander, G. M., & Hines, M. (2002). Sex differences in response to
children's toys in nonhuman primates (Cercopithecus aethiops sabaeus).
Evolution and Human Behavior, 23(6), 467--479. doi:10.1016/S1090-5138
(02)00107-1 Alexander, R. D. (1974). The evolution of social behavior.
Annual Review of Econology and Systematics, 5, 325--383. doi:10.1146/
annurev.es.05.110174.001545 Algren, M. H., Ekholm, O., Nielsen, L.,
Ersbøll, A. K., Bak, C. K., & Andersen, P. T. (2018). Associations
between perceived stress, socioeconomic status, and health-risk
behaviour in deprived neighbourhoods in Denmark: a cross-sectional
study. BMC Public Health, 18(1), 250. doi:10.1186/ s12889-018-5170-x
Allen, K. (2003). Are pets a healthy pleasure? The influence of pets on
blood pressure. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12,
236--239. doi:10.1046/j.09637214.2003.01269.x Allen, L. A., & Woolfolk,
R. L. (2010). Cognitive behavioral therapy for somatoform disorders.
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 33(3), 579--593. doi:10.1016/j.
psc.2010.04.014 Allen, L. S., Hines, M., Shryne, J. E., & Gorski, R. A.
(1989). Two sexually dimorphic cell groups in the human brain. Journal
of Neuroscience, 9, 497--506. doi:10.1523/ JNEUROSCI.09-02-00497.1989
Allison, T., & Cicchetti, D. V. (1976). Sleep in mammals: ecological and
constitutional correlates. Science, 194(4266), 732--734.
doi:10.1126/science.982039 Alloway, T. P., & Alloway, R. G. (2010).
Investigating the predictive roles of working memory and IQ in academic
attainment. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 106(1), 20--29.
doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2009.11.003 Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality: A
psychological interpretation. New York: Henry Holt. Allport, G. W.
(1954). The nature of prejudice. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books. Allport,
G. W. (1961). Pattern and growth in personality. Oxford, England: Holt,
Reinhart & Winston. Allport, G. W., & Odbert, H. S. (1936). Trait names:
A psycho-lexical study. Psychological Monographs, 47, 1--171.
doi:10.1037/h0093360 Ally, B. A., Hussey, E. P., & Donahue, M. J.
(2013). A case of hyperthymesia: Rethinking the role of the amygdala in
autobiographical memory. Neurocase, 19(2), 166--181.
doi:10.1080/13554794.2011.654225 Altman, J. D., Prittie, B. A., &
Forbach, G. B. (2019). Disparity in expectations of reward for effort
expended among students, professors, and employers. Teaching of
Psychology, 46(3), 197--207. doi:10.1177/0098628319848875 Alwin, D. F.
(1988). From obedience to autonomy: Changes in traits desired in
children, 1924--1978. The Public Opinion Quarterly, 52(1), 33--52.
doi:10.1086/269081 Amaral, D. G. (2001). The effects of bilateral
lesions of the amygdala on dyadic social

R-2

interactions in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta). Behavioral
Neuroscience, 115, 515--544. doi:10.1037/0735-7044.115.3.515 Amaral, D.
G., Schumann, C. M., & Nordahl, C. W. (2008). Neuroanatomy of autism.
Trends in Neurosciences, 31(3), 137--145. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2007.12.005
Ambeskovic, M., Babenko, O., Ilnytskyy, Y., Kovalchuk, I., Kolb, B., &
Metz, G. A. S. (2019). Ancestral stress alters lifetime mental health
trajectories and cortical neuromorphology via epigenetic regulation.
Scientific Reports, 9(1), 6389. doi:10.1038/ s41598-019-42691-z Ameis,
S. H., Lerch, J. P., Taylor, M. J., Lee, W., Viviano, J. D., Pipitone,
J., Nazeri, A., Croarkin, P. E., Voineskos, A. N., Lai, M-C., Crosbie,
J., Brian, J., Soreni, N., Schachar, R., Szatmari, P., Arnold, P. D., &
Anagnostou, E. (2016). A diffusion tensor imaging study in children with
ADHD, autism spectrum disorder, OCD, and matched controls: Distinct and
non-distinct white matter disruption and dimensional brain-behavior
relationships. American Journal of Psychiatry, 173(12), 1213--1222.
doi:10.1176/appi/ ajp.2016.15111435 American Psychiatric Association
(APA; 2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th
ed.). Washington, DC: Author. American Psychological Association (APA;
2012). Guidelines for ethical conduct in the care and use of animals.
https://www.apa .org/science/leadership/care/guidelines American
Psychological Association (APA; 2014). Questions and answers about
memories of child abuse. http://www .apa.org /topics/trauma/memories
.aspx?item=2 American Psychological Association (APA; 2017). Ethical
principles of psychologists and code of conduct. https://www.apa.org
/ethics/code American Psychological Association (APA; 2017). Idaho
becomes fifth state to allow psychologists to prescribe medications.
https:// www.apa.org/news/press/releases
/2017/04/idaho-psychologists-medications American Psychological
Association Presidential Task Force on Evidence-based Practice. (2006).
Evidence-based practice in psychology. American Psychologist, 61(4),
271--285. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.61.4.271 Ammentorp, J., Uhrenfeldt, L.,
Angel, F., Ehrensvärd, M., Carlsen, E. B., & Kofoed, P.-E. (2013). Can
life coaching improve health outcomes?--A systematic review of
intervention studies. BMC Health Services Research, 13(1), 428.
doi:10.1186/1472-6963-13-428 Ammon, K., & Gandevia, S. (1990).
Transcranial magnetic stimulation can influence the selection of motor
programmes. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 53(8),
705--707. doi:10.1136/jnnp.53.8.705 Anacker, C., Zunszain, P. A.,
Cattaneo, A., Carvalho, L. A., Garabedian, M. J., Thuret, S., Price, J.,
& Pariante, C. M. (2011).

Antidepressants increase human hippocampal neurogenesis by activating
the glucocorticoid receptor. Molecular Psychiatry, 16(7), 738--750.
doi:10.1038/mp.2011.26 Anand, B., & Brobeck, J. R. (1951). Hypothalamic
control of food intake in rats and cats. Yale Journal of Biology and
Medicine, 24, 123--140. Anderson, C. A., & Dill, K. E. (2000). Video
games and aggressive thoughts, feelings, and behavior in the laboratory
and in life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 772--790.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.4.772 Anderson, J. A., Hawrylewicz, K., &
Grundy, J. G. (2020). Does bilingualism protect against dementia? A
meta-analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 27(5), 952--965.
doi:10.3758/ s13423-020-01736-5 Anderson, K. N., Lind, J. N., Simeone,
R. M., Bobo, W. V., Mitchell, A. A., RiehleColarusso, T., Polen, K. N.,
& Reefhuis, J. (2020). Maternal use of specific antidepressant
medications during early pregnancy and the risk of selected birth
defects. JAMA Psychiatry 77(12), 1246--1255. doi:10.1001/
jamapsychiatry.2020.2453 Anderson, S. W., Bechara, A., Damasio, H.,
Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R. (1999). Impairment of social and moral
behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex. Nature
Neuroscience, 2(11), 1032--1037. doi:10.1038/14833 Anderton, B. H.
(1997). Changes in the ageing brain in health and disease. Philosophical
Transactions: Biological Sciences, 352(1363), 1781--1792.
doi:10.1098/rstb.1997.0162 Andreasen, N. C., O'leary, D. S., Flaum, M.,
Nopoulos, P., Watkins, G. L., Ponto, L. L. B., & Hichwa, R. D. (1997).
Hypofrontality in schizophrenia: Distributed dysfunctional circuits in
neuroleptic-naive patients. The Lancet, 349(9067), 1730--1734.
doi:10.1016/ S0140-6736(96)08258-X Angelakis, I., Gooding, P. A., &
Panagioti, M. (2016). Suicidality in body dysmorphic disorder (BDD): A
systematic review with meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 49,
55--66. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2016.08.002 Angold, A., Erkanli, A., Egger, H.
L., & Costello, E. J. (2000). Stimulant treatment for children: A
community perspective. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 39, 975--984.
doi:10.1097/00004583-200008000-00009 Angst, J., Paksarian, D., Cui, L.,
Merikangas, K., Hengartner, M., Ajdacic-Gross, V., & Rössler, W. (2016).
The epidemiology of common mental disorders from age 20 to 50: Results
from the prospective Zurich cohort Study. Epidemiology and Psychiatric
Sciences, 25(01), 24--32. doi:10.1017/S204579601500027X Annunziato, A.
(2008). DNA packaging: Nucleosomes and chromatin. Nature Education,
1(1), 26. Anokhin, A. P., Golosheykin, S., & Heath, A. C. (2010).
Heritability of individual differences in cortical processing of facial

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

affect. Behavior Genetics, 40(2), 178--185.
doi:10.1007/s10519-010-9337-1 Antoniou, M. (2019). The advantages of
bilingualism debate. Annual Review of Linguistics, 5(1), 395--415.
doi:10.1146/ annurev-linguistics-011718-011820 Antonov, I., Antonova,
I., Kandel, E. R., & Hawkins, R. D. (2003). Activity-dependent
presynaptic facilitation and hebbian LTP are both required and interact
during classical conditioning in Aplysia. Neuron, 37, 135--147.
doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(02)001129-7 Apovian, C. M., Aronne, L. J.,
Bessesen, D. H., McDonnell, M. E., Murad, M. H., Pagotto, U., Ryan, D.
H., & Still, C. D. (2015). Pharmacological management of obesity: An
endocrine society clinical practice guideline. The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology & Metabolism, 100(2), 342--362. doi:10.1210/jc.2014-3415
Argote, L., & Guo, J. M. (2016). Routines and transactive memory
systems: Creating, coordinating, retaining, and transferring knowledge
in organizations. Research in Organizational Behavior, 36, 65--84.
doi:10.1016/j.riob.2016.10.002 Ariel, B., Farrar, W. A., & Sutherland,
A. (2015). The effect of police body-worn cameras on use of force and
citizens' complaints against the police: A randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 31(3), 509--535.
doi:10.1007/s10940-0149236-3 Aritake-Okada, S., Tanabe, K., Mochizuki,
Y., Ochiai, R., Hibi, M., Kozuma, K., Katsuragi, Y., Ganeko, M., Takeda,
N., & Uchida, S. (2019). Diurnal repeated exercise promotes slow-wave
activity and fast-sigma power during sleep with increase in body
temperature: A human crossover trial. Journal of Applied Physiology,
127(1), 168--177. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.00765.2018 Armstrong, L., &
Jenkins, S. (2000). It's not about the bike: My journey back to life.
New York: Penguin Putnam. Arnett, J. J. (1999). Adolescent storm and
stress, reconsidered. American Psychologist, 54(5), 317--326.
doi:10.1037//0003-066x.54.5.317 Arnett, J. J. (2014). Emerging
adulthood: The winding road from the late teens through the twenties.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Arnsten, A. F. (2006).
Stimulants: Therapeuticactions in ADHD. Neuropsychopharmacology, 31(11),
2376--2383. doi:10.1038/sj.npp.1301164 Aron, A., Fisher, H., Mashek, D.
J., Strong, G., Li, H., & Brown, L. L. (2005). Reward, motivation, and
emotion systems associated with early-stage intense romantic love.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 94(1), 327--337. doi:10.1152/jn.00838.2004
Aron, A., Ketay, S., Hedden, T., Aron, E. N., Rose Markus, H., &
Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2010). Temperament trait of sensory processing
sensitivity moderates cultural differences in neural response. Social
Cognitive and

Affective Neuroscience, 5(2--3), 219--226. doi:10.1093/scan/nsq028 Aron,
A., Norman, C. C., Aron, E. N., McKenna, C., & Heyman, R. E. (2000).
Couples' shared participation in novel and arousing activities and
experienced relationship quality. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 78(2), 273--284. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.2.273 Aronson, E.
(2011). Jigsaw basics. http://www .jigsaw.org/pdf/basics.pdf Asch, S. E.
(1951). Effects of group pressure upon the modification and distortion
of judgments. In H. Guetzkow (Ed.), Groups, leadership and men; Research
in human relations. (pp. 177--190). Oxford, England: Carnegie Press.
Aschwanden, D., Strickhouser, J. E., Sesker, A. A., Lee, J. H.,
Luchetti, M., Stephan, Y., Sutin, A. R., & Terracciano, A. (2020).
Psychological and behavioural responses to coronavirus disease 2019: The
role of personality. European Journal of Personality.
doi:10.1002/per.2281 Asendorpf, J. B., Banse, R., & Mücke, D. (2002).
Double dissociation between implicit and explicit personality
self-concept: The case of shy behavior. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 83(2), 380--393. doi:10.1037//0022-3514.83.2.380
Aserinsky, E., & Kleitman, N. (1953). Regularly occurring periods of eye
motility and concomitant phenomena during sleep. Science, 118, 273--274.
doi:10.1126/science. 118.3062.273 Asmundson, G. J. G., & Norton, G. R.
(1993). Anxiety sensitivity and its relationship to spontaneous and cued
panic attacks in college students. Behavior Research and Therapy, 31,
199--201. doi:10.1016/00057967(93)90072-3 Atkinson, Q. D. (2011).
Phonemic diversity supports a serial founder effect model of language
expansion from Africa. Science, 332(6027), 346--349.
doi:10.1126/science.1199295 Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968).
Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes. In K. W.
Spence & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation:
Vol. 2. Advances in research and theory (pp. 89--195). New York:
Academic Press. Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1971). The control
of short-term memory. Scientific American, 225, 82--90. Atri, A.,
Sherman, S., Norman, K. A., Kirchhoff, B. A., Nicolas, M. M., Greicius,
M. D., Cramer, S. C., Breiter, H. C., Hasselmo, M. E., & Stern, C. E.
(2004). Blockade of central cholinergic receptors impairs new learning
and increases proactive interference in a word paired-associate memory
task. Behavioral Neuroscience, 118, 223--236.
doi:10.1037/0735--7044.118. 1.223

Austin Alchon, S. (2003). A pest in the land: new world epidemics in a
global perspective. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press.
Averbach, E., & Sperling, G. (1961). Short term storage of information
in vision. In C. Cherry (Ed.), Information Theory (pp. 196--211).
London: Butterworth. Avinun, R., Israel, S., Knodt, A. R., & Hariri, A.
R. (2020). Little evidence for associations between the Big Five
personality traits and variability in brain gray or white matter.
Neuroimage, 220, 117092. doi:10.1016/j. neuroimage.2020.117092 Axelrod,
R., & Hamilton, W. D. (1981). The evolution of cooperation. Science,
211(4489), 1390--1396. doi:10.1126/science. 7466396 Ayalon, L.,
Shiovitz-Ezra, S., & Roziner, I. (2016). A cross-lagged model of the
reciprocal associations of loneliness and memory functioning. Psychology
and Aging, 31(3), 255--261. doi:10.1037/pag0000075 Baars, B. J. (1988).
A cognitive theory of consciousness. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press. Babad, E., Bernieri, F., & Rosenthal, R. (1991).
Students as judges of teachers' verbal and nonverbal behavior. American
Educational Research Journal, 28, 211--234.
doi:10.3102/00028312028001211 Bachman, J. G., & O'Malley, P. M. (1977).
Selfesteem in young men: A longitudinal analysis of the impact of
educational and occupational attainment. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 35, 365--380. doi:10.1037//0022-3514.35.6.365
Baddeley, A. D. (1996). Exploring the central executive. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A, 5--28. doi:10.1080/713755608
Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. J. (1974). Working memory. In G. Bower
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 8, pp. 47--89).
New York: Academic Press. Baddeley, A. D., Logie, R. H., Nimmo-Smith,
I., & Brereton, J. (1985). Components of fluent reading. Journal of
Memory and Language, 24, 119--131. doi:10.1016/0749596X(85)90019-1
Baddeley, A., Eysenck, M. W., & Anderson, M. C. (2009). Memory. London:
Psychology Press. Baer, D. M., Wolf, M. M., & Risley, T. R. (1968). Some
current dimensions of applied behavior analysis. Journal of Applied
Behavior Analysis, 1(1), 91--97. doi:10.1901/ jaba.1968.1--91 Bahrick,
H. P. (1984). Semantic memory content in permastore: Fifty years of
memory for Spanish learned in school. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 113, 1--29. doi:10.1037//0096-3445.113.1.1 Bailey,
A. A., & Hurd, P. L. (2005). Finger length ratio (2D:4D) correlates with
physical aggression in men but not in women.

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-3

Biological Psychology, 68, 215--222. doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2004.05.001
Bailey, C. H., & Chen, M. C. (1983). Morphological basis of long-term
habituation and sensitization in Aplysia. Science, 220, 91--93.
doi:10.1126/science.6828885 Bailey, J. M., Vasey, P. L., Diamond, L. M.,
Breedlove, S. M., Vilain, E., & Epprecht, M. (2016). Sexual orientation,
controversy, and science. Psychological Science in the Public Interest,
17(2), 45--101. doi:10.1177/1529100616637616 Baillargeon, R., Li, J.,
Gertner, Y., & Wu, D. (2011). How do infants reason about physical
events?. In U. Goswami (Ed.), The WileyBlackwell handbook of childhood
cognitive development (pp. 11--48). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell. Baker,
T. B., McFall, R. M., & Shoham, V. (2008). Current status and future
prospects of clinical psychology: Toward a scientifically principled
approach to mental and behavioral health care. Psychological Science in
the Public Interest, 9(2), 67--103. doi:10.1111/
j.1539-6053.2009.01036.x Bakker, A., Spinhoven, P., van Balkom, A. J. L.
M., & van Dyck, R. (2002). Relevance of assessment of cognitions during
panic attacks in the treatment of panic disorder. Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 71(3), 158--161. doi:10.1159/000056283 Baldwin, D. S.,
Anderson, I. M., Nutt, D. J., Allgulander, C., Bandelow, B., den Boer,
J. A., Christmas, D. M., Davies, S., Fineberg, N., Lidbetter, N.,
Malizia, A., McCrone, P., Nabarro, D., O'Neill, C., Scott, J., van der
Wee, N., & Wittchen, H.-U. (2014). Evidence-based pharmacological
treatment of anxiety disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder and
obsessive-compulsive disorder: A revision of the 2005 guidelines from
the British Association for Psychopharmacology. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 28(5), 403--439. doi:10.1177/0269881114525674
Balschuna, D., Zuschrattera, W., & Wetzel, W. (2006). Allosteric
enhancement of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 function promotes
spatial memory. Neuroscience, 142, 691--702.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.06.043 Balthazart, J. (2011).
Minireview: Hormones and human sexual orientation. Endocrinology,
152(8), 2937--2947. doi:10.1210/en.2011-0277 Bandura, A. (1965).
Influence of models' reinforcement contingencies on the acquisition of
imitative responses. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1,
589--595. doi:10.1037/h0022070 Bandura, A. (1973). Aggression: A social
learning analysis. Oxford, England: Prentice-Hall. Bandura, A. (1990).
Perceived self-efficacy in the exercise of personal agency. Journal of
Applied Sport Psychology, 2, 128--163. doi:10.1080/10413209008406426
Bandura, A. (1993). Perceived self-efficacy in cognitive development and
functioning.

R-4

Educational Psychologist, 28, 117--148. doi:10.1207/s15326985ep2802_3
Bandura, A. (1995). Exercise of personal and collective efficacy in
changing societies. In A. Bandura (Ed.), Self-efficacy in changing
societies (pp. 1--45). New York: Cambridge University Press. Bandura, A.
(2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review
of Psychology, 52(1), 1--26. doi:10.1146/ annurev.psych.52.1.1 Bandura,
A., Ross, D., & Ross, S. A. (1963). Imitation of film-mediated
aggressive models. The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 66(1),
3--11. doi:10.1037/h0048687 Banerjee, D. (2020). The other side of
COVID-19: Impact on obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and hoarding.
Psychiatry Research, 288, 112966--112966.
doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2020.112966 Banerjee, T. D., Middleton, F., &
Faraone, S. V. (2007). Environmental risk factors for attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder. Acta Paediatrica, 96(9), 1269--1274.
doi:10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00430.x Banks, E., & Canfell, K. (2009).
Invited commentary: Hormone therapy risks and benefits---The Women's
Health Initiative findings and the postmenopausal estrogen timing
hypothesis. American Journal of Epidemiology, 170(1), 24--28.
doi:10.1093 /aje/kwp113 Baños, R. M., Guillen, V., Quero, S.,
GarciaPalacios, A., Alcaniz, M., & Botella, C. (2011). A virtual reality
system for the treatment of stress-related disorders: A preliminary
analysis of efficacy compared to a standard cognitive behavioral
program. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 69(9),
602--613. doi:10.1016/j. ijhcs.2011.06.002 Bar-On, R., Tranel, D.,
Denburg, N. L., & Bechara, A. (2003). Exploring the neurological
substrate of emotional and social intelligence. Brain, 126(8),
1790--1800. doi:10.1093/brain/awg177 Barber, S. J., & Kim, H. (2020).
COVID-19 Worries and behavior changes in older and younger men and
women. The Journals of Gerontology: Series B. doi:10.1093/geronb/gbaa068
Bard, P. (1934). Emotion: I. The neurohumoral basis of emotional
reactions. In C. Murchison (Ed.), Handbook of general experimental
psychology (pp. 264--311). Worcester, MA: Clark University Press.
Barkley, R. (1995). Taking charge of ADHD: The complete, authoritative
guide for parents. New York: Guilford Press. Barkley, R. (1997). ADHD
and the nature of self-control. New York: Guilford Press. Barkley, R.
A., & Cox, D. (2007). A review of driving risks and impairments
associated with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and the effects
of stimulant medication on driving performance. Journal of Safety
Research, 38(1), 113--128. doi:10.1016/j. jsr.2006.09.004

Barlow, D. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment
of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford Press. Barnea-Goraly, N.,
Frazier, T. W., Piacenza, L., Minshew, N. J., Keshavan, M. S., Reiss, A.
L., & Hardan, A. Y. (2014). A preliminary longitudinal volumetric MRI
study of amygdala and hippocampal volumes in autism. Progress in
Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 48, 124--128.
doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.09.010 Barnes, J., McRobbie, H., Dong, C. Y.,
Walker, N., & Hartmann-Boyce, J. (2019). Hypnotherapy for smoking
cessation. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews(6).
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001008.pub3 Baron-Cohen, S. (1991). The
development of a theory of mind in autism: Deviance and delay?
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 14, 33--51.
doi:10.1177/1362361310366314 Baron-Cohen, S. (2000). Theory of mind and
autism: A review. In L. M. Glidden (Ed.), International review of
research in mental retardation, 23,169--184.
doi:10.1016/S00747750(00)80010-5 Baron-Cohen, S. (2017). Editorial
perspective: Neurodiversity -- a revolutionary concept for autism and
psychiatry. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 58(6), 744--747.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.12703 Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Hill, J.,
Raste, Y., & Plumb, I. (2001). The "Reading the Mind in the Eyes" Test
Revised Version: A study with normal adults, and adults with Asperger
syndrome or high-functioning autism. The Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 42(2), \|241--251.
doi:10.1017/S0021963001006643 Baron, R. S. (2005). So right it's wrong:
Groupthink and the ubiquitous nature of polarized group decision making.
In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol.
37, pp. 219--253). San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press. Barresi, J.,
& Moore, C. (1996). Intentional relations and social understanding.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 19, 107--122.
doi:10.1017/S0140525X00041790 Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The
big five personality dimensions and job performance: A meta-analysis.
Personnel Psychology, 44, 1--26. doi:10.1111/j.17446570.1991.tb00688.x
Bartels, A., & Zeki, S. (2000). The neural basis of romantic love.
NeuroReport, 11(17), 3829--3834. doi:10.1097/00001756200011270-00046
Bartels, A., & Zeki, S. (2004). The neural correlates of maternal and
romantic love. NeuroImage, 21(3), 1155--1166.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.11.003 Barthel, M., Mitchell, A., &
Holcomb, J. (2016). Many Americans believe fake news is sowing
confusion. http://www.journalism. org/2016/12/15/many-americans-believe
-fake-news-is-sowing-confusion/

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Bartle-Haring, S., Shannon, S., Holowacz, E., Patton, R., &
Lotspeich-Younkin, F. (2018). Is there the "sweet spot" for age at
marriage and positive marital outcomes? Journal of Family Issues, 39(4),
1085--1107. doi:10.1177/0192513x16686135 Bartlett, F. C. (1932/1967).
Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press Bartone, P. T. (2000). Hardiness as a
resiliency factor for United States Forces in the Gulf War. In J. M.
Violanti, D. Paton, & C. Dunning (Eds.), Posttraumatic stress
intervention: Challenges, issues, and perspectives. (pp. 115--133).
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas. Bartoshuk, L. M. (2000). Comparing
sensory experiences across individuals: Recent psychophysical advances
illuminate genetic variation in taste perception. Chemical Senses, 25,
447--460. doi:10.1093/ chemse/25.4.447 Baruch, I., Hemsley, D. R., &
Gray, J. A. (1988a). Differential performance of acute and chronic
schizophrenics in a latent inhibition task. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 176, 598--606. doi:10.1097/00005053-198810000-00004
Baruch, I., Hemsley, D. R., & Gray, J. A. (1988b). Latent inhibition and
"psychotic proneness" in normal subjects. Personality and Individual
Differences, 9, 777--783. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(88)90067-0 Bashore, T.
R., Ridderinkhof, K. R., & W., van der Molen, M. (1997). The decline of
cognitive processing speed in old age:. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 6(6), 163--169. doi:10.1111_1467-8721. ep10772944
Bateman, A. W., Gunderson, J., & Mulder, R. (2015). Treatment of
personality disorder. The Lancet, 385(9969), 735--743.
doi:10.1016/S0140--6736(14)61394--5 Bateson, M., Nettle, D., & Roberts,
G. (2006). Cues of being watched enhance cooperation in a real-world
setting. Biology Letters, 2(3), 412--414. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2006.0509
Bauer, P. J., & Lukowski, A. F. (2010). The memory is in the details:
Relations between memory for the specific features of events and
long-term recall during infancy. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 107(1), 1--14. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2010.04.004 Bauer, P. J.,
Larkina, M., & Deocampo, J. (2011). Early memory development. In U.
Goswami (Ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of childhood cognitive
development (2nd ed., pp. 153--179). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
Bauer, R. M. (1984). Autonomic recognition of names and faces in
prosopagnosia: A neuropsychological application of the guilty knowledge
test. Neuropsychologia, 22(4), 457--469.
doi:10.1016/0028-3932(84)90040-X Baugh, J. (2017). Meaning-less
differences: Exposing fallacies and flaws in "the word gap" hypothesis
that conceal a dangerous "language trap" for low-income American
families and their children. International

Multilingual Research Journal, 11(1), 39--51.
doi:10.1080/19313152.2016.1258189 Baumann, M. L., & Teasdale, B. (2018).
Severe mental illness and firearm access: Is violence really the
danger?. International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, 56, 44-49.
doi:10.1016/j. ijlp.2017.11.003 Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R.
(1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as a
fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117(3), 497--529.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.117.3.497 Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D.,
Krueger, J. I., & Vohs, K. D. (2003). Does high self-esteem cause better
performance, interpersonal success, happiness, or healthier lifestyles?
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 4(1), 1--44.
doi:10.1111/1529-1006.01431 Baumeister, R. F., Smart, L., & Boden, J. M.
(1999). Relation of threatened egotism to violence and aggression: the
dark side of high self-esteem. New York: Psychology Press. Baumeister,
R. F., Vohs, K. D., Aaker, J. L., & Garbinsky, E. N. (2013). Some key
differences between a happy life and a meaningful life. The Journal of
Positive Psychology, 8(6), 505--516. doi:10.1080/17439760.2013. 830764
Baumrind, D. (1975). Early socialization and the discipline controversy.
Morristown, NJ: General Learning Press. Bavel, J. J. V., Baicker, K.,
Boggio, P. S., Capraro, V., Cichocka, A., Cikara, M., Crockett, M. J.,
Crum, A. J., Douglas, K. M., Druckman, J. N., Drury, J., Dube, O.,
Ellemers, N., Finkel, E. J., Fowler, J. H., Gelfand, M., Han, S.,Haslam,
S. A., Jetten, J., . . . Willer, R. (2020). Using social and behavioural
science to support COVID-19 pandemic response. Nature Human Behaviour,
4(5), 460--471. doi:10.1038/s41562-020-0884-z Bavelas, J. B.,
Hutchinson, S., Kenwood, C., & Matheson, D. H. (1997). Using face-toface
dialogue as a standard for other communication systems. Canadian Journal
of Communication, 22, 5--24. doi:10.22230 /CJC.1997V22N1A973 Baxter, L.
R., Schwartz, J. M., Bergman, K. S., Szuba, M. P., Guze, B. H.,
Mazziotta, J. C., Alazraki, A., Carl E. Selin, C. E., HuanKwang Ferng,
H.-K., Munford, P., & Phelps, M. E. (1992). Caudate glucose metabolic
rate changes with both drug and behavior therapy for
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49(9),
681--689. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1992. 01820090009002 Beaman, A. L.,
Klentz, B., Diener, E., & Svanum, S. (1979). Self-awareness and
transgression in children: Two field studies. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 37, 1835--1846. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.37.10.1835
Beaton, A., Hudson, M., Milne, M., Port, R. V., Russell, K., Smith, B.,
Toki, V., Uerata, L., Wilcox P., Bartholomew, K., & Wihongi, H. (2016).
Engaging Māori in biobanking and genomic research: a model for biobanks
to guide culturally informed governance,

operational, and community engagement activities. Genetics In Medicine,
19, 345. doi:10.1038/gim.2016.111 Bechara, A. (2005). Decision making,
impulse control and loss of willpower to resist drugs: A neurocognitive
perspective. Nature Neuroscience, 8(11), 1458--1463. doi:10.1038/nn1584
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. (2000). Emotion,
decision-making, and the orbitofrontal cortex. Cerebral Cortex, 10,
295--307. doi:10.1093/cercor/10.3.295 Beck, A. T. (1975). Cognitive
therapy and the emotional disorders. Madison, CT: International
Universities Press. Beck, A. T. (1985). Cognitive therapy, behavior
therapy, psychoanalysis, and pharmacotherapy: A cognitive continuum. In
M. Mahoney & A. Freeman (Eds.), Cognition and psychotherapy
(pp. 197--220). New York: Plenum Press. Beck, A. T., Rush, A., Shaw, B.,
& Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford
Press. Becker, A. E., Burwell, R. A., Herzog, D. B., Hamburg, P., &
Gilman, S. E. (2002). Eating behaviours and attitudes following
prolonged exposure to television among ethnic Fijian adolescent girls.
British Journal of Psychiatry, 180, 509--514. doi:10.1192/ bjp.180.6.509
Becker, M., Vignoles, V. L., Owe, E., Easterbrook, M. J., Brown, R.,
Smith, P. B., Bond, M. H., Regalia, C., Manzi, C., Brambilla, M.,
Aldhafri, S., González, R., Carrasco, D., Paz Cadena, M., Lay, S.,
Schweiger Gallo, I., Torres, A., Camino, L., Özgen, E., . . . Koller, S.
H. (2014). Cultural bases for self-evaluation: Seeing oneself positively
in different cultural contexts. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 40(5), 657--675. doi:10.1177/0146167214522836 Beckerman, S.,
Erickson, P. I., Yost, J., Regalado, J., Jaramillo, L., Sparks, C.,
Iromenga, M., & Long, K. (2009). Life histories, blood revenge, and
reproductive success among the Waorani of Ecuador. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 106(20),
8134--8139. doi:10.1073/pnas. 0901431106 Beevers, C. G., Gibb, B. E.,
McGeary, J. E., & Miller, I. W. (2007). Serotonin transporter genetic
variation and biased attention for emotional word stimuli among
psychiatric inpatients. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116(1),
208--212. doi:10.1037/0021-843x. 116.1.208 Begemann, M. J., Florisse, E.
J., van Lutterveld, R., Kooyman, M., & Sommer, I. E. (2016). Efficacy of
EEG neurofeedback in psychiatry: A comprehensive overview and
metaanalysis. Translational Brain Rhythmicity, 1(1), 19--29.
doi:10.15761/TBR.1000105 Beitel, M., Myhra, L. L., Gone, J. P., Barber,
J. P., Miller, A., Rasband, A., Cutter, C. J., Schottenfeld, R. S., &
Barry, D. T. (2018). REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-5

Psychotherapy with American Indians: An exploration of therapist-rated
techniques in three urban clinics. Psychotherapy, 55(1), 45--51.
doi:10.1037/pst0000156 Békés, V., & Aafjes-van Doorn, K. (2020).
Psychotherapists' attitudes toward online therapy during the COVID-19
pandemic. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 30(2), 238--247.
doi:10.1037/int0000214 Bellis, M. A., Hughes, K., Hughes, S., & Ashton,
J. R. (2005). Measuring paternal discrepancy and its public health
consequences. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 59(9),
749--754. doi:10.1136/jech. 2005.036517 Bellugi, U., Wang, P. O., &
Jernigan, T. L. (1994). Williams syndrome: An unusual neuropsychological
profile. In S. H. Broman & J. Grafman (Eds.), Atypical cognitive
deficits in developmental disorders: Implications for brain function
(pp. 23--56). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Belsky, J. (1999). Modern
evolutionary theory and patterns of attachment. In J. Cassidy & P. R.
Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research and clinical
applications (pp. 141--161). New York: Guilford Press. Bem, D. J.
(1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 6, pp. 1--62). New York: Academic
Press. Bem, D. J. (2001). Exotic becomes erotic: Integrating biological
and experiential antecedents of sexual orientation. In A. R. D'Augelli &
C. J. Patterson (Eds.), Lesbian, gay, and bisexual identities and youth:
Psychological perspectives. (pp. 52--68). New York, NY US: Oxford
University Press. Bem, D. J. (2011). Feeling the future: Experimental
evidence for anomalous retroactive influences on cognition and affect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100(3), 407--425.
doi:10.1037/a0021524 Benedict, C., Vogel, H., Jonas, W., Woting, A.,
Blaut, M., Schürmann, A., & Cedernaes, J. (2016). Gut microbiota and
glucometabolic alterations in response to recurrent partial sleep
deprivation in normal-weight young individuals. Molecular Metabolism,
5(12), 1175--1186. doi:10.1016/j.molmet.2016. 10.003 Benjamin, D. J.,
Berger, J. O., Johannesson, M., Nosek, B. A., Wagenmakers, E. J., Berk,
R., Bolen, K. A., Brembs, B., Brown, L., Camerer, C., Cesarini, D.,
Chambers, C. D., Clyde, M., Cook, T. D., De Boeck, P., Dienes, Z.,
Dreber, A., Easwaran, K., Efferson, C., ... Johnson, V. E. (2018).
Redefine statistical significance. Nature Human Behaviour, 2(1), 6--10.
doi:10.1038/s41562-017-0189-z Bennett, R. L., Batenhorst, R. L., Bivins,
B. A., Bell, R. M., Graves, D. A., Foster, T. S., Wright, B. D., &
Griffen, W. O. J. (1982). Patient-controlled analgesia: A new concept of
postoperative pain relief. Annals of Surgery, 195(6), 700--705.
doi:10.1097/00000658-198206000-00004. Berglas, S., & Jones, E. E.
(1978). Drug choice as a self-handicapping strategy in response

R-6

to noncontingent success. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
36(4), 405--417. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.36.4.405 Berk, M., & Jacka, F. N.
(2019). Diet and depression---From confirmation to implementation. JAMA,
321(9), 842--843. doi:10.1001/ jama.2019.0273 Berkun, M. M., Bialek, H.
M., Kern, R. P., & Yagi, K. (1962). Experimental studies of
psychological stress in man. Psychological Monographs: General and
Applied, 76(15), 1--39. doi:10.1037/h0093835 Berlim, M. T., Mattevi, B.
S., Belmontede-Abreu, P., & Crow, T. J. (2003). The etiology of
schizophrenia and the origin of language. Overview of a theory.
Comprehensive Psychiatry, 44(1), 7--14. doi:10.1053/comp. 2003.50003
Berman, K. F., Torrey, E. F., Daniel, D. G., & Weinberger, D. R. (1992).
Regional cerebral blood flow in monozygotic twins discordant and
concordant for schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 49,
927--934. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1992.01820120015004 Berman, M. G. (2009).
In search of decay in verbal short term memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology:Learning, Memory and Cognition, 35(2), 317--333. doi:10.1037/
a0014873 Bernhardt, P. C., Dabbs, J. M., Jr., Fielden, J. A., & Lutter,
C. D. (1998). Testosterone changes during vicarious experiences of
winning and losing among fans at sporting events. Physiology and
Behavior, 65, 59--62. doi:10.1016/S0031-9384(98)00147-4 Bernstein, B.
O., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2020). Academic acceleration in
gifted youth and fruitless concerns regarding psychological well-being:
A 35-year longitudinal study. Journal of Educational Psychology.
doi:10.1037/edu0000500 Bernstein, D. (2011). Essentials of psychology (5
ed.). Belmont, CA: Cengage. Berntson, G. G., Cacioppo, J. T., & Quigley,
K. S. (1991). Autonomic determinism: The modes of autonomic control, the
doctrine of autonomic space, and the laws of autonomic constraint.
Psychological Review, 98, 459--487. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.98.4.459
Berscheid, E., & Peplau, L. A. (1983). The emerging science of
relationships. In H. H. Kelley, E. Berscheid, A. Christensen, J. H.
Harvey, T. L. Huston, G. Levinger, E. McClintock, L. A. Peplau, & D. R.
Peterson (Eds.), Close relationships (pp. 1--19). New York: Freeman.
Berscheid, E., Snyder, M., & Omoto, A.M. (1989). The Relationship
Closeness Inventory: Assessing the closeness of interpersonal
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57,
792--807. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.57.5.792 Bewernick, B. H., Hurlemann,
R., Matusch, A., Kayser, S., Grubert, C., Hadrysiewicz, B., Axmacher,
N., Lemke, M., CooperMahkorn, D., Cohen, M. X., Brockmann, H., Lenartz,
D., Sturm, V., & Schlaepfer, T. E. (2010). Nucleus accumbens deep brain

stimulation decreases ratings of depression and anxiety in
treatment-resistant depression. Biological Psychiatry, 67(2), 110--116.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.013 Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I., & Luk,
G. (2012). Bilingualism: Consequences for mind and brain. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 16(4), 240--250. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2012.03.001
Bickman, L. (1974). The social power of a uniform. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 4(1), 47--61. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1974. tb02599.x
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-bycomponents: A theory of human image
understanding. Psychological Review, 94, 115--147.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.94.2.115 Biederman, J., Rosenbaum, J. F.,
Hirshfeld, D. R., Faraone, S. V., Bolduc, E. A., Gersten, M., Meminger,
S. R., Kagan, J., Snidman, N., & Reznick, J. S. (1990). Psychiatric
correlates of behavioral inhibition in young children of parents with
and without psychiatric disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry,
47(1), 21--26. doi:10.1001/archpsyc. 1990.01810130023004 Biezonski, D.
K., & Meyer, J. S. (2011). The nature of 3,
4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-induced serotonergic dysfunction:
Evidence for and against the neurodegeneration hypothesis. Current
Neuropharmacology, 9(1), 84--90. doi:10.2174/157015911795017146 Biglan,
A., Duncan, T. E., Ary, D. V., & Smolkowski, K. (1995). Peer and
parental influences on adolescent tobacco use. Journal of Behavioral
Medicine, 18(4), 315--330. doi:10.1007/bf01857657 Binder, J. R., Desai,
R. H., Graves, W. W., & Conant, L. L. (2009). Where is the semantic
system? A critical review and meta-analysis of 120 functional
neuroimaging studies. Cerebral Cortex, 19(12), 2767--2796.
doi:10.1093/cercor/bhp055 Birchler, G. R. (1992). Marriage. In V. B. V.
Hasselt & M. Hersen (Eds.), Handbook of social development: A lifespan
perspective. New York: Plenum. Bisson, J. I., Roberts, N. P., Andrew,
M., Cooper, R., & Lewis, C. (2013). Psychological therapies for chronic
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) in adults. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, (12). doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003388.pub4 Bjornsson,
A. S., Didie, E. R., & Phillips, K. A. (2010). Body dysmorphic disorder.
Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 12(2), 221--232.
doi:10.31887/DCNS.2010.12.2/abjornsson Blagev, D. P., Harris, D., Dunn,
A. C., Guidry, D. W., Grissom, C. K., & Lanspa, M. J. (2019). Clinical
presentation, treatment, and short-term outcomes of lung injury
associated with e-cigarettes or vaping: a prospective observational
cohort study. The Lancet, 394(10214), 2073--2083.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(19)32679-0 Blair, R. J., Colledge, E., Murray,
L., & Mitchell, D. G. (2001). A selective impairment in the processing
of sad and fearful expressions in children with psychopathic tendencies.

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 29, 491--498.
doi:10.1023/A:1012225108281 Blais, A.-R., & Weber, E. U. (2006). A
domainspecific risk-taking (DOSPERT) scale for adult populations.
Judgment and Decision making, 1(1), 33--47. Blake, R., & Sekuler, R.
(2006). Perception, 5th Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill. Blakemore, S.-J., &
Mills, K. L. (2014). Is adolescence a sensitive period for sociocultural
processing? Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 187--207.
doi:10.1146/annurev-psych010213-115202 Blakemore, S.-J., & Robbins, T.
W. (2012). Decision-making in the adolescent brain. Nature Neuroscience,
15, 1184--1191. doi:10.1038/nn.3177 Blanchard, R. (1997). Birth order
and sibling sex ratio in homosexual versus heterosexual males and
females. Annual Review of Sex Research, 8, 27--67. doi:10.1080/10532528.
1997.10559918 Blanco, C., Okuda, M., Wright, C., Hasin, D. S., Grant, B.
F., Liu, S.-M., & Olfson, M. (2008). Mental health of college students
and their non-college-attending peers: Results from the National
Epidemiologic Study on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 65(12), 1429--1437. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.65.12.1429
Bledowski, C., Kaiser, J., & Rahm, B. (2010). Basic operations in
working memory: Contributions from functional imaging studies.
Behavioural Brain Research, 214(2), 172--179.
doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2010.05.041 Bleidorn, W., Arslan, R. C., Denissen, J.
J., Rentfrow, P. J., Gebauer, J. E., Potter, J., & Gosling, S. D.
(2016). Age and gender differences in self-esteem---A cross-cultural
window. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 111(3), 396--410.
doi:10.1037/ pspp0000078 Blevins, J. E., Morton, G. J., Williams, D. L.,
Caldwell, D. W., Bastian, L. S., Wisse, B. E., Schwartz, M. W., &
Baskin, D. G. (2009). Forebrain melanocortin signaling enhances the
hindbrain satiety response to CCK-8. American Journal of
Physiology-Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology, 296(3),
R476-R484. doi:10.1152/ajpregu. 90544.2008 Bliss, T. V. P., & Lømo, T.
(1973). Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in the
dentate gyrus of the anesthetized rabbit following stimulation of the
perforant path. Journal of Physiology, 232, 331--356.
doi:10.1016/0006-8993(88)91499-0 Bloom, P. (2004). Can a dog learn a
word? Science, 304(5677), 1605--1606. doi:10.1126/science.1099899
Blumenthal, J. A., Babyak, M. A., Moore, K. A., Craighead, W. E.,
Herman, S., Khatri, P., Waugh, R., Napolitano, M. A., Forman, L. M.,
Appelbaum, Murali Doraiswamy, P. M., & Krishnan, K. R. (1999). Effects
of exercise training on older patients with major depression. Archives
of Internal

Medicine, 159(19), 2349--2356. doi:10.1001/ archinte.159.19.2349 Boddy,
C. R. (2017). Psychopathic leadership: A case study of a corporate
psychopath CEO. Journal of Business Ethics, 145(1), 141--156.
doi:10.1007/s10551-015-2908-6 Bogaert, A. F., Ashton, M. C., & Lee, K.
(2018). Personality and sexual orientation: Extension to asexuality and
the HEXACO model. The Journal of Sex Research, 55(8), 951--961.
doi:10.1080/00224499.2017.1287844 Bogen, J. E. (1995). On the
neurophysiology of consciousness: Part II. Constraining the semantic
problem. Consciousness and Cognition, 4(2), 137--158. doi:10.1006/ccog.
1995.1020 Bogen, J. E., Schultz, D. H., & Vogel, P. J. (1988).
Completeness of callosotomy shown by magnetic resonance imaging in the
long term. Archives of Neurology, 45, 1203--1205.
doi:10.1001/archneur.1988.00520350041013 Bohart, A., O'Hara, M., &
Leitner, L. (1998). Empirically violated treatments: Disenfranchisement
of humanistic and other psychotherapies. Psychotherapy Research, 8(2),
141--157. doi:10.1093/ptr/8.2.141 Boksem, M. A. S., & Smidts, A. (2015).
Brain responses to movie trailers predict individual preferences for
movies and their population-wide commercial success. Journal of
Marketing Research, 52(4), 482--492. doi:10.1509/jmr.13.0572 Bolger, N.,
& Schilling, E. A. (1991). Personality and the problems of everyday
life: The role of neuroticism in exposure and reactivity to daily
stressors. Journal of Personality, 59, 355--386. doi:10.1111/
j.1467-6494.1991.tb00253.x Bölte, S., Girdler, S., & Marschik, P. B.
(2019). The contribution of environmental exposure to the etiology of
autism spectrum disorder. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 76(7),
1275--1297. doi:10.1007/s00018-018-2988-4 Bolz, L., Heigele, S., &
Bischofberger, J. (2015). Running improves pattern separation during
novel object recognition. Brain Plasticity, 1(1), 129--141.
doi:10.3233/BPL-150010 Bomfim, I. L., Lamb, F., Fink, K., Szakács, A.,
Silveira, A., Franzén, L., Azhary, V., Maeurer, M., Feltelius, N.,
Darin, N., Hallböök T., Arnheim-Dahlström, L., Kockum, I., & Olsson, T.
(2017). The immunogenetics of narcolepsy associated with A(H1N1)pdm09
vaccination (Pandemrix) supports a potent gene--environment interaction.
Genes & Immunity, 18(2), 75--81. doi:10.1038/gene.2017.1 Bonanno, G. A.
(2004). Loss, trauma, and human resilience: Have we underestimated the
human capacity to thrive after extremely aversive events? American
Psychologist, 59(1), 20--28. doi:10.1037/0003-066X. 59.1.20 Bond, C. F.,
& Titus, L. J. (1983). Social facilitation: A meta-analysis of 241
studies. Psychological Bulletin, 94, 265--292.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.94.2.265

Boomsma, D. I. (2015). Loneliness across phylogeny and a call for
comparative studies and animal models. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 10(2), 202--212. doi:10.1177/1745691614564876 Boomsma, D. I.,
Willemsen, G., Dolan, C. V., Hawkley, L. C., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2005).
Genetic and environmental contributions to loneliness in adults: The
Netherlands Twin Register Study. Behavior Genetics, 35(6), 745--752.
doi:10.1007/s10519-005-6040-8 Booth, A., Shelley, G., Mazur, A., Tharp,
G., & Kittok, R. (1989). Testosterone, and winning and losing in human
competition. Hormones and Behavior, 23, 556--571.
doi:10.1016/0018-506X(89)90042-1 Borjigin, J., Lee, U., Liu, T., Pal,
D., Huff, S., Klarr, D., Sloboda, J., Hernandez, J., Wang, M. M., &
Mashour, G. A. (2013). Surge of neurophysiological coherence and
connectivity in the dying brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 110(35), 14432--14437.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1308285110 Bornstein, M. H., Kessen, W., & Weiskopf, S.
(1976). Color vision and hue categorization in young human infants.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 2,
115--119. doi:10.1037/ 0096-1523.2.1.115 Borsini, A., Stangl, D.,
Jeffries, A. R., Pariante, C. M., & Thuret, S. (2020). The role of
omega-3 fatty acids in preventing glucocorticoidinduced reduction in
human hippocampal neurogenesis and increase in apoptosis. Translational
Psychiatry, 10(1), 219. doi:10.1038/s41398-020-00908-0 Borsook, D.,
Becerra, L., Fishman, S., Edwards, A., Jennings, C. L., Stojanovic, M.,
Papinicolas, L., Ramachandran, V. S., Gonzalez, R. G., & Breiter, H.
(1998). Acute plasticity in the human somatosensory cortex following
amputation. NeuroReport, 9, 1013--1017.
doi:10.1097/00001756199804200-00011 Bosch, J. A., De Geus, E. J. C., &
Kelder, A. (2001). Differential effects of active versus passive coping
on secretory immunity. Psychophysiology, 38, 836--846. doi:10.1017/
S0048577201000488 Boss, L., Kang, D.-H., & Branson, S. (2015).
Loneliness and cognitive function in the older adult: A systematic
review. International Psychogeriatrics, 27(4), 541--553.
doi:10.1017/S1041610214002749 Bossard, J. H. S. (1932). Residential
propinquity in marriage selection. American Journal of Sociology, 38,
219--224. doi:10.1086/216031 Bossini, L., Tavanti, M., Calossi, S.,
Lombardelli, A., Polizzotto, N. R., Galli, R., Vatti, G., Pieraccini,
F., & Castrogiovanni, P. (2008). Magnetic resonance imaging volumes of
the hippocampus in drug-naïve patients with post-traumatic stress
disorder without comorbidity conditions. Journal of Psychiatric
Research, 42(9), 752--762. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2007.08.004

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-7

Boston Globe. (2019, 2019--09-11). Single drivers are taking over Mass.
carpool lanes. https://www.boston.com/cars/commute
/2019/09/11/single-drivers-are-taking-over -mass-carpool-lanes Bouchard,
T., Jr. (1994). Genes, environment, and personality. Science, 264,
1700--1701. doi:10.1126/science.8209250 Bouchard, T., Jr., Lykken, D.
T., McGue, M., Segal, N. L., & Tellegen, A. (1990). Sources of human
psychological differences: The Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart.
Science, 250, 223--228. doi:10.1126/science. 2218526 Bower, G. H., &
Gilligan, S. G. (1979). Remembering information related to one's self.
Journal of Research in Personality, 13(4), 420--432.
doi:10.1016/0092-6566(79) 90005-9 Bowlby, J. (1969/1982). Attachment and
loss. Vol 1: Attachment. New York: Basic Books. Bowlby, J. (1973/1999a).
Attachment and loss. Vol 2: Separation: Anxiety and anger. New York:
Basic Books. Bowlby, J. (1973/1999b). Attachment and loss. Vol 3: Loss:
Sadness and depression. New York: Basic Books. Boyce, C. J., Wood, A.
M., Daly, M., & Sedikides, C. (2015). Personality change following
unemployment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100(4), 991--1011.
doi:10.1037/ a0038647 Boyce, R., Glasgow, S. D., Williams, S., &
Adamantidis, A. (2016). Causal evidence for the role of REM sleep theta
rhythm in contextual memory consolidation. Science, 352(6287), 812--816.
doi:10.1126/science.aad5252 Boydell, J., & Murray, R. (2003).
Urbanization, migration and risk of schizophrenia. In R. M. Murray, P.
B. Jones, E. Susser, J. van Os, & M. Cannon (Eds.), The epidemiology of
schizophrenia (pp. 49--67). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Bradley, C. (1937). The behavior of children receiving benzedrine.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 94(3), 577--585. doi:10.1176/
ajp.94.3.577 Brannon, S. M., & Gawronski, B. (2017). A second chance for
first impressions? Exploring the context-(in) dependent updating of
implicit evaluations. Social Psychological and Personality Science,
8(3), 275---283. doi:10.1177/1948550616673875. Bransford, J. D., &
Johnson, M. K. (1972). Contextual prerequisites for understanding: Some
investigations of comprehension and recall. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 11, 717--726. doi:10.1016/S00225371(72)80006-9
Bratsberg, B., & Rogeberg, O. (2018). Flynn effect and its reversal are
both environmentally caused. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 115(26), 6674--6678.
doi:10.1073/ pnas.1718793115 Bray, R. M., & Noble, A. M. (1978).
Authoritarianism and decisions of mock juries: Evidence of jury bias and
group

R-8

polarization. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36,
1424--1430. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.36.12.1424 Brazil, I. A., van Dongen,
J. D. M., Maes, J. H. R., Mars, R. B., & Baskin-Sommers, A. R. (2018).
Classification and treatment of antisocial individuals: From behavior to
biocognition. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 91, 259--277.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.10.010 Breit, S., Kupferberg, A., Rogler,
G., & Hasler, G. (2018). Vagus nerve as modulator of the brain--gut axis
in psychiatric and inflammatory disorders. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 9,
44. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00044 Breland, K., & Breland, M. (1961). The
misbehavior of organisms. American Psychologist, 16, 681--684.
doi:10.1037/h0040090 Brembs, B. (1996). Chaos, cheating and cooperation:
Potential solutions to the Prisoner's Dilemma. Oikos, 76, 14--24.
doi:10.2307/3545744 Bremner, J. D., Vythilingam, M., Vermetten, E.,
Nazeer, A., Adil, J., Khan, S., Staib, L. H., & Charney, D. S. (2002).
Reduced volume of orbitofrontal cortex in major depression. Biological
Psychiatry, 51(4), 273--279. doi:10.1016/S0006-3223(01)01336-1 Breslow,
R. A., & Smothers, B. A. (2005). Drinking pattern and body mass index in
never smokers: National Health Survey, 1997--2001. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 161(4), 368--376. doi:10.1093/aje/kwi061 Brewer, J. A.,
Worhunsky, P. D., Gray, J. R., Tang, Y.-Y., Weber, J., & Kober, H.
(2011). Meditation experience is associated with differences in default
mode network activity and connectivity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(50),
20254--20259. Brewer, M. B. (2000). Reducing prejudice through
cross-categorization: Effects of multiple social identities. In S.
Oskamp (Ed.), "The Claremont Symposium on Applied Social Psychology"
Reducing prejudice and discrimination (p. 165--183). Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Publishers. Brewer, M. B., & Gardner, W. (1996). Who is this
'We'? Levels of collective identity and self representations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71(1), 83--93.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.71.1.83 Brewer, N., Keast, A., & Rishworth, A.
(2002). The confidence-accuracy relationship in eyewitness
identification: The effects of reflection and disconfirmation on
correlation and calibration. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 8, 46--58. doi:10.1037/1076-898X.8.1.44 Brewer, N., Young, R.
L., & Barnett, E. (2017). Measuring theory of mind in adults with autism
spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 47(7),
1927--1941. doi:10.1007/s10803-017-3080-x Brewin, C. R., Andrews, B., &
Valentine, J. D. (2000). Meta-analysis of risk factors for posttraumatic
stress disorder in traumaexposed adults. Journal of Consulting and

Clinical Psychology, 68, 748−766. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.68.5.748
Bringsjord, S., Licato, J., Govindarajulu, N. S., Ghosh, R., & Sen, A.
(2015). Real robots that pass human tests of self-consciousness. In 2015
24th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication (RO-MAN) (pp. 498-504). IEEE. Briñol, P., Petty, R. E., &
Stavraki, M. (2019). Structure and function of attitudes. In Oxford
Research Encyclopedia of Psychology. doi:10.1093/acrefore/
9780190236557.013.320 Brooks, L., Norman, G., & Allen, S. (1991). Role
of specific similarity in a medical diagnostic task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 120, 278-287.
doi:10.1037/00963445.120.3.278 Brosnan, S. F. (2010). Behavioral
development: Timing is everything. Current Biology, 20(3), R98-R100.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2009.12.009 Brosnan, S. F., & De Waal, F. B. (2003).
Monkeys reject unequal pay. Nature, 425, 297--299.
doi:10.1038/nature01963 Brown, G. W., & Harris, T. O. (1989).
Depression.In G. W. Brown & T. O. Harris (Eds.), Life events and illness
(pp. 49--93). New York: Guilford Press. Brown, J. D., & Mankowski, T. A.
(1993). Selfesteem, mood, and self-evaluation: Changes in mood and the
way you see you. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(3),
421--430. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.64.3.421 Brown, J. D., & Smart, S. A.
(1991). The self and social conduct: Linking self-representations to
prosocial behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(3),
368--375. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.60.3.368 Brown, K. T., Brown, T. N.,
Jackson, J. S., Sellers, R. M., & Manuel, W. J. (2003). Teammates on and
off the field? Contact with black teammates and the racial attitudes of
white student athletes. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 33(7),
1379--1403. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2003.tb01954.x Brown, P., & Elliot,
R. (1965). Control of aggression in a nursery school class. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 2, 103--109.
doi:10.1016/0022-0965(65)90035-4 Brown, R. W., & McNeill, D. (1966). The
"tip of the tongue" phenomenon. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 5, 325--337. doi:10.1016/S0022-5371(66)80040-3 Brownstein, M.,
Madva, A., & Gawronski, B. (2019). What do implicit measures measure?
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 10(5), e1501.
doi:10.1002/wcs.1501 Bruck, M., & Ceci, S. J. (2009). Reliability of
child witnesses' reports. In J. L. Skeem, S. O. Lilienfeld, & K. S.
Douglas (Eds.), Psychological science in the courtroom: Consensus and
controversy (pp. 149--171). New York, NY US: Guilford Press. Bruine de
Bruin, W., Parker, A. M., & Fischhoff, B. (2007). Individual differences
in adult decision-making competence. Journal of

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Personality and Social Psychology, 92(5), 938--956.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.92.5.938 Brummelman, E., Thomaes, S., Orobio de
Castro, B., Overbeek, G., & Bushman, B. J. (2014). "That's not just
beautiful---That's incredibly beautiful!": The adverse impact of
inflated praise on children with low self-esteem. Psychological Science,
25(3), 728--735. doi:10.1177/0956797613514251 Brummelman, E., Thomaes,
S., Nelemans, S. A., Orobio de Castro, B., Overbeek, G., & Bushman, B.
J. (2015). Origins of narcissism in children. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112(12),
3659--3662. doi:10.1073/ pnas.1420870112 Brune, M. (2006). The
evolutionary psychology of obsessive-compulsive disorder: The role of
cognitive metarepresentation. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine,
49(3), 317--329. doi:10.1353/pbm.2006.0037 Brunelli, M., Castellucci,
V., & Kandel, E. R. (1976). Synaptic facilitation and behavioral
sensitization in Aplysia: Possible role of serotonin and cyclic AMP.
Science, 194(4270), 1178--1181. doi:10.1126/science.186870 Brunner, H.,
Nelen, M., Breakefield, X., Ropers, H., & van Oost, B. (1993). Abnormal
behavior associated with a point mutation in the structural gene for
monoamine oxidase A. Science, 262(5133), 578--580. doi:10.1126/
science.8211186 Bryant, C. M., & Duncan, J. C. (2019). Interracial
marriages: Historical and contemporary trends. In Nazarinia R. R. &,
Rollins A. (eds) Biracial families (pp. 81-104): Cham, Switzerland:
Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-96160-6_5 Bryant, F. B., & Veroff, J.
(2007). Savoring: A new model of positive experience. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. Brysbaert, M., Stevens, M.,
Mandera, P., & Keuleers, E. (2016). How many words do we know? Practical
estimates of vocabulary size dependent on word definition, the degree of
language input and the participant's age. Frontiers in Psychology,
7(1116). doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01116 Buchanan, R. W., Breier, A., &
Tamminga, C. A. (1995). Patient response and resource management:
Another view of clozapine treatment of schizophrenia. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 152(6), 827--832. doi:10.1176/ajp.152.6.827 Buchanan, T.
W., & Preston, S. D. (2014). Stress leads to prosocial action in
immediate need situations. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 8, 5.
doi:10.3389/ fnbeh.2014.00005 Bulik, C. M., Kleiman, S. C., & Yilmaz, Z.
(2016). Genetic epidemiology of eating disorders. Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 29(6), 383--388. doi:10.1097/YCO.0000000000000275 Buoli, M.,
Serati, M., Grassi, S., Pergoli, L., Cantone, L., Altamura, A. C., &
Bollati, V. (2018). The role of clock genes in the

etiology of major depressive disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders,
234, 351--357. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2017.11.015 Burch, M. R., & Bailey, J.
S. (1999). How dogs learn. Hoboken, N.J.: Howell Book House. Burger, J.
M. (2009). Replicating Milgram: Would people still obey today? American
Psychologist, 64(1), 1--11. doi:10.1037/ a0010932 Burger, J. M.,
Messian, N., Patel, S., del Prado, A., & Anderson, C. (2004). What a
coincidence! The effects of incidental similarity on compliance.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 35--43.
doi:10.1177/0146167203258838 Burke, S. C., Cremeens, J., Vail-Smith, K.,
& Woolsey, C. (2010). Drunkorexia: Calorie restriction prior to alcohol
consumption among college freshmen. Journal of Alcohol and Drug
Education, 54(2), 17--34. Burt, D., & Talati, Z. (2017). The unsolved
value of executive coaching: A meta-analysis of outcomes using
randomised control trial studies. International Journal of Evidence
Based Coaching and Mentoring, 15(2), 17. Burton, L. A., Henninger, D.,
Hafetz, J., & Cofer, J. (2009). Aggression, gender-typical childhood
play, and a prenatal hormonal index. . Social Behavior & Personality: An
International Journal, 37(1), 105--115. doi:10.2224/sbp.2009.37.1.105
Buscemi, N., Vandermeer, B., Friesen, C., Bialy, L., Tubman, M., Ospina,
M., Klassen, T. P., & Witmans, M. (2007). The efficacy and safety of
drug treatments for chronic insomnia in adults: A meta-analysis of RCTs.
Journal of General Internal Medicine, 22(9), 1335--1350.
doi:10.1007/s11606-007-0251-z Bushdid, C., Magnasco, M. O., Vosshall, L.
B., & Keller, A. (2014). Humans can discriminate more than 1 trillion
olfactory stimuli. Science, 343(6177), 1370--1372. doi:10.1126/
science.1249168 Bushman, B. J. (2002). Does venting anger feed or
extinguish the flame? Catharsis, rumination, distraction, anger, and
aggressive responding. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28,
724--731. doi:10.1177/0146167202289002 Bushnell, I. W. R. (2001).
Mother's face recognition in newborn infants: Learning and memory.
Infant and Child Development, 10, 67--74. doi:10.1002/icd.248 Buss, D.
M. (1985). Human mate selection. American Scientist, 73, 47--51. Buss,
D. M. (1996). Evolutionary biology and personality psychology: Toward a
conception of human nature and individual differences. In G.-H. Jennings
(Ed.), Passages beyond the gate: A Jungian approach to understanding the
nature of American psychology at the dawn of the new millennium
(pp. 108--125). Needham Heights, MA: Simon & Schuster Custom Publishing.
Buss, D. M. (1999). Human nature and individual differences: The
evolution of human

personality. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of
personality: Theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 31--56). New York:
Guilford Press. Buss, D. M., & Schmitt, D. P. (1993). Sexual Strategies
Theory: An evolutionary perspective on human mating. Psychological
Review, 100, 204--232. doi:10.1037/0033295X.100.2.204 Buss, D. M.,
Larsen, R. J., & Westen, D. (1992). Sex differences in jealousy:
Evolution, physiology, and psychology. Psychological Science, 3,
251--255. doi:10.1111/j.14679280.1992.tb00038.x Bustillo, J. R.,
Lauriello, J., Horan, W. P., & Keith, S. J. (2001). The psychosocial
treatment of schizophrenia: An update. The American Journal of
Psychiatry, 158(2), 163--175. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.158.2.163 Bynum, W.
F., & Porter, R. (Eds.). (2005). Oxford dictionary of scientific
quotations. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Byrne, D. (1961).
Interpersonal attraction and attitude similarity. Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology, 62, 713--715. doi:10.1037/ h0044721 Cáceres, M.,
Lachuer, J., Zapala, M. A., Redmond, J. C., Kudo, L., Geschwind, D. H.,
Lockhart, D. J., Preuss, T. M., & Barlow, C. (2003). Elevated gene
expression levels distinguish human from non-human primate brains.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 100(22), 13030--13035. doi:10.1073/pnas. 2135499100 Cacioppo,
J. T., Adler, A. B., Lester, P. B., McGurk, D., Thomas, J. L., Chen,
H.-Y., & Cacioppo, S. (2015). Building social resilience in soldiers: A
double dissociative randomized controlled study. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 109(1), 90--105. 10.1037/pspi0000022 Cacioppo, J.
T., & Berntson, G. G. (2001). The affect system and racial prejudice. In
J. Bargh & D. K. Apsley (Eds.), Unraveling the complexities of social
life: A festschrift in honor of Robert B. Zajonc (pp. 95--110).
Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. Cacioppo, J. T., &
Berntson, G. G. (2011). The brain, homeostasis, and health: Balancing
demands of the internal and external milieu. In H. S. Friedman (Ed.),
The Oxford handbook of health psychology. (pp. 121--137). New York:
Oxford University Press. Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., Adolphs, R.,
Carter, C. S., Davidson, R. J., McClintock, M. K., & et al.. (2002).
Foundations in social neuroscience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Cacioppo,
J. T., Berntson, G. G., & Klein, D. J. (1992). What is an emotion? The
role of somatovisceral afference, with special emphasis on
somatovisceral "illusions." Review of Personality and Social Psychology,
14, 63--98. Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., Larsen, J. T., Poehlmann,
K. M., & Ito, T. A. (2000). The psychophysiology of emotion. In M. Lewis

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-9

& J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (Vol. 2,
pp. 173--191). New York: Guilford Press. Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G.
G., Norris, C. J., & Gollan, J. K. (2012). The evaluative space model.
In Handbook of theories of social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 50--72).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Cacioppo, J. T., & Cacioppo, S. (2014). Social
relationships and health: The toxic effects of perceived social
isolation. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 8(2), 58--72.
doi:10.1111/spc3.12087 Cacioppo, J. T., & Cacioppo, S. (2018a).
Loneliness in the modern age: An Evolutionary Theory of Loneliness
(ETL). In J. M. Olson (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology
(Vol. 58, pp. 127--197). New York, NY: Academic Press. Cacioppo, J. T.,
& Cacioppo, S. (2018b). The growing problem of loneliness. The Lancet,
391(10119), 426. doi:10.1016/S01406736(18)30142-9 Cacioppo, J. T.,
Cacioppo, S., & Boomsma, D. (2014). Evolutionary mechanisms for
loneliness. Cognition and Emotion, 28(1), 3--21.
doi:10.1080/02699931.2013.837379 Cacioppo, J. T., Cacioppo, S.,
Capitanio, J. P., & Cole, W. W. (2015). The neuroendocrinology of social
isolation. Annual Review of Psychology, 66, 733--767. doi:10/1146/
annurev-psych-010814-015240 Cacioppo, J. T., Cacioppo, S., Cole, S. W.,
Capitanio, J. P., Goossens, L., & Boomsma, D. I. (2015). Loneliness
across phylogeny and a call for comparative studies and animal models.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10(2), 202--212.
doi:10.1177/1745691614564876 Cacioppo, J. T., Cacioppo, S., Gonzaga, G.
C., Ogburn, E. L., & VanderWeele, T. J. (2013). Marital satisfaction and
break-ups differ across on-line and off-line meeting venues. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
110(25), 10135--10140. doi:10.1073/pnas. 1222447110 Cacioppo, J. T.,
Chen, H. Y., & Cacioppo, S. (2017). Reciprocal influences between
loneliness and self-centeredness: A crosslagged panel analysis in a
population-based sample of African American, Hispanic, and Caucasian
adults. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 43(8), 1125--1135.
doi:10.1177/0146167217705120 Cacioppo, J. T., & Decety, J. (2011a).
Social neuroscience: Challenges and opportunities in the study of
complex behavior. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1224(1),
162--173. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632. 2010.05858.x Cacioppo, J. T., &
Decety, J. (2011b). An introduction to social neuroscience. In J. Decety
& J. T. Cacioppo (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of social neuroscience
(pp. 3--8). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

R-10

Cacioppo, J. T., & Gardner, W. L. (1999). Emotion. Annual Review of
Psychology, 50, 191--214. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.50.1.191 Cacioppo,
J. T., Hawkley, L. C., Berntson, G. G., Ernst, J. M., Gibbs, A. C.,
Stickgold, R., & Hobson, J. A. (2002). Do lonely days invade the nights?
Potential social modulation of sleep efficiency. Psychological Science,
13, 384--387. doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00469 Cacioppo, J. T., Hawkley, L.
C., Ernst, J. M., Burleson, M., Berntson, G. G., Nouriani, B., &
Spiegel, D. (2006). Loneliness within a nomological net: An evolutionary
perspective. Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 1054--1085.
doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2005.11.007 Cacioppo, J. T., Hawkley, L. C., Kalil,
A., Hughes, M. E., Waite, L., & Thisted, R. A. (2008). Happiness and the
invisible threads of social connection: The Chicago Health, Aging, and
Social Relations Study. In M. Eid & R. Larsen (Eds.), The science of
well-being (pp. 195--219). New York: Guilford. Cacioppo, J. T., Hawkley,
L. C., & Thisted, R. A. (2010). Perceived social isolation makes me sad:
5-year cross-lagged analyses of loneliness and depressive symptomatology
in the Chicago Health, Aging, and Social Relations Study. Psychology and
Aging, 25(2), 453--463. doi:10.1037/a0017216 Cacioppo, J. T.,
Marshall-Goodell, B. S., Tassinary, L. G., & Petty, R. E. (1992).
Rudimentary determinants of attitudes: Classical conditioning is more
effective when prior knowledge about the attitude stimulus is low than
high. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 28, 207--233.
doi:10.1016/0022-1031(92)90053-M Cacioppo, J. T., Norris, C. J., Decety,
J., Monteleone, G., & Nusbaum, H. (2009). In the eye of the beholder:
Individual differences in perceived social isolation predict regional
brain activation to social stimuli. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
21(1), 83--92. doi:10.1162/jocn.2009.21007 Cacioppo, J. T., & Patrick,
W. (2008). Loneliness: Human nature and the need for social
connectedness. New York: Norton. Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1981).
Electromyograms as measures of extent and affectivity of information
processing. American Psychologist, 36, 441--456.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.36.5.441 Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R.E., Feinstein,
J.A., & Jarvis, W.B.G. (1996). Dispositional differences in cognitive
motivation: The life and times of individuals varying in need for
cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 197-- 253.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.119.2.1 Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R.E., & Kao, C.F.
(1984). The efficient assessment of need for cognition. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 48, 306--307. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.36.5.441
Cacioppo, J. T., Semin, G. R., & Berntson, G. G. (2004). Realism,
instrumentalism, and scientific symbiosis: Psychological theory as a
search for truth and the discovery of solutions. American Psychologist,
59(4), 214--223. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.59.4.214

Cacioppo, S. (2016). Neural markers of interpersonal attraction: A
possible new direction for couples therapy. Emotion Researcher, ISRE's
Sourcebook for Research on Emotion and Affect.
http://emotionresearcher.com/neural
-markers-of-interpersonal-attraction-a-pos
sible-new-direction-for-couples-therapy/ Cacioppo, S., Bangee, M.,
Balogh, S., CardenasIniguez, C., Qualter, P., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2016).
Loneliness and implicit attention to social threat: A high-performance
electrical neuroimaging study. Cognitive Neuroscience, 7(1-4), 138--159.
doi:10.1080/17588928.201 5.1070136 Cacioppo, S., Bianchi-Demicheli, F.,
Hatfield, E., & Rapson, R. L. (2012). Social neuroscience of love.
Clinical Neuropsychiatry: Journal of Treatment Evaluation 9, 3--13.
Cacioppo, S., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2013). Lust for life. Scientific
American Mind, 24(5), 56--60. Cacioppo, S., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2020).
Introduction to social neuroscience. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press. Cacioppo, S., Couto, B., Bolmont, M., Sedeno, L., Frum, C.,
Lewis, J. W., Manes, F., Ibanez, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2013). Selective
decision-making deficit in love following damage to the anterior insula.
Current Trends in Neurology, 7, 15--19. Cai, X. J., Widdowson, P. S.,
Harrold, J., Wilson, S., Buckingham, R. E., Arch, J., Tadayyon, M.,
Clapham, J. C., Wilding, J., & Williams, G. (1999). Hypothalamic orexin
expression: modulation by blood glucose and feeding. Diabetes, 48(11),
2132--2137. doi:10.2337/ diabetes.48.11.2132 Cain, W. S., & Gent, J. F.
(1991). Olfactory sensitivity: Reliability, generality, and association
with aging. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 17, 382--391. doi:10.1037/0096-1523.17.2.382 Calcagni, E.,
& Elenkov, I. (2006). Stress system activity, innate and T helper
cytokines, and susceptibility to immune-related diseases. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 1069, 62--76. doi:10.1196/annals. 1351.006
Caldwell, D. F., & Caldwell, M. C. (1976). Cetaceans. In T. A. Sebeok
(Ed.), How animals communicate (pp. 794--808). Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University. Calkins, M. W. (1906). A reconciliation between structural
and functional psychology, Psychological Review, 13, 61--81.
doi:10.1037/h0071994 Calvin, W. H. (2004). A brief history of the mind:
From apes to intellect and beyond. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Camelot Group. (2004). Living the dream: Jackpot winners reveal their
millionaire lifestyles. http://www.camelotgroup.co.uk /Winnerfacts.pdf
Canary, D. J., Stafford, L., Hause, K. S., & Wallace, L. A. (1993). An
inductive analysis of relational maintenance strategies: Comparisons
among lovers, relatives, friends, and others. Communication

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Research Reports, 10(1), 5--14. doi:10.1080/08824099309359913 Cannon, W.
(1927). The James-Lange theory of emotions: A critical examination and
an alternative theory. American Journal of Psychology, 39, 106--124.
doi:10.2307/1415404 Cannon, W. (1932). The wisdom of the body. New York:
W.W. Norton. Cannon, W. B. (1929). Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear
and rage (2nd ed.). New York: Harper & Row. Cannon, W., & Washburn, A.
L. (1912). An explanation of hunger. American Journal of Physiology, 29,
441--454. doi:10.1152/ajplegacy. 1912.29.5.441 Cantalupo, C., & Hopkins,
W. D. (2001). Asymmetric Broca's area in great apes. Nature, 414(6863),
505--505. doi:10.1038/35107134 Capela, J. P., Fernandes, E., Remião, F.,
Bastos, M. L., Meisel, A., & Carvalho, F. (2007). Ecstasy induces
apoptosis via 5-HT(2A)receptor stimulation in cortical neurons.
Neurotoxicology, 28(4), 868--875. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2007.04.005
Cappelletti, M., & Wallen, K. (2016). Increasing women's sexual desire:
The comparative effectiveness of estrogens and androgens. Hormones and
Behavior, 78, 178--193. doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2015.11.003 Capshew, J. H.
(1993). Engineering behavior: World War II, Project Pigeon, and the
conditioning of B.F. Skinner. Technology & Culture, 34, 835--857.
doi:10.2307/3106417 Cardin, V., Orfanidou, E., Kästner, L., Rönnberg,
J., Woll, B., Capek, C. M., & Rudner, M. (2016). Monitoring different
phonological parameters of sign language engages the same cortical
language network but distinctive perceptual ones. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 28(1), 20--40. doi:10.1162/jocn_a_00872 %M 26351993 Carew,
T. J., & Kandel, E. R. (1973). Acquisition and retention of long-term
habituation in Aplysia: Correlation of behavioral and cellular
processes. Science, 182(4117), 1158--1160.
doi:10.1126/science.182.4117.1158 Carhart-Harris, R. L.,
Muthukumaraswamy, S., Roseman, L., Kaelen, M., Droog, W., Murphy, K.,
Tagliazucchi, E., Schenberg, E. E., Nest, T., Orban, C., Leech, R.,
Williams, L. T., Williams, T. M., Bolstridge, M., Sessa, B., McGonigle,
J., Sereno, M. I., Nichols, D., Hellyer, P. J., . . . Nutt, D. J.
(2016). Neural correlates of the LSD experience revealed by multimodal
neuroimaging. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 113(17), 4853--4858.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1518377113 Carlsmith, J. M., & Anderson, C. A. (1979).
Ambient temperature and the occurrence of collective violence: A new
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(3), 337--344.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.37.3.337 Carney, D. R., Cuddy, A. J. C., & Yap, A.
J. (2010). Power posing: Brief nonverbal displays affect neuroendocrine
levels and

risk tolerance. Psychological Science, 21(10), 1363--1368.
doi:10.1177/0956797610383437 Carskadon, M. A., Wolfson, A. R., Acebo,
C., Tzischinsky, O., & Seifer, R. (1998). Adolescent sleep patterns,
circadian timing, and sleepiness at a transition to early school days.
Sleep, 21, 871--881. doi:10.1093/sleep/ 21.8.871 Carstensen, L. L.,
Fung, H. H., & Charles, S. T. (2003). Socioemotional selectivity theory
and the regulation of emotion in the second half of life. Motivation and
Emotion, 27(2), 103--123. doi:10.1023/a:1024569803230 Carstensen, L. L.,
Turan, B., Scheibe, S., Ram, N., Ersner-Hershfield, H., Samanez-Larkin,
G. R., Brooks, K. P, & Nesselroade, J. R. (2010). Emotional experience
improves with age: Evidence based on over 10 years of experience
sampling. Psychology and Aging, 26(1), 21--33. doi:10.1037/a0021285
Caruso, C. C. (2014). Negative impacts of shiftwork and long work hours.
Rehabilitation Nursing, 39(1), 16--25. doi:10.1002/rnj.107 Carvalho, C.,
Caetano, J. M., Cunha, L., Rebouta, P., Kaptchuk, T. J., & Kirsch, I.
(2016). Open-label placebo treatment in chronic low back pain: A
randomized controlled trial. Pain, 157(12), 2766--2772.
doi:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000700 Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F.
(2000). Origins and functions of positive and negative affect: A
control-process view. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.),
Motivational science: Social and personality perspectives
(pp. 256--272). New York: Psychology Press. Carver, C. S., Scheier, M.
F., & Segerstrom, S. C. (2010). Optimism. Clinical Psychology Review,
30(7), 879--889. doi:10.1016/j.cpr. 2010.01.006 Casanova, M. F.,
Switala, A. E., Trippe, J., & Fitzgerald, M. (2007). Comparative
minicolumnar morphometry of three distinguished scientists. Autism,
11(6), 557--569. doi:10.1177/1362361307083261 Cascio, C. J., Moore, D.,
& McGlone, F. (2019). Social touch and human development. Developmental
Cognitive Neuroscience, 35, 5--11. doi:10.1016/j.dcn.2018.04.009 Caspi,
A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T. E., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I. W., . .
. Poulton, R. (2002). Role of genotype in the cycle of violence in
maltreated children. Science, 297(5582), 851--854. doi:10.1126/science.
1072290 Caterina, M. J., Leffler, A., Malmberg, A. B., Martin, W. J.,
Trafton, J., Petersen-Zeitz, K. R., Koltzenburg, M., Basbaum, A. I., &
Julius, D. (2000). Impaired nociception and pain sensation in mice
lacking the capsaicin receptor. Science, 220, 306--313.
doi:10.1126/science.288.5464.306 Caterina, M. J., Schumacher, M. A.,
Tominaga, M., Rosen, T. A., Levine, J. D., & Julius, D. (1997). The
capsaicin receptor: A heatactivated ion channel in the pain pathway.
Nature, 389, 816--824. doi:10.1038/39807

Cattell, R. B. (1946/1969). Description and measurement of personality.
Yonkers, NY: World Book Company. Cattell, R. B. (1963). Theory of fluid
and crystallized intelligence: A critical experiment. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 54(1), 1--22. doi:10.1037/h0046743 Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; 2017). Life expectancy. https://www
.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/life-expectancy.htm Centers for Disease Control &
Prevention. (2019) Understanding the epidemic. https://
www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/epidemic/index .html Centers for Disease
Control & Prevention (CDC; 2019). Drug overdose deaths. https://www
.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/data/statedeaths.html Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC; 2019). Current cigarette smoking among adults in
the United States. https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics
/fact_sheets/adult_data/cig_smoking /index.htm Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC; 2020). Adult obesity facts. https://
www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC; 2020a). About e-cigarettes. https://
www.cdc.gov/tobacco/basic_information
/e-cigarettes/about-e-cigarettes.html Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC; 2020b). Health effects of secondhand smoke.
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco /data_statistics/fact_sheets/secondhand
\_smoke/health_effects/index.htm Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC; 2020c). Smoking & tobacco use: Fast facts.
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco
/data_statistics/fact_sheets/fast_facts/index .htm#beginning Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; 2020). Research on medicines and
pregnancy. https://www.cdc.gov/pregnancy
/meds/treatingfortwo/research.html Cerella, J., & Hale, S. (1994). The
rise and fall in information-processing rates over the life span. Acta
Psychologica, 86, 109--197. doi:10.1016/0001-6918(94)90002-7 Chagnon, N.
A. (1988). Life histories, blood revenge, and warfare in a tribal
population. Science, 239, 985--992. doi:10.1126/science. 239.4843.985
Champagne, F., Francis, D. D., Mar, A., & Meaney, M. J. (2003).
Naturally-occurring variations in maternal care in the rat as a
mediating influence for the effects of environment on the development of
individual differences in stress reactivity. Physiology & Behavior, 79,
359--371. doi:10.1016/S00319384(03)00149-5 Chang, E. C. (1996). Cultural
differences in optimism, pessimism, and coping: Predictors of subsequent
adjustment in Asian American and Caucasian American college students.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43(1), 113--123.
doi:10.1037/0022-0167.43.1.113

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-11

Chang, E. C., Elizabeth, A. Y., Kahle, E. R., Jeglic, E. L., & Hirsch,
J. K. (2013). Is doubling up on positive future cognitions associated
with lower suicidal risk in Latinos?: A look at hope and positive
problem orientation. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 37(6), 1285--1293.
doi:10.1007/s10608-013-9572-x Chang, Y. S., Wu, Y. H., Hsu, C. Y., Tang,
S. H., Yang, L. L., & Su, S. F. (2011). Impairment of perceptual and
motor abilities at the end of a night shift is greater in nurses working
fast rotating shifts. Sleep Medicine, 12(9), 866--869.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep. 2011.03.018 Chapman, B., Fiscella,
K., Duberstein, P., Kawachi, I., & Muennig, P. (2014). Measurement
confounding affects the extent to which verbal IQ explains social
gradients in mortality. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health,
68(8), 728--733. doi:10.1136/jech-2013-203741 Chapman, S., & MacKenzie,
R. (2010). The global research neglect of unassisted smoking cessation:
Causes and consequences. PLoS Medicine, 7(2), e1000216.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000216 Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973).
Perception in chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4(1), 55--81.
doi:10.1016/0010-0285(73)90004-2 Chatrian, G.-E. (1990). Coma, other
states of altered responsiveness, and brain death. In D. D. Daly, & T.
A. Pedley (Eds.), Current practice of clinical electroencephalography
(pp. 425--487). New York: Raven Press. Chaudhari, N., Landlin, A. M., &
Roper, S. D. (2000). A metabotropic glutamate receptor variant functions
as a taste receptor. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 113--119. doi:10.1038/
72053 Chaudhri, N., Sahuque, L. L., & Janak, P. H. (2008).
Context-induced relapse of conditioned behavioral responding to ethanol
cues in rats. Biological Psychiatry, 64(3), 203--210. doi:10.1038/72053
Chawanpaiboon, S., Vogel, J. P., Moller, A.-B., Lumbiganon, P., Petzold,
M., Hogan, D., . . . Gülmezoglu, A. M. (2019). Global, regional, and
national estimates of levels of preterm birth in 2014: A systematic
review and modelling analysis. The Lancet Global Health, 7(1), e37--e46.
doi:10.1016/S2214109X(18)30451-0 Chein, J., Albert, D., O'Brien, L.,
Uckert, K., & Steinberg, L. (2011). Peers increase adolescent risk
taking by enhancing activity in the brain's reward circuitry.
Developmental Science, 14(2), F1--F10.
doi:10.1111/j.14677687.2010.01035.x Chemtob, C. M., Nomura, Y.,
Rajendran, K., Yehuda, R., Schwartz, D., & Abramovitz, R. (2010). Impact
of maternal posttraumatic stress sisorder and depression following
exposure to the September 11 attacks on preschool children's behavior.
Child Development, 81(4), 1129--1141.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01458.x Chen, C., Nakagawa, S., An, Y.,
Ito, K., Kitaichi, Y., & Kusumi, I. (2017). The exercise-gluco-

R-12

corticoid paradox: How exercise is beneficial to cognition, mood, and
the brain while increasing glucocorticoid levels. Frontiers in
Neuroendocrinology, 44, 83--102. doi:https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.yfrne.2016.12.001 Chen, S., & Bonanno, G. A. (2020).
Psychologicaladjustment during the global outbreak of COVID-19: A
resilience perspective. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research,
Practice, and Policy, 12(S1), S51--S54. doi:10.1037/tra0000685 Chen, S.,
Boucher, H. C., & Tapias, M. P. (2006). The relational self revealed:
Integrative conceptualization and implications for interpersonal life.
Psychological Bulletin, 132(2), 151--179.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.132.2.151 Chen, S., Fragoza, R., Klei, L., Liu,
Y., Wang, J., Roeder, K., . . . Yu, H. (2018). An interactome
perturbation framework prioritizes damaging missense mutations for
developmental disorders. Nature Genetics, 50(7), 1032-- 1040.
doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0130-z Cherkas, L., Hochberg, F., MacGregor, A.
J., Snieder, H., & Spector, T. D. (2000). Happy families: A twin study
of humour. Twin Research, 3, 17--22. doi:10.1375/twin.3.1.17 Cherkassky,
V. L., Kana, R. K., Keller, T. A., & Just, M. A. (2006). Functional
connectivity in a baseline resting-state network in autism. NeuroReport,
17(16), 1687--1690. doi:10.1097/01.wnr.0000239956.45448.4c Chertkow, H.,
Whitehead, V., Phillips, N., Wolfson, C., Atherton, J., & Bergman, H.
(2010). Multilingualism (but not always bilingualism) delays the onset
of Alzheimer disease: Evidence from a bilingual community. Alzheimer
Disease & Associated Disorders, 24(2), 118--125. doi:10.1097/
WAD.0b013e3181ca1221 Chetty, R., Stepner, M., Abraham, S., Lin, S.,
Scuderi, B., Turner, N., Bergeron, A., & Cutler, D. (2016). The
association between income and life expectancy in the United States,
2001--2014. JAMA, 315(16), 1750--1766. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.4226
Chicago Social Brain Network. (2011). Invisible forces and unseen
powers: Gravity, gods, and minds. Saddle River, NJ: Pearson. Child, I.
L. (1973). Humanistic psychology and the research tradition: Their
several virtues. Oxford England: John Wiley & Sons. Chin, B., Murphy, M.
L., Janicki-Deverts, D., & Cohen, S. (2017). Marital status as a
predictor of diurnal salivary cortisol levels and slopes in a community
sample of healthy adults. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 78, 68--75.
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2017.01.016 Chiu, L.-H. (1972). A cross-cultural
comparison of cognitive styles in Chinese and American children.
International Journal of Psychology, 7(4), 235--242.
doi:10.1080/00207597208246604 Cho, K., Ennaceur, A., Cole, J. C., & Suh,
C. K. (2000). Chronic jet lag produces cognitive deficits. Journal of
Neuroscience, 20(6), 1--5. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.20-06-j0005.2000

Choi, I., Nisbett, R. E., & Norenzayan, A. (1999). Causal attribution
across cultures: Variation and universality. Psychological Bulletin,
125(1), 47--63. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.125.1.47 Choi, J., Cutler, A., &
Broersma, M. (2017). Early development of abstract language knowledge:
Evidence from perception-- production transfer of birth-language memory.
Royal Society Open Science, 4(1), 160660. doi:10.1098/rsos.160660
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic structures. The Hague, Netherlands:
Mouton. Chopik, W. J., & Grimm, K. J. (2019). Longitudinal changes and
historic differences in narcissism from adolescence to older adulthood.
Psychology and Aging, 34(8), 1109---1123. doi:10.1037/pag0000379 Chrea,
C., Valentin, D., Sulmont-Rosse, C., Mai, H. L., Nguyen, D. H., & Abdi,
H. (2004). Culture and odor categorization: Agreement between cultures
depends upon the odors. Food Quality and Preference, 15, 669--679.
doi:10.1016/j.foodqual.2003.10.005 Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H.
(2014). Friendship and natural selection. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(Supplement 3),
10796--10801. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa066082 Christakis, N., & Fowler, J.
(2007). The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32 years.
New England Journal of Medicine, 357, 370--379. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa066082
Christensen, A. C. (2000). Cats as an aid to teaching genetics.
Genetics, 155(3), 999--1004. Christoforou, C., Papadopoulos, T. C.,
Constantinidou, F., & Theodorou, M. (2017). Your brain on the movies: A
computational approach for predicting boxoffice performance from
viewer's brain responses to movie trailers. Frontiers in
Neuroinformatics, 11(72). doi:10.3389/fninf. 2017.00072 Chua, H. F., Ho,
S. S., Jasinska, A. J., Polk, T. A., Welsh, R. C., Liberzon, I., &
Strecher, V. J. (2011). Self-related neural response to tailored
smoking-cessation messages predicts quitting. Nature Neuroscience,
14(4), 426--427. doi:10.1038/nn.2761 Cialdini, R. B. (2001). Influence:
Science and practice (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. Cialdini, R. B.,
Borden, R. J., Thorne, A., Walker, M. R., Freeman, S., & Sloan, L. R.
(1976). Basking in reflected glory: Three (football) field studies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34(3), 366--375.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.34.3.366 Cialdini, R. B., Cacioppo, J., Bassett,
R., & Miller, J. (1978). Low-ball procedure for producing compliance:
Commitment then cost. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36,
463--476. doi:10.1037/00223514.36.5.463 Cialdini, R. B., & Goldstein, N.
J. (2004). Social influence: Compliance and conformity. Annual Review of
Psychology, 55, 591--621. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.55.090902. 142015

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cialdini, R. B., Kenrick, D. T., & Baumann, D. J. (1981). Effects of
mood on prosocial behavior in children and adults. In N. Eisenberg
(Ed.), The development of prosocial behavior (pp. 339--359). New York:
Academic Press. Cialdini, R. B., Vincent, J., Lewis, S., Catalan, J.,
Wheeler, D., & Darby, B. L. (1975). Reciprocal concessions procedure for
inducing compliance: The door-in-the-face technique. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 206--215. doi:10.1037/h0076284
Cipolli, C., Ferrara, M., De Gennaro, L., & Plazzi, G. (2016). Beyond
the neuropsychology of dreaming: Insights into the neural basis of
dreaming with new techniques of sleep recording and analysis. Sleep
Medicine Reviews, 35, 8---20. doi:10.1016/j. smrv.2016.07.005.
Cipolotti, L., Husain, M., Crinion, J., Bird, C. M., Khan, S. S.,
Losseff, N., Howard, R. S., & Leff, A. P. (2008). The role of the
thalamus in amnesia: A tractography, highresolution MRI and
neuropsychological study. Neuropsychologia, 46(11), 2745--2758.
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.05.009 Cipriani, A., Furukawa, T.
A., Salanti, G., Chaimani, A., Atkinson, L. Z., Ogawa, Y., Leucht, S.,
Ruhe, H. G., Turner, E. H., Higgins, J. P. T., Egger, M., Takeshima, N.,
Hayasaka, Y., Imai, H., Shinohara, K., Tajika, A., Ionnidis, J. P. A., &
Geddes, J. R. (2018). Comparative efficacy and acceptability of 21
antidepressant drugs for the acute treatment of adults with major
depressive disorder: A systematic review and network metaanalysis. The
Lancet, 391(10128), 1357--1366. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32802-7 Clark,
D. M. (1988). A cognitive model of panic attacks. In S. Rachman & D.
Maser (Eds.), Panic: Psychological perspectives (pp. 71--89): Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. Clarke, A., & Butler, P. E.
(2009). The psychological management of facial transplantation. Expert
Review of Neurotherapeutics, 9(7), 1087--1100. doi:10.1586/ern.09.42
Coan, J. A., Schaefer, H. S., & Davidson, R. J. (2006). Lending a hand:
Social regulation of the neural response to threat. Psychological
Science, 17(12), 1032--1039. doi:10.1111/ j.1467-9280.2006.01832.x
Coffey, S. F., Dansky, B. S., Carrigan, M. H., & Brady, K. T. (2000).
Acute and protracted cocaine abstinence in an outpatient population: A
prospective study of mood, sleep and withdrawal symptoms. Drug and
Alcohol Dependence, 59(3), 277--286. doi:10.1016/S0376-8716(99)00126-X
Cogsdill, E. J., Todorov, A. T., Spelke, E. S., & Banaji, M. R. (2014).
Inferring character from faces: A developmental study. Psychological
Science, 25(5), 1132--1139. doi:10.1177/0956797614523297 Cohen, E.,
Chazan, S., Lerner, M., & Maimon, E. (2010). Posttraumatic play in young
children exposed to terrorism: An empirical study. Infant Mental Health
Journal, 31(2), 159--181. doi:10.1002/imhj.20250

Cohen, S., & Herbert, T.B. (1996). Health psychology: Psychological
factors and physical disease from the perspective of human
psychoneuroimmunology. Annual Review of Psychology, 47, 113--142.
doi:10.1146/ annurev.psych.47.1.113 Cohen, S., Alper, C., Adler, N.,
Treanor, J. J., & Turner, R. B. (2008). Objective and subjective
socioeconomic status and susceptibility to the common cold. Health
Psychology, 27(2), 268--274. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.27.2.268 Cohen, S.,
Tyrrell, D. A., & Smith, A. P. (1991). Psychological stress and
susceptibility to the common cold. New England Journal of Medicine,
325(9), 606--612. doi:10.1056/ NEJM199108293250903 Cohn, D., & Taylor,
P. (2010). Baby boomers approach age 65--glumly. http://pewresearch
.org/pubs/1834/baby-boomers-old -age-downbeat-pessimism Cohn, M. A.,
Fredrickson, B. L., Brown, S. L., Mikels, J. A., & Conway, A. M. (2009).
Happiness unpacked: Positive emotions increase life satisfaction by
building resilience. Emotion, 9(3), 361--368. doi:10.1037/a0015952
Cokely, E. T., Feltz, A., Ghazal, S., Allan, J. N., Petrova, D., &
Garcia-Retamero, R. (2018). Decision making skill: From intelligence to
numeracy and expertise. In K. A. Ericsson, R. R. Hoffman, A. Kozbelt, &
A. M. Williams (Eds.), Cambridge handbook of expertise and expert
performance (2nd ed., pp. 476--505). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. Cole, F. S., Alleyne, C., Barks, J. D. E., Boyle, R. J., Carroll,
J. L., Dokken, D., Edwards, W. H., Georgieff, M., Gregory, K., Johnston,
M. V., Kramer, M., Mitchell, C., Neu, J., Pursley, D. M., Robinson, W.
M., & Rowitch, D. H. (2011). NIH Consensus Development Conference
Statement: Inhaled Nitric-Oxide Therapy for Premature Infants.
Pediatrics, 127(2), 363-369. doi:10.1542/peds.20103507 Cole, J. (1955).
Paw preference in cats related to hand preference in animals and man.
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 48, 137--140.
doi:10.1037/h0040380 Cole, S. W., Capitanio, J. P., Chun, K., Arevalo,
J. M., Ma, J., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2015). Myeloid differentiation
architecture of leukocyte transcriptome dynamics in perceived social
isolation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 112(49), 15142--15147. doi:10.1073/pnas.1514249112
Cole, S. W., Conti, G., Arevalo, J. M. G., Ruggiero, A. M., Heckman, J.
J., & Suomi, S. J. (2012). Transcriptional modulation of the developing
immune system by early life social adversity. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109(50),
20578--20583. doi:10.1073/pnas.1218253109 Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E.
(1975). A spreading activation theory of semantic processing.
Psychological Review, 82, 407--428. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.82.6.407
Colosio, M., Shestakova, A., Nikulin, V. V., Blagovechtchenski, E., &
Klucharev, V.

(2017). Neural mechanisms of cognitive dissonance (revised): An EEG
study. Journal of Neuroscience, 37(20), 5074--5083.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3209-16.2017 Colwell, K., Hiscock-Anisman, C. K.,
Memon, A., Taylor, L., & Prewett, J. (2007). Assessment Criteria
Indicative of Deception (ACID): An integrated system of investigative
interviewing and detecting deception. Journal of Investigative
Psychology and Offender Profiling, 4(3), 167--180. doi:10.1002/jip.73
Comings, D. E., & Blum, K. (2000). Reward deficiency syndrome: Genetic
aspects of behavioral disorders. Progress in Brain Research, 126,
325--341. doi:10.1016/S00796123(00)26022-6 Connolly, T., & Zeelenberg,
M. (2002). Regret in decision making. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 11(6), 212--216. doi:10.1111/1467-8721.00203
Consumerreports.com. (2009). Risky business.
http://www.consumerreports.org/health
/healthy-living/health-safety/risk-taking /overview/risk-taking-ov.htm
Conway, J. (2010). A chronicle of the activities of the Canadian
Psychological Association, 1938--2000. https://cpa.ca/docs/File
/A_Chronicle_of_the_Activities_of \_CPA_1938_2000_Sept_13_10.pdf Cooke,
J. E., Eirich, R., Racine, N., & Madigan, S. (2020). Prevalence of
posttraumatic and general psychological stress during COVID-19: A rapid
review and meta-analysis. Psychiatry Research, 292, 113347.
doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113347 Cooper, S. J., & Dourish, C. T.
(1990). Multiple cholecystokinin (CCK) receptors and CCKmonoamine
interactions are instrumental in the control of feeding. Physiology and
Behavior, 48, 849--857. doi:10.1016/00319384(90)90239-Z Corballis, M. C.
(2004). The origins of modernity: Was autonomous speech the critical
factor? Psychological Review, 111(2), 543--552.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.111.2.543 Corballis, M. C. (2020). Crossing the
Rubicon: Behaviorism, language, and evolutionary continuity. Frontiers
in Psychology, 11, 653--653. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00653 Corbett, M.
(1991). American public opinion. White Plains, NY: Longman. Corder, G.,
Ahanonu, B., Grewe, B. F., Wang, D., Schnitzer, M. J., & Scherrer, G.
(2019). An amygdalar neural ensemble that encodes the unpleasantness of
pain. Science, 363(6424), 276--281. doi:10.1126/science. aap8586
Cordonier, L., Nettles, T., & Rochat, P. (2018). Strong and strategic
conformity understanding by 3- and 5-year-old children. British Journal
of Developmental Psychology, 36(3), 438--451. doi:10.1111/bjdp.12229
Coren, S. (1996). Daylight savings time and traffic accidents. New
England Journal of Medicine, 334(14), 924--925. doi:10.1056/
NEJM199604043341416

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-13

Coren, S. (2012). Sleep thieves: Simon and Schuster. Corkin, S. (2002).
What's new with the amnesic patient H.M.? Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
3(2), 153--160. doi:10.1038/nrn726 Cornford, F. M. (1957). From religion
to philosophy: A study in the origins of Western speculation. New York:
Harper Torchbooks. Corsi, D. J., Donelle, J., Sucha, E., Hawken, S.,
Hsu, H., El-Chaâr, D., Bisnaire, L., Fell, D., Wen, S. W., & Walker, M.
(2020). Maternal cannabis use in pregnancy and child neurodevelopmental
outcomes. Nature Medicine. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1002-5 Cosmides, L., &
Tooby, J. (1997). Evolutionary psychology: A primer. http://www.psych
.ucsb.edu/research/cep/primer.html Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (2011).
NEO Personality Inventory-Revised (NEO PI-R).
http://www4.parinc.com/Products/Product .aspx?ProductID=NEO-PI-R
Courchesne, E. (1997). Brainstem, cerebellar and limbic neuroanatomical
abnormalities in autism. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 7(2),
269--278. doi:10.1016/S0959-4388(97) 80016-5 Courtet, P., &
Lopez-Castroman, J. (2017). Antidepressants and suicide risk in
depression. World psychiatry: Official Journal of the World Psychiatric
Association (WPA), 16(3), 317--318. doi:10.1002/wps.20460 Cowan, N.
(2000). The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A reconsideration of
mental storage capacity. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 87--185.
doi:10.1017/ S0140525X01003922 Cowen, P. J. (2010). Not fade away: The
HPA axis and depression. Psychological Medicine, 40(01), 1--4.
doi:10.1017/ S0033291709005558 Cox, M. J., Owen, M. T., Henderson, V.
K., & Margand, N. A. (1992). Prediction of infant-father and
infant-mother attachment. Developmental Psychology, 28(3), 474--483.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.28.3.474 Craddock, N., & Sklar, P. (2013).
Genetics of bipolar disorder. The Lancet, 381(9878), 1654--1662.
doi:10.1136/jmg.36.8.585 Craig, A., & Tran, Y. (2005). The epidemiology
of stuttering: The need for reliable estimates of prevalence and anxiety
levels over the lifespan. Advances in Speech Language Pathology, 7(1),
41--46. doi:10.1080/14417040500055060 Craig, I. W. (2007). The
importance of stress and genetic variation in human aggression.
Bioessays, 29(3), 227--236. doi:10.1002/ bies.20538 Craik, F. I. M., &
Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory
research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671--684.
doi:10.1016/ S0022-5371(72)80001-X Craik, F. I., & Tulving, E. (1975).
Depth of processing and the retention of words in episodic memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 104(3), 268--294.
doi:10.1037/0096-3445.104.3.268

R-14

Crick, F., & Koch, C. (2003). A framework for consciousness. Nature
Neuroscience, 6(2), 119--126. doi:10.1038/nn0203-119 Cross-Disorder
Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. (2013). Genetic
relationship between five psychiatric disorders estimated from
genome-wide SNPs. Nature Genetics, 45(9), 984--994. doi:10.1038/ng.2711
Crum, A. J., Corbin, W. R., Brownell, K. D., & Salovey, P. (2011). Mind
over milkshakes: Mindsets, not just nutrients, determine ghrelin
response. Health Psychology, 30(4), 424--429. doi:10.1037/a0023467 Crum,
A. J., Salovey, P., & Achor, S. (2013). Rethinking stress: The role of
mindsets in determining the stress response. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 104(4), 716--733. doi:10.1037/a0031201
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience.
New York: Harper and Row. Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1996). Creativity: Flow
and the psychology of discovery and invention. New York: Harper Collins.
Cuddy, A. J. C., Schultz, S. J., & Fosse, N. E. (2018). P-curving a more
comprehensive body of research on postural feedback reveals clear
evidential value for power-posing effects: Reply to Simmons and
Simonsohn (2017). Psychological Science, 29(4), 656--666.
doi:10.1177/0956797617746749 Cui, M., Darling, C. A., Coccia, C.,
Fincham, F. D., & May, R. W. (2019). Indulgent parenting, helicopter
parenting, and wellbeing of parents and emerging adults. Journal of
Child and Family Studies, 28(3), 860--871. doi:10.1007/s10826-01801314-3
Cui, M., Graber, J. A., Metz, A., & Darling, C. A. (2019). Parental
indulgence, self-regulation, and young adults' behavioral and emotional
problems. Journal of Family Studies, 25(3), 233--249.
doi:10.1080/13229400.2016.1237884 Cumming, G. (2013). The New
Statistics: Why and how. Psychological Science, 25(1), 7--29.
doi:10.1177/0956797613504966 Cuperman, R., & Ickes, W. (2009). Big Five
predictors of behavior and perceptions in initial dyadic interactions:
Personality similarity helps extraverts and introverts, but hurts
"disagreeables". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(4),
667--684. doi:10.1037/a0015741 Curtis, R. G., Windsor, T. D., &
Soubelet, A. (2014). The relationship between Big-5 personality traits
and cognitive ability in older adults--A review. Aging, Neuropsychology,
and Cognition, 22(1), 42--71. doi:10.1080/13825585.2014.888392. Cutrona,
C. E. (1982). Transition to college: Loneliness and the process of
social adjustment. In L. A. Peplau & D. Perlman (Eds.), Loneliness: A
sourcebook of current theory, research, and therapy (pp. 291--309). New
York, NY: Wiley.

Cvencek, D., Greenwald, A. G., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2016). Implicit
measures for preschool children confirm self-esteem's role in
maintaining a balanced identity. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 62, 50--57. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2015.09.015 Cyders, M. A., &
Coskunpinar, A. (2011). Measurement of constructs using self-report and
behavioral lab tasks: Is there overlap in nomothetic span and construct
representation for impulsivity? Clinical Psychology Review, 31(6),
965--982. doi:http://dx.doi. org/10.1016/j.cpr.2011.06.001 D'Mello, A.
M., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2018). Cognitive neuroscience of dyslexia.
Language, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 49(4), 798--809.
doi:10.1044/2018\_ LSHSS-DYSLC-18-0020 Dabbs, J. M., & Janis, I. L.
(1965). Why does eating while reading facilitate opinion change? An
experimental inquiry. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 1,
133--144. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(65)90041-7 Dabbs, J. M., Jr., &
Hargrove, M. F. (1997). Age, testosterone, and behavior among female
prison inmates. Psychosomatic Medicine, 59, 477--480.
doi:10.1097/00006842199709000-00003 Dabbs, J. M., Jr., & Morris, R.
(1990). Testosterone, social class, and antisocial behavior in a sample
of 4,462 men. Psychological Science, 1, 209--211.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.1990.tb00200.x Dabbs, J. M., Jr., Frady, R. L.,
Carr, T. S., & Besch, N. F. (1987). Saliva testosterone and criminal
violence in young adult prison inmates. Psychosomatic Medicine, 49,
174--182. doi:10.1097/00006842-198703000-00007 Dahl, R. E., Holttum, J.,
& Trubnick, L. (1994). A clinical picture of child and adolescent
narcolepsy. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 33(6), 834--841. doi:10.1097/00004583199407000-00009 Dalege,
J., Borsboom, D., van Harreveld, F., van den Berg, H., Conner, M., & van
der Maas, H. L. (2016). Toward a formalized account of attitudes: The
Causal Attitude Network (CAN) model. Psychological Review, 123(1),
2--22. doi:10.1037/a0039802 Daly, R. (2006). Psychiatrists proactive in
scope-of-practice battles. Psychiatric News, 41(5), 17--34. Damasio, A.
R. (1994). Descartes' error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain. New
York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. Damasio, A. (2003). Feelings of emotion and
the self. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1001(1), 253--261.
doi:10.1196/ annals.1279.014 Damasio, A., Bellugi, U., Damasio, H.,
Poizner, H., & Van Gilder, J. (1986). Sign language aphasia during
left-hemisphere Amytal injection. Nature, 322(6077), 363--365.
doi:10.1038/322363a0 Damasio, A. R., Grabowski, T. J., Bechara, A.,
Damasio, H., Ponto, L. L., Parvizi, J., & Hichwa, R. D. (2000).
Subcortical and

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

cortical brain activity during the feeling of self-generated emotions.
Nature Neuroscience, 3, 1049--1056. doi:10.1038/79871 Damasio, H.,
Grabowski, T., Frank, R., Galaburda, A. M., & Damasio, A. R. (1994). The
return of Phineas Gage: Clues about the brain from the skull of a famous
patient. Science, 264 1102--1105. doi:10.1126/ science.8178168 Damian,
R. I., & Roberts, B. W. (2015). The associations of birth order with
personality and intelligence in a representative sample of US high
school students. Journal of Research in Personality, 58, 96--105.
doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2015.05.005 Dani, J. A., & Harris, R. A. (2005).
Nicotine addiction and comorbidity with alcohol abuse and mental
illness. Nature Neuroscience, 8(11), 1465--1470. doi:10.1038/nn1580
Danielson, M. L., Bitsko, R. H., Ghandour, R. M., Holbrook, J. R.,
Kogan, M. D., & Blumberg, S. J. (2018). Prevalence of parentreported
ADHD diagnosis and associated treatment among US children and
adolescents, 2016. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology,
47(2), 199--212. doi:10.1080/15374416.2017.1417860 Danziger, K., &
Ballantyne, P. F. (1997). Psychological experiments. In W. G. Bringmann,
H. E. Luck, R. Miller, & C. E. Early (Eds.), Pictorial history of
psychology (pp. 233-239). New York: Oxford University Press. Darby, R.
R., Horn, A., Cushman, F., & Fox, M. D. (2018). Lesion network
localization of criminal behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 115(3), 601--606.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1706587115 Darby, R. R., Laganiere, S., Pascual-Leone,
A., Prasad, S., & Fox, M. D. (2016). Finding the imposter: Brain
connectivity of lesions causing delusional misidentifications. Brain,
140(2), 497--507. doi:10.1093/brain/ aww288 Darwin, C. (1859). On the
origin of the species by means of natural selection, or the preservation
of favoured races in the struggle for life. London: John Murray. Darwin,
C. (1871). The descent of man and selection in relation to sex. London:
John Murray. Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of emotions in man and
animals. London: Murray. Das, R., Jana, N., Arora, N., & Sengupta, S.
(2020). Ultrasound assessment of fetal hearing response to vibroacoustic
stimulation. The Journal of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal Medicine, 33(14),
2326--2332. doi:10.1080/ 14767058.2018.1548600 Data Source: T. S.
Critchfield et al. (2003). A half century of scalloping in the work
habits of the United States Congress. Journal of Applied Behavior
Analysis, 36(4), 465--486. doi:10.1901/jaba.2003.36-465 Dator, J.
(2015). James Harrison took away his kids' trophies.
https://www.sbnation.com

/lookit/2015/8/15/9160799/james-harrison
-kids-participation-trophies-facebook -steelers-nfl Dauvilliers, Y.,
Montplaisir, J., Cochen, V., Desautels, A., Einen, M., Lin, L.,
Kawashima, M., Bayard, S., Monaca, C., Tiberge, M., Filipini, D.,
Tripathy, A.,, Nguyen, B. H., Kotagal, S., & Mignot, E. (2010).
Post-H1N1 narcolepsy-cataplexy. Sleep, 33(11), 1428--1430.
doi:10.1093/sleep/33.11.1428 Dauvilliers, Y., Arnulf, I., Lecendreux,
M., Charley, C. M., Franco, P., Drouot, X.,d'Ortho, M.-P., Lanois, S.,
Lingot, S., Bourgin, P., Nogues, B., Rey, M., Bayard, S., Scholz, S.,
Lavault, S., Tubert-Bitter, P., Saussier, C., Pariente, A., & NarcofluVF
Study Group (2013). Increased risk of narcolepsy in children and adults
after pandemic H1N1 vaccination in France. Brain, 136(8), 2486-2496.
doi:10.1093/brain/awt187 Davidson, C. L., Wingate, L. R., Slish, M. L.,
& Rasmus, K. A. (2010). The great black hope: Hope and its relation to
suicide risk among African Americans. Suicide and LifeThreatening
Behavior, 40(2), 170--180. doi:10.1521/suli.2010.40.2.170 Davidson, R.
J., Putnam, K. M., & Larson, C. L. (2000). Dysfunction in the neural
circuitry of emotion regulation---A possible prelude to violence.
Science, 289, 591--594. doi:10.1126/science.289.5479.591 Davila, J.,
Burge, D., & Hammen, C. (1997). Why does attachment style change?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(4), 826--838.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.73.4.826 Davis, C. G., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S.
(2009). Making sense of loss, perceiving benefits, and posttraumatic
growth. In S. J. Lopez & C. R. Snyder (Eds.), Oxford handbook of
positive psychology (4th ed., pp. 641--649). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press. Davis, J. A., Smith, T.W., & Marsden, P.V. (2006).
General Social Survey (GSS). http://www
.norc.uchicago.edu/projects/gensoc.asp Davis, J. L., & Rusbult, C. E.
(2001). Attitude alignment in close relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 65--84.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.81.1.65 Davis, M. (2007). An introduction to
sine-wave speech. http://www.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk
/people/matt.davis/sine-wave-speech/ Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish
gene. Oxford, U. K.: Oxford University Press. de Gelder, B., Snyder, J.,
Greve, D., Gerard, G., & Hadjikhani, N. (2004). Fear fosters flight: A
mechanism for fear contagion when perceiving emotion expressed by a
whole body. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 101, 16701--16706. doi:10.1073/pnas.040
7042101 de Lecea, L., Kilduff, T. S., Peyron, C., Gao, X. B., Foye, P.
E., Danielson, P. E., Fukuhara, C., Battenberg, E. L. F., Gautvik, V.
T., Bartlett II, F. S., Frankel, W. N., van den Pol, A. N., Bloom, F.
E., Gautvik, K. M., & Sutcliffe, J. G. (1998). The hypocretins:
Hypothalamusspecific peptides with neuroexcitatory

activity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 95(1), 322--327. doi:10.1073/ pnas.95.1.322 De Neve,
J. E., Diener, E., Tay, L., & Xuereb, C. (2013). The objective benefits
of subjective well-being. World happiness report. New York, NY:
Sustainable Development Solutions Network. De Valois, R. L., & De
Valois, K.K., & (1980). Spatial vision. Annual Review of Psychology, 31,
309--341. doi:10.1146/annurev. ps.31.020180.001521 de Voogd, L. D.,
Kanen, J. W., Neville, D. A., Roelofs, K., Fernandez, G., & Hermans, E.
J. (2018). Eye-movement intervention enhances extinction via amygdala
deactivation. bioRxiv, 282467. doi:10.1101/282467 de Vries, A. P.,
Kassam-Adams, N., Cnaan, A., Sherman-Slate, E., Gallagher, P. R., &
Winston, F. K. (1999). Looking beyond the physical injury: Posttraumatic
stress disorder in children and parents after pediatric traffic injury.
Pediatrics, 104, 1293--1299. doi:10.1542/peds.104.6.1293 Dean, K. K., &
Koenig, A. M. (2019). Crosscultural differences and similarities in
attribution. In K. D. Keith (Ed.), Cross-Cultural Psychology:
Contemporary Themes and Perspectives, (pp. 575--597). Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley. Dear Abby. (January 14, 2006). Man ready to scrap marriage after
wife wrecks his car. http://www.uexpress.com/dearabby/?
uc_full_date=20060114 Deary, I. J., Penke, L., & Johnson, W. (2010). The
neuroscience of human intelligence differences. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 11(3), 201--211. doi:10.1038/nrn2793 Deary, I. J., Strand,
S., Smith, P., & Fernandes, C. (2007). Intelligence and educational
achievement. Intelligence, 35(1), 13--21.
doi:10.1016/j.intell.2006.02.001 Deater-Deckard, K., & Dodge, K. A.
(1997). Externalizing behavior problems and discipline revisited:
Nonlinear effects and variation by culture, context, and gender.
Psychological Inquiry, 8(3), 161--175. doi:10.1207/s15327965pli0803_1
DeCasper, A. J., & Fifer, W. P. (1980). Of human bonding: Newborns
prefer their mothers' voices. Science, 208, 1174--1176. doi:10.1126/
science.7375928 DeCasper, A. J., & Spence, M. J. (1986). Prenatal
maternal speech influences newborns' perception of speech sounds. Infant
Behavior and Development, 9, 133--150. doi:10.1016/0163-6383(86)90025-1
DeCharms, R. (1968). Personal causation. New York: Academic. Deci, E.
L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The "what" and "why" of goal pursuits: Human
needs and the self-determination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 11,
227--268. doi:10.1207/S15327965PLI1104_01 Deese, J. (1959). Influence of
inter-item associative strength upon immediate free recall.

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-15

Psychological Reports, 5, 305--312. doi:10.2466/PR0.5.3.305-312
DeFilippis, M., & Wagner, K. D. (2016). Treatment of autism spectrum
disorder in children and adolescents. Psychopharmacology Bulletin,
46(2), 18--41. Dejong, K., Olyaei, A., & Lo, J. O. (2019). Alcohol use
in pregnancy. Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology, 62(1), 142--155.
doi:10.1097/GRF.0000000000000414 Del Maschio, N., & Abutalebi, J.
(2020). Language organization in the bilingual and multilingual brain.
In J. W. Schwieter & M Paradis (Eds.), The handbook of the euroscience
of multilingualism. doi:10.1002/9781119387725.ch9 DeLisi, M., Drury, A.
J., & Elbert, M. J. (2019). The etiology of antisocial personality
disorder: The differential roles of adverse childhood experiences and
childhood psychopathology. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 92, 1--6.
doi:10.1016/j.comppsych.2019.04.001 Della Rosa, P. A., Videsott, G.,
Borsa, V. M., Canini, M., Weekes, B. S., Franceschini, R., & Abutalebi,
J. (2013). A neural interactive location for multilingual talent.
Cortex, 49(2), 605--608. doi:10.1016/j. cortex.2012.12.001 Dement, W.
(1960). The effect of dream deprivation. Science, 131(3415), 1705--1707.
doi:10.1126/science.131.3415.1705. Dement, W., & Kleitman, N. (1957).
The relation of eye movements during sleep to dream activity: An
objective method for the study of dreaming. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 53, 339--346. doi:10.1037/ h0048189 den Houting, J. (2019).
Neurodiversity: An insider's perspective. Autism, 23(2), 271--273.
doi:10.1177/1362361318820762 DeNeve, K. M., & Cooper, H. (1998). The
happy personality: A meta-analysis of 137 personality traits and
subjective well-being. Psychological Bulletin, 124(2), 197--229.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.124.2.197 Denny, C. H., Acero, C. S., Naimi, T.
S., & Kim, S. Y. (2019). Consumption of alcoholic beverages and binge
drinking among pregnant women aged 18---44 years---United States,
2015--2017. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 68, 365--368.
doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6816a1 Derntl, B., Windischberger, C., Robinson, S.,
Kryspin-Exner, I., Gur, R. C., Moser, E., & Habel, U. (2009). Amygdala
activity to fear and anger in healthy young males is associated with
testosterone. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 34(5), 687--693.
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.11.007 Derogatis, L. R., & Coons, H. L.
(1993). Selfreport measures of stress. In L. Goldberger & S. Breznitz
(Eds.), Handbook of stress: Theoretical and clinical aspects (2nd ed.,
pp. 200--233). New York: Free Press. Deschamps, J. C., & Doise, W.
(1978). Crossed category membership in intergroup relations. In H. Tajfe
(Ed.), Differentiation

R-16

between social groups (pp. 141--158). London: Academic Press.
Deschrijver, E., Wiersema, J. R., & Brass, M. (2017). Disentangling
neural sources of the motor interference effect in high functioning
autism: An EEG-study. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
47(3), 690--700. doi:10.1007/s10803-016-2991-2 Dew, J., & Wilcox, W. B.
(2011). If Momma ain't happy: Explaining declines in marital
satisfaction among new mothers. Journal of Marriage and Family, 73(1),
1--12. doi:10.1111/j.1741-3737.2010.00782.x DeYoung, C. G., & Allen, T.
A. (2019). Personality neuroscience: A developmental perspective. In D.
P. McAdams, R. L. Shiner, & J. L. Tackett (Eds.), Handbook of
personality development. (pp. 79--105). New York, NY: The Guilford
Press. Di Forti, M., Quattrone, D., Freeman, T. P., Tripoli, G.,
Gayer-Anderson, C., Quigley, H., Rodriguez, V., Jongsma, H. E., Ferraro,
L., La Cascia, C., La Barbera, D., Tarricone, I., Berardi, D., Szöke,
A., Arango, C., Tortelli, A., Velthorst, E., Bernardo, M., Del-Ben, C.
M., . . . the EU-GEI WP2 Group (2019). The contribution of cannabis use
to variation in the incidence of psychotic disorder across Europe
(EU-GEI): a multicentre case-control study. The Lancet Psychiatry, 6(5),
427--436. doi:10.1016/ S2215-0366(19)30048-3 Di Noto, P. M., Newman, L.,
Wall, S., & Einstein, G. (2012). The hermunculus: What is known about
the representation of the female body in the brain? Cerebral Cortex,
23(5), 1005--1013. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhs005 Di Noto, P. M., Newman, L.,
Wall, S., & Einstein, G. (2012). The hermunculus: What Is known about
the representation of the female body in the brain? Cerebral Cortex,
23(5), 1005--1013. doi:10.1093/ cercor/bhs005 di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga,
L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (1992). Understanding
motor events: A neurophysiological study. Experimental Brain Research,
91(1), 176--180. doi:10.1007/bf00230027 Diamond, A., & Goldman-Rakic, P.
S. (1989). Comparison of human infants and rhesus monkeys on Piaget's AB
task: Evidence for dependence on dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
Experimental Brain Research, 74(1), 24--40. doi:10.1007/BF00248277
Diamond, D. M., Campbell, A. M., Park, C. R., Halonen, J., & Zoladz, P.
R. (2007). The temporal dynamics model of emotional memory processing: A
synthesis on the neurobiological basis of stress-induced amnesia,
flashbulb and traumatic memories, and the Yerkes-Dodson Law. Neural
Plasticity, 60803. doi:10.1155/2007/60803 Diamond, L. M. (2004).
Emerging perspectives on distinctions between romantic love and sexual
desire. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13(3), 116--119.
doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2004.00287.x

Diamond, L. M. (2012). The desire disorder in research on sexual
orientation in women: Contributions of dynamical systems theory.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 41(1), 73--83.
doi:10.1007/s10508-012-9909-7 Dias, B. G., & Ressler, K. J. (2013).
Parental olfactory experience influences behavior and neural structure
in subsequent generations. Nature Neuroscience, 17(1), 89--96.
doi:10.1038/nn.3594 Dick, A. S., Garcia, N. L., Pruden, S. M., Thompson,
W. K., Hawes, S. W., Sutherland, M. T., Riedel, M. C., Laird, A. R., &
Gonzalez, R. (2019). No evidence for a bilingual executive function
advantage in the ABCD study. Nature Human Behaviour, 3(7), 692--701.
doi:10.1038/s41562-019-0609-3 Dickens, W. T., & Flynn, J. R. (2001).
Heritability estimates versus large environmental effects: the IQ
paradox resolved. Psychological Review, 108(2), 346.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.108.2.346 Dickens, W. T., & Flynn, J. R. (2006).
Black Americans reduce the racial IQ gap: Evidence from standardization
samples. Psychological Science, 17(10), 913--920.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01802.x Dickhaus, J., Brown, K. A.,
Ferrucci, P., & Anderson, M. L. (2019). And the award goes to: Examining
the effects of the "trophy culture" on millenials. Journal of
Contemporary Athletics, 13(1), 39--51. Diefendorf, A. R., & Dodge, R.
(1908). An experimental study of the ocular reactions of the insane from
photographic records. Brain, 31(3), 451--489. doi:10.1093/
brain/31.3.451 Diekelmann, S., & Born, J. (2010). The memory function of
sleep. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 114--126. doi:10.1038/
nrn2762 Diener, E., & Chan, M. Y. (2011). Happy people live longer:
Subjective well-being contributes to health and longevity. Applied
Psychology: Health and Well-Being, 3(1), 1--43.
doi:10.1111/j.1758-0854.2010.01045.x Diener, E., & Seligman, M. E. P.
(2004). Beyond money: Toward an economy of well-being. Psychological
Science in the Public Interest, 5, 1--31.
doi:10.1111/j.09637214.2004.00501001.x Diener, E., Horwitz, J., &
Emmons, R. A. (1985). Happiness of the very wealthy. Social Indicators,
16, 263--274. doi:10.1007/ BF00415126 Dierks, T., Linden, D. E., Jandl,
M., Formisano, E., Goebel, R., Lanfermann, H., & Singer, W. (1999).
Activation of Heschl's gyrus during auditory hallucinations. Neuron, 22,
615--621. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(00)80715-1 Dietrich, A., & Al-Shawaf,
L. (2018). The transient hypofrontality theory of altered states of
consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 25(11--12), 226--247.
DiGrande, L., Perrin, M. A., Thorpe, L. E., Thalji, L., Murphy, J., Wu,
D., Farfel, M., & Brackbill, R. M. (2008). Posttraumatic stress

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

symptoms, PTSD, and risk factors among lower Manhattan residents 2--3
years after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 21(3), 264--273. doi:10.1002/jts.20345 DiLalla, L. F.,
Kagan, J., & Reznick, J. S. (1994). Genetic etiology of behavioral
inhibition among 2-year-old children. Infant Behavior and Development,
17, 405--412. doi:10.1016/0163-6383(94)90032-9 Dion, K., Berscheid, E.,
& Walster, E. (1972). What is beautiful is good. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 24, 285--290. doi:10.1037/h0033731 Dobson, D., &
Dobson, K. S. (2016). Evidencebased practice of cognitive-behavioral
therapy. New York, NY: Guilford Publications. Doctors warn of the
dangers of trepanning (2000). BMJ: British Medical Journal, 320(7235),
602. doi:10.1136/ bmj.320.7235.602/c Dodet, P., Chavez, M.,
Leu-Semenescu, S., Golmard, J.-L., & Arnulf, I. (2015). Lucid dreaming
in narcolepsy. Sleep, 38(3), 487--497. doi:10.5665/sleep.4516 Dold, M.,
Aigner, M., Klabunde, M., Treasure, J., & Kasper, S. (2015).
Second-generation antipsychotic drugs in anorexia nervosa: A
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 84(2), 110--116. doi:10.1159/000369978 Dolinoy, D. C.,
Huang, D., & Jirtle, R. L. (2007). Maternal nutrient supplementation
counteracts bisphenol A-induced DNA hypomethylation in early
development. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 104, 13056--13061. doi:10.1073/pnas.0703739104
Doll, R., Peto, R., Boreham, J., & Sutherland, I. (2004). Mortality in
relation to smoking: 50 years' observations on male British doctors.
British Medical Journal, 328(7455), 1519.
doi:10.1136/bmj.38142.554479.AE Domanski, C. W. (2013). Mysterious
"Monsieur Leborgne": The mystery of the famous patient in the history of
neuropsychology is explained. Journal of the History of the
Neurosciences, 22(1), 47--52. doi:10.1080/ 0964704X.2012.667528
Domingue, B. W., Fletcher, J., Conley, D., & Boardman, J. D. (2014).
Genetic and educational assortative mating among US adults. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
111(22), 7996--8000. doi:10.1073/ pnas/1321426111 Domínguez-Clavé, E.,
Soler, J., Elices, M., Pascual, J. C., Álvarez, E., de la Fuente
Revenga, M., Friedlander, P., Feilding, A., & Riba, J. (2016).
Ayahuasca: Pharmacology, neuroscience and therapeutic potential. Brain
Research Bulletin, 126, Part 1, 89--101.
doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.03.002 Doty, R. L., Shaman, P., & Dann,
M. (1984). Development of the University of Pennsylvania Smell
Identification Test: A standardized microencapsulated test of olfac-

tory function. Physiology & Behavior, 32(3), 489--502.
doi:10.1016/0031-9384(84)90269-5 Dresler, M., Eibl, L., Fischer, C. F.,
Wehrle, R., Spoormaker, V. I., Steiger, A., Czisch, M., & Pawlowski, M.
(2013). Volitional components of consciousness vary across wakefulness,
dreaming and lucid dreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 987.
doi:10.3389/ fpsyg.2013.00987. Dronkers, N. F., Ivanova, M. V., & Baldo,
J. V. (2017). What do language disorders reveal about brain-language
relationships? From classic models to network approaches. Journal of the
International Neuropsychology Society, 23(9--10), 741--754. doi:10.1017/
S1355617717001126 Dronkers, N. F., Pinker, S., & Damasio, A. (2000).
Language and the aphasias. In E. R. Kandel, J. H. Schwartz, & T. M.
Jessell (Eds.), Principles of neural science (Vol. 4, pp. 1169-- 1187).
New York: McGraw-Hill. Druckman, D. E., & Bjork, R. A. (1991). In the
mind's eye: Enhancing human performance. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press. Dubernard, J.-M., Owen, E. R., Lanzetta, M., & Hakim, N.
(2001). What is happening with hand transplants? The Lancet, 357,
1711--1712. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(00)04846-7 Dubois, J., Galdi, P.,
Paul, L. K., & Adolphs, R. (2018). A distributed brain network predicts
general intelligence from resting-state human neuroimaging data.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
373(1756), 20170284. doi:10.1098/rstb.2017.0284 Dudai, Y. (2004). The
neurobiology of consolidations, or, how stable is the engram? Annual
Review of Psychology, 55, 51--86.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.55.090902.142050 Dulaney, S., & Fiske, A. P.
(1994). Cultural rituals and obsessive-compulsive disorder: Is there a
common psychological mechanism? Ethos, 22(3), 243--283. doi:10.1525/
eth.1994.22.3.02a00010 Dumontheil, I. (2016). Adolescent brain
development. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 10, 39--44.
doi:10.1016/j.cobeha. 2016.04.012 Dunbar, R. I. (2011). Evolutionary
basis of the social brain. In J. Decety & J. T. Cacioppo (Eds.), Oxford
handbook of social neuroscience (pp. 28--38). New York: Oxford
University Press. Dunbar, R. I. M., & Schultz, S. (2007). Evolution in
the social brain. Science, 317, 1344--1347. doi:10.1126/science.1145463
Duncan, L. E., Ratanatharathorn, A., Aiello, A. E., Almli, L. M.,
Amstadter, A. B., AshleyKoch, A. E., Baker, D. G., Beckham, J. Bierut,
L. J., Bisson, J., Bradley, B., Chen, C.-Y., Dalvie, S., Farrer, L. A.,
Galea, S., Garrett, M. E., Gelernter, J. E., Guffanti, G., Hauser, M.
A., . . . Koenen, K. C. (2018). Largest GWAS of PTSD (N=20 070) yields
genetic overlap with schizophrenia and sex differences in heritability.
Molecular Psychiatry, 23(3), 666--673. doi:10.1038/mp.2017.77

Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I. (2014). Prosocial spending
and happiness: Using money to benefit others pays off. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 23(1), 41--47. doi:10.1177/
0963721413512503 Dutton, D. G., & Aron, A. P. (1974). Some evidence for
heightened sexual attraction under conditions of high anxiety. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 30, 510--517. doi:10.1037/h0037031
Dweck, C. (2012). Mindset: How you can fulfil your potential. London:
Hachette UK. Dweck, C. S. (2000). Self-theories: Their role in
motivation, personality, and development. New York, NY: Psychology
Press. Dyson-Hudson, N., & Dyson-Hudson, R. (1999). The social
organization of resource exploitation in South Turkana. In M. A. Little
& P. W. Leslie (Eds.), Turkana herders of the dry savanna: Ecology and
biobeahvioral response of nomads to an uncertain environment
(pp. 68--86). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Dyson-Hudson, R., &
Dyson-Hudson, N. (1995). South Turkana homicide: A proximate view. Paper
presented at the Human Behavior and Evolution Conference, Santa Barbara,
CA. http://www.hbes.com/HBES /abst95.htm#South_Turkana Eberhardt, J. L.,
Davies, P. G., Purdie-Vaughns, V. J., & Johnson, S. L. (2006). Looking
deathworthy: Perceived stereotypicality of Black defendants predicts
capital-sentencing outcomes. Psychological Science, 17, 383--386.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01716.x Ehlers, C. L. (2007). Variations in
ADH and ALDH in Southwest California Indians. Alcohol Research and
Health, 30(1), 14--17. Eichel, S. K. D. (2002). Credentialing: It may
not be the cat's meow. http://users.snip
.net/\~drsteve/Articles/Dr_Zoe.htm. Einstein, A. (1945). A testimonial
from Professor Einstein (Appendix II). In J. Hadamard (Ed.), An essay on
the psychology of invention in the mathematical field (pp. 142--143).
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Eisenberg, D. T. A., & Hayes,
M. G. (2011). Testing the null hypothesis: Comments on 'Culture-gene
coevolution of individualism-collectivism and the serotonin transporter
gene'. Proceedings. Biological Sciences, 278(1704), 329--332.
doi:10.1098/ rspb.2010.0714 Ekelund, U., Steene-Johannessen, J., Brown,
W. J., Fagerland, M. W., Owen, N., Powell, K. E., Bauman, A., Lee,
I.-M., & the Lancet Sedentary Behaviour Working Group. (2016). Does
physical activity attenuate, or even eliminate, the detrimental
association of sitting time with mortality? A harmonised meta-analysis
of data from more than 1 million men and women. The Lancet, 388(10051),
1302--1310. doi:10.1016/S01406736(16)30370-1

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-17

Ekirch, A. R. (2001). Sleep we have lost: Preindustrial slumber in the
British Isles. The American Historical Review, 106(2), 343--386.
doi:10.2307/2651611 Ekman, P. (1996). Why don't we catch liars? Social
Research, 63, 801--817. https://www .jstor.org/stable/40972316 Ekman,
P., & O'Sullivan, M. (1991). Who can catch a liar? American
Psychologist, 46(9), 913--920. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.46.9.913 Ekman, P.,
Davidson, R. J., & Friesen, W. V. (1990). The Duchenne smile: Emotional
expression and brain physiology: II. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 58(2), 342. doi:10.1037/00223514.58.2.342 Ekman, P.,
Friesen, W. V., & Ellsworth, P. (1972). Emotion in the human face:
Guidelines for research and an integration of findings. London: Pergamon
Press. Elbert, T., Pantev, C., Weinbruch, C., Rockstroh, B., & Taub, E.
(1995). Increased cortical representation of the fingers of the left
hand in string players. Science, 270, 305--307.
doi:10.1126/science.270.5234.305 Elkind, D. (1967). Egocentrism in
adolescence. Child Development, 38, 1025--1034. doi:10.2307/1127100
Elkind, D., & Bowen, R. (1979). Imaginary audience behavior in children
and adolescents. Developmental Psychology, 15, 38--44.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.15.1.38 Elkins, G. R., Barabasz, A. F., Council,
J. R., & Spiegel, D. (2015). Advancing research and practice: The
revised APA Division 30 definition of hypnosis. American Journal of
Clinical Hypnosis, 57(4), 378--385. doi:10.1080/00207144.2014.961870
Eller, A., Abrams, D., Viki, G. T., & Imara, D. A. (2007). When my
friend's friend is a police officer: Extended contact,
crosscategorisation, and public-police relations of black and white
people. South African Journal of Psychology, 37(4), 783--802.
Ellinghaus, D., Degenhardt, F., Bujanda, L., Buti, M., Albillos, A.,
Invernizzi, P., Fernández, J., Prati, D., Baselli, G., Asselta, R.,
Grimsrud, M.M., Milani, C., Aziz, F., Kässens, J., May, S., Wendorff,
M., Wienbrandt, Uellendahl-Werth, L. F., Zheng, T., . . . Karlsen, T. H.
(2020). Genomewide association study of severe Covid-19 with respiratory
failure. New England Journal of Medicine. doi:10.1056/ NEJMoa2020283
Elliot, A. J. (1999). Approach and avoidance motivation and achievement
goals. Educational Psychologist, 34(3), 169--189.
doi:10.1207/s15326985ep3403_3 Elliot, A. J., & Murayama, K. (2008). On
the measurement of achievement goals: Critique, illustration, and
application. Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(3), 613--628.
doi:10.1037/0022-0663.100.3.613 Ellis Weismer, S., Lord, C., & Esler, A.
(2010). Early language patterns of toddlers on the autism spectrum
compared to toddlers with developmental delay. Journal of Autism and

R-18

Developmental Disorders, 40(10), 1259-1273.
doi:10.1007/s10803-010-0983-1 Ellis Weismer, S., Lord, C., & Esler, A.
(2010). Early language patterns of toddlers on the autism spectrum
compared to toddlers with developmental delay. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 40(10), 1259--1273.
doi:10.1007/s10803-010-0983-1 Ellis, A. (1975). A new guide to rational
living. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Ellis, H. C., & Hunt, R.
R. (1983). Fundamentals of human memory and cognition. Dubuque, IA:
William C. Brown. Ellsworth, P. C. (1994). Sense, culture, and
sensibility. In S. Kitayama & H. R. Markus (Eds.), Emotion and culture:
Empirical studies of mutual influence (pp. 23--50). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/10152-001 Elman, C.
(2011). The midlife years: Human capital and job mobility. In J. L.
Angel, J. R. A. Settersten, & R. Settersten (Eds.), Handbook of
sociology of aging (pp. 245--261). New York: Springer. EMDR Institute.
(2019). What is EMDR? https://www.emdr.com/what-is-emdr/ Emery, N. J.,
Capitanio, J. P., Mason, W. A., Machado, C. J., Mendoza, S. P., &
Amaral, D. G. (2001). The effects of bilateral lesions of the amygdala
on dyadic social interactions in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta).
Behavioral Neuroscience, 115, 515--544. doi:10.1037/0735-7044.115.3.515
Emlen, S. T., & Oring, L. W. (1977). Ecology, sexual selection, and the
evolution of mating systems. Science, 197, 215--223. doi:10.1126/
science.327542 Emmons, R. A., Barrett, J. L., & Schnitker, S. A.(2008).
Personality and the capacity for religious and spiritual experience. In
O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality
psychology: Theory and research (3rd ed., pp. 634--653). New York, NY:
Guilford Press. Eng, M. Y., Luczak, S. E., & Wall, T. L. (2007). ALDH2,
ADH1B, and ADH1C genotypes in Asians: A literature review. Alcohol
Research and Health, 30(1), 22--27. Engel, S. M., & Daniels, J. L.
(2011). On the complex relationship between genes and environment in the
etiology of autism. Epidemiology, 22(4), 486--488. doi:10.1097/
EDE.1090b1013e31821daf31821c. English, T., & John, O. P. (2013).
Understanding the social effects of emotion regulation: The mediating
role of authenticity for individual differences in suppression. Emotion,
13(2), 314--329. doi:10.1037/a0029847 Entertainment Software Rating
Board (ESRB). (2019). Rating process from ESRB. https://
www.esrb.org/ratings/ratings_process.aspx Erikson, E. H. (1968).
Identity: Youth and crisis. Oxford, England: Norton & Co. Erol, R. Y., &
Orth, U. (2011). Self-esteem development from age 14 to 30 years: A
longitudinal study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
101(3), 607--619. doi:10.1037/a0024299

Eshun, S. (1999). Cultural variations in hopelessness, optimism, and
suicidal ideation: A study of Ghana and US college samples.
Cross-Cultural Research, 33(3), 227--238. doi:10.1177/106939719903300301
Eskelinen, M. H., & Kivipelto, M. (2010). Caffeine as a protective
factor in dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Journal of Alzheimer's
Disease, 20(Suppl. 1), S167--S174. doi:10.3233/JAD-2010-1404 Eslinger,
P. J., & Damasio, A. R. (1985). Severe disturbance of higher cognition
after bilateral frontal lobe ablation: Patient EVR. Neurology, 35,
1731--1741. doi:10.1212/ WNL.35.12.1731 Espitia-Bautista, E.,
Velasco-Ramos, M., Osnaya-Ramírez, I., Ángeles-Castellanos, M., Buijs,
R. M., & Escobar, C. (2017). Social jet-lag potentiates obesity and
metabolic syndrome when combined with cafeteria diet in rats.
Metabolism, 72, 83--93. doi:10.1016/j.metabol.2017.04.006 Evans, P. D.,
Anderson, J. R., Vallender, E. J., Gilbert, S. L., Malcom, C. M., Dorus,
S., & Lahn, B. T. (2004). Adaptive evolution of ASPM, a major
determinant of cerebral cortical size in humans. Human Molecular
Genetics, 13, 489--494. doi:10.1093/hmg/ ddh055 Evans, P. D., Gilbert,
S. L., Mekel-Bobrov, N., Vallender, E. J., Anderson, J. R., Vaez-Azizi,
L. M., & al., e. (2005). Microcephalin, a gene regulating brain size,
continues to evolve adaptively in humans. Science, 309, 1717--1720.
doi:10.1126/science.1113722 Eysenck, H. J. (1967). The biological basis
of personality. Springfield, IL: Thomas. Falcone, G., & Jerram, M.
(2018). Brain activity in mindfulness depends on experience: A
meta-analysis of fMRI studies. Mindfulness, 9(5), 1319--1329.
doi:10.1007/s12671-0180884-5 Faraone, S. V., & Larsson, H. (2019).
Genetics of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Molecular
Psychiatry, 24(4), 562--575. doi:10.1038/s41380-018-0070-0 Farrell, M.
S., Werge, T., Sklar, P., Owen, M. J., Ophoff, R. A., O'Donovan, M. C.,
Corvin, A., Cichon, S., & Sullivan, P. F. (2015). Evaluating historical
candidate genes for schizophrenia. Molecular Psychiatry, 20, 555.
doi:10.1038/mp.2015.16 Farstad, S. M., McGeown, L. M., & von Ranson, K.
M. (2016). Eating disorders and personality, 2004--2016: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 46, 91--105.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. cpr.2016.04.005 Fatemi, S. H.,
Aldinger, K. A., Ashwood, P., Bauman, M. L., Blaha, C. D., Blatt, G. J.,
Chauhan, A., Chauhan, V., Dager, S. R., Dickson, P. E., Estes, A. M.,
Goldowitz, D., Heck, D. H., Kemper, T. L., King, B. H., Martin, L. A.,
Millen, K. J., Mittleman, G., . . . Welsh, J. P. (2012). Consensus
paper: Pathological role of the cerebellum in autism. The Cerebellum,
11(3), 777--807. doi:10.1007/s12311-012-0355-9

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Feeney, J. A., & Noller, P. (1990). Attachment style as a predictor of
adult romantic relationships. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 58(2), 281--291. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.58.2.281 Fehr, E., &
Rockenbach, B. (2004). Human altruism: Economic, neural, and
evolutionary perspectives. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 14,
784--790. doi:10.1016/j. conb.2004.10.007 Feinberg, I. (1978). Efference
copy and corollary discharge: Implications for thinking and its
disorders. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 4, 636--640.
doi:10.1093/schbul/4.4.636 Feinstein, J. S., Adolphs, R., Damasio, A., &
Tranel, D. (2011). The human amygdala and the induction and experience
of fear. Current Biology 21(1), 34--38. doi:10.1016/j. cub.2010.11.042
Fejfar, M. C., & Hoyle, R. H. (2000). Effect of private self-awareness
on negative affect and self-referent attribution: A quantitative review.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 4(2), 132--142. doi:10.1207/
S15327957PSPR0402_02 Fenton, N., & Neil, M. (2012). Risk assessment and
decision analysis with Bayesian networks. London, UK: CRC Press.
Ferdenzi, C., Joussain, P., Digard, B., Luneau, L., Djordjevic, J., &
Bensafi, M. (2016). Individual differences in verbal and non-verbal
affective responses to smells: Influence of odor label across cultures.
Chemical Senses, 42(1), 37--46. doi:10.1093/ chemse/bjw098 Ferguson, C.
J. (2010). Genetic contributions to antisocial personality and behavior:
A meta-analytic review from an evolutionary perspective. The Journal of
Social Psychology, 150(2), 160--180. doi:10.1080/00224540903366503
Fergusson, D. M., Boden, J. M., & Horwood, L. J. (2015). Psychosocial
sequelae of cannabis use and implications for policy: Findings from the
Christchurch Health and Development Study. Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 50(9), 1317--1326.
doi:10.1007/s00127-015-1070-x Fergusson, D. M., Boden, J. M., Horwood,
L. J., Miller, A. L., & Kennedy, M. A. (2011). MAOA, abuse exposure and
antisocial behaviour: 30-year longitudinal study. The British Journal of
Psychiatry, 198(6), 457--463. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.110.086991 Fergusson,
D. M., Horwood, L. J., & Ridder, E. M. (2005). Tests of causal linkages
between cannabis use and psychotic symptoms. Addiction, 100, 354--366.
doi:10.1111/j. 1360-0443.2005.01001.x Fernald, A., & Kuhl, P. (1987).
Acoustic determinants of infant preference for motherese speech. Infant
Behavior and Development, 10(3), 279--293. doi:10.1016/0163-6383
(87)90017-8 Fernald, A., & Weisleder, A. (2015). Twenty years after
"meaningful differences," it's time to reframe the "deficit" debate
about the importance of children's early language

experience. Human Development, 58(1), 1--4. doi:10.1159/000375515
Ferrari, P. F., Paukner, A., Ionica, C., & Suomi, S. J. (2009).
Reciprocal face-to-face communication between rhesus macaque mothers and
their newborn infants. Current Biology, 19(20), 1768--1772.
doi:10.1016/j. cub.2009.08.055 Festinger, L. (1950). Informal social
communication. Psychological Review, 57, 271--282. doi:10.1037/h0056932
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human
Relations, 7, 117--140. doi:10.1177/001872675400700202 Festinger, L.
(1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press. Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J.M. (1959). Cognitive
consequences of forced compliance. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 58, 203--210. doi:10.1037/ h0041593 Feusner, J. D.,
Neziroglu, F., Wilhelm, S., Mancusi, L., & Bohon, C. (2010). What causes
BDD? Psychiatric Annals, 40(7), 349--355.
doi:10.3928/00485713-20100701-08 Fidler, D. J., Most, D. E.,
Booth-LaForce, C., & Kelly, J. F. (2008). Emerging social strengths in
young children with Down syndrome. Infants & Young Children, 21(3),
207--220. doi:10.1097/01. IYC.0000324550.39446.1f Field, Y., Boyle, E.
A., Telis, N., Gao, Z., Gaulton, K. J., Golan, D., Yengo, L., Rocheleau,
G., Froguel, P., McCarthy, M. I., & Pritchard, J. K. (2016). Detection
of human adaptation during the past 2000 years. Science, 354(6313),
760--764. doi:10.1101/052084 Fisher, P. A., Van Ryzin, M. J., & Gunnar,
M. R. (2011). Mitigating HPA axis dysregulation associated with
placement changes in foster care. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 36(4),
531--539. doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.08.007 Fink, G. R., Markowitsch,
H. J., Reinkemeier, M., Bruckbauer, T., Kessler, J., & Heiss, W.-D.
(1996). Cerebral representation of one''s own past: Neural networks
involved in autobiographical memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 16(13),
4275--4282. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-13-04275.1996 Finkel, E. J.,
Eastwick, P. W., Karney, B. R., Reis, H. T., & Sprecher, S. (2012).
Dating in a digital world. Scientific American Mind, 23(4), 26--33.
Fischhoff, B., de Bruin, W. B., Parker, A. M., Millstein, S. G., &
Halpern-Felsher, B. L. (2010). Adolescents' perceived risk of dying.
Journal of Adolescent Health, 46(3), 265--269.
doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2009.06.026 Fisher, M. L., Worth, K., Garcia,
J. R., & Meredith, T. (2012). Feelings of regret following uncommitted
sexual encounters in Canadian university students. Culture, Health &
Sexuality, 14(1), 45--57. doi:10.1080/13691058.2011.619579 Fisher, P.
A., Van Ryzin, M. J., & Gunnar, M. R. (2011). Mitigating HPA axis
dysregulation associated with placement changes in foster

care. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 36(4), 531--539.
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2010.08.007 Fisher, P. A., Van Ryzin, M. J., &
Gunnar, M. R. (2011). Mitigating HPA axis dysregulation associated with
placement changes in foster care. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 36(4), 531
Fisher, R. P., & Geiselman, R. E. (2010). The cognitive interview method
of conducting police interviews: Eliciting extensive information and
promoting therapeutic jurisprudence. International Journal of Law and
Psychiatry, 33(5--6), 321--328. doi:10.1016/j.ijlp.2010.09.004 Fisher,
S., Reynolds, J. L., Hsu, W.-W., Barnes, J., & Tyler, K. (2014).
Examining multiracial youth in context: Ethnic identity development and
mental health outcomes. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 43(10),
1688--1699. doi:10.1007/s10964-014-0163-2 Fiske, S. T. (1998).
Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T.
Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology (4th ed.,
Vol. 2, pp. 357--411). New York: McGraw-Hill. Fleischman, J. (2002).
Phineas Gage: A gruesome but true story about brain science. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin. Flexser, A. J., & Tulving, E. (1978). Retrieval
independence in recall and recognition. Psychological Review, 85,
153--171. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.85.3.153 Flick, C. (2015). Informed
consent and the Facebook emotional manipulation study. Research Ethics,
12(1), 14--28. doi:10.1177/1747016115599568 Flynn, J. R. (1999).
Searching for justice: The discovery of IQ gains over time. American
Psychologist, 54, 5--20. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.54.1.5 Flynn, J. R.
(2016). No population is frozen in time: The sociology of intelligence.
Psychological Inquiry, 27(3), 205--209. doi:10.
1080/1047840X.2016.1181518 Forer, B. R. (1949). The fallacy of personal
validation: A classroom demonstration of gullibility. The Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44(1), 118--123. doi:10.1037/ h0059240
Forrest, A. D., Coto, C. A., & Siegel, S. J. (2014). Animal models of
psychosis: Current state and future directions. Current Behavioral
Neuroscience Reports, 1(2), 100--116. doi:10.1007/s40473-014-0013-2
Forsyth, D. R., & Kerr, N. A. (1999). Are adaptive illusions adaptive?
Poster presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Psychological
Association, Boston, MA. Forsyth, D. R., & Schlenker, B. R. (1977).
Attributing the causes of group performance: Effects of performance
quality, task importance, and future testing. Journal of Personality,
45(2), 220--236. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.1977.tb00148.x Foulkes, D.
(1999). Children's dreaming and the development of consciousness.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Foutz, A., Mitler, M.,
Cavalli-Sforza, L., & Dement, W. (1978). Genetic factors in canine
narcolepsy. Sleep, 1(4), 413--421. doi:10.1093/sleep/1.4.413 REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-19

Fowler, J. H., & Christakis, N. A. (2008). Dynamic spread of happiness
in a large social network: Longitudinal analysis over 20 years in the
Framingham Heart Study. British Medical Journal, 337, a2338.
doi:10.1136/bmj.a2338 Fox, K. C., Nijeboer, S., Solomonova, E., Domhoff,
G. W., & Christoff, K. (2013). Dreaming as mind wandering: Evidence from
functional neuroimaging and firstperson content reports. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 7, 412. doi:10.3389 /fnhum.2013.00412 Fox, K. C. R.,
Nijeboer, S., Dixon, M. L., Floman, J. L., Ellamil, M., Rumak, S. P.,
Sedlmeier, P., & Christoff, K. (2014). Is meditation associated with
altered brain structure? A systematic review and metaanalysis of
morphometric neuroimaging in meditation practitioners. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 43, 48--73. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.03.016
Fox, M. C., & Mitchum, A. L. (2013). A knowledge-based theory of rising
scores on "culture-free" tests. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 142(3), 979--1000. doi:10.1037/a0030155 Fox, P. W.,
Hershberger, S. L., & Bouchard, T. J., Jr. (1996). Genetic and
environmental contributions to the acquisition of a motor skill. Nature,
384(6607), 356--358. doi:10.1038/384356a0 Fraga, M. F., Ballestar, E.,
Paz, M. F., Ropero, S., Setien, F., Ballestar, M. L., et al. (2005).
Epigenetic differences arise during the lifetime of monozygotic twins.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 102, 10604--10609. Frances, A. (2010). It's not too late to
save 'normal': Psychiatry's latest manual goes too far in creating
disorders. Los Angeles Times. http://articles.latimes.com/2010/mar/01
/opinion/la-oe-frances1-2010mar01 Frances, A. (2013). The new somatic
symptom disorder in DSM-5 risks mislabeling many people as mentally
ill. BMJ : British Medical Journal, 346, f1580. doi:10.1136/bmj.f1580
Franco, Z. E., Blau, K., & Zimbardo, P. G. (2011). Heroism: A conceptual
analysis and differentiation between heroic action and altruism. Review
of General Psychology, 15(2), 99--113. doi:10.1037/a0022672 Frank, M.
G., & Ekman, P. (1993). Not all smiles are created equal: The
differences between enjoyment and nonenjoyment smiles.
Humor-International Journal of Humor Research, 6(1), 9--26. doi:10.1515/
humr.1993.6.1.9 Franken, D. (2002). Personal strengths, positive
psychology, optimum psycho-social lifeskills. Holland, MI: Wellness
Publications. Frazier, T. W., Thompson, L., Youngstrom, E. A., Law, P.,
Hardan, A. Y., Eng, C., & Morris, N. (2014). A twin study of heritable
and shared environmental contributions to autism. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 1--13. doi:10.1007/s10803-014-2081-2

R-20

Freedman, D. G. (1964). Smiling in blind infants and the issue of innate
vs. acquired. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 5(3--4),
171--184. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.1964.tb02139.x French, J. E., &
Meltzer, A. L. (2019). Maximizing tendencies in marriage: Accentuating
the implications of readily observable partner characteristics for
intimates' satisfaction. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
45(10), 1468--1481. doi:10.1177/0146167219832337 Freud, S. (1900/1953).
Interpretation of dreams. In J. Strachey (Ed.), The standard edition of
the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vols. 4 and 5).
London: Hogarth Press. Freud, S. (1909/1976). Analysis of a phobia of a
five year old boy. In The Pelican Freud library: Case Histories I (Vol.
8, pp. 169--306). Harmondsworth, England: Penguin Books. Frick, P. J.,
Ray, J. V., Thornton, L. C., & Kahn, R. E. (2014). Can
callous-unemotional traits enhance the understanding, diagnosis, and
treatment of serious conduct problems in children and adolescents? A
comprehensive review. Psychological Bulletin, 140(1), 1--57.
doi:10.1037/a0033076 Friedman, J. M., & Halaas, J. L. (1998). Leptin and
the regulation of body weight in mammals. Nature, 395(6704), 673--770.
doi:10.1038/27376 Friedman, M., & Rosenman, R. H. (1974). Type A
behavior and your heart. New York: Knopf. Friedson, M. (2016).
Authoritarian parenting attitudes and social origin: The
multigenerational relationship of socioeconomic position to childrearing
values. Child Abuse & Neglect, 51, 263--275. doi:10.1016/j.chiabu.
2015.10.001 Frisch, R. E. (1983). Fatness, menarche, and fertility. In
S. Golub (Ed.), Menarche: The transition from girl to woman (pp. 5--20).
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books. Frost, P. (2006). European hair and eye
color. Evolution and Human Behavior, 27, 85--103.
doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2005.07.002 Fulkerson, J. A., Story, M.,
Mellin, A., Leffert, N., Neumark-Sztainer, D., & French, S. A. (2006).
Family dinner meal frequency and adolescent development: Relationships
with developmental assets and high-risk behaviors. Journal of Adolescent
Health, 39(3), 337--345. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth. 2005.12.026 Funder,
D. C. (2009). Persons, behaviors and situations: An agenda for
personality psychology in the postwar era. Journal of Research in
Personality, 43(2), 120--126. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2008.12.041 Fung, L. K.,
Mahajan, R., Nozzolillo, A., Bernal, P., Krasner, A., Jo, B., Coury, D.,
Whitaker, A., Veenstra-Vanderweele, J., & Hardan, A. Y. (2016).
Pharmacologic treatment of severe irritability and problem behaviors in
autism: A systematic review and metaanalysis. Pediatrics, 137(Supplement
2), S124-S135. doi:10.1542/peds.2015-2851K

Furnham, A. (2018). The great divide: Academic versus practitioner
criteria for psychometric test choice. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 100(5), 498--506. doi:10.1080/00223891.2018.1488134 Furtner,
M. R., Maran, T., & Rauthmann, J. F. (2017). Dark leadership: The role
of leaders' dark triad personality traits. In M. G. Clark & C. W. Gruber
(Eds.), Leader development deconstructed (pp. 75--99). New York:
Springer International Publishing. Gabriel, P. O., Halbert, P., &
Golightly, R. T. (2014). Steller's jay aversion treatment in the Santa
Cruz Mountains in 2013. https://www
.researchgate.net/publication/272790325
*Steller's_Jay_Conditioned_Aversion*
Treatment_in_the_Santa_Cruz_Mountains \_in_2013/citation/download
Gainotti, G. (2019). The role of the right hemisphere in emotional and
behavioral disorders of patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration:
An updated review. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 11(55). doi:10.3389/
fnagi.2019.00055 Galbally, M., van Rossum, E. F., Watson, S. J., de
Kloet, E. R., & Lewis, A. J. (2019). Trans-generational stress
regulation: Mother-infant cortisol and maternal mental health across the
perinatal period. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 109, 104--374.
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2019.104--374. Galea, S., Ahern, J., Resnick, H.,
Kilpatrick, D., Bucuvalas, M., Gold, J., & Vlahov, D. (2002).
Psychological sequelae of the September 11 terrorist attacks in New York
City. The New England Journal of Medicine, 346(13), 982--987.
doi:10.1056/ NEJMsa013404 Gallup Poll News Service. (2005). Three in
four Americans believe in paranormal. http://
home.sandiego.edu/\~baber/logic/gallup.html Gallup, G. G. (1970).
Chimpanzees: Self-recognition. Science, 167, 86--87.
doi:10.1126/science.167.3914.86 Gallup, G. G., & Suarez, S. D. (1986).
Selfawareness and the emergence of mind in humans and other primate. In
J. Suls & A. Greenwald (Eds.), Psychological perspectives on the self
(Vol. 3) (pp. 3--26). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Galovski, T., & Lyons, J.
A. (2004). Psychological sequelae of combat violence: A review of the
impact of PTSD on the veteran's family and possible interventions.
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 9(5), 477--501.
doi:10.1016/s13591789(03)00045-4 Galvan, A., Hare, T., Voss, H., Glover,
G., & Casey, B. J. (2007). Risk-taking and the adolescent brain: Who is
at risk? Developmental Science, 10(2), F8--F14. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7687.
2006.00579.x Ganna, A., Verweij, K. J. H., Nivard, M. G., Maier, R.,
Wedow, R., Busch, A. S., Abdelaoui, A., Guo, S., Sathirapongsasuti, J.
F., 23andMe Research Team, Lichtenstein, P., Lundström, S., Långström,
N., Auton, A., Harris, K. M., Beecham, G. W., Martin, E. R., Sanders, A.
R., Perry, J. R. B., . . . Zietsch, B.

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P. (2019). Large-scale GWAS reveals insights into the genetic
architecture of same-sex sexual behavior. Science, 365(6456), eaat7693.
doi:10.1126/science.aat7693 Gantt, W. H. (1928). Ivan P. Pavlov: A
biographical sketch. In I. P. Pavlov (Ed.), Lectures on conditioned
reflexes (W. H. Gantt, Trans.) (pp. 11--34). New York: International
Universities Press. Garb, H. N., Wood, J. M., Lilienfeld, S. O., &
Nezworski, M. T. (2005). Roots of the Rorschach controversy. Clinical
Psychology Review, 25, 97--118. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2004.09.002
García-León, M. Á., Pérez-Mármol, J. M., Gonzalez-Pérez, R.,
García-Ríos, M. d. C., & Peralta-Ramírez, M. I. (2019). Relationship
between resilience and stress: Perceived stress, stressful life events,
HPA axis response during a stressful task and hair cortisol. Physiology
& Behavior, 202, 87--93. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2019.02.001 Garcia, J., &
Koelling, K. W. (1966). Relation of cue to consequence in avoidance
learning. Psychonomic Science, 4, 123--124. doi:10.3758/BF03342209
Gardner, H. (1976). The shattered mind: The person after brain damage.
New York, NY: Knopf. Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of
multiple intelligences. New York: Basic Books. Gardner, H. (1999).
Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for the 21st century. New
York: Basic Books. Gardner, R. A., & Gardner, B. T. (1969). Teaching
sign language to a chimpanzee. Science, 165(3894), 664--672.
doi:10.1126/ science.165.3894.664 Garmezy, N. (1991). Resilience and
vulnerability to adverse developmental outcomes associated with poverty.
American Behavioral Scientist, 34(4), 416--430.
doi:10.1177/0002764291034004003 Garrity, A., Pearlson, G., McKiernan,
K., Lloyd, D., Kiehl, K., & Calhoun, V. (2007). Aberrant "default mode"
functional connectivity in schizophrenia. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 164(3), 450--457. doi:10.1176/ appi.ajp.164.3.450
Garver-Apgar, C. E., Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., Miller, R. D., &
Olp, J. J. (2006). Major histocompatibility complex alleles, sexual
responsivity, and unfaithfulness in romantic couples. Psychological
Science, 17(10), 830--835. doi:10.1111/j. 1467-9280.2006.01789.x
Gasquoine, P. G. (2014). Contributions of the insula to cognition and
emotion. Neuropsychology review, 24(2), 77--87.
doi:10.1007/s11065-014-9246-9 Gatz, M., Smyer, M. A., & DiGilio, D. A.
(2016). Psychology's contribution to the well-being of older Americans.
American Psychologist, 71(4), 257--267. doi:10.1037/ a0040251. Gautam,
P., Warner, T. D., Kan, E. C., & Sowell, E. R. (2015). Executive
function and cortical thickness in youths prenatally exposed to cocaine,
alcohol and tobacco. Developmental

Cognitive Neuroscience, 16, 155--165. doi:10.1016/j.dcn.2015.01.010
Gawronski, B. (2004). Theory-based bias correction in dispositional
inference: The fundamental attribution error is dead, long live the
correspondence bias. European Review of Social Psychology, 15, 183--217.
doi:10.1080/10463280440000026 Gawronski, B., & Brannon, S. M. (2019).
What is cognitive consistency, and why does it matter? In E.
Harmon-Jones (Ed.), Cognitive dissonance: Reexamining a pivotal theory
in psychology (p. 91--116). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. doi:10.1037/0000135-005 Gazzaniga, M. S. (1967). The split
brain in man. Scientific American, 217, 24--29.
doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0867-24 Gazzaniga, M. S. (2011). Who's in
charge? Free will and the science of the brain. New York, NY:
HarperCollins. Geiser, S., & Studley, R. (2002). UC and the SAT:
Predictive validity and differential impact of the SAT I and SAT II at
the University of California. Educational Assessment, 8(1), 1--26.
doi:10.1207/ S15326977EA0801_01 Gelfand, M. J., Raver, J. L., Nishii,
L., Leslie, L. M., Lun, J., Lim, B. C., Duan, L., Almaliach, A., Ang,
S., Arnadottir, J., Aycan Z., Boehnke, K., Boski, P., Cabecinhas, Chan,
R. D., Chhokar, J., D'Amato, A., Ferrer, M., Fischlmayr, I. C., Fischer,
R., . . . Yamaguchi, S. (2011). Differences between tight and loose
cultures: A 33-nation study. Science, 332(6033), 1100--1104.
doi:10.1126/science.1197754 Gendron, M., Roberson, D., van der Vyver, J.
M., & Barrett, L. F. (2014). Perceptions of emotion from facial
expressions are not culturally universal: Evidence from a remote
culture. Emotion, 14(2), 251--262. doi:10.1037/a0036052 Genzel, L.,
Kroes, M. C., Dresler, M., & Battaglia, F. P. (2014). Light sleep versus
slow wave sleep in memory consolidation: A question of global versus
local processes? Trends in Neurosciences, 37(1), 10--19.
doi:10.1016/j.tins.2013.10.002 Gerolimatos, L. A., & Edelstein, B. A.
(2012). Predictors of health anxiety among older and young adults.
International Psychogeriatrics, 24(12), 1998--2008.
doi:10.1017/S1041610212001329 Gershoff, E. T., Lansford, J. E., Sexton,
H. R., Davis-Kean, P., & Sameroff, A. J. (2012). Longitudinal links
between spanking and children's externalizing behaviors in a national
sample of White, Black, Hispanic, and Asian American families. Child
Development, 83(3), 838--843. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01732.x
Gershoff, E. T., Sattler, K. M. P., & Ansari, A. (2017). Strengthening
causal estimates for links between spanking and children's externalizing
behavior problems. Psychological Science, 29(1), 110--120.
doi:10.1177/0956797617729816

Gettler, L. T., McDade, T. W., Feranil, A. B., & Kuzawa, C. W. (2011).
Longitudinal evidence that fatherhood decreases testosterone in human
males. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America. doi:10.1073/pnas. 1105403108 Ghosh, A. (2017).
Linking elementary properties of the human brain to the behaviour
captured on touchscreen smartphones. In C. Montag & M. Reuter (Eds.),
Internet addiction: Neuroscientific approaches and therapeutical
implications including smartphone addiction (pp. 373--381). New York,
NY: Springer International Publishing. Gialluisi, A., Andlauer, T. F.,
Mirza-Schreiber, N., Moll, K., Becker, J., Hoffmann, P., Ludwig, K. U.,
Czamara, D., St. Pourcain, B., Brandler, W., Honbolygó, F., Tóth, D.,
Csépe, V., Huguet, G., Morris, A. P., Hulslander, J., Willcutt, E. G.,
DeFries, J. C., Olson, R. K., . . . Schulte-Körne, G. (2019).
Genome-wide association scan identifies new variants associated with a
cognitive predictor of dyslexia. Translational Psychiatry, 9(1), 1--15.
doi:10.1038/s41398-019-0402-0 Giancola, P. R. (2013). Alcohol and
aggression: Theories and mechanisms: Wiley-Blackwell: Chichester, UK.
Gibbons, T., Pence, B., Bhattacharya, T., Mach, H., Ossyra, J.,
McCusker, R., Kelley, K., Rhodes, J., Johnson, R., & Woods, J. (2014).
Diet, exercise, neurogenesis and cognition. The FASEB Journal, 28(1
Supplement), 1025.4. Gibson, M. A. (2008). Does investment in the sexes
differ when fathers are absent? Sexbiased infant survival and child
growth in rural Ethiopia. Human Nature, 19(3), 263--276.
doi:10.1007/s12110-008-9044-2 Giedd, J. N., Raznahan, A.,
AlexanderBloch, A., Schmitt, E., Gogtay, N., & Rapoport, J. L. (2015).
Child Psychiatry Branch of the National Institute of Mental Health
Longitudinal Structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study of Human Brain
Development. Neuropsychopharmacology, 40(1), 43--49.
doi:10.1038/npp.2014.236 Giesbrecht, T., Lynn, S. J., Lilienfeld, S. O.,
& Merckelbach, H. (2010). Cognitive processes, trauma, and
dissociation--- Misconceptions and misrepresentations: Reply to Bremner
(2010). Psychological Bulletin, 136(1), 7--11. doi:10.1037/a0018068
Gigerenzer, G. (2008). Why heuristics work. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 3(1), 20--29. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6916.2008.
00058.x Gilbert, D. T., & Jones, E. E. (1986). Perceiverinduced
constraint: Interpretations of self-generated reality. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 50(2), 269--280.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.50.2.269. Gilbert, D. T., & Malone, P. S. (1995).
The correspondence bias. Psychological Bulletin, 117(1), 21--38.
doi:10.1037/00332909.117.1.21

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-21

Gilbert, D. T., King, G., Pettigrew, S., & Wilson, T. D. (2016). Comment
on "Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science." Science,
351(6277), 1037--1037. doi:10.1126/ science.aad7243 Gilligan, M.,
Stocker, C. M., & Jewsbury Conger, K. (2020). Sibling relationships in
adulthood: Research findings and new frontiers. Journal of Family Theory
& Review. doi:10.1111/jftr.12385 Gillihan, S. J., & Farah, M. J. (2005).
Is self special? A critical review of evidence from experimental
psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Psychological Bulletin, 131(1),
76--97. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.131.1.76 Gilovich, T., Medvec, V. H., &
Savitsky, K. (2000). The spotlight effect in social judgment: An
egocentric bias in estimates of the salience of one's own actions and
appearance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78(2),
211--222. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.2.211 Glanzer, M., & Cunitz, A. R.
(1966). Two storage mechanisms in free recall. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 5, 351--360.
doi:10.1016/S00225371(66)80044-0 Glass, A. L., & Kang, M. (2018).
Dividing attention in the classroom reduces exam performance.
Educational Psychology, 39(3), 395--408.
doi:10.1080/01443410.2018.1489046 Glass, J., Simon, R. W., & Andersson,
M. A.(2016). Parenthood and happiness: Effects of work-family
reconciliation policies in 22 OECD countries. American Journal of
Sociology, 122(3), 886--929. doi:10.1086/688892 Gleeson, M. (2007).
Immune function in sport and exercise. Journal of Applied Physiology,
103(2), 693--699. doi:10.1152/japplphysiol .00008.2007 Gleick, J.
(1992). Genius: The life and science of Richard Feynman. New York, NY:
Pantheon. Glenn, A. L., Johnson, A. K., & Raine, A. (2013). Antisocial
personality disorder: A current review. Current Psychiatry Reports,
15(12), 1--8. doi:10.1007/s11920-013-0427-7 Glenn, N. D., Uecker, J. E.,
& Love Jr, R. W. (2010). Later first marriage and marital success.
Social Science Research, 39(5), 787--800. doi:10.1016/j.ssresearch.2010.
06.002 Gliga, T., Bedford, R., Charman, T., Johnson, M. H., & Team, B.
(2015). Enhanced visual search in infancy predicts emerging autism
symptoms. Current Biology, 25(13), 1727-- 1730.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.05.011 Godden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1975).
Context-dependent memory in two natural environments: On land and under
water. British Journal of Psychology, 66, 325--331.
doi:10.1111/j.2044-8295.1975.tb01468.x Goetz, C. G., Leurgans, S.,
Pappert, E. J., Raman, R., & Stemer, A. B. (2001). Prospective
longitudinal assessment of hallucinations in Parkinson's disease.
Neurology, 57, 2078-- 2082.doi:10.1212/WNL.57.11.2078

R-22

Goff, D. C., & Evins, A. E. (1998). Negativesymptoms in schizophrenia:
Neurobiological models and treatment response. Harvard Review of
Psychiatry, 6(2), 59--77. doi:10.3109/10673229809000313 Goldstein, D.
G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of ecological rationality: The
recognition heuristic. Psychological Review, 109(1), 75--90.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.109.1.75 Goldstein, E. B. (2010). Sensation and
perception (Vol. 8). Belmont, CA: Cengage. Goleman, D. (2006). Social
intelligence. New York: Random House. Gollan, J. K., McCloskey, M.,
Hoxha, D., & Coccaro, E. F. (2010). How do depressed and healthy adults
interpret nuanced facial expressions? Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
119(4), 804-810. doi:10.1037/ a0020234 González-Tapia, M. I., & Obsuth,
I. (2015). "Bad genes" & criminal responsibility. International Journal
of Law and Psychiatry, 39, 60--71. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijlp.
2015.01.022 Goodall, J. (1971). In the shadow of man. Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifflin. Goodfriend, W., & Agnew, C. R. (2008). Sunken costs
and desired plans: Examining different types of investments in close
relationships. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(12),
1639--1652. doi:10.1177/0146167208323743 Gordon, N. (2002). Stuttering:
Incidence and causes. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 44(4),
278--282. doi:10.1017/ S0012162201002067 Gorgoni, M., Lauri, G.,
Truglia, I., Cordone, S., Sarasso, S., Scarpelli, S., Mangiaruga, A.,
D'Atri, A., Tempesta, D., Ferrara, M., Marra, C., Rossini, P. M., & De
Gennaro, L. (2016). Parietal fast sleep spindle density decrease in
Alzheimer's disease and amnesic mild cognitive impairment. Neural
Plasticity, 2016, 10. doi:10.1155/2016/8376108 Goriounova, N. A., &
Mansvelder, H. D. (2019). Genes, cells and brain areas of intelligence.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13(44). doi:10.3389/fnhum.2019.00044
Goschke, T. (2014). Dysfunctions of decision-making and cognitive
control as transdiagnostic mechanisms of mental disorders: Advances,
gaps, and needs in current research. International Journal of Methods in
Psychiatric Research, 23(S1), 41--57. doi:10.1002/mpr.1410 Gosling, S.
D., Mollaghan, D. M., & Van Lange, P. A. M. (2006). Animal research in
social psychology: A bridge to functional genomics and other unique
research opportunities. In P. A. M. Van Lange (Ed.), Bridging social
psychology: Benefits of transdisciplinary approaches. (pp. 123--128).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Gottesman, C. (2002). The neurochemistry of waking
and sleeping mental activity: The disinhibition-dopamine hypothesis.
Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 56(4),

345--354. doi:10.1046/j.1440-1819.2002. 01022.x. Gottesman, I. I.
(1991). Schizophrenia genesis. New York: W.H. Freeman & Co. Gottman, J.
M. (2011). The science of trust: Emotional attunement for couples. New
York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company. Gottman, J., & Gottman, J. (2017). The
natural principles of love. Journal of Family Theory & Review, 9(1),
7--26. doi:10.1111/ jftr.12182 Gottman, J., Swanson, C., & Swanson, K.
(2002). A general systems theory of marriage: Nonlinear difference
equation modeling of marital interaction. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 6(4), 326--340. doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr0604_07
Gould, C. E., & Edelstein, B. A. (2010). Worry, emotion control, and
anxiety control in older and young adults. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
24(7), 759--766. doi:10.1016/ j.janxdis.2010.05.009 Gouldner, A. (1960).
The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary analysis. American Sociological
Review, 25, 161--178. doi:10.2307/2092623 Goyal, M., Singh, S., Sibinga,
E. S., Gould, N.. F., Rowland-Seymour, A., Sharma, R., Berger, Z.,
Sleicher, D., Maron, D. D., Shihab, H. M., Ranasinghe, P. D., Linn, S.,
Saha, S., Bass, E. B., & Haythornthwaite, J. A. (2014). Meditation
programs for psychological stress and well-being: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. JAMA Internal Medicine, 174(3), 357--368.
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.13018 Gräff, J., Joseph, N. F., Horn, M.
E., Samiei, A., Meng, J., Seo, J., Rei, D., Bero, A. W., Phan, T. X.,
Wagner, F., Holson, E., Xu, J., Sun, J., Neve, R. L., Mach, R. H.,
Haggarty, S. J., & Tsai, L.-H. (2014). Epigenetic priming of memory
updating during reconsolidation to attenuate remote fear memories. Cell,
156(1), 261--276. doi:10.1016/j.cell. 2013.12.020 Grafton, S. T., Arbib,
M. A., Fadiga, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (1996). Localization of grasp
representations in humans by positron emission tomography. Experimental
Brain Research, 112(1), 103--111. doi:10.1007/ BF00227183 Graham, J.,
Haidt, J., & Nosek, B. A. (2009). Liberals and conservatives rely on
different sets of moral foundations. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 96(5), 1029--1046. doi:10.1037/a0015141 Grandin, T. (2010).
Thinking in pictures. New York, NY: Vintage Books. Grandin, T., &
Barron, S. (2005). The unwritten rules of social relationships.
Arlington, TX: Future Horizons. Granpeesheh, D., Tarbox, J., Dixon, D.
R., Wilke, A. E., Allen, M. S., & Bradstreet, J. J. (2010). Randomized
trial of hyperbaric oxygen therapy for children with autism. Research in
Autism Spectrum Disorders, 4(2), 268--
275.doi:10.1016/j.rasd.2009.09.014

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Granrud, C. E., Haake, J. J., & Yonas, A. (1985). Infants' sensitivity
to familiar size: The effect of memory on spatial perception. Perception
and Psychophysics, 37, 459--466. doi:10.3758/BF03202878 Grant, A. M.
(2013). Rethinking the extraverted sales ideal: The ambivert advantage.
Psychological Science, 24(6), 1024--1030. doi:10.1177/0956797612463706
Gray, J. A. (1970). The psychophysiological basis of
introversion-extraversion. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 8(3),
249--266.doi:10.1016/0005-7967(70)90069-0 Gray, J. A. (1987).
Perspectives on anxiety and impulsivity: A commentary. Journal of
Research in Personality, 21(4), 493--509.
doi:10.1016/0092-6566(87)90036-5 Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (2003).
The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the function of the
septo-hippocampal system. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Gray, J.
R., Chabris, C. F., & Braver, T. S. (2003). Neural mechanisms of general
fluid intelligence. Nature Neuroscience, 6(3), 316--322.
doi:10.1038/nn1014. Gray, J. R., & Thompson, P. M. (2004). Neurobiology
of intelligence: Science and ethics. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5(6),
471--482. doi:10.1038/nrn1405 Gray, P. B., Singh, A. B., Woodhouse, L.
J., Storer, T. W., Casaburi, R., Dzekov, J., . . . Bhasin, S. (2005).
Dose-dependent effects of testosterone on sexual function, mood, and
visuospatial cognition in older men. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology
and Metabolism, 90(7), 3838--3846. Gray, P. B., Singh, A. B., Woodhouse,
L. J., Storer, T. W., Casaburi, R., Dzekov, J., Sinha-Hikim, I., &
Bhasin, S. (2005). Dose-dependent effects of testosterone on sexual
function, mood, and visuospatial cognition in older men. Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 90(7), 3838--3846. doi:10.1210/
jc.2005-0247 Greenberg, J., Pyszczynski, T., & Solomon, S. (1986). The
causes and consequences of a need for self-esteem: A terror management
theory. In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Public self and private self
(pp. 189--212). New York: Springer-Verlag. Greenspoon, J., & Ranyard, R.
(1957). Stimulus conditions and retroactive inhibition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 53, 55--59. doi:10.1037/h0042803 Greenwald, A.
G. (1980). The totalitarian ego: Fabrication and revision of personal
history. American Psychologist, 35(7), 603--618.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.35.7.603 Greenwald, A. G., & Farnham, S. D.
(2000). Using the Implicit Association Test to measure self-esteem and
self-concept. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79,
1022--1038. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.79.6.1022 Greer, D. M., Wang, H. H.,
Robinson, J. D., Varelas, P. N., Henderson, G. V., & Wijdicks, E. F. M.
(2016). Variability of brain death policies in the United States. JAMA

Neurology, 73(2), 213--218. doi:10.1001/ jamaneurol.2015.3943 Greicius,
M. D., Srivastava, G., Reiss, A. L., & Menon, V. (2004). Default-mode
network activity distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from healthy aging:
Evidence from functional MRI. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 101(13), 4637--4642.
doi:10.1073/ pnas.0308627101 Griffith, J. (2012). Correlates of suicide
among Army National Guard soldiers. Military Psychology, 24(6),
568--591. doi:10.1080/08995605.2012.736324 Griffith, J. (2015).
Homecoming of soldiers who are citizens: Re-employment and financial
status of returning Army National Guard soldiers from Operations Iraqi
Freedom (OIF) and Enduring Freedom (OEF). Work, 50(1), 85--96.
doi:10.3233/ WOR-131794 Grigg-Damberger, M. M. (2017). Ontogeny of sleep
and its functions in infancy, childhood, and adolescence. In S.
Nevšímalová & O. Bruni (Eds.), Sleep disorders in children (pp. 3--29).
New York, NY: Springer International Publishing. Griggs, R. A. (2017).
Milgram's obedience study: A contentious classic reinterpreted. Teaching
of Psychology, 44(1), 32--37. doi:10.1177/0098628316677644 Grizzard, M.,
Tamborini, R., Sherry, J. L., Weber, R., Prabhu, S., Hahn, L., & Idzik,
P. (2015). The thrill is gone, but you might not know: Habituation and
generalization of biophysiological and self-reported arousal responses
to video games. Communication Monographs, 82(1), 64--87.
doi:10.1080/0363 7751.2014.971418 Grogan-Kaylor, A., Ma, J., &
Graham-Bermann, S. A. (2018). The case against physical punishment.
Current Opinion in Psychology, 19, 22--27.
doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.03.022 Grønli, J., Byrkjedal, I. K., Bjorvatn,
B., Nødtvedt, Ø., Hamre, B., & Pallesen, S. (2016). Reading from an iPad
or from a book in bed: The impact on human sleep. A randomized
controlled crossover trial. Sleep Medicine, 21, 86--92. doi:10.1016/j.
sleep.2016.02.006 Gross, J. J. (1998). The emerging field of emotion
regulation: An integrative review. Review of General Psychology, 2(3),
271--299. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.2.3.271 Gross, J. J. (2013). Emotion
regulation: Taking stock and moving forward. Emotion, 13(3), 359--365.
doi:10.1037/a0032135 Gross, J. J., & John, O. P. (2003). Individual
differences in two emotion regulation processes: Implications for
affect, relationships, and well-being. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85(2), 348--362. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.85.2.348
Groth-Marnat, G. (2009). Handbook of psychological assessment (5th ed.).
New York, NY: Wiley.

Grover, S., & Helliwell, J. F. (2019). How's life at home? New evidence
on marriage and the set point for happiness. Journal of Happiness
Studies, 20(2), 373--390. doi:10.1007/s10902017-9941-3 Guenther, C. A.,
Tasic, B., Luo, L., Bedell, M. A., & Kingsley, D. M. (2014). A molecular
basis for classic blond hair color in Europeans. Nature Genetics, 46(7),
748--752. doi:10.1038/ng.2991 Guglielmi, R. S., & Brekke, N. (2017). A
framework for understanding cross-national and cross-ethnic gaps in math
and science achievement: The case of the United States. Comparative
Education Review, 61(1), 176--213. doi:10.1086/689656 Guignard, J.-H., &
Lubart, T. (2006). Is it reasonable to be creative? In J. C. Kaufman &
J. Baer (Eds.), Creativity and reason in cognitive development.
(pp. 269--281). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. Gunderson, J.
G., Herpertz, S. C., Skodol, A. E., Torgersen, S., & Zanarini, M. C.
(2018). Borderline personality disorder. Nature Reviews Disease Primers,
4(1), 18029. doi:10.1038/nrdp.2018.29 Guo, Q., Li, C., & Wang, J.
(2017). Updated review on the clinical use of repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation in psychiatric disorders. Neuroscience Bulletin,
33(6), 747-- 756. doi:10.1007/s12264-017-0185-3 Gurung, R. A., Cacioppo,
J. T., Enns, C., Frantz, S., Freeman, J., Hackathorn, J., & Loop, T.
(2014). Strengthening the common core of the introductory psychology
course. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. Gurung,
R., Hackathorn, J., Enns, C., Frantz, S., Cacioppo, J. T., Loop, T., &
Freeman, J. E. (2016). Teaching introductory psychology: Content,
context, and resources. American Psychologist, 71(2), 112--124.
doi:10.1037/ a0040012 Gustavson, C. R., Kelly, D. J., Sweeney, M., &
Garcia, J. (1976). Prey-lithium aversions. I: Coyotes and wolves.
Behavioral Biology, 17(1), 61--72. doi:10.1016/S00916773(76)90272-8
Guynn, M. J., McDaniel, M. A., Strosser, G. L., Ramirez, J. M.,
Castleberry, E. H., & Arnett, K. H. (2014). Relational and item-specific
influences on generate--recognize processes in recall. Memory &
Cognition, 1--14. doi:10.3758/s13421-013-0341-6 Haber, R. N., & Haber,
R. B. (1964). Eidetic imagery: I. Frequency. Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 19(1), 131--138. doi:10.2466/ pms.1964.19.1.131 Hackenberg, T.
D. (2018). Token reinforcement: Translational research and application.
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 51(2), 393--435.
doi:10.1002/jaba.439 Haemer, M. A., Huang, T. T., & Daniels, S. R.
(2009). The effect of neurohormonal factors, epigenetic factors, and gut
microbiota on risk of obesity. Preventing Chronic Disease, 6(3), A96.

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-23

Haidt, J. (2007). The new synthesis in moral psychology. Science,
316(5827), 998--1002. doi:10.1126/science/1137651 Halaas, J. L.,
Gajiwala, K. S., Maffei, M., Cohen, S. L., Chait, B. T., Rabinowitz, D.,
Lallone, R. L., Burley, S. K., & Friedman, J. M. (1995). Weight-reducing
effects of the plasma protein encoded by the obese gene. Science, 269,
543--546. doi:10.1126/science. 7624777 Hales, C. M., Carroll, M. D.,
Fryar, C. D., & Ogden, C. L. (2020). Prevalence of obesity and severe
obesity among adults: United States, 2017--2018. https://www.cdc.gov
/nchs/products/databriefs/db360.htm Hall, C. S. (1954/2016). A primer of
Freudian psychology New York, NY: Pickle Partners Publishing. Halmi, K.
A., Casper, R. C., Eckert, E. D., Goldberg, S. C., & Davis, J. M.
(1979). Unique features associated with age of onset of anorexia
nervosa. Psychiatry Research, 1(2), 209--215.
doi:10.1016/0165-1781(79)90063-5 Halpern, D. F., Benbow, C. P., Geary,
D. C., Gur, R. C., Hyde, J. S., & Gernsbacher, M. A. (2007). The science
of sex differences in science and mathematics. Psychological Science in
the Public Interest, 8(1), 1--51. doi:10.1111/j.1529-1006.2007.00032.x
Halpern, J. H., & Pope, H. G., Jr. (2003). Hallucinogen persisting
perception disorder: What do we know after 50 years? Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 69(2), 109--119. doi:10.1016/s0376-8716(02)00306-x
Halverson, M. S., & Bolnick, D. A. (2008). An ancient DNA test of a
founder effect in Native American ABO blood group frequencies. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology, 137(3), 342--347.
doi:10.1002/ajpa.20887 Hamamura, T. (2012). Are cultures becoming
individualistic? A cross-temporal comparison of
individualism--collectivism in the United States and Japan. Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 16(1), 3--24. doi:10.1177/1088868311411587
Hamel, M., Shaffer, T. W., & Erdberg, P. (2000). A study of nonpatient
preadolescent Rorschach protocols. Journal of Personality Assessment,
75(2), 280--294. doi:10.1207/ s15327752jpa7502_8 Hamermesh, D. S., &
Parker, A. M. (2003). Beauty in the classroom: Professors' pulchritude
and putative pedagogical productivity. Economics of Education Review,
24(4), 369--376. doi:10.1016/j.econedurev.2004. 07.013 Hamilton, W. D.
(1964). The genetical evolution of social behaviour: I and II. Journal
of Theoretical Biology, 7, 1--16 and 17--52.
doi:10.1016/0022-5193(64)90038-4 Han, S., & Ma, Y. (2015). A
culture--behavior-- brain loop model of human development. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 19(11), 666--676. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2015.08.010
Han, T.-U., Root, J., Reyes, L. D., Huchinson, E. B., du Hoffmann, J.,
Lee, W.-S., Barnes, T. D., & Drayna, D. (2019). Human GNPTAB stuttering
mutations engineered into mice cause

R-24

vocalization deficits and astrocyte pathology in the corpus callosum.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 116(35), 17515--17524. doi:10.1073/pnas.1901480116 Haney, C.,
Banks, C., & Zimbardo, P. (1973). Interpersonal dynamics in a simulated
prison. International Journal of Criminology and Penology, 1, 69--97.
Hare, R. D. (2002). The predators among us. Paper presented at the
Canadian Police Association Annual General Meeting, St. John's,
Newfoundland and Labrador. Hare, R. D. (2006). Psychopathy: A clinical
and forensic overview. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 29(3),
709--724. doi:10.1016/j.psc.2006.04.007 Harlow, H. (1958). The nature of
love. American Psychologist, 13, 573--685. doi:10.1037/h0047884 Harlow,
H. F., & Harlow, M. K. (1973). Social deprivation in monkeys. In W. T.
Greenough (Ed.), The nature and nurture of behavior: Readings from the
Scientific American (pp. 108---116). San Francisco, CA: Freeman. Harms,
P. D., Herian, M., Krasikova, D. V., Vanhove, A. J., & Lester, P. B.
(2013). The Comprehensive Soldier and Family Fitness Program Evaluation.
Report \# 4: Evaluation of resilience training and mental and behavioral
health outcomes. https://digitalcommons .unl.edu/pdharms/10/ Harper, F.
K., Schmidt, J. E., Beacham, A. O., Salsman, J. M., Averill, A. J.,
Graves, K. D., & Andrykowski, M. A. (2006). The role of social cognitive
processing theory and optimism in positive psychosocial and physical
behavior change after cancer diagnosis and treatment. Psychooncology,
16, 79--91. doi:10.1002/pon.1068 Hart, A. J., Whalen, P. J., Shin, L.
M., McInerney, S. C., Fischer, H., & Rauch, S. L. (2000). Differential
response in the human amygdala to racial outgroup vs ingroup face
stimuli. Neuroreport, 11, 2351--2355.
doi:10.1097/00001756-200008030-00004 Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995).
Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young American
children: Baltimore, MD: Paul H Brookes Publishing. Hart, W., &
Albarracin, D. (2009). The effects of chronic achievement motivation and
achievement primes on the activation of achievement and fun goals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(6), 1129--1141.
doi:10.1037/a0017146 Harvey, A., Watkins, E., Mansell, W., & Shafran, R.
(2004). Cognitive behavioural processes across psychological disorders.
New York: Oxford University Press. Haselton, M. G., Bryant, G. A.,
Wilke, A., Frederick, D. A., Galperin, A., Frankenhuis, W. E., & Moore,
T. (2009). Adaptive rationality: An evolutionary perspective on
cognitive bias. Social Cognition, 27(5), 733--763.
doi:10.1521/soco.2009.27.5.733 Hashmi, A., Nere, A., & Tononi, G.
(2013). Sleepdependent synaptic down-selection (II): Singleneuron level
benefits for matching, selectivity,

and specificity. Frontiers in Neurology, 4(148).
doi:10.3389/fneur.2013.00148 Hasin, D. S., & Grant, B. F. (2015). The
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC)
Waves 1 and 2: Review and summary of findings. Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 50(11), 1609--1640.
doi:10.1007/s00127-015-1088-0 Haslam, S. A., Reicher, S. D., Millard,
K., & McDonald, R. (2015). 'Happy to have been of service': The Yale
archive as a window into the engaged followership of participants in
Milgram's 'obedience' experiments. British Journal of Social Psychology,
54(1), 55--83. doi:10.1111/bjso.12074 Hathaway, S. R., & McKinley, J. C.
(1940). A multiphasic personality schedule (Minnesota): I. Construction
of the schedule. Journal of Psychology, 10, 249--254.
doi:10.1080/00223980.1940.9917000 Hathaway, S. R., & McKinley, J. C.
(1943). The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory manual. New
York: Psychological Corporation. Haubrich, J., & Nader, K. (2016).
Memory reconsolidation. Current Topics in Behavioral Neuroscience, 37,
151--176. doi:10.1007/7854_2016_463 Havekes, R., Park, A. J., Tudor, J.
C., Luczak, V. G., Hansen, R. T., Ferri, S. L., . . . Abel, T. (2016).
Sleep deprivation causes memory deficits by negatively impacting
neuronal connectivity in hippocampal area CA1. eLife, 5, e13424.
doi:10.7554/eLife.13424 Hawkins, S. S., Wylie, B. J., & Hacker, M. R.
(2020). Use of ENDS and cigarettes during pregnancy. American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 58(1), 122--128. doi:10.1016/j. amepre.2019.08.031
Hawkley, L. C., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2010). Loneliness matters: A
theoretical and empirical review of consequences and mechanisms. Annals
of Behavioral Medicine, 40(2), 218--227. doi:10.1007/s12160-010-9210-8
Hawkley, L. C., Thisted, R. A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2009). Loneliness
predicts reduced physical activity: Cross-sectional & longitudinal
analyses. Health Psychology, 28(3), 354--363. doi:10.1037/a0014400
Hawkley, L. C., Wroblewski, K., Kaiser, T., Luhmann, M., & Schumm, L. P.
(2019). Are US older adults getting lonelier? Age, period, and cohort
differences. Psychology and Aging, 34(8), 1144--1157. doi:10.1037/
pag0000365 Hayes, J. A., McAleavey, A. A., Castonguay, L. G., & Locke,
B. D. (2016). Psychotherapists' outcomes with White and racial/ethnic
minority clients: First, the good news. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 63(3), 261--268. doi:10.1037/cou0000098 Hayes, J. P., Logue,
M. W., Reagan, A., Salat, D., Wolf, E. J., Sadeh, N., Spielberg, J. M.,
Sperbeck, E., Hayes, S. M., McGlinchey, R. E., Millberg, W. P.,
Verfaille, M., Stone, A., Schichman, S. A., & Miller, M. W. (2017). COMT
Val158Met polymorphism

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

moderates the association between PTSD symptom severity and hippocampal
volume. Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience, 42(2), 95--102.
doi:10.1503/jpn.150339 Hecht, S., Shlaer, S., & Pirenne, M. H. (1942).
Energy, quanta, and vision. Journal of General Physiology, 25, 819--840.
doi:10.1085/jgp.25.6.819 Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of
interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley. Heinz, A. J., Beck, A.,
Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Sterzer, P., & Heinz, A. (2011). Cognitive and
neurobiological mechanisms of alcohol-related aggression. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 12(7), 400--413. doi:10.1038/ nrn3042 Held, B. S. (2004).
The negative side ofpositive psychology. Journal of
HumanisticPsychology, 44(1), 9--46. doi:10.1177/0022167803259645
Helliwell, J. F. (2003). How's life? Combining individual and national
variables to explain subjective well-being. Economic Modeling, 20,
331--360. doi:10.1016/S02649993(02)00057-3 Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H.,
Wang, S., & Norton, M. (2020). Social environments for world happiness.
In J. F. Helliwell, R. Layard, J. D. Sachs, & J.-E. De Neve (Eds.),
World happiness report (pp. 13--46). New York, NY: Sustainable
Development Solutions Network. Helpern, J. A., Adisetiyo, V., Falangola,
M. F., Hu, C., Di Martino, A., Williams, K., Castellanos, F. X., &
Jensen, J. H. (2011). Preliminary evidence of altered gray and white
matter microstructural development in the frontal lobe of adolescents
with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A diffusional kurtosis
imaging study. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, 33(1), 17--23.
doi:10.1002/jmri.22397 Hendin, H. M., & Cheek, J. M. (1997). Assessing
hypersensitive narcissism: A reexamination of Murray's Narcism Scale.
Journal of Research in Personality, 31(4), 588--599.
doi:10.1006/jrpe.1997.2204 Henkel, L. A., & Mather, M. (2007). Memory
attributions for choices: How beliefs shape our memories. Journal of
Memory and Language, 57(2), 163--176. doi:10.1016/j. jml.2006.08.012
Hennenlotter, A., Schroeder, U., Erhard, P., Haslinger, B., Stahl, R.,
Weindl, A., von Einseidel, H. G., Lange, K. W., & CeballosBaumann, A.
(2004). Neural correlates associated with impaired disgust processing in
pre-symptomatic Huntington's disease. Brain, 127(6), 1446--1453.
doi:10.1093/brain/awh165 Herek, G. M., & Glunt, E. K. (1993).
Interpersonal contact and heterosexuals' attitudes toward gay men:
Results from a national survey. The Journal of Sex Research, 30(3),
239--244. doi:10.1080/00224499309551707 Hernandez, T. L., Kittelson, J.
M., Law, C. K., Ketch, L. L., Stob, N. R., Lindstrom, R. C.,

Scherzinger, A., Stamm, E. R., & Eckel, R. H. (2011). Fat redistribution
following suction lipectomy: Defense of body fat and patterns of
restoration. Obesity, 19(7), 1388--1395. doi:10.1038/oby.2011.64
Herndon, J. G. (2010). The grandmother effect: Implications for studies
on aging and cognition. Gerontology, 56(1), 73--79.
doi:10.1159/000236045 Herpertz, S. C., Werth, U., Lukas, G., Qunaibi,
M., Schuerkens, A., Kunert, H. J., Freese, R., Flesch, M.,
Mueller-Isberner, R., Osterheider, M., & Sass, H. (2001). Emotion in
criminal offenders with psychopathy and borderline personality disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 58, 737--745.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.58.8.737 Herrnstein, R. J. (1979). Acquisition,
generalization, and discrimination reversal of a natural concept.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 5(2),
116--129. doi:10.1037/0097-7403.5.2.116 Herrnstein, R. J., & Boring, E.
G. (1965). A source book in the history of psychology. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. Herrnstein, R. J., & de Villiers, P. A.
(1980). Fish as a natural category for people and pigeons. In G. H.
Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 14,
pp. 59--95). New York, NY: Academic Press. Herrnstein, R. J., & Heyman,
G. M. (1979). Is matching compatible with reinforcement maximization on
concurrent variableinterval, variable ratio? Journal of the Experimental
Analysis of Behavior, 31, 209--223. doi:10.1901/jeab.1979.31-209
Herxheimer, A., & Waterhouse, J. (2003). The prevention and treatment of
jet lag. British Medical Journal, 326(7384), 296--297.
doi:10.1136/bmj.326.7384.296 Herz, D. M., Tan, H., Brittain, J.-S.,
Fischer, P., Cheeran, B., Green, A. L., FitzGerald, J., Aziz, T. Z.,
Ashkan, K., Little, S., Foltynie, T., Limousin, P., Zrinzo, L., Bogacz,
R., & Brown, P. (2017). Distinct mechanisms mediate speed-accuracy
adjustments in cortico-subthalamic networks. eLife, 6, e21481.
doi:10.7554/eLife.21481 Herz, R. (2003). The effect of verbal context on
olfactory perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 132,
595--606. doi:10.1037/0096-3445.132.4.595 Hicks, T. V., Leitenberg, H.,
Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2005).
Physical, mental, and social catastrophic cognitions as prognostic
factors in cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological treatments for panic
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73(3),
506--514. doi:10.1037/0022-006x.73.3.506 Himelboim, I., McCreery, S., &
Smith, M. (2013). Birds of a feather tweet together: Integrating network
and content analyses to examine cross-ideology exposure on Twitter.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 18(2), 40--60.
doi:10.1111/jcc4.12001

Hinton, D. E., & Good, B. (Eds.). (2009). Culture and panic disorder.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Hirshkowitz, M., & Moore, C. A.
(1996). Sleep-related erectile activity. Neurologic Clinics, 14(4),
721--737. doi:10.1016/s07338619(05)70282-6 Ho, B.-C., Wassink, T. H.,
Ziebell, S., & Andreasen, N. C. (2011). Cannabinoid receptor 1 gene
polymorphisms and marijuana misuse interactions on white matter and
cognitive deficits in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 128(1--3),
66--75. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2011.02.021 Ho, M. Y., & Fung, H. H.
(2011). A dynamic process model of forgiveness: A crosscultural
perspective. Review of General Psychology, 15(1), 77--84. doi:10.1037/
a0022605 Hobson, J., & McCarley, R. W. (1977). The brain as a dream
state generator: An activation-synthesis hypothesis of the dream
process. American Journal of Psychiatry, 134, 1335--1348.
doi:10.1176/ajp.134.12.1335 Hodges, B. H., & Geyer, A. L. (2006). A
nonconformist account of the Asch experiments: Values, pragmatics, and
moral dilemmas. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(1), 2--19.
doi:10.1207/ s15327957pspr1001_1 Hodgkin, A. L., & Huxley, A. F. (1952).
A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to
conduction and excitation in nerve. Journal of Physiology, 117,
500--544. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.1952.sp004764 Hoebel, B. G., &
Teitelbaum, P. (1966). Effects of forcefeeding and starvation on food
intake and body weight in a rat with ventromedial hypothalamic lesions.
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 61, 189--193.
doi:10.1037/h0023126 Hoeft, F., McCandliss, B. D., Black, J. M.,
Gantman, A., Zakerani, N. Hulme, C., Lyytinen, H., Whitfield-Gabrieli,
S., Glover, G. H., Reiss, A. L., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2011). Neural
systems predicting long-term outcome in dyslexia, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(1),
361--366. doi:10.1073/ pnas.1008950108 Hoff, T. L. (1992). Psychology in
Canada one hundred years ago: James Mark Baldwin at the University of
Toronto. Canadian Psychology, 33, 683--694. doi:10.1037/h0078745
Hofling, C. K., Brotzman, E., Dalrymple, S., Graves, N., & Pierce, C. M.
(1966). An experimental study in nurse-physician relationships. Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 143, 171--180.
doi:10.1097/00005053-196608000-00008 Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture's
consequences. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. Hofstede, G. (1984). The cultural
relativity of the quality of life concept. The Academy of Management
Review, 9(3), 389--398. doi:10.5465/AMR.1984.4279653

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-25

Hogan, C. L., Mata, J., & Carstensen, L. L. (2013). Exercise holds
immediate benefits for affect and cognition in younger and older adults.
Psychology and Aging, 28(2), 587--594. doi:10.1037/a0032634 Holder, M.
K. (1999). Influences and constraints on manual asymmetry in wild
African primates: Reassessing implications for the evolution of human
handedness and brain lateralization. Ph.D. dissertation. Rutgers
University. New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA. Holingue, C., Newill, C.,
Lee, L.-C., Pasricha, P. J., & Daniele Fallin, M. (2018).
Gastrointestinal symptoms in autism spectrum disorder: A review of the
literature on ascertainment and prevalence. Autism Research, 11(1),
24--36. doi:10.1002/aur.1854 Holland, D., Chang, L., Ernst, T. M.,
Curran, M., Buchthal, S. D., Alicata, D., Skranes, J., Johansen, H.,
Hernandez, A., Yamakawa, R., Kuperman, J. M., & Dale, A. M. (2014).
Structural growth trajectories and rates of change in the first 3 months
of infant brain development. JAMA Neurology, 71(10), 1266--1274.
doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1638 Hollon, S. D., Thase, M. E., &
Markowitz, J. C. (2002). Treatment and prevention of depression.
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 3(2), 39--77.
doi:10.1111/15291006.00008 Holmes, T. H., & Rahe, R. H. (1967). The
social readjustment rating scale. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 11,
213--218. doi:10.1016/0022-3999(67)90010-4 Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T.
B., Baker, M., Harris, T., & Stephenson, D. (2015). Loneliness and
social isolation as risk factors for mortality: A meta-analytic review.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10(2), 227--237.
doi:10.1177/1745691614568352 Holt, L. H., Lotto, A. J., & Kleuender, K.
R. (1998). Incorporating principles of general learning in theories of
language acquisition. In M. Gruber, C. D. Higgins, K. S. Olson, & T.
Wysocki (Eds.), Chicago Linguistic Society: Vol. 34: The panels
(pp. 253--268). Chicago, IL: Chicago Linguistic Society. Holtmann, O.,
Bruchmann, M., Mönig, C., Schwindt, W., Melzer, N., Miltner, W. H. R., &
Straube, T. (2020). Lateralized deficits of disgust processing after
insula-basal ganglia damage. Frontiers in Psychology, 11(1429).
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01429 Holtzman, J. N., Miller, S., Hooshmand, F.,
Wang, P. W., Chang, K. D., Goffin, K. C., Hill, S. J., Ketter, T. A., &
Rasgon, N. L. (2016). Gender by onset age interaction may characterize
distinct phenotypic subgroups in bipolar patients. Journal of
Psychiatric Research, 76, 128--135. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2016.02.009
Hölzel, B. K., Lazar, S. W., Gard, T., SchumanOlivier, Z., Vago, D. R.,
& Ott, U. (2011). How does mindfulness meditation work? Proposing
mechanisms of action from a conceptual and neural perspective.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6(6), 537--559.
doi:10.1177/1745691611419671

R-26

Holzgrabe, U., Kapkova, P., Alptuzun, V., Scheiber, J., & Kugelmann, E.
(2007). Targeting acetylcholinesterase to treat neurodegeneration.
Expert Opinion on Therapeutic Targets 11(2), 161--179.
doi:10.1517/14728222.11.2.161 Hoogman, M., Bralten, J., Hibar, D. P.,
Mennes, M., Zwiers, M. P., Schweren, L. S., van Hulzen K. J. E.,
Medland, S. E., Shumskaya, E., Jahanshad, N., de Zeeuw, P., Szekely, E.,
Sudre, G., Wolfers, T., Onnink, A. M. H., Dammers, J. T., Mostert, J.
C., VivesGilabert, Y., Kohls, G., . . . Franke, B. (2017). Subcortical
brain volume differences in participants with attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder in children and adults: A crosssectional
mega-analysis. The Lancet Psychiatry, 4(4), 310--319. doi:10.1016/
S2215-0366(17)30049-4 Hopkins, W. D. (2006). Comparative and familial
analysis of handedness in great apes. Psychological Bulletin, 132(4),
538--559. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.132.4.538 Hopper, K., Harrison, G.,
Janca, A., & Sartorius, N. (2007). Recovery from schizophrenia: An
international perspective: A report from the WHO Collaborative Project,
the international study of schizophrenia. New York, NY US: Oxford
University Press. Horn, J. L., & Hofer, S. M. (1992). Major abilities
and development in the adult period. In R. J. Sternberg & C. A. Berg
(Eds.), Intellectual development (pp. 44--99). Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press. Horney, K. (1923-1937/1967). Feminine
psychology. New York: Norton. Horney, K. (1950). The collected works of
Karen Horney. New York: Norton. Horwitz, A. V., White, H. R., &
Howell-White, S. (1997). Becoming married and mental health: A
longitudinal study of a cohort of young adults. Journal of Marriage and
the Family, 58, 895--907. doi:10.2307/353978 Hosobuchi, Y., Adams, J., &
Linchitz, R. (1977). Pain relief by electrical stimulation of the
central gray matter in humans and its reversal by naloxone. Science,
197(4299), 183--186. doi:10.1126/science.301658 Hostinar, C. E.,
Sullivan, R. M., & Gunnar, M. R. (2013). Psychobiological mechanisms
underlying the social buffering of the
hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenocortical axis: A review of animal models
and human studies across development. Psychological Bulletin, 140(1),
256--282. doi:10.1037/a0032671 Hou, Y., Song, B., Hu, Y., Pan, Y., & Hu,
Y. (2020). The averaged inter-brain coherence between the audience and a
violinist predicts the popularity of violin performance. NeuroImage,
211, 116655. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116655 House, J. S., Landis,
K. R., & Umberson, D. (1988). Social relationships and health. Science,
241, 540--545. doi:10.1126/science.3399889 Houston, S. M., Herting, M.
M., & Sowell, E. R. (2013). The neurobiology of childhood structural
brain development: Conception through adulthood. Current

Topics in Behavioral Neuroscience, 16, 3--17. doi:10.1007/7854_2013_265
Hove, M. J., & Stelzer, J. (2018). Biological foundations and beneficial
effects of trance. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 41, e76.
doi:10.1017/S0140525X17002072 Howard, A. D., Feighner, S. D., Cully, D.
F., Arena, J. P., Liberator, P. A., Rosenblum, C. I., Hamelin, M.
Hreniuk, D. L., Palyha, O. C., Anderson, J., Paress, P. S., Diaz, C.,
Chou, M., Liu, K. K., McKee, K. K., Pong, S-S., Chaung, L-Y., Elbrecht,
A., Dashkevicz, M., . . . Van der Ploeg, L. H. T. (1996). A receptor in
pituitary and hypothalamus that functions in growth hormone release.
Science, 273(5277), 974--977. doi:10.1126/ science.273.5277.974 Howell,
R. T., & Hill, G. (2009). The mediators of experiential purchases:
Determining the impact of psychological needs satisfaction and social
comparison. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 4(6), 511--522.
doi:10.1080/17439760903270993 Howes, O. D., McCutcheon, R., Owen, M. J.,
& Murray, R. M. (2017). The role of genes, stress, and dopamine in the
development of schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry, 81(1), 9--20.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.07.014 H. P. Nair & L. J. Young (2006).
Vasopressin and pair-bond formation: Genes to brain to behavior. Journal
of Physiology, 21(2), 146--152. doi:10.1152/physiol.00049.2005 Hrdy, S.
B. (2005). Comes the child before the man: How cooperative breeding and
prolonged postweaning dependence shaped human potential. In B. S.
Hewlett & S. E. Lamb (Eds.), Hunter-gatherer childhoods: Evolutionary,
developmental and cultural perspectives (pp. 65--91). New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction publishers. Hübel, C., Leppä, V., Breen, G., & Bulik, C. M.
(2018). Rigor and reproducibility in genetic research on eating
disorders. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 51(7), 593--607.
doi:10.1002/eat.22896 Hubel, D. H., & Livingstone, M. S. (1987).
Segregation of form, color, and stereopsis in primate area 18. Journal
of Neuroscience, 7, 3378--3415. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0711-03378.1987
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1959). Receptive fields of single neurons
in the cat's striate cortex. Journal of Physiology, 148, 574--591.
doi:10.1113/jphysiol.1959.sp006308 Hudson, J. I., Hiripi, E., Pope, H.
G., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). The prevalence and correlates of eating
disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biological
Psychiatry, 61(3), 348--358. doi:10.1016/j. biopsych.2006.03.040 Hudson,
N. W., & Fraley, R. C. (2015). Volitional personality trait change: Can
people choose to change their personality traits? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 109(3), 490--507. doi:10.1037/pspp0000021
Hudspeth, A. (1983). The hair cells of the inner ear. Scientific
American, 248, 54--64. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0183-54

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Hugenberg, K., Young, S. G., Bernstein, M. J., & Sacco, D. F. (2010).
The categorizationindividuation model: An integrative account of the
other-race recognition deficit. Psychological Review, 117(4),
1168--1187. doi:10.1037/a0020463 Hull, C. L. (1943). Principles of
Behaviour. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. Hunt, H. T. (1989). The
multiplicity of dreams. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Hunt, J.,
& Eisenberg, D. (2010). Mental health problems and help-seeking behavior
among college students. Journal of Adolescent Health, 46(1), 3--10.
doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2009. 08.008 Hupka, R. B., Lenton, A. P., &
Hutchison, K. A. (1999). Universal development of emotion categories in
natural language. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
247--278. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.77.2.247 Huttenlocher, P. R. (2009).
Neural plasticity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Hüweler, R.,
Kandil, F. I., Alpers, G. W., & Gerlach, A. L. (2009). The impact of
visual flow stimulation on anxiety, dizziness, and body sway in
individuals with and without fear of heights. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 47(4), 345--352. doi:10.1016/ j.brat.2009.01.011
Hypnotherapists Union Local 472. (2019). Summary of state laws regarding
hypnosis. https://hypnotherapistsunion.wildapricot .org/statelaws
Hystad, S. W., Eid, J., Laberg, J. C., Johnsen, B. H., & Bartone, P. T.
(2009). Academic stress and health: Exploring the moderating role of
personality hardiness. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research,
53(5), 421--429. doi:10.1080/00313830903180349 Igielnik, R. (2020). Most
Americans say they regularly wore a mask in stores in the past month;
Fewer see others doing it. Pew Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.
org/fact-tank/2020/06/23/most-americanssay-they-regularly-wore-a-mask-in-stores-inthe-past-month-fewer-see-others-doing-it/
Inman, C. S., Manns, J. R., Bijanki, K. R., Bass, D. I., Hamann, S.,
Drane, D. L., Fasano, R. E., Kovach, C. K., Gross, R. E., & Willie, J.
T. (2018). Direct electrical stimulation of the amygdala enhances
declarative memory in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 115(1), 98--103.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1714058114 Insel, T. R. (2007). Post-traumatic stress
disorder research at the National Institute of Mental Health.
http://www.hhs.gov/asl/testify/2007/05/t20070524a.html Instant
Chemistry. (2019). Instant Chemistry uses biological and psychological
factors to determine relationship compatibility.
https://instantchemistry.com/pages /relationship-compatibility Institute
of Medicine (IOM). (1994). Growing up tobacco free: Preventing nicotine
addiction in children and youths. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.

International Coach Federation (ICF). (2016). 2016 ICF Global Coaching
Study. https:// coachfederation.org/app/uploads/2017
/12/2016ICFGlobalCoachingStudy \_ExecutiveSummary-2.pdf International
Coach Federation (ICF). (n.d.). FAQs. http://coachfederation.org/faqs
International Society for the Study of Trauma and Dissociation. (2015).
Guidelines for treating dissociative identity disorder in adults.
http://www.isst-d.org/default .asp?contentID=49 Ioannou, C. C., Guttal,
V., & Couzin, I. D. (2012). Predatory fish select for coordinated
collective motion in virtual prey. Science, 337(6099), 1212--1215.
doi:10.1126/science.1218919 Ironson, G., Lucette, A., Hylton, E.,
Pargament, K. I., & Krause, N. (2018). The relationship between
religious and psychospiritual measures and an inflammation marker (CRP)
in older adults experiencing life event stress. Journal of Religion and
Health, 57(4), 1554--1566. doi:10.1007/s10943-018-0600-8 Ishunina, T.
A., & Swaab, D. F. (1999). Vasopressin and oxytocin neurons of the human
supraoptic and paraventricular nucleus; Size changes in relation to age
and sex. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 84(12),
4637--4644. doi:10.1210/jc.84.12.4637 Ito, T. A., & Urland, G. R.
(2003). The influence of processing objectives on the perception of
faces: An ERP study of race and gender perception. Cognitive, Affective,
and Behavioral Neuroscience, 5, 21--36. doi:10.3758/CABN.5.1.21
Ittleson, W. H. (1952). The Ames demonstrations in perception.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Iveson, C. (2002).
Solution-focused brief therapy. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 8,
149--156. doi:10.1192/apt.8.2.149 Ivleva, E. I., Clementz, B. A.,
Dutcher, A. M., Arnold, S. J., Jeon-Slaughter, H., Aslan, S., et
al. (2016). Brain structure biomarkers in the psychosis biotypes:
Findings from the bipolar-schizophrenia network for intermediate
phenotypes. Biological Psychiatry, 82(1) 26--39.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.08.030 Jackson, B., Kubzansky, L. D., Cohen,
S., Jacobs, D. R., Jr., & Wright, R. J. (2007). Does harboring hostility
hurt? Associations between hostility and pulmonary function in the
Coronary Artery Risk Development in (Young) Adults (CARDIA) study.
Health Psychology, 26(3), 333--340. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.26.3.333
Jackson, J. H. (1884). The Croonian lectures of evolution and
dissolution of the nervous system. Lecture 1. British Medical Journal,
1, 591--593. doi:10.1136/bmj.1.1214.660 Jakupcak, M., Tull, M. T.,
McDermott, M. J., Kaysen, D., Hunt, S., & Simpson, T. (2010). PTSD
symptom clusters in relationship to alcohol misuse among Iraq and
Afghanistan war veterans seeking post-deployment VA health care.
Addictive Behaviors, 35(9), 840--843. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2010.03.023

Jamal, A., King, B. A., Neff, L. J., Whitmill, J., Babb, S. D., &
Graffunder, C. M. (2016). Current cigarette smoking among adults ---
United States, 2005--2015. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 65
(44), 1205--1211. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6544a2 James, W. (1884/1969). What
is an emotion? In William James: Collected essays and reviews
(pp. 244--280). New York: Russell and Russell. James, W. (1887). What is
an instinct? Scribner's Magazine, 1, 355--365. James, W. (1890).
Principles of psychology. New York: Henry Holt. James, W. (1899). Talks
to teachers on psychology: And to students on some of life's ideals. New
York, NY: Holt. James, W. (1905). The varieties of religious experience:
A study in human nature. New York: Longmans, Green, and Company.
Jamison, K. (1993). Touched with fire: Manicdepressive illness and the
artistic temperament. New York: Free Press. Jamison, K. R. (1995).
Manic-depressive illness and creativity. Scientific American, 272,
62--67. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0295-62 Jancke, L., & Kaufmann, N.
(1994). Facial EMG responses to odors in solitude and with an audience.
Chemical Senses, 19, 99--111. doi:10.1093/chemse/19.2.99 Jang, K. L.,
Livesley, W. J., & Vernon, P. A. (1996). Heritability of the big five
personality dimensions and their facets: A twin study. Journal of
Personality, 64, 575--592. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.1996.tb00522.x Janik,
V. M., Sayigh, L. S., & Wells, R. S. (2006). Signature whistle shape
conveys identity information to bottlenose dolphins. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103,
8293--8297. doi:10.1073/pnas.0509918103 Janis, I. (1971). Groupthink.
Psychology Today, 5, 43--46; 74--76. Janusonis, S. (2008). Origin of the
blood hyperserotonemia of autism. Theoretical Biology & Medical
Modelling, 5, 10. doi:10.1186/1742-4682-5--10 Jaques, E. (1965). Death
and the midlife crisis. International Journal of Psycho-analysis, 46,
502--514. Jardri, R., Hugdahl, K., Hughes, M., Brunelin, J., Waters, F.,
Alderson-Day, B., Smailes, D., Sterzer, P., Corlett, P. R., Leptourgos,
P., Debbané, M., Cachia, A., & Denève, S. (2016). Are hallucinations due
to an imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory influences on the
brain? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 42(5), 1124--1134.
doi:10.1093/schbul/sbw075 Jardri, R., Thomas, P., Delmaire, C., Delion,
P., & Pins, D. (2013). The neurodynamic organization of
modality-dependent hallucinations. Cerebral Cortex, 23(5), 1108--1117.
doi:10.1093/cercor/bhs082 Jeglic, E., Miranda, R., Polanco-Roman, L.,
Chang, E., Downey, C., Hirsch, J., & Lin, N. (2016). Positive psychology
in the context of race and ethnicity. In E. Chang, C. REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-27

A. Downey, J. K. Hirsch, & N. Lin (Eds.), Positive Psychology in Racial
and Ethnic Groups (pp.13--33). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Jegou, A., Schabus, M., Gosseries, O., Dahmen, B., Albouy,
G., Desseilles, M., Sterpenich, V., Phillips, C., Maquet, P., Grova, C.,
& Dang-Vu, T. T. (2019). Cortical reactivations during sleep spindles
following declarative learning. NeuroImage, 195, 104--112.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.03.051 Jenkinson, C. E., Dickens, A. P.,
Jones, K., Thompson-Coon, J., Taylor, R. S., Rogers, M., Bambra, C. L.,
Lang, I., & Richards, S. H. (2013). Is volunteering a public health
intervention? A systematic review and meta-analysis of the health and
survival of volunteers. BMC Public Health, 13(1), 773.
doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-773 Jensen, R., & Burgess, H. (1997).
Mythmaking: How introductory psychology texts present B. F. Skinner's
analysis of cognition. Psychological Record, 47(2), 221--232.
doi:10.1007/BF03395221 Jepson, T. L., Ernst, M. E., & Kelly, M. W.
(1998). Current perspectives on the management of seasonal affective
disorder. Journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association, 39(6),
822--829. Jerabeck, J. M., & Ferguson, C. J. (2013). The influence of
solitary and cooperative violent video game play on aggressive and
prosocial behavior. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(6), 2573--2578.
doi:10.1016/j. chb.2013.06.034 Jetten, J., Branscombe, N. R., Haslam, S.
A., Haslam, C., Cruwys, T., Jones, J. M., Cui, L., Dingle, G., Liu, J.,
Murphy, S., Thai, A., Walter, Z., & Zhang, A. (2015). Having a lot of a
good thing: Multiple important group memberships as a source of
self-esteem. PloS one, 10(5), e0124609. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0124609 Ji, Y., Azuine, R. E., Zhang, Y., Hou, W., Hong,
X., Wang, G., Riley, A., Pearson, C., Zuckerman, B., & Wang, X. (2020).
Association of cord plasma biomarkers of in utero acetaminophen exposure
with risk of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder and autism
spectrum disorder in childhood. JAMA Psychiatry, 77(2), 180--189.
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2019.3259 Ji, Y., Azuine, R. E., Zhang, Y.,
Hou, W., Hong, X., Wang, G., Riley, A., Pearson, C., Zuckerman, B., &
Wang, X. (2020). Association of cord plasma biomarkers of in utero
acetaminophen exposure with risk of attention-deficit/ hyperactivity
disorder and autism spectrum disorder in childhood. JAMA Psychiatry,
77(2), 180--189. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2019.3259 Jia, F., &
Krettenauer, T. (2017). Recognizing moral identity as a cultural
construct. Frontiers in Psychology, 8(412). doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2017.00412 Jiang, C., Mitran, A., Minino, A., & Ni, H. (2015).
Racial and gender disparities in suicide among young adults aged 18--24:

R-28

United States, 2009--2013. https://www.cdc
.gov/nchs/data/hestat/suicide/racial_and \_gender_2009_2013.htm Joas,
E., Karanti, A., Song, J., Goodwin, G. M., Lichtenstein, P., & Landén,
M. (2017). Pharmacological treatment and risk of psychiatric hospital
admission in bipolar disorder. The British Journal of Psychiatry,
210(3), 197--202. doi:10.1192/bjp. bp.116.187989 Joel, S., Gordon, A.
M., Impett, E. A., MacDonald, G., & Keltner, D. (2013). The things you
do for me: Perceptions of a romantic partner's investments promote
gratitude and commitment. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
39(10), 1333--1345. doi:10.1177/0146167213497801 Joëls, M. (2006).
Corticosteroid effects in the brain: U-shape it. Trends in
Pharmacological Sciences, 27(5), 244--250. doi:10.1016/j.tips.
2006.03.007 Johns, M. W. (1991). A new method for measuring daytime
sleepiness: The Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep, 14(6), 540--545. doi:
10.1093/sleep/14.6.540 Johnson, J. A. (2009). Wrong and right questions
about persons and situations. Journal of Research in Personality, 43(2),
251--252. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2008.12.022 Johnson, P. L., Truitt, W.,
Fitz, S. D., Minick, P. E., Dietrich, A., Sanghani, S., TräskmanBendz,
L., Goddard, A. W., Brundin, L., & Shekhar, A. (2010). A key role for
orexin in panic anxiety. Nature Medicine, 16(1), 111--115.
doi:10.1038/nm.2075 Johnson, S. P., & Aslin, R. N. (1995). Perception of
object unity in 2-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology, 31,
739--745. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.31.5.739 Jones, B. C., Hahn, A. C.,
Fisher, C. I., Wang, H., Kandrik, M., & DeBruine, L. M. (2018). General
sexual desire, but not desire for uncommitted sexual relationships,
tracks changes in women's hormonal status. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 88,
153--157. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j. psyneuen.2017.12.015 Jones, E.
E., & Nisbett, R. E. (1972). The actor and the observer: Divergent
perceptions of the causes of the behavior. In E. E. Jones, D. E.
Kanouse, H. H. Kelley, R. E. Nisbett, S. Valins, & B. Weiner (Eds.),
Attribution: Perceiving the causes of behavior (pp. 79--94). Morristown,
NJ: General Learning Press. Jones, E. E., Rhodewalt, F., Berglas, S., &
Skelton, J. A. (1981). Effects of strategic self-presentation on
subsequent selfesteem. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41,
407--421. doi:10.1037/00223514.41.3.407 Jones, M. C. (1924). The
elimination of children's fears. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 7,
382--390. doi:10.1037/ h0072283 Jones, M. E., Schoemaker, M. J.,
McFadden, E. C., Wright, L. B., Johns, L. E., & Swerdlow, A. J. (2019).
Night shift work and risk of breast cancer in women: The Generations
Study

cohort. British Journal of Cancer, 121(2), 172--179.
doi:10.1038/s41416-019-0485-7 Jorm, A. F., Patten, S. B., Brugha, T. S.,
& Mojtabai, R. (2017). Has increased provision of treatment reduced the
prevalence of common mental disorders? Review of the evidence from four
countries. World Psychiatry, 16(1), 90--99. doi:10.1002/wps.20388
Jouriles, E. N., Rosenfield, D., McDonald, R., Vu, N. L., Rancher, C., &
Mueller, V. (2018). Children exposed to intimate partner violence:
Conduct problems, interventions, and partner contact with the child.
Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 47(3), 397--409.
doi:10.1080/15374416.2016.1163706 Judge, T. A., Livingston, B. A., &
Hurst, C. (2012). Do nice guys---and gals---really finish last? The
joint effects of sex and agreeableness on income. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 102(2), 390--407. doi:10.1037/a0026021 Jung, C.
G. (1928). Contributions to analytical psychology. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. Juster, R.-P., McEwen, B. S., & Lupien, S. J. (2010).
Allostatic load biomarkers of chronic stress and impact on health and
cognition. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(1), 2--16.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev. 2009.10.002 Juvonen, J. (2005). Myths and facts
about bullying in schools. Behavioral Health Management, 25, 36--40.
Kaczkurkin, A. N., Burton, P. C., Chazin, S. M., Manbeck, A. B.,
Espensen-Sturges, T., Cooper, S. E., Sponheim, S. R., & Lissek, S.
(2016). Neural substrates of overgeneralized conditioned fear in PTSD.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 174(2), 125--135. doi:10.1176/ appi.
ajp.2016.15121549 Kaestle, C. E. (2019). Sexual orientation trajectories
based on sexual attractions, partners, and identity: A longitudinal
investigation from adolescence through young adulthood using a US
representative sample. The Journal of Sex Research, 56(7), 811--826.
doi:10.1080/00224499.2019.1577351 Kagan, J. (1997). Temperament and the
reactions to unfamiliarity. Child Development, 68, 139--143.
doi:10.2307/1131931 Kagan, J., Kearsley, R. B., & Zelazo, P. R. (1978).
Infancy: Its place in human development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. Kahn, D. (2013). Brain basis of self: Selforganization
and lessons from dreaming. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 408. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00408. Kail, R. V., Lervåg, A., & Hulme, C. (2016).
Longitudinal evidence linking processing speed to the development of
reasoning. Developmental Science, 19(6), 1067--1074.
doi:10.1111/desc.12352 Kail, R., & Bisanz, J. (1991). Developmental
change in speed of processing during childhood and adolescence.
Psychological Bulletin, 109, 490--501. doi:10.1037/00332909.109.3.490

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Kail, R., & Bisanz, J. (1992). The informationprocessing perspective on
cognitive development in childhood and adolescence. In R. J. Sternberg &
C. A. Berg (Eds.), Intellectual development (pp. 229--260). New York:
Cambridge University Press. Kalinowsky, L. B. (1986). History of
convulsive therapy. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 462(1),
1--4. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1986.tb51233.x Kalisch, R., & Gerlicher,
A. M. V. (2014). Making a mountain out of a molehill: On the role of the
rostral dorsal anterior cingulate and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex in
conscious threat appraisal, catastrophizing, and worrying. Neuroscience
& Biobehavioral Reviews, 42(0), 1--8. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.
2014.02.002 Kamin, L. J. (1959). The delay-of-punishment gradient.
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 52(4), 434--437.
doi:10.1037/h0045089 Kamin, L. J. (1968). "Attention-like" processes in
classical conditioning. In M. R. Jones (Ed.), Miami symposium on the
prediction of behavior: Aversive stimulation (pp. 9--31). Miami, FL:
University of Miami Press. Kamin, L. J. (1969). Predictability,
surprise, attention, and conditioning. In B. A. Campbell & R. M. Church
(Eds.), Punishment and aversive behavior (pp. 279--296). New York:
AppletonCentury-Crofts. Kandel, D. B. (1978). Similarity in real-life
adolescent friendship pairs. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 36, 306--312. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.36.3.306 Kandel, E. R.,
& Wurtz, R. H. (2000). Constructing the visual image. In E. R. Kandel,
J. H. Schwartz, & T. M. Jessell (Eds.), Principles of Neural Science
(4th ed., pp. 492--506). New York: McGraw-Hll. Kane, J. M., & Freeman,
H. L. (1994). Towards more effective antipsychotic treatment. The
British Journal of Psychiatry, 165(Suppl. 25), 22--31.
doi:10.1192/S0007125000293173 Kang, C., Riazuddin, S., Mundorff, J.,
Krasnewich, D., Friedman, P., Mullikin, J. C., & Drayna, D. (2010).
Mutations in the lysosomal enzyme--targeting pathway and persistent
atuttering. New England Journal of Medicine, 362(8), 677--685.
doi:10.1056/ NEJMoa0902630 Kaniasty, K., & Norris, F. H. (2008).
Longitudinal linkages between perceived social support and posttraumatic
stress symptoms: Sequential roles of social causation and social
selection. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 21, 274−281.
doi:10.1002/jts.20334 Kanner, A. D., Coyne, J. C., Schaefer, C., &
Lazarus, R. S. (1981). Comparison of two modes of stress measurement:
Daily hassles and uplifts versus major life events. Journal of
Behavioral Medicine, 4, 1--39. doi:10.1007/BF00844845 Kanner, L. (1943).
Autistic disturbances of affective contact. Nervous Child, 2, 217--250.

Kant, I. (1798/1978). Anthropology from a pragmatic point of view (V. L.
Dodwell, Trans.). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Kaplan, H., & Dove, H. (1987). Infant development among the Ache of
Eastern Paraguay. Developmental Psychology, 23, 190--198.
doi:10.1037/0012-1649.23.2.190 Kaplan, R. M., & Kronick, R. G. (2006).
Marital status and longevity in the United States population. Journal of
Epidemiology & Community Health, 60(9), 760--765.
doi:10.1136/jech.2005.037606 Karasik, L. B., Tamis-LeMonda, C. S.,
Ossmy, O., & Adolph, K. E. (2018). The ties that bind: Cradling in
Tajikistan. PloS One, 13(10), e0204428. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0204428 Karau, S. J., & Williams, K. D. (1993). Social loafing: A
meta-analytic review and theoretical integration. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 65, 681--706. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.65.4.681
Karraker, A., DeLamater, J., & Schwartz, C. R. (2011). Sexual frequency
decline from midlife to later life. The Journals of Gerontology Series
B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 66B(4), 502--512.
doi:10.1093/geronb/gbr058 Kass, A. E., Kolko, R. P., & Wilfley, D. E.
(2013). Psychological treatments for eating disorders. Current Opinion
in Psychiatry, 26(6), 549--555. doi:510.1097
/YCO.1090b1013e328365a328330e. Katzenberg, D., Young, T., Finn, L., Lin,
L., King, D. P., Takahashi, J. S., & Mignot, E. (1998). A CLOCK
polymorphism associated with human diurnal preference. Sleep, 21, 569--
578. doi:10.1093/sleep/21.6.569 Katzmarzyk, P. T., Church, T. S., Craig,
C. L., & Bouchard, C. (2009). Sitting time and mortality from all
causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer. Medicine & Science in Sports
& Exercise, 41(5), 998--1005. doi:10.1249/ MSS.0b013e3181930355 Kaufman,
A. S. (2009). IQ testing 101: Springer Publishing Company. Kealy, D.,
Goodman, G., Rasmussen, B., Weideman, R., & Ogrodniczuk, J. S. (2017).
Therapists' perspectives on optimal treatment for pathological
narcissism. Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment,
8(1), 35--45. doi:10.1037/ per0000164 Kearney, C. A., Albano, A. M.,
Eisen, A. R., Allan, W. D., & Barlow, D. H. (1997). The phenomenology of
panic disorder in youngsters: An empirical study of a clinical sample.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 11, 49--62.
doi:10.1016/S0887-6185(96)00034-5 Kearns, D. N., Weiss, S. J.,
Schindler, C. W., & Panlilio, L. V. (2005). Conditioned inhibition of
cocaine seeking in rats. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes, 31, 247--253. doi:10.1037/00977403.31.2.247

Kecklund, G., & Axelsson, J. (2016). Health consequences of shift work
and insufficient sleep. BMJ, 355, i5210. doi:10.1136/bmj.i5210 Keenan,
J. P., Nelson, A., O'Connor, M., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2001).
Self-recognition and the right hemisphere. Nature, 409(6818), 305.
doi:10.1038/35053167 Keith, S. J., Regier, D. A., & Rae, D. S. (1991).
Schizophrenic disorders. In L. N. Robins & D. A. Regier (Eds.),
Psychiatric disorders in America (pp. 33--52). New York: Free Press.
Kekst CNC. (2020). COVID-19 Opinion Tracker.
https://www.kekstcnc.com/media/2793/
kekstcnc_research_covid-19_opinion_tracker_wave-4.pdf?fbclid=IwAR3L3ODW08C4TgfBNyjrSpCKAMzShQNMi8KACY0sOo-gek6qNpxd90LaZE
Keller, H. (1933). Helen Keller in Scotland: A personal record by
herself (J. K. Love, Ed.). London, UK: Methuen and Co. Kelley, M. E.,
Wan, C. R., Broussard, B., Crisafio, A., Cristofaro, S., Johnson, S.,
Reed, T. A., Amar, P., Kaslow, N. J., Walker, E. F., & Compton, M. T.
(2016). Marijuana use in the immediate 5-year premorbid period is
associated with increased risk of onset of schizophrenia and related
psychotic disorders. Schizophrenia Research, 171(1), 62--67.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2016.01.015 Kellner, C. H., Obbels, J., & Sienaert,
P. (2020). When to consider electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 141(4), 304--315. doi:10.1111/acps.13134
Kellogg, W. N., & Kellogg, L. A. (1933). The ape and the child. New
York: McGraw-Hill. Kelly, D., Miellet, S., & Caldara, R. (2010). Culture
shapes eye movements for visually homogeneous objects. Frontiers in
Psychology, 1(6). doi:10.3389/fpsyg. 2010.00006 Kelly, T. L., Neri, D.
F., Grill, J. T., Ryman, D., Hunt, P. D., Dijk, D.-J., Shanahan, T. L.,
& Czeisler, C. A. (1999). Nonentrained circadian rhythms of melatonin in
submariners scheduled to an 18-hour day. Journal of Biological Rhythms,
14(3), 190--196. doi:10.1177/074873099129000597 Keltner, D., & Ekman, P.
(2000). Facial expression of emotion. In M. Lewis & J. M. HavilandJones
(Eds.), Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp. 236--250). New York: Guilford
Press. Kendler, K. S., Walters, E. E., Neale, M. C., Kessler, R. C.,
Heath, A. C., & Eaves, L. J. (1995). The structure of the genetic and
environmental risk factors for six major psychiatric disorders in women:
Phobia, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, bulimia, major
depression, and alcoholism. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52(5),
374--383. doi:10.1001 /archpsyc.1995.03950170048007 Kendzerska, T.,
Gershon, A. S., Hawker, G., Leung, R. S., & Tomlinson, G. (2014).
Obstructive sleep apnea and risk of cardiovascular events and all-cause
mortality: A decade-long historical cohort study. PLOS

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-29

Medicine, 11(2), e1001599. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001599 Kennedy, G.
C. (1953). The role of depot fat in the hypothalamic control of food
intake in the rat. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B, 140,
578--592. doi:10.1098/ rspb.1953.0009 Kennis, M., Rademaker, A. R., &
Geuze, E. (2013). Neural correlates of personality: An integrative
review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 37(1), 73--95.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.10.012 Kenrick, D. T., Griskevicius, V.,
Neuberg, S. L., & Schaller, M. (2010). Renovating the pyramid of needs:
Contemporary extensions built upon ancient foundations. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 5(3), 292--314. doi:10.1177/1745691610369469
Kenworthy, J. B., Barden, M. A., Diamond, S., & del Carmen, A. (2011).
Ingroup identification as a moderator of racial bias in a shoot--no
shoot decision task. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 14(3),
311-- 318. doi:10.1177/1368430210392932 Kessler, R. C., Aguilar-Gaxiola,
S., Alonso, J., Benjet, C., Bromet, E. J., Cardoso, G., Degenhardt, L.,
de Girolamo, G., Dinolova, R. V., Ferry, F., Florescu, S., Gureje, O.,
Haro, J. M., Huang, Y., Karam, E. G., Kawakami, N., Lee, S., Lepine,
J.-P., Levinson, D., . . . Koenen, K. C. (2017). Trauma and PTSD in the
WHO World Mental Health Surveys. European Journal of Psychotraumatology,
8(sup5), 1353383. doi:10. 1080/20008198.2017.1353383 Kessler, R. C.,
Angermeyer, M., Anthony, J. C., De Graaf, R., Demyttenaere, K., Gasquet,
I., de Girolamo, G., Gluzman, S., Gureje, O., Haro, J. M., Kawakami, N.,
Karam, A., Levinson, D., Mora, M. E. M., Browne, M. A. O., Posada-Villa,
J., Stein, D. J., Tsang, C. H. A., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., . . . Ustün, T.
B. (2007). Lifetime prevalence and age-ofonset distributions of mental
disorders in the World Health Organization's World Mental Health Survey
Initiative. World Psychiatry, 6(3), 168--176. Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W.
T., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and
comorbidity of twelve-month DSMIVdisorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication (NCS-R). Archives of General Psychiatry, 62,
617--627. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.617 Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A.,
Bromet, E., Hughes, M., & Nelson, C. B. (1996). Posttraumatic stress
disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 52, 1048--1060. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1995. 03950240066012
Kety, S. S., Rosenthal, D., Wender, P. H., & Schulsinger, F. (1968). The
types and prevalence of mental illness in the biological and adoptive
families of adopted schizophrenics. In D. Rosenthal & S. S. Kety (Eds.),
The transmission of schizophrenia (pp. 345--362). Oxford, UK: Pergamon
Press.

R-30

Keys, A., Brozek, J., Henschel, A., Mickelsen, O., & Taylor, H. L.
(1950). The biology of human starvation. Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press. Khoury, B., Lecomte, T., Fortin, G., Masse, M.,
Therien, P., Bouchard, V., Chapleau, M.-A., Paquin, K., & Hofmann, S. G.
(2013). Mindfulness-based therapy: A comprehensive meta-analysis.
Clinical Psychology Review, 33(6), 763--771.
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2013.05.005 Khundrakpam, B. S., Lewis, J. D., Reid,
A., Karama, S., Zhao, L., Chouinard-Decorte, F., Evans, A. C., & Brain
Development Cooperative Group (2017). Imaging structural covariance in
the development of intelligence. NeuroImage, 144, 227--240.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.08.041 Kiehl, K. A., Anderson, N. E.,
Aharoni, E., Maurer, J. M., Harenski, K. A., Rao, V., Claus, E. D.,
Harenski, C., Koenigs, M., Decety, J., Kosson, D., Wager, T. D.,
Calhoun, V. D., & Steele, V. R. (2018). Age of gray matters:
Neuroprediction of recidivism. NeuroImage: Clinical, 19, 813--823.
doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2018.05.036 Kiehl, K. A., Smith, A. M., Hare, R. D.,
Mendrek, A., Forster, B. B., Brink, J., & Liddle, P. F. (2001). Limbic
abnormalities in affective processing by criminal psychopaths as
revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. Biological
Psychiatry, 50(9), 677--684. doi:10.1016/S0006-3223(01)01222-7 Kiely,
E., & Robertson, L. (2016). How to spot fake news. https://www.factcheck
.org/2016/11/how-to-spot-fake-news/ Kikkert, M. A., Ribbers, G. M., &
Koudstaal, P. J. (2006). Alien hand syndrome in stroke: A report of 2
cases and review of the literature. Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, 87(5), 728--732. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2006.02.002 Kilham,
W., & Mann, L. (1974). Level of destructive obedience as a function of
transmitter and executant roles in the Milgram obedience paradigm.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 29, 696--702.
doi:10.1037/h0036636 Kim, H., & Markus, H. R. (1999). Deviance or
uniqueness, harmony or conformity? A cultural analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 785--800.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.77.4.785 King, J. E., & Figueredo, A. J. (1997).
The fivefactor model plus dominance in chimpanzee personality. Journal
of Research in Personality, 31(2), 257--271. doi:10.1006/ jrpe.1997.2179
King, P. M., & Kitchener, K. S. (2002). The Reflective Judgment Model:
Twenty years of research on epistemic cognition. In B. K. Hofer & P. R.
Pintrich (Eds.), Personal epistemology: The psychology of beliefs about
knowledge and knowing. (pp. 37--61). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Publishers. Kirk, K., Bailey, J., & Martin, N. (2000).
Etiology of male sexual orientation in

an Australian twin sample. Psychology, Evolution & Gender, 2(3),
301--311. doi:10.1080/14616660010024418 Klauke, B., Deckert, J., Reif,
A., Pauli, P., & Domschke, K. (2010). Life events in panic disorder---An
update on "candidate stressors." Depression and Anxiety, 27(8),
716--730. doi:10.1002/da.20667 Klein, R. A., Ratliff, K. A., Vianello,
M., Jr., R. B. A., Bahník, Š., Bernstein, M. J., Bocian, K., Brandt, M.
J., Brooks, B., Brumbaugh, C. C., Cimalcilar, Z., Chandler, J., Cheong,
W., Davis, W. E., Devos, T., Eisner, M., Frankowska, N., Furrow, D.,
Galliani, E. M., . . . Nosek, B. A. (2014). Investigating variation in
replicability. Social Psychology, 45(3), 142--152.
doi:10.1027/1864-9335/a000178 Klein, R. M., Christie, J., & Parkvall, M.
(2016). Does multilingualism affect the incidence of Alzheimer's
disease?: A worldwide analysis by country. SSM-Population Health, 2,
463--467. doi:10.1016/j.ssmph.2016.06.002 Klein, S. B., Cosmides, L., &
Tooby, J. (2002). Decisions and the evolution of memory: Multiple
systems, multiple functions. Psychological Review, 109, 306--329.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.109.2.306 Kleinmuntz, B., & Szucko, J. J. (1984).
A field study of the fallibility of polygraph lie detection. Nature,
308, 449--450. doi:10.1038/308449a0 Klima, E. S., & Bellugi, U. (1979).
The signs of language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard. Kline, P. (2013). Fact
and fantasy in Freudian theory. Philadephia, PA:Routledge. Klüver, H., &
Bucy, P. (1939). Preliminary analysis of functions of the temporal lobe
in monkeys. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 42, 979--1000.
doi:10.1001/ archneurpsyc.1939.02270240017001 Kneer, J., Jacobs, R., &
Ferguson, C. (2018). You could have just asked: The perception of
motivations to play violent video games. Studies in Media and
Communication, 6(2), 1--11. doi:10.11114/smc.v6i2.3389 Knickmeyer, R.,
Baron-Cohen, S., Raggatt, P., & Taylor, K. (2005). Foetal testosterone,
social relationships, and restricted interests in children. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 46(2),
198--210. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2004. 00349.x Knight, D. C., Nguyen,
H. T., & Bandettini, P. A. (2003). Expression of conditional fear with
and without awareness. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 100(25), 15280--15283.
doi:10.1073/pnas.2535780100 Knowlton, B. J., Squire, L. R., Paulsen, J.
S., Swerdlow, N. R., Swenson, M., & Butters, N. (1996). Dissociations
within nondeclarative memory in Huntington's Disease. Neuropsychology,
10(4), 538--548. doi:10.1037/0894-4105.10.4.538 Knyazev, G. G.,
Slobodskoj-Plusnin, J. Y., Bocharov, A. V., & Pylkova, L. V. (2011). The
default mode network and EEG alpha

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

oscillations: An independent component analysis. Brain Research, 1402,
67--79. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2011.05.052 Kobayakawa, T., Wakita, M.,
Saito, S., Gotow, N., Sakai, N., & Ogawa, H. (2005). Location of the
primary gustatory area in humans and its properties, studied by
magnetoencephalography. Chemical Senses, 30(suppl_1), i226-i227.
doi:10.1093/chemse/bjh196 Kochanek, K. D., Murphy, S. L., Xu, J., &
TejadaVera, B. (2017). Deaths: Final data for 2014. National Vital
Statistics Report, 65(4), 1--122. Koeda, T., Seki, A., Uchiyama, H., &
Sadato, N. (2011). Dyslexia: Advances in clinical and imaging studies.
Brain and Development, 33(3), 268--275. doi:10.1016/j.braindev.2010.
11.006 Koenigsberg, H. W., Teicher, M. H., Mitropoulou, V., Navalta, C.,
New, A. S., Trestman, R., & Siever, L. J. (2004). 24-h Monitoring of
plasma norepinephrine, MHPG, cortisol, growth hormone and prolactin in
depression. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 38(5), 503--511.
doi:10.1016/j. jpsychires.2004.03.006 Koffka, K. (1935). Principles of
Gestalt psychology. London: Lund Humphries. Kohlberg, L. (1981). The
philosophy of moral development: Essays on moral development (Vol. 1).
San Francisco: Harper & Row. Kohlberg, L. (1984). Essays on moral
development: The psychology of moral development (Vol. 2). San
Francisco: Harper & Row. Kohler, C. G., Walker, J. B., Martin, E. A.,
Healey, K. M., & Moberg, P. J. (2009). Facial emotion perception in
schizophrenia: A meta-analytic review. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36(5),
1009--1019 doi:10.1093/schbul/sbn192. Kohn, G., Apodaca, J., Munoz, M.,
Strebe, S., White, S., & Wright, T. (2019). FoxP2 expression and vocal
learning abilities in the budgerigar (Melopsittacus undulatus).
Integrative and Comparative Biology, 59, E127. Kokis, J. V., Macpherson,
R., Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2002). Heuristic and
analytic processing: Age trends and associations with cognitive ability
and cognitive styles. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 83(1),
26--52. doi:10.1016/S00220965(02)00121-2 Komarraju, M., Karau, S. J., &
Schmeck, R. R. (2009). Role of the Big Five personality traits in
predicting college students' academic motivation and achievement.
Learning and Individual Differences, 19(1), 47--52.
doi:10.1016/j.lindif.2008.07.001 Konopka, G., Bomar, J. M., Winden, K.,
Coppola, G., Jonsson, Z. O., Gao, F., Peng, S., Preuss, T. M.,
Wohlschlegel, J. A., & Geschwind, D. H. (2009). Human-specific
transcriptional regulation of CNS development genes by FOXP2. Nature,
462, 213--217. doi:10.1038/ nature08549 Konrath, S. H., O'Brien, E. H.,
& Hsing, C. (2011). Changes in dispositional empathy in American college
students over time: A meta-analysis. Personality and Social

Psychology Review, 15(2), 180--198. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0103469
Konrath, S., Meier, B. P., & Bushman, B. J. (2014). Development and
validation of the single item narcissism scale (SINS). PLOS One, 9(8),
e103469. doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0103469 Kopell, B. H., Machado, A.
G., & Rezai, A. R. (2005). Not your father's lobotomy: Psychiatric
surgery revisited. Clinical Neurosurgery, 52, 315--330. Kopelman, M. D.
(2002). Disorders of memory. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 125(10),
2152--2190. doi:10.1093/brain/awf229 Kosslyn, S. M. (1978). Measuring
the visual angle of the mind's eye. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 356--389.
doi:10.1016/00100285(78)90004-X Kosslyn, S. M. (1980). Image and mind.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Kotov, R., Gamez, W., Schmidt,
F., & Watson, D. (2010). Linking "big" personality traits to anxiety,
depressive, and substance use disorders: A meta-analysis. Psychological
Bulletin, 136(5), 768--821. doi:10.1037/a0020327 Kramer, A. D. I.,
Guillory, J. E., & Hancock, J. T. (2014). Experimental evidence of
massive-scale emotional contagion through social networks. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
111(24), 8788--8790. doi:10.1073/ pnas.1320040111 Kramer, B. J. (1993).
Expanding the conceptualization of caregiver coping: The importance of
relationship-focused coping strategies. Family Relations, 42(4),
383--391. doi:10.2307/585338 Kravitz, D. A., & Martin, B. (1986).
Ringelmann rediscovered: The original article. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 50, 936-- 941. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.50.5.936
Krebs, H., Hogan, N., Hening, W., Adamovich, S., & Poizner, H. (2001).
Procedural motor learning in Parkinson's disease. Experimental Brain
Research, 141, 425--437. doi:10.1007/s002210100871 Krijn, M., Emmelkamp,
P. M. G., Ólafsson, R. P., Bouwman, M., van Gerwen, L. J., Spinhoven,
P., Schuemie, M. J., & van der Mast, C. A. P. G. (2007). Fear of flying
treatment methods: Virtual reality exposure vs. cognitive behavioral
therapy. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 78(2), 121--128.
Kross, E., Gard, D., Deldin, P., Clifton, J., & Ayduk, O. (2012).
"Asking why" from a distance: Its cognitive and emotional consequences
for people with major depressive disorder. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 121(3), 559--569. doi:10.1037/a0028808 Krous, H. (2014).
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), sudden unexpected death in infancy
(SUDI), and sudden unexplained death in childhood (SUDC). In K. A.
Collins, & R. W. Byard (Eds.), Forensic pathology of infancy and
childhood (pp. 193--206). New York: Springer.
doi:10.1007/987-161779-403-2_32

Krueger, R. F., South, S., Johnson, W., & Iacono, W. (2008). The
heritability of personality is not always 50%: Gene-environment
interactions and correlations between personality and parenting. Journal
of Personality, 76(6), 1485-- 1522. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2008.00529.x
Kruger, J., & Dunning, D. (1999). Unskilled and unaware of it: How
difficulties in recognizing one's own incompetence lead to inflated
self-assessments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
1121--1134. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.77.6.1121 Krupenye, C., Kano, F.,
Hirata, S., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2016). Great apes anticipate that
other individuals will act according to false beliefs. Science,
354(6308), 110--114. doi:10.1126/science.aaf8110 Kuhl, B. A., Dudukovic,
N. M., Kahn, I., & Wagner, A. D. (2007). Decreased demands on cognitive
control reveal the neural processing benefits of forgetting. Nature
Neuroscience, 10(7), 908---914. doi:10.1038/nn1918 Kuhl, P. K. (2007).
Is speech learning 'gated' by the social brain? Developmental Science,
10(1), 110--120. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7687. 2007.00572.x Kuhl, P. K.
(2011). Early language learning and literacy: Neuroscience implications
for education. Mind, Brain, and Education, 5(3), 128-- 142.
doi:10.1111/j.1751-228X.2011.01121.x Kuhl, P. K., & Meltzoff, A. N.
(1982). The bimodal perception of speech in infancy. Science, 218(4577),
1138--1141. doi:10.1126/science.7146899 Kuhl, U., Neef, N. E., Kraft,
I., Schaadt, G., Dörr, L., Brauer, J., Czepezauer, I., Müller, B.,
Wilcke, A., Kirsten, H., Emmrich, F., Boltze, J., Friedericia, A. D., &
Skeide, M. A. (2020). The emergence of dyslexia in the developing brain.
NeuroImage, 211, 116633. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116633 Kuhn, D.
(2008). Formal operations from a twenty-first century perspective. Human
Development, 51(1), 48--55. doi:10.1159/000113155 Kulik, J. A., Mahler,
H. I., & Moore, P. J. (1996). Social comparison and affiliation under
threat: Effects on recovery from major surgery. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 71(5), 967--979. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.71.5.967
Kuo, L. E., Czarnecka, M., Kitlinska, J. B., Tilan, J. U., Kvetňanský,
R., & Zukowska, Z. (2009). Chronic stress, combined with a
high-fat/high-sugar diet, shifts sympathetic signaling toward
neuropeptide Y and leads to obesity and the metabolic syndrome. In R.
Kvetňanský, G. Aguilera, D. Goldstein, D. Jezova, O. Krizanova, E. L.
Sabban, & K. Pacak (Eds.), Stress, neurotransmitters, and hormones:
Neuroendocrine and genetic mechanisms. (pp. 232--237). New York, NY:
Wiley-Blackwell. Kurihara, T., Kato, M., Sakamoto, S., Reverger, R., &
Kitamura, T. (2000). Public attitudes towards the mentally ill: A
cross-cultural study between Bali and Tokyo. Psychiatry

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-31

and Clinical Neurosciences, 54, 547--552.
doi:10.1046/j.1440-1819.2000.00751.x Kurland, J. A. (1977). Kin
selection in the Japanese monkey. Contributions to Primatology, 12,
1--145. doi:10.1525/ aa.1980.82.1.02a00600 Kurzban, R., & Houser, D.
(2005). Experiments investigating cooperative types in humans: A
complement to evolutionary theory and simulations. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102,
1803--1807. doi:10.1073/ pnas.0408759102 Kuster, J. M. (2015). Folk
myths about stuttering. http://www.mnsu.edu/comdis/kuster
/Infostuttering/folkmyths.html Kwong, A. S. F., Pearson, R. M., Adams,
M. J., Northstone, K., Tilling, K., Smith, D., Fawns-Ritchie, C., Bould,
H., Warne, N., Zammit, S., Gunnell, D., Moran, P., Micali, N.,
Reichenberg, A., Hickman, M., Rai, D., Haworth, S., Campbell, A.,
Altschul, D., . . . Timpson, N. J. (2020). Mental health during the
COVID-19 pandemic in two longitudinal UK population cohorts. The British
Journal of Psychiatry, 1-27. doi:10.1192/bjp.2020.242 La Tona, G.,
Terranova, M. C., Vernuccio, F., Lo Re, G., Salerno, S., Zerbo, S., &
Argo, A. (2020). Lie detection: fMRI. In G. Lo Re, A. Argo, M. Midiri, &
C. Cattaneo (Eds.), Radiology in forensic medicine: From identification
to postmortem imaging (pp. 197--202).New York, NY: Springer
International Publishing. Ladd, G. W., Buhs, E. S., & Seid, M. (2000).
Children's initial sentiments about kindergarten: Is school liking an
antecedent of early classroom participation and achievement?
Merrill-Palmer Quarterly: Journal of Developmental Psychology, 46(2),
255--279. https://www.jstor.org/stable/23093716 Lafer-Sousa, R.,
Hermann, K. L., & Conway, B. R. (2015). Striking individual differences
in color perception uncovered by 'the dress' photograph. Current
Biology, 25(13), R545546. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.04.053 Lagerspetz, K.
M. J., & Lagerspetz, K. Y. H. (1983). Genes and aggression. In E. C.
Simmel, M. E. Hahn, & J. K. Walters (Eds.), Aggressive behavior: Genetic
and neural approaches (pp. 89--102). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Lahey, B.
B. (1995). Psychology: An Introduction (5th ed.). Dubuque, IA: WCB Brown
& Benchmark. Lahham, D. & Green, C. D. (2013). John Wallace Baird: The
first Canadian president of the American Psychological Association.
Canadian Psychology, 54, 124--132. doi:10.1037/a0026286 Lai, C. S.,
Fisher, S. E., Hurst, J. A., VarghaKhadem, F., & Monaco, A. P. (2001). A
forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language
disorder. Nature, 413(6855), 519--523. doi:10.1038/35097076 Lake, C. J.,
Carlson, J., Rose, A., & ChlevinThiele, C. (2019). Trust in name brand
assessments: The case of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. The
Psychologist-Manager

R-32

Journal, 22(2), 91--107. doi:10.1037/ mgr0000086 Lakin, J. L.,
Chartrand, T. L., & Arkin, R. M. (2008). I am too just like you:
Nonconscious mimicry as an automatic behavioral response to social
exclusion. Psychological Science.19(8), 816--822.
doi:10.1111/j.14679280.2008.02162.x Lane, A., Young, R., Baker, A., &
Angley, M. (2010). Sensory processing subtypes in autism: Association
with adaptive behavior. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
40(1), 112--122. doi:10.1007/ s10803-009-0840-2 Lane, R. E. (2001).
Self-reliance and empathy: The enemies of poverty--and of the poor.
Political Psychology, 22(3), 473--492. doi:10.1111/0162-895X.00250
Langa, K. M., Larson, E. B., Crimmins, E. M., Faul, J. D., Levine, D.
A., Kabeto, M. U., & Weir, D. R. (2017). A comparison of the prevalence
of dementia in the United States in 2000 and 2012. JAMA Internal
Medicine, 177(1), 51--58. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed. 2016.6807 Lange, C.
G. (1885/1912). The mechanisms of the emotions. In B. Rand (Ed.), The
classical psychologists (pp. 672--284). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Langenecker, S. A., Weisenbach, S. L., Giordani, B., Briceño, E. M.,
Guidotti Breting, L. M., Schallmo, M.-P., Leon, H. M., Noll, D. C.,
Zubieta, J.-K., Schteingart, D. E., & Starkman, M. N. (2012). Impact of
chronic hypercortisolemia on affective processing. Neuropharmacology,
61(2), 217--225. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.07.006 Langleben, D.,
Hakun, J., Seelig, D., Wang, A., Ruparel, K., Bilker, W., & Gur, R.
(2016). Polygraphy and functional magnetic resonance imaging in lie
detection: A controlled blind comparison using the concealed information
test. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 77(10),1372--1830.
doi:10.4088/JCP.15m09785 Langleben, D. D., & Moriarty, J. C. (2013).
Using brain imaging for lie detection: Where science, law, and policy
collide. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 19(2), 222--234.
doi:10.1037/a0028841 Langley, J. (1921). The autonomic nervous system.
Cambridge, UK: Heffer & Sons. Langlois, J. H., Roggman, L. A., &
RieserDanner, L. A. (1990). Infants' differential social responses to
attractive and unattractive faces. Developmental Psychology, 26(1),
153--159. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.26.1.153 Långström, N., Rahman, Q.,
Carlström, E., & Lichtenstein, P. (2010). Genetic and environmental
effects on same-sex sexual behavior: A population study of twins in
Sweden. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39(1), 75--80.
doi:10.1007/s10508-008-9386-1 Largo, R. H., Molinari, L., von
Siebenthal, K., & Wolfensberger, U. (1996). Does a profound change in
toilet-training affect development of bowel and bladder control?
Developmental Medicine

and Child Neurology, 38, 1106--1116.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-8749.1996.tb15074.x Larner, A. J. (2014). Effect size
(Cohen's d) of cognitive screening instruments examined in pragmatic
diagnostic accuracy studies. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders
Extra, 4(2), 236--241. doi:10.1159/000363735 Lassek, W. D., & Gaulin, S.
J. C. (2009). Costs and benefits of fat-free muscle mass in men:
Relationship to mating success, dietary requirements, and native
immunity. Evolution and Human Behavior, 30(5), 322--328.
doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2009.04.002 Latané, B., & Darley, J. M.
(1968). Group inhibition of bystander intervention in emergencies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 10, 215--221. doi:10.1037/
h0026570 Latané, B., Williams, K., & Harkins, S. (1979). Many hands make
light the work: The causes and consequences of social loafing. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 822--832.
doi:10.1037/00223514.37.6.822 Lau, J. (2019). Improve our thinking
skills. https://philosophy.hku.hk/think/critical /improve.php Laumann,
E. O., Paik, A., Glasser, D. B., Kang, J.-H., Wang, T., Levinson, B.,
Moreira, Jr, E. D., Nicolosi, A., & Gingell, C. (2006). A cross-national
study of subjective sexual well-being among older women and men:
Findings from the global study of sexual attitudes and behaviors.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 35(2), 145--159. doi:10.1007/
s10508-005-9005-3 Law, M., & Tang, J. (1995). An analysis of the
effectiveness of interventions intended to help people stop smoking.
Archives of Internal Medicine, 155(18), 1933--1941.
doi:10.1001/archinte.1995.00430180025004 Layous, K., Nelson, S. K.,
Oberle, E., SchonertReichl, K. A., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2012). Kindness
counts: Prompting prosocial behavior in preadolescents boosts peer
acceptance and well-being. PLoS One, 7(12), e51380.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0051380 Lazar, S. W., Bush, G., Gollub, R. L.,
Fricchione, G. L., Khalsa, G., & Benson, H. (2000). Functional brain
mapping of the relaxation response and meditation. NeuroReport, 11(7),
1581--1585. Lazar, S. W., Kerr, C. E., Wasserman, R. H., Gray, J. R.,
Greve, D. N., Treadway, M. T., McGarvey, M., Quinn, B. T., Dusek, J. A.,
Benson, H., Rauch, S. L., Moore, C. I., & Fischl, B. (2005). Meditation
experience is associated with increased cortical thickness. NeuroReport,
16(17), 1893. Lazarus, A. A. (2005). Multimodal therapy. In J. C.
Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration
(pp. 105--120). New York: Oxford. Lazarus, R. S. (1966). Psychological
stress and the coping process. New York: McGraw-Hill. Lazer, D. M.,
Baum, M. A., Benkler, Y., Berinsky, A. J., Greenhill, K. M., Menczer,
F., Metzger,

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

M. J., Nyhan, B., Pennycook, G., Rothschild, D., Schudson M., Sloman, S.
A., Sunstein, C. R., Thorson, E. A., Watts, D. J., & Zittrain, J. L.
(2018). The science of fake news. Science, 359(6380), 1094--1096.
doi:10.1126/science.aao2998 Le, N., Loll, F., & Pinkwart, N. (2013).
Operationalizing the continuum between well-defined and ill-defined
problems for educational technology. IEEE Transactions on Learning
Technologies, 6(3), 258--270. doi:10.1109/TLT.2013.16 Lea, M., & Spears,
R. (1991). Computermediated communication, de-individuation and group
decision-making. International Journal of Man Machine Studies, 34,
283--301. doi:10.1016/0020-7373(91)90045-9 Leary, M. R., & Downs, D. L.
(1995). Interpersonal functions of the self-esteem motive: The
self-esteem system as a sociometer. In M. H. Kernis (Ed.), Efficacy,
agency, and self-esteem (pp. 123--144). NewYork: Plenum. Leary, M. R.,
Tambor, E. S., Terdal, S. K., & Downs, D. L. (1995). Self-esteem as an
interpersonal monitor: The sociometer hypothesis. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 68, 518--530. doi:10.1037/00223514.68.3.518
LeBlanc, S. A. (2003). Constant battles: The myth of the peaceful, noble
savage. New York: St. Martin's Press. Lecomte, T., Dumais, A., Dugré, J.
R., & Potvin, S. (2018). The prevalence of substance-induced psychotic
disorder in methamphetamine misusers: A meta-analysis. Psychiatry
Research, 268, 189--192. doi:10.1016/j.psychres. 2018.05.033 LeDoux, J.
E. (2000). Emotion circuits in the brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience,
23, 155--184. doi:10.1146/annurev. neuro.23.1.155 LeDoux, J. E. (2014).
Coming to terms with fear. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 111(8), 2871--2878.
doi:10.1073/ pnas.1400335111 LeDoux, J. E., Cicchetti, P., Xagoraris,
A., & Romanski, L. M. (1990). The lateral amygdaloid nucleus: Sensory
interface of the amygdala in fear conditioning. Journal of Neuroscience,
10, 1062--1069. doi:10.1523/ JNEUROSCI.10-04-01062.1990 Lee, H., Park,
S.-A., Lee, Y.-A., & Cameron, G. T. (2010). Assessment of motion media
on believability and credibility: An exploratory study. Public Relations
Review, 36, 310--312. doi:10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.04.003 Lee, J.-Y.,
Bachrach, D. G., & Lewis, K. (2014). Social network ties, transactive
memory, and performance in groups. Organization Science, 25(3),
951--967. doi:10.1287/orsc.2013.0884 Lee, P. A., Fuqua, J. S., Houk, C.
P., Kogan, B. A., Mazur, T., & Caldamone, A. (2020). Individualized care
for patients with intersex (disorders/differences of sex development):
part I. Journal of Pediatric Urology, 16(2), 230---237.
doi:10.1016/j.jpurol.2020.02.013

Leichsenring, F., & Rabung, S. (2008). Effectiveness of long-term
psychodynamic psychotherapy: A meta-analysis. JAMA, 300(13), 1551--1565.
doi:10.1001/ jama.300.13.1551 Leichtman, M. (1995). Behavioral
observations. In J. N. Butcher (Ed.), Clinical personality assessment:
Practical approaches (pp. 251--266). New York: Oxford University Press.
Leiknes, K. A., Jarosh-von Schweder, L., & Høie, B. (2012). Contemporary
use and practice of electroconvulsive therapy worldwide. Brain and
Behavior, 2(3), 283--344. doi:10.1002/ brb3.37 LePine, J. A., & Van
Dyne, L. (1998). Predicting voice behavior in work groups. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 83, 853--868. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.83.6.853 LePort,
A. K. R., Mattfeld, A. T., DickinsonAnson, H., Fallon, J. H., Stark, C.
E. L., Kruggel, F., Cahill, L., & McGaugh, J. L. (2012). Behavioral and
neuroanatomical investigation of Highly Superior Autobiographical Memory
(HSAM). Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 98(1), 78--92.
doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2012.05.002 Lerner, M. J., & Miller, D. T. (1978).
Just world research and the attribution process: Looking back and ahead.
Psychological Bulletin, 85, 1030--1051. doi:10.1037/00332909.85.5.1030
Leroi, A. M. (2006). The future of neo-eugenics. EMBO Reports, 7(12),
1184-1187. doi:10.1038/sj.embor.7400860 Leslie, M., Turton, R., Burgess,
E., Nazar, B. P., & Treasure, J. (2018). Testing the addictive appetite
model of binge eating: The importance of craving, coping, and reward
enhancement. European Eating Disorders Review, 26(6), 541--550.
doi:10.1002/erv.2621 Lester, P. B., Harms, P. D., Bulling, D. J.,
Herian, M. N., & Spain, S. M. (2011). Evaluation of relationships
between reported resilience and soldier outcomes. Report 1: Negative
outcomes (suicide, drug use, and violent crimes): DTIC Document.
http://www.dtic.mil/docs /citations/ADA538618 Leucht, S., Cipriani, A.,
Spineli, L., Mavridis, D., Örey, D., Richter, F., Samara, M., Barbui,
C., Engel, R. R., Geddes, J. R., Kissling, W., Stapf, M. P., Lässig, B.,
Salanti, G., & Davis, J. M. (2013). Comparative efficacy and
tolerability of 15 antipsychotic drugs in schizophrenia: A
multiple-treatments meta-analysis. The Lancet, 382(9896), 951--962.
doi:10.1016/ S0140-6736(13)60733-3 Leung, A. K.-y., Kim, Y.-H., Zhang,
Z.-X., Tam, K.-P., & Chiu, C.-y. (2011). Cultural construction of
success and epistemic motives moderate American-Chinese differences in
reward allocation biases. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 43(1),
46--52. doi:10.1177/0022022111405660 LeVay, S. (1991). A difference in
hypothalamic structure between heterosexual and homosexual men. Science,
253, 1034--1037. doi:10.1126/science.1887219

Levenson, R. W., Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1990). Voluntary facial
action generates emotion-specific autonomic nervous system activity.
Psychophysiology, 27, 363--384. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8986.1990.tb02330.x
Levine, M., Taylor, P. J., & Best, R. (2011). Third parties, violence,
and conflict resolution. Psychological Science, 22(3), 406--412.
doi:10.1177/0956797611398495 Levinson, D., Darrow, C. M., Klein, E. B.,
Levinson, M. H., & McKee, B. (1976). Periods in the adult development of
men: Ages 18--14. The Counseling Psychologist, 6(1), 21--25.
doi:10.1177/001100007600600105 Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social
science: Selected theoretical papers (D. Cartwright, Ed.). New York:
Harper. Lewis, M., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1979). Social cognition and the
acquisition of self. New York: Plenum Press. Li, H., Bu, Q., Chen, B.,
Shao, X., Hu, Z., Deng, P., Zhu, R., Li, Y., Zhang, B., Hou, J., Du, C.,
Zhao, Q., Fu, D., Zhao, Y., & Cen, X. (2014). Mechanisms of metabonomic
for a gateway drug: Nicotine priming enhances behavioral response to
cocaine with modification in energy metabolism and neurotransmitter
level. PLoS One, 9(1), e87040. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0087040 Li,
S.-C., Lindenberger, U., Hommel, B., Aschersleben, G., Prinz, W., &
Baltes, P. B. (2004). Transformations in the couplings among
intellectual abilities and constituent cognitive processes across the
life span. Psychological Science, 15(3), 155--163.
doi:10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.01503003.x Li, W., Ma, L., Yang, G., & Gan,
W.-B. (2017). REM sleep selectively prunes and maintains new synapses in
development and learning. Nature Neuroscience, 20, 427--437.
doi:10.1038/nn.4479 Libet, B., Gleason, C. A., Wright, E. W., & Pearl,
D. K. (1993). Time of conscious intention to act in relation to onset of
cerebral activity (readinesspotential). In B. Libet (Ed.),
Neurophysiology of consciousness (pp. 249--268). Boston, MA: Birkhäuser
Boston. Libon, D. J., McMillan, C., Avants, B., Boller, A., Morgan, B.,
Burkholder, L., Chandrasekaran, K., Elman, L., McCluskey, L., &
Grossman, M. (2012). Deficits in concept formation in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Neuropsychology, 26(4), 422--429.
doi:10.1037/a0028668 Lichtenberg, J. D., Lachmann, F. M., & Fosshage, J.
L. (2013). The clinical exchange: Techniques derived from self and
motivational systems (Vol. 16): Routledge. Lichtenstein, E., Harris, D.
E., Birchler, G. R., Wahl, J. M., & Schmahl, D. P. (1973). Comparison of
rapid smoking, warm, smoky air, and attention placebo in the
modification of smoking behavior. Joumal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 40, 92--98. doi:10.1037/h0034039

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-33

Liddon, L., Kingerlee, R., & Barry, J. A. (2018). Gender differences in
preferences for psychological treatment, coping strategies, and triggers
to help-seeking. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57(1), 42--58.
doi:10.1111/bjc.12147 Lieberman, J. D., Solomon, S., Greenberg, J., &
McGregor, H. A. (1999). A hot new way to measure aggression: Hot sauce
allocation. Aggressive Behavior, 25(5), 331--348.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)10982337(1999)25:5\<331::AID-AB2\>3.0.CO;2-1 Light, K.
C., Grewen, K. M., & Amico, J. A. (2005). More frequent partner hugs and
higher oxytocin levels are linked to lower blood pressure and heart rate
in premenopausal women. Biological Psychology, 69(1), 5--21.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2004.11.002 Liguori, A., Hughes, J. R., & Grass,
J. A. (1997). Absorption and subjective effects of caffeine from coffee,
cola and capsules. Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, 58(3),
721--726. doi:10.1016/s00913057(97)00003-8 Likert, R. (1932). A
technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychology, 140,
44--53. Lilly, I. C. (1967). The mind of the dolphin. New York:
Doubleday. Lin, L.-Y., Wang, J., Ou-yang, X.-Y., Miao, Q., Chen, R.,
Liang, F.-X., Zhang, Y.-P., Tang, Q., & Wang, T. (2020). The immediate
impact of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak on subjective
sleep status. Sleep Medicine, S1389-9457(20)30221-30225
doi:10.1016/j.sleep.2020.05.018 Lindqvist, A., Renström, E. A., &
Gustafsson Sendén, M. (2019). Reducing a male bias in language?
Establishing the efficiency of three different gender-fair language
strategies. Sex Roles, 81(1), 109--117. doi:10.1007/ s11199-018-0974-9
Linehan, M. M., Armstrong, H. E., Suarez, A., Allmon, D., & Heard, H. L.
(1991). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of chronically parasuicidal
borderline patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48(12), 1060--
1064. doi:10.1001/archpsyc. 1991.01810360024003 Linehan, M. M., Comtois,
K. A., Murray, A. M., Brown, M. Z., Gallop, R. J., Heard, H. L.,
Korslund, K. E., Tutek, D. A., Reynolds, S. K., & Lindenboim, N. (2006).
Two-year randomized controlled trial and follow-up of dialectical
behavior therapy vs therapy by experts for suicidal behaviors and
borderline personality disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(7),
757--766. doi:10.1001/ archpsyc.63.7.757 Li, S.-C., Lindenberger, U.,
Hommel, B., Aschersleben, G., Prinz, W., & Baltes, P. B. (2004).
Transformations in the couplings among intellectual abilities and
constituent cognitive processes across the life span. Psychological
Science, 15(3),155--163. doi:10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.01503003.x Little,
A. C., Jones, B. C., DeBruine, L. M., & Feinberg, D. R. (2008). Symmetry
and

R-34

sexual dimorphism in human faces: Interrelated preferences suggest both
signal quality. Behavioral Ecology, 19(4), 902--908.
doi:10.1093/beheco/arn049 Liu, C. H., Stevens, C., Wong, S. H., Yasui,
M., & Chen, J. A. (2019). The prevalence and predictors of mental health
diagnoses and suicide among US college students: Implications for
addressing disparities in service use. Depression and Anxiety, 36(1),
8--17. doi:10.1002/da.22830 Liversedge, T., & Hirsch, N. (2010). Coma.
Anaesthesia & Intensive Care Medicine, 11(9), 337--339.
doi:10.1016/j.mpaic.2010. 05.008 Livingstone, M. S., & Hubel, D. H.
(1984). Anatomy and physiology of a color system in the primate visual
cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 4, 309--356. doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.04-01-00309.1984 Livshits, G., Kato, B. S., Wilson, S. G., &
Spector, T. D. (2007). Linkage of genes to total lean body mass in
normal women. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 92(8),
3171--3176. doi:10.1210/ jc.2007-0418 Lo, M.-T., Hinds, D. A., Tung, J.
Y., Franz, C., Fan, C.-C., Wang, Y., Smeland, O. B., Schork, A.,
Holland, D., Kauppi, K., Sanyal, N., Escott-Price, V., Smith, D. J.,
O'Donovan, M., Stefansson, H., Bjornsdottir, G., Thorgeirsson, T. E.,
Stefansson, K., McEvoy, L. K., . . . Chen, C.-H (2017). Genome-wide
analyses for personality traits identify six genomic loci and show
correlations with psychiatric disorders. Nature Genetics, 49(1),
152--156. doi:10.1038/ng.3736 Lodder, G. M. A., Scholte, R. H. J.,
Goossens, L., Engels, R. C. M. E., & Verhagen, M. (2016). Loneliness and
the social monitoring system: Emotion recognition and eye gaze in a
real-life conversation. British Journal of Psychology, 107(1), 135--153.
doi:10.1111/ bjop.12131 Loe, I., & Feldman, H. (2007). Academic and
educational outcome of children with ADHD. Journal of Pediatric
Psychology, 32(6), 643--654. doi:10.1016/j. ambp.2006.05.005 Loehlin, J.
C., McCrae, R. R., Costa Jr, P. T., & John, O. P. (1998). Heritabilities
of common and measure-specific components of the Big Five personality
factors. Journal of Research in Personality, 32(4), 431--453.
doi:10.1006/ jrpe.1998.2225 Loftus, E. F. (1979). Eyewitness testimony.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Loftus, E. F. (1997). Creating
false memories. Scientific American, 277(3), 70--75. Loftus, E. F.
(2003). Our changeable memories: Legal and practical implications.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 231--234. doi:10.1038/nrn1054 Loftus, E.
F., & Palmer, J. C. (1974). Reconstruction of automobile destruction: An
example of the interaction between language and memory. Journal of
Verbal

Learning & Verbal Behavior, 13, 585--589.
doi:10.1016/S0022-5371(74)80011-3 Logue, M. W., van Rooij, S. J. H.,
Dennis, E. L., Davis, S. L., Hayes, J. P., Stevens, J. S., Densmore, M.,
Haswell, C. C., Ipser, J., Koch, S. B. J., Korgaonkar, M., Lebois, L. A.
M., Peverill, M., Baker, J. T., Boedhoe, P. S. W., Frijling, J. L.,
Gruber, S. A., Harpaz-Rotem, I., Jahanshad, N., . . . Morey, R. A.
(2018). Smaller hippocampal volume in posttraumatic stress disorder: A
multisite ENIGMAPGC study: Subcortical volumetry results from
posttraumatic stress disorder consortia. Biological Psychiatry, 83(3),
244--253. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.09.006 Lopez, R. B., Hofmann, W.,
Wagner, D. D., Kelley, W. M., & Heatherton, T. F. (2014). Neural
predictors of giving in to temptation in daily life. Psychological
Science, 25(7), 1337--1344. doi:10.1177/0956797614531492 Lorenz, T.,
Rullo, J., & Faubion, S. (2016). Antidepressant-induced female sexual
dysfunction. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 91(9), 1280--1286.
doi:10.1016/j.mayocp. 2016.04.033 Lovaas, O. I. (1996). The UCLA young
autism model of service delivery. In C. Maurice, G. Green, & S. C. Luce
(Eds.), Behavioral intervention for young children with autism: A manual
for parents and professionals (pp. 241--248). Austin, TX: PRO-ED, Inc.
Lovaas, O. I., Freitag, G., Kinder, M. I., Rubenstein, B. D., Schaeffer,
B., & Simmons, J. Q. (1966). Establishment of social reinforcers in two
schizophrenic children on the basis of food. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 4(2), 109--125. doi:10.1016/0022-0965(66)90011-7
Lovett, M. C. (2002). Problem solving. In H. Pashler & D. Medin (Eds.),
Steven's handbook of experimental psychology, Vol. 2: Memory and
cognitive processes (3rd ed., pp. 317--362). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley &
Sons. Lovie, A. D., & Lovie, P. (1993). Charles Spearman, Cyril Burt,
and the origins of factor analysis. Journal of the History of the
Behavioral Sciences, 29(4), 308--321. doi:10.1002/1520-6696(199310)29:4
\<308::aid-jhbs2300290402\>3.0.co;2-p Lowry, R. (Ed.) (1973). A. H.
Maslow: An intellectual portrait. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole. Lubow, R.
E., & Moore, A. U. (1959). Latent inhibition: The effect of
nonreinforced exposure to the conditioned stimulus. Journal of
Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 52, 415--419. doi:10.1037/
h0046700 Lubow, R. E., Ingberg-Sachs, Y., Salstein-Orda, N., & Gewirtz,
J. C. (1992). Latent inhibition in low and high "psychotic-prone" normal
subjects. Personality and Individual Differences, 15, 563--572.
doi:10.1016/01918869(92)90197-W Lucatch, A. M., Lowe, D. J. E., Clark,
R. C., Kozak, K., & George, T. P. (2018). Neurobiological determinants
of tobacco smoking in schizophrenia. Frontiers in

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Psychiatry, 9(672). doi:10.3389/fpsyt. 2018.00672 Lund, R., Christensen,
U., Nilsson, C. J., Kriegbaum, M., & Rod, N. H. (2014). Stressful social
relations and mortality: A prospective cohort study. Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health, 68(8), 720--727.
doi:10.1136/jech-2013-203675 Luo, S., & Zhang, G. (2009). What leads to
romantic attraction: Similarity, reciprocity, security, or beauty?
Evidence from a speed-dating study. Journal of Personality, 77(4),
933--964. doi:10.1111/j.14676494.2009.00570.x Luo, S., Zhang, G.,
Watson, D., & Snider, A. G. (2010). Using cross-sectional couple data to
disentangle the causality between positive partner perceptions and
marital satisfaction. Journal of Research in Personality, 44(5),
665--668. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2010.08.006 Luo, Y., & Waite, L. J. (2014).
Loneliness and mortality among older adults in China. The Journals of
Gerontology: Series B, 69(4), 633--645. doi:10.1093/geronb/gbu007 Luo,
Y., Hawkley, L. C., Waite, L. J., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2012). Loneliness,
health, and mortality in old age: A national longitudinal study. Social
Science & Medicine, 74(6), 907--914. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.
2011.11.028 Luyckx, K., Tildesley, E. A., Soenens, B., Andrews, J. A.,
Hampson, S. E., Peterson, M., & Duriez, B. (2011). Parenting and
trajectories of children's maladaptive behaviors: A 12-year prospective
community study. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology,
40(3), 468--478. doi:10.1080/15374416.2011.563470 Lydholm, C. N.,
Köhler-Forsberg, O., Nordentoft, M., Yolken, R. H., Mortensen, P. B.,
Petersen, L., & Benros, M. E. (2019). Parental infections before,
during, and after pregnancy as risk factors for mental disorders in
childhood and adolescence: A nationwide Danish study. Biological
Psychiatry, 85(4), 317--325. doi:10.1016/j. biopsych.2018.09.013 Lykken,
D. T. (1982). Fearlessness: Its carefree charm and deadly risks.
Psychology Today, 16, 20--28. Lykken, D., & Tellegen, A. (1996).
Happiness is a stochastic phenomenon. Psychological Science, 7,
186--189. doi:10.1111/j. 1467-9280.1996.tb00355.x Lynn, M., & Simons, T.
(2000). Predictors of male and female servers' average tip earnings.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 30, 241--252.
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2000. tb02314.x Lyu, W., & Wehby, G. L. (2020).
Community use of face masks and COVID-19: Evidence from a natural
experiment of state mandates in the US. Health Affairs, 39(8).
doi:10.1377/ hlthaff.2020.00818 Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., & Diener, E.
(2005). The benefits of frequent positive affect: Does happiness lead to
success?

Psychological Bulletin, 131(6), 803--855.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.131.6.803 Maccoby, E. E., & Martin, J. A. (1983).
Socialization in the context of the family: Parent-child interaction. In
P. Mussen & E. M. Hetherington (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology,
Vol. IV: Socialization, personality, and social development
(pp. 1--101). New York: Wiley. Maccoby, M. (2003). The productive
narcissist: The promise and perils of visionary leadership. New York:
Broadway Books. Macleod, J., Davey Smith, G., Heslop, P., Metcalfe, C.,
Carroll, D., & Hart, C. (2002). Psychological stress and cardiovascular
disease: Empirical demonstration of bias in a prospective observational
study of Scottish men. British Medical Journal, 324, 1247--1252.
doi:10.1136/bmj.324.7348.1247 Maddi, S. R. (2006). Hardiness: The
courage to grow from stresses. The Journal of Positive Psychology, 1(3),
160--168. doi:10.1080/17439760600619609 Madigan, S., Browne, D., Racine,
N., Mori, C., & Tough, S. (2019). Association between screen time and
children's performance on a developmental screening test. JAMA
Pediatrics, 173(3), 244--250. doi:10.1001/ jamapediatrics.2018.5056
Maeda, T., Ohno, M., Matsunobu, A., Yoshihara, K., & Yabe, N. (1991). A
cytogenetic survey of 14,835 consecutive liveborns. Japanese Journal of
Human Genetics, 36(1), 117--129. doi:10.1007/BF01876812 Maenner, M. J.,
Shaw, K. A., & Baio, J. (2020). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorder
among children aged 8 years---autism and developmental disabilities
monitoring network, 11 sites, United States, 2016. MMWR Surveillance
Summaries, 69(4), 1. Maggard, M. A., Shugarman, L. R., Suttorp, M.,
Maglione, M., Sugerman, H. J., Livingston, E. H., Nguyen, N. T., Li, Z.,
Mojica, W. A., Hilton, L., Rhodes, S., Morton, S. C., & Shekelle, P. G.
(2005). Meta-analysis: Surgical treatment of obesity. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 142(7), 547--559. doi:10.7326/00034819-142-7-200504050-00013
Maher, B. A. (2001). Music, the brain, and Williams syndrome: rare
disorder offers insight into the genetic basis of cognition. (focus on
Genes and Genomics). The Scientist, 15(23), 20--22. Mahon, B. Z., &
Caramazza, A. (2009). Concepts and categories: A cognitive
neuropsychological perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 27--51.
doi:10.1146/annurev .psych.60.110707.163532 Mahoney, D. E., & Green, A.
L. (2020). Psychosurgery: History of the neurosurgical management of
psychiatric disorders. World Neurosurgery, 137, 327--334. doi:10.1016/j.
wneu.2020.01.212 Maier, S. F., & Seligman, M. E. (2016). Learned
helplessness at fifty: Insights from neuroscience. Psychological review,
123(4), 349--367. doi:10.1037/rev0000033

Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1986). Discovery of an
insecure-disorganized/disoriented attachment pattern. In T. B. Brazelton
& M. W. Yogman (Eds.), Affective development in infancy. (pp. 95--124).
Westport, CT US: Ablex Publishing. Mak, L. E., Minuzzi, L., MacQueen,
G., Hall, G., Kennedy, S. H., & Milev, R. (2017). The default mode
network in healthy individuals: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Brain Connectivity, 7(1), 25--33. doi:10.1089/ brain.2016.0438
Makrygianni, M. K., Gena, A., Katoudi, S., & Galanis, P. (2018). The
effectiveness of applied behavior analytic interventions for children
with autism spectrum disorder: A meta-analytic study. Research in Autism
Spectrum Disorders, 51, 18--31. doi:10.1016/j. rasd.2018.03.006 Malhi,
G. S., & Outhred, T. (2016). Therapeutic mechanisms of lithium in
bipolar disorder: Recent advances and current understanding. CNS Drugs,
30(10), 931--949. doi:10.1007/s40263-016-0380-1 Malle, B. F. (2006). The
actor-observer asymmetry in attribution: A (surprising) metaanalysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 132(6), 895--919.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.132.6.895 Malmberg, K. J., Raaijmakers, J. G. W.,
& Shiffrin, R. M. (2019). 50 years of research sparked by Atkinson and
Shiffrin (1968). Memory and Cognition, 47, 561--574.
doi:10.3758/s13421-019-00896-7 Maloney, S. E., Akula, S., Rieger, M. A.,
McCullough, K. B., Chandler, K., Corbett, A. M., McGowin, A. E., &
Dougherty, J. D. (2018). Examining the reversibility of longterm
behavioral disruptions in progeny of maternal SSRI exposure. Eneuro,
5(4). doi:10.1523/ENEURO.0120-18.2018 Malt, B. C., & Smith, E. E.
(1984). Correlated properties in natural categories. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23(2), 250--269.
doi:10.1016/S00225371(84)90170-1 Maner, J. K. (2016). Into the wild:
Field research can increase both replicability and realworld impact.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 66, 100--106. doi:10.1016/j.
jesp.2015.09.018 Mann, T. C., & Ferguson, M. J. (2017). Reversing
implicit first impressions through reinterpretation after a two-day
delay. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 68, 122--127.
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2016.06.004 Manning, R., Levine, M., & Collins, A.
(2007). The Kitty Genovese murder and the social psychology of helping:
The parable of the 38 witnesses. American Psychologist, 62(6), 555--562.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.62.6.555 Mannix, R., Meehan III, W. P., &
Pascual-Leone, A. (2016). Sports-related concussions-- media, science
and policy. Nature Reviews Neurology, 12(8), 486--490.
doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2016.99 Månsson, H. (2000). Childhood stuttering:
Incidence and development. Journal

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-35

of Fluency Disorders, 25(1), 47--57. doi:10.1016/S0094-730X(99)00023-6
Mantell, D. M. (1971). The potential for violence in Germany. Journal of
Social Issues, 27, 101--112. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.1971.tb00680.x
Mäntylä, T., & Nilsson, L.-G. (1988). Cue distinctiveness and
forgetting: Effectiveness of self-generated retrieval cues in delayed
recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 14(3), 502--509. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.14.3.502 Marconi, A.,
Di Forti, M., Lewis, C. M., Murray, R. M., & Vassos, E. (2016).
Meta-analysis of the association between the level of cannabis use and
risk of psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 42(5), 1262--1269.
doi:10.1093/ schbul/sbw003 Margittai, Z., Strombach, T., van Wingerden,
M., Joels, M., Schwabe, L., & Kalenscher, T. (2015). A friend in need:
Time-dependent effects of stress on social discounting in men. Hormones
and Behavior, 73, 75--82. doi:10.1016/j.yhbeh.2015.05.019 Margoni, F.,
Baillargeon, R., & Surian, L. (2018). Infants distinguish between
leaders and bullies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 115(38), E8835-E8843.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1801677115 Mark, K. P., Garcia, J. R., & Fisher, H. E.
(2015). Perceived emotional and sexual satisfaction across sexual
relationship contexts: Gender and sexual orientation differences and
similarities. The Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality, 24(2), 120--130.
doi:10.3138/cjhs.242-A8 Mark, K. P., Vowels, L. M., & Murray, S. H.
(2018). The impact of attachment style on sexual satisfaction and sexual
desire in a sexually diverse sample. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy,
44(5), 450--458. doi:10.1080 /0092623X.2017.1405310 Marks, G. A.,
Shaffery, J. P., Oksenberg, A., Speciale, S. G., & Roffwarg, H. P.
(1995). A functional role for REM sleep in brain maturation. Behavioural
Brain Research, 69(1), 1--11. doi:10.1016/0166-4328(95)00018-O Markus,
H. (1977). Self-schemata and processing information about the self.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(2), 63--78.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.35.2.63 Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991).
Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion, and
motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 223--253.
doi:10.1037/0033295X.98.2.224 Marmot, M. G., Rose, G., Shipley, M., &
Hamilton, P. J. (1978). Employment grade and coronary heart disease in
British civil servants. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health,
32(4), 244--249. doi:10.1136/jech.32.4.244 Marmot, M. G., Shipley, M.
J., & Rose, G. (1984). Inequalities in death---specific explanations of
a general pattern? The Lancet, 323(8384), 1003--1006. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(84)92337-7 Marner, L., Nyengaard, J. R., Tang, Y., &
Pakkenberg, B. (2003). Marked loss of

R-36

myelinated nerve fibers in the human brain with age. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 462(2), 144--152. doi:10.1002/cne.10714 Marsh, A.
A., & Blair, R. J. R. (2008). Deficits in facial affect recognition
among antisocial populations: A meta-analysis. Neuroscience
&Biobehavioral Reviews, 32(3), 454--465.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2007.08.003 Marsh, B. U., Pezdek, K., & Ozery,
D. H. (2016). The cross-race effect in face recognition memory by
bicultural individuals. Acta Psychologica, 169, 38--44. doi:10.1016/j.
actpsy.2016.05.003 Marsh, E. J., Cantor, A. D., & M. Brashier, N.
(2016). Believing that humans swallow spiders in their sleep: False
beliefs as side effects of the processes that support accurate
knowledge. In B. H. Ross (Ed.), Psychology of learning and motivation
(Vol. 64, pp. 93--132). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press. Marshall, G. D.,
& Zimbardo, P. G. (1979). Affective consequences of inadequately
explained physiological arousal. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 37(6), 970--988. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.37.6.970
Marsvenus.com (n.d.). Bio. https://www .marsvenus.com/john-gray/
Martial, C., Cassol, H., Charland-Verville, V., Pallavicini, C., Sanz,
C., Zamberlan, F., Vivot, R. M., Erowid, F., Erowid, E., Laureys, S.,
Greyson, B., & Tagliazucchi, E. (2019). Neurochemical models of
near-death experiences: A large-scale study based on the semantic
similarity of written reports. Consciousness and Cognition, 69, 52--69.
doi:10.1016/j.concog.2019.01.011 Martin, A., Wiggs, C. L., Ungerleider,
L. G., & Haxby, J. V. (1996). Neural correlates of category-specific
knowledge. Nature, 379, 649--652. doi:10.1038/379649a0 Martin, G. N.
(2019). (Why) do you like scary movies? A review of the empirical
research on psychological responses to horror films. Frontiers in
Psychology, 10, 2298. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02298 Masi, C. M., Chen,
H.-Y., Hawkley, L. C., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2011). A metaanalysis of
interventions to reduce loneliness. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 15(3), 219--266. doi:10.1177/1088868310377394 Maslow, A. H.
(1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 50,
370--396. doi:10.1037/h0054346 Maslow, A. H. (1950). Self-actualizing
people: A study of psychological health. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Mason, M. F., Norton, M. I., Van Horn, J. D., Wegner, D. M., Grafton, S.
T., & Macrae, C. N. (2007). Wandering minds: The default network and
stimulus-independent thought. Science, 315(5810), 393--395. doi:10.1126/
science.1131295 Mason, W. A., Capitanio, J. P., Machado, C. J., Mendoza,
S. P., & Amaral, D. G. (2006). Amygdalectomy and responsiveness to
novelty in rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta): Generality and individual
consistency

of effects. Emotion, 6, 73--81. doi:10.1037/1528-3542.6.1.73 Masten, A.
S., Hubbard, J. J., Gest, S. D., Tellegen, A., Garmezy, N., & Ramirez,
M. (1999). Competence in the context of adversity: Pathways to
resilience and maladaptation from childhood to late adolescence.
Development and Psychopathology, 11(1), 143--169.
doi:10.1017/s0954579499001996 Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001).
Attending holistically versus analytically: Comparing the context
sensitivity of Japanese and Americans. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 81(5), 922--934. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.81.5.922 Matsa, K.
E., & Lu, K. (2016). 10 facts about the changing digital news landscape.
Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact
-tank/2016/09/14/facts-about-the-changing -digital-news-landscape/
Matsumoto, D., & Hwang, H. S. (2011). Cooperation and competition in
intercultural interactions. International Journal of Intercultural
Relations, 35(5), 677--685.doi:10.1016/j.ijintrel.2011.02.017 Matsumoto,
D., & Willingham, B. (2009). Spontaneous facial expressions of emotion
of congenitally and noncongenitally blind individuals. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 96(1), 1--10. doi:10.1037/a0014037
Matthews-Ewald, M. R., Zullig, K. J., & Ward, R. M. (2014). Sexual
orientation and disordered eating behaviors among selfidentified male
and female college students. Eating Behaviors, 15(3), 441--444.
doi:http:// dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eatbeh.2014.05.002 Matthews, C. E.,
Chen, K. Y., Freedson, P. S., & al., e. (2008). Amount of time spent in
sedentary behaviors in the United States, 2003--2004. American Journal
of Epidemiology, 167, 875-- 881. doi:10.1093/aje/kwm390 Maurer, D., &
Maurer, C. (1988). The world of the newborn. New York: Basic Books.
Maxwell, R., Merckelbach, H., Lilienfeld, S. O., & Lynn, S. J. (2018).
The treatment of dissociation: An evaluation of effectiveness and
potential mechanisms. In D. David, S. J. Lynn, & G. H. Montgomery
(Eds.), Evidence-based psychotherapy: The state of the science and
practice (pp. 329--361). Wiley-Blackwell. Mayberg, H. S., Lozano, A. M.,
Voon, V., McNeely, H. E., Seminowicz, D., Hamani, C., . . . Kennedy, S.
H. (2005). Deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression.
Neuron, 45(5), 651--660. doi:10.1016/j. neuron.2005.02.014 Mayer, D., &
Salovey, P. (1993). The intelligence of emotional ntelligence.
Intelligence, 17, 433--442. doi:10.1016/0160-2896(93)90010-3 Mayer, J.
(1955). Regulation of energy intake and the body weight: The glucostatic
theory and the lipostatic hypothesis. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 63, 15--43. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1955.tb36543.x Mazur, A.,
& Booth, A. (1998). Testosterone and dominance in men. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 21, 353--363. doi:10.1017/ S0140525X98001228

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Mazur, A., & Michalek, J. (1998). Marriage, divorce and male
testosterone. Social Forces, 77, 315--331. doi:10.1093/sf/77.1.315
Mazur, A., & Mueller, E. (1996). Facial dominance. In A. Somit & S.
Peterson (Eds.), Research in biopolitics (Vol. 4, pp. 99--111). London:
JAI Press. Mazure, C. M. (1998). Life stressors as risk factors in
depression. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 5, 291--313.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2850.1998.tb00151.x Mazza, S., Gerbier, E., Gustin,
M.-P., Kasikci, Z., Koenig, O., Toppino, T. C., & Magnin, M. (2016).
Relearn faster and retain longer: Along With practice, sleep makes
perfect. Psychological Science, 27(10), 1321--1330.
doi:10.1177/0956797616659930 McArthur, L. Z., & Berry, D. S. (1987).
Cross-cultural agreement in perceptions of babyfaced adults. Journal of
CrossCultural Psychology, 18(2), 165--192.
doi:10.1177/0022002187018002003 McCain, J. L., & Campbell, W. K. (2016).
Narcissism and social media use: A metaanalytic review. Psychology of
Popular Media Culture, 7(3), 308--327. doi:10.1037/ ppm0000137 McCall,
M. (1997). The effects of physical attractiveness on gaining access to
alcohol: When social policy meets social decision making. Addiction, 92,
597--600. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.1997.tb02916.x McCann, D., Barrett,
A., Cooper, A., Crumpler, D., Dalen, L., Grimshaw, K., Kitchin, E., Lok,
K., Porteous, L., Prince, E., Sonuga-Barke, E., Warner, J. O., &
Stevenson, J. (2007). Food additives and hyperactive behaviour in
3-year-old and 8/9-year-old children in the community: A randomised,
double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. The Lancet, 370(9598),
1560--1567. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(07)61306-3 McCarley, R. W. (2007).
Neurobiology of REM and NREM sleep. Sleep Medicine, 8(4), 302--330.
doi:10.1016/j.sleep.2007.03.005 McCarthy-Jones, S., Smailes, D., Corvin,
A., Gill, M., Morris, D. W., Dinan, T. G., Murphy, K. C., O'Neill, F.
A., Waddington, J. L., Australian Schizophrenia Research Bank, Donohoe,
G., & Dudley, R. (2017). Occurrence and co-occurrence of hallucinations
by modality in schizophrenia-spectrum disorders. Psychiatry Research,
252, 154--160. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.102 McClelland, D. C.
(1985). Human motivation. Glenview, IL: Scott, Foresman. McClung, C. A.
(2007). Circadian genes, rhythms and the biology of mood disorders.
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 114(2), 222--232.
doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera. 2007.02.003 McClure, S. M., Li, J., Tomlin,
D., Cypert, K. S., Montague, L. M., & Montague, P. R. (2004). Neural
correlates of behavioral preference for culturally familiar drinks.
Neuron, 44(2), 379--387. doi:10.1016/j. neuron.2004.09.019

McComb, K., Baker, L., & Moss, C. (2006). African elephants show high
levels of interest in the skulls and ivory of their own species. Biology
Letters, 2(1), 26--28. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2005.0400 McConnell, R. A., &
Clark, T. K. (1991). National Academy of Sciences' opinion on
parapsychology. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research,
71, 261--271. McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1997). Personality
trait structure as a human universal. American Psychologist, 52(5),
509--516. doi:10.1037/0003-066x.52.5.509 McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T.
(1985). Updating Norman's 'adequacy taxonomy': Intelligence and
personality dimensions in natural language and in questionnaires.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 710--721.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.49.3.710 McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1987).
Validation of the five-factor model of personality across instruments
and observers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 81--90.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.52.1.81 McCrae, R. R., Kurtz, J. E., Yamagata, S.,
& Terracciano, A. (2011). Internal consistency, retest reliability, and
their implications for personality scale validity. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 15(1), 28--50. doi:10.1177/1088868310366253
McDonald, N. D., Rands, S. A., Hill, F., Elder, C., & Ioannou, C. C.
(2016). Consensus and experience trump leadership, suppressing
individual personality during social foraging. Science Advances, 2(9),
e1600892. doi:10.1126/sciadv.1600892 McDuffie, A., Thurman, A. J.,
Channell, M. M., & Abbeduto, L. (2017). Language disorders in children
with intellectual disability of genetic origin. In R. G. Schwarz (Ed.),
Handbook of child language disorders (2nd ed., pp. 52--81). Milton Park,
UK: Taylor and Francis. McEwen, B. S., & Gianaros, P. J. (2011).
Stressand allostasis-induced brain plasticity. Annual Review of
Medicine, 62(1), 431--445. doi:10.1146/annurev-med-052209-100430 McGann,
J. P. (2017). Poor human olfaction is a 19th-century myth. Science,
356(6338), eaam7263. doi:10.1126/science.aam7263 McGraw, A. P., Mellers,
B. A., & Tetlock, P. E. (2005). Expectations and emotions of Olympic
athletes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41(4), 438--446.
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2004.09.001 McGuffin, P., Reveley, A., & Holland, A.
(1982). Identical triplets: non-identical psychosis? British Journal of
Psychiatry, 140, 1--6. doi:10.1192/bjp.140.1.1 McHugh, R. K., Whitton,
S. W., Peckham, A. D., Welge, J. A., & Otto, M. W. (2013). Patient
preference for psychological vs. pharmacological treatment of
psychiatric disorders: A meta-analytic review. The Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 74(6), 595--602. doi:10.4088/JCP.12r07757 McKay, D. (2011).
Methods and mechanisms in the efficacy of psychodynamic

psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 66(2), 147--148.
doi:10.1037/a0021195 McKay, K. E., Halperin, J. M., Schwartz, S. T., &
Sharma, V. (1994). Developmental analysis of three aspects of
information processing: Sustained attention, selective attention, and
response organization. Developmental Neuropsychology, 10(2), 121--132.
doi:10.1080/87565649409540572 McLean, D. E., & Link, B. G. (1994).
Unraveling complexity: Strategies to refine concepts, measures, and
research designs in the study of life events and mental health. In W. R.
Avison & I. H. Gotlib (Eds.), Stress and mental health: Contemporary
issues and prospects for the future (pp. 15--42). New York: Plenum
Press. McNamara, R. K., & Welge, J. A. (2016). Meta-analysis of
erythrocyte polyunsaturated fatty acid biostatus in bipolar disorder.
Bipolar Disorders, 18(3), 300--306. doi:10.1111/bdi.12386 McNulty, J.
K., Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2008). Beyond initial attraction:
Physical attractiveness in newlywed marriage. Journal of Family
Psychology, 22(1), 135--143. doi:10.1037/0893-3200.22.1.135 McPherson,
M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Brashears, M. E. (2006). Social isolation in
America: Changes in core discussion networks over two decades. American
Sociological Review, 71(3), 353--375. doi:10.1177/000312240607100301
McQueeny, T., Schweinsburg, B. C., Schweinsburg, A. D., Jacobus, J.,
Bava, S., Frank, L. R., & Tapert, S. F. (2009). Altered white matter
integrity in adolescent binge drinkers. Alcoholism: Clinical and
Experimental Research, 33(7), 1278--1285.
doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2009.00953.x Meaney, M. J. (2010). Epigenetics
and the biological definition of gene x environment interactions. Child
Development, 81(1), 41--79. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009. 01381.x Mecca,
A. M., Smelser, N. J., & Vasconcellos, J. (Eds.). (1989). The social
importance of self-esteem. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Medda, P., Perugi, G., Zanello, S., Ciuffa, M., & Cassano, G. (2009).
Response to ECT in bipolar I, bipolar II and unipolar depression.
Journal of Affective Disorders, 118(1), 55--59.
doi:10.1016/j.jad.2009.01.014 Meddis, R., Pearson, A., & Langford, G.
(1973). An extreme case of healthy insomnia. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, 35(2), 213--214.
doi:10.1016/0013-4694(73)90180-6 Medvec, V. H., Madey, S. F., &
Gilovich, T. (1995). When less is more: Counterfactual thinking and
satisfaction among Olympic medalists. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 69(4), 603--610. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.69.4.603 Meeus, W. H.
J., & Raaijmakers, Q. A. W. (1995). Obedience in modern society: The
Utrecht

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-37

studies. Journal of Social Issues, 51, 155--175.
doi:10.1111/j.1540-4560.1995.tb01339.x Meissner, C. A., & Brigham, J. C.
(2001). Thirty years of investigating the own-race bias in memory for
faces: A meta-analytic review. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7(1),
3--35. doi:10.1037/1076-8971.7.1.3 Meltzer, H. Y., Bobo, W. V., Lee, M.
A., Cola, P., & Jayathilake, K. (2010). A randomized trial comparing
clozapine and typical neuroleptic drugs in non-treatment-resistant
schizophrenia. Psychiatry Research, 177(3), 286--293.
doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2010.02.018 Meltzoff, A. N., Kuhl, P. K.,
Movellan, J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2009). Foundations for a new science
of learning. Science, 325(5938), 284--288. doi:10.1126/science.1175626
Melzack, R., & Wall, P. D. (1965). Pain mechanisms: A new history.
Science, 150, 971--979. doi:10.1126/science.150.3699.971 Melzack, R., &
Wall, P. D. (1983). The challenge of pain. New York: Basic Books.
Mendel, G. (1866). Experiments in plant hybridization (W. Bateson & R.
Blumberg, Trans.). http://www.esp.org/foundations
/genetics/classical/gm-65-f.pdf Mennella, J. A., & Beauchamp, G. K.
(1996). The human infant's response to vanilla flavors in mother's milk
and formula. Infant Behavior and Development, 19, 13--19.
doi:10.1016/S0163-6383(96)90040-5 Mennella, J. A., Jagnow, C. P., &
Beauchamp, G. K. (2001). Prenatal and postnatal flavor learning by human
infants. Pediatrics, 107, E88. doi:10.1542/peds.107.6.e88 Mental Health
Foundation. (2020). Loneliness during coronavirus.
https://www.mentalhealth .org.uk/coronavirus/coping-with-loneliness
Menzel, E. W. (1978). Cognitive mapping in chimpanzees. In S. H. Hulse,
H. Fowler, & W. K. Honig (Eds.), Cognitive processes in animal behavior
(pp. 375--422). Hillsdale, N. J.: Erlbaum. Menzies, L., Chamberlain, S.
R., Laird, A. R., Thelen, S. M., Sahakian, B. J., & Bullmore, E. T.
(2008). Integrating evidence from neuroimaging and neuropsychological
studies of obsessive-compulsive disorder: The orbitofronto-striatal
model revisited. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 32(3),
525--549. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev. 2007.09.005 Mery, F., & Kawecki, T.
J. (2005). A cost of long-term memory in Drosophila. Science, 308, 1148.
doi:10.1126/science.1111331 Merzenich, M. M., & Jenkins, W. M. (1993).
Reorganization of cortical representations of the hand following
alterations of skin inputs induced by nerve injury, skin island
transfers, and experience. Journal of Hand Therapy, 6, 89--104.
doi:10.1016/S08941130(12)80290-0 Mestre-Bach, G., Jiménez-Murcia, S.,
Fernández-Aranda, F., & Potenza, M. N. (2019). Addressing controversies
surrounding food addiction. In P. Cottone, V. Sabino, C. F. Moore, & G.
F. Koob (Eds.), Compulsive eating behavior and food

R-38

addiction (pp. 419--448). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press. Meyer-Bahlburg,
H. F., Dalke, K. B., Berenbaum, S. A., Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., Hines, M.,
& Schober, J. M. (2016). Gender assignment, reassignment and outcome in
disorders of sex development: Update of the 2005 Consensus Conference.
Hormone Research in Paediatrics, 85(2), 112--118. doi:10.1159/000442386
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F., Dolezal, C., Baker, S. W., & New, M. I. (2008).
Sexual orientation in women with classical or non-classical congenital
adrenal hyperplasia as a function of degree of prenatal androgen excess.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 37(1), 85--99.
doi:10.1007/s10508-007-9265-1 Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F., Dolezal, C., Baker,
S. W., Carlson, A. D., Obeid, J. S., & New, M. I. (2004). Prenatal
androgenization affects gender-related behavior but not gender identity
in 5--12-year-old girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 33(2), 97--104. doi:10.1023/ b:aseb.0000014324.25718.51
Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Domes, G., Kirsch, P., & Heinrichs, M. (2011).
Oxytocin and vasopressin in the human brain: Social neuropeptides for
translational medicine. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 12(9), 524--538.
doi:10.1038/nrn3044 Meyer, D. E., & Schvanevelt, R. W. (1971).
Facilitation in recognizing pairs of words: Evidence of a dependence
between retrieval operations. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 90,
227--234. doi:10.1037/h0031564 Micco, J. A., Henin, A., Mick, E., Kim,
S., Hopkins, C. A., Biederman, J., & HirshfeldBecker, D. R. (2009).
Anxiety and depressive disorders in offspring at high risk for anxiety:
A meta-analysis. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23(8), 1158--1164.
doi:10.1016/j. janxdis.2009.07.021 Micheau, J., & Marighetto, A. (2011).
Acetylcholine and memory: A long, complex and chaotic but still living
relationship. Behavioural Brain Research, 221(2), 424--429.
doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2010.11.052 Micheli, L., Ceccarelli, M., D'Andrea, G.,
& Tirone, F. (2018). Depression and adult neurogenesis: Positive effects
of the antidepressant fluoxetine and of physical exercise. Brain
Research Bulletin, 143, 181--193. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.09.002
Mieda, M., Williams, S. C., Richardson, J. A., Tanaka, K., & Yanagisawa,
M. (2006). The dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus as a putative
food-entrainable circadian pacemaker. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 103(32),
12150--12155. doi:10.1073/pnas.0604189103 Milani, R. V., & Lavie, C. J.
(2009). Reducing psychosocial stress: A novel mechanism of improving
survival from exercise training. The American Journal of Medicine,
122(10), 931--938. doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2009.03.028 Milevsky, A.,
Schlechter, M., Netter, S., & Keehn, D. (2007). Maternal and paternal
parenting

styles in adolescents: Associations with self-esteem, depression and
life-satisfaction. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 16(1), 39--47.
doi:10.1007/s10826-006-9066-5 Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of
obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 371--378.
doi:10.1037/ h0040525 Milgram, S. (1974). Obedience to authority. New
York: Harper & Row. Milich, R., & Pelham, W. E. (1986). Effects of sugar
ingestion on the classroom and playground behavior of attention deficit
disordered boys. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54,
714--718. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.54.5.714 Milinski, M., Semmann, D., &
Jrambeck, H.-J. (2002). Reputation helps solve the 'tragedy of the
commons'. Nature, 415, 424--426. doi:10.1038/415424a Miller, B. L.,
Seeley, W. W., Mychack, P., Rosen, H. J., Mena, I., & Boone, K. (2001).
Neuroanatomy of the self: Evidence from patients with frontotemporal
dementia. Neurology, 57(5), 817--821. doi:10.1212/WNL.57.5.817 Miller,
D. J., Duka, T., Stimpson, C. D., Schapiro, S. J., Baze, W. B.,
McArthur, M. J., Fobbs, A. J., Sousa, A. M. M., Šestan, N., Wildman, D.
E., Lipovitch, L., Kuzawa, C. W., Hof, P. R., & Sherwood, C. C. (2012).
Prolonged myelination in human neocortical evolution. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109(41),
16480--16485. doi:10.1073/ pnas.1117943109 Miller, D. T., & Ross, M.
(1975). Self-serving biases in the attribution of causality: Fact or
fiction? Psychological Bulletin, 82, 213--225 doi:10.1037/h0076486.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some
limits on our capacity for processing information. Psychological Review,
63, 81--97. doi:10.1037/ h0043158 Miller, J. D., Hoffman, B. J.,
Gaughan, E. T., Gentile, B., Maples, J., & Keith Campbell, W. (2011).
Grandiose and vulnerable narcissism: A nomological network analysis.
Journal of Personality, 79(5), 1013--1042.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2010.00711.x Miller, J. D., Lynam, D. R., Hyatt,
C. S., & Campbell, W. K. (2017). Controversies in narcissism. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, 13(1), 291--315. doi:10.1146/
annurevclinpsy-032816-045244 Miller, J. G., & Bersoff, D. M. (1992).
Culture and moral judgment: How are conflicts between justice and
interpersonal responsibilities resolved? Journal of Personality & Social
Psychology, 62(4), 541--554. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.62.4.541 Miller, K.
D., Choi, S., & Pentland, B. T. (2014). The role of transactive memory
in the formation of organizational routines. Strategic Organization,
12(2), 109--133. doi:10.1177/1476127014521609 Miller, N. E. (1944).
Experimental studies in conflict. In J. M. Hunt (Ed.), Personality and

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

the behavior disorders. New York: Ronald Press. Miller, R. (2007).
Theory of the normal waking EEG: From single neurones to waveforms in
the alpha, beta and gamma frequency ranges. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 64(1), 18--23. doi:10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2006. 07.009
Miller, S. L., Zielaskowski, K., & Plant, E. A. (2012). The basis of
shooter biases: Beyond cultural stereotypes. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 38(10), 1358--1366. doi:10.1037/h0076486 Million,
M., Angelakis, E., Maraninchi, M., Henry, M., Giorgi, R., Valero, R.,
Vialettes, B., & Raoult, D. (2013). Correlation between body mass index
and gut concentrations of Lactobacillus reuteri, Bifidobacterium
animalis, Methanobrevibacter smithii and Escherichia coli. International
Journal of Obesity, 37(11), 1460--1466. doi:10.1038/ijo.2013.20
Millward, C., Ferriter, M., Calver, S., & Connell-Jones, G. (2008).
Gluten- and casein-free diets for autistic spectrum disorder. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2, CD003498.
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003498.pub3 Milner, B. (1966). Amnesia following
operation on the temporal lobe. In C. W. M. Whitty & O. L. Zangwill
(Eds.), Amnesia (pp. 109--133). London: Butterworth. Milner, B. (2005).
The medial temporallobe amnesic syndrome. The Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 28, 599--611. doi:10.1016/j.psc.2005.06.002 Mindess, A.
(2006). Reading between the signs (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Intercultural
Press. Mineka, S., Sutton, J., Craske, M. G., Hermans, D., &
Vansteenwegen, D. (2006). Contemporary learning theory perspectives on
the etiology of fears and phobias. In M. G. Craske, D. Hermans, & D.
Vansteenwegen (Eds.), Fear and learning: From basic processes to
clinical implications. (pp. 75--97). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and
assessment. New York: Wiley. Mischel, W. (2004). Toward an integrative
science of the person. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 1--22.
doi:10.1146/annurev .psych.55.042902.130709 Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y.
(1995). A cognitiveaffective system theory of personality:
Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in
personality structure. Psychological Review, 102(2), 246--268.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.102.2.246 Mitchell, B. A., & Lovegreen, L. D.
(2009). The empty nest syndrome in midlife families. Journal of Family
Issues, 30(12), 1651--1670. doi:10.1177/0192513x09339020 Mitchell, K.
R., Mercer, C. H., Prah, P., Clifton, S., Tanton, C., Wellings, K., &
Copas, A. (2019). Why do men report more oppositesex sexual partners
than women? Analysis of the gender discrepancy in a British National
Probability Survey. The Journal of

Sex Research, 56(1), 1--8. doi:10.1080/002244 99.2018.1481193 Mogensen,
D. M., Pihl, M. B., Skakkebæk, N. E., Andersen, H. R., Juul, A., Kyhl,
H. B., Swan, S., Kristensen, D. M., Andersen, M. S., Lind, D. V., &
Jensen, T. K. (2017). Prenatal exposure to antifungal medication may
change anogenital distance in male offspring: A preliminary study.
Environmental Health, 16(1), 68. doi:10.1186/s12940-017-0263-z
Moldofsky, H., & Scarisbrick, P. (1976). Induction of neurasthenic
musculoskeletal pain syndrome by selective sleep stage deprivation.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 38(1), 35--44
doi:10.1097/00006842-19760100000006. Molendijk, M., Molero, P., Ortuño
SánchezPedreño, F., Van der Does, W., & Angel Martínez-González, M.
(2018). Diet quality and depression risk: A systematic review and
dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 226, 346--354. doi:10.1016/j. jad.2017.09.022 Molina, E.,
Cervilla, J., Rivera, M., Torres, F., Bellón, J. Á., Moreno, B., King,
M., Nazareth, I., & Gutiérrez, B. (2011). Polymorphic variation at the
serotonin 1-A receptor gene is associated with comorbid depression and
generalized anxiety. Psychiatric Genetics, 21(4), 195--201.
doi:10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283457a48 Monson, C. M., Taft, C. T., & Fredman,
S. J. (2009). Military-related PTSD and intimate relationships: From
description to theory-driven research and intervention development.
Clinical Psychology Review, 29(8), 707--714.
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2009.09.002 Montpetit, M. A., Bergeman, C. S.,
Deboeck, P. R., Tiberio, S. S., & Boker, S. M. (2010).
Resilience-as-process: Negative affect, stress, and coupled dynamical
systems. Psychology and Aging, 25(3), 631--640. doi:10.1037/ a0019268
Moon, C. (2017). Prenatal experience with the maternal voice. In M.
Filippa, P. Kuhn, & B. Westrup (Eds.), Early vocal contact and preterm
infant brain development: Bridging the gaps between research and
practice (pp. 25--37). New York, NY: Springer International Publishing.
Moon, C., Cooper, R. P., & Fifer, W. P. (1993). Two-day-olds prefer
their native language. Infant Behavior and Development, 16, 495--500.
doi:10.1016/0163-6383(93)80007-U Moon, H. Y., Becke, A., Berron, D.,
Becker, B., Sah, N., Benoni, G., Janke, E., Lubejko, S. T., Greig, N.
H., Mattison, J. A., Duzel, E., & van Praag, H. (2016). Running-induced
systemic cathepsin B secretion is associated with memory function. Cell
Metabolism, 24(2), 332--340. doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2016.05.025 Moon, R. Y.,
& Task Force on Sudden Infant Death Syndrome. (2016). SIDS and other
sleep-related infant deaths: Evidence base for 2016 updated
recommendations for a safe infant sleeping environment. Pediatrics,
e20162940. doi:10.1542/peds.2016-2940

Moore, D. J., Mowen, J. C., & Reardon, R. (1994). Multiple sources in
advertising appeals: When product endorsers are paid by the advertising
sponsor. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 22(3), 234--243.
doi:10.1177/0092070394223004 Moors, A., Ellsworth, P. C., Scherer, K.
R., & Frijda, N. H. (2013). Appraisal theories of emotion: State of the
art and future development. Emotion Review, 5(2), 119--124.
doi:10.1177/1754073912468165 Morgan, E. M. (2013). Contemporary issues
in sexual orientation and identity development in emerging adulthood.
Emerging Adulthood, 1(1), 52--66. doi:10.1177/2167696812469187 Morin, C.
M., & Carrier, J. (2020). The acute effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on
insomnia and psychological symptoms. Sleep Medicine, S1389-9457(20)30261
-6. doi:10.1016/j.sleep.2020.06.005 Morres, I. D., Hatzigeorgiadis, A.,
Stathi, A., Comoutos, N., Arpin-Cribbie, C., Krommidas, C., &
Theodorakis, Y. (2019). Aerobic exercise for adult patients with major
depressive disorder in mental health services: A systematic review and
metaanalysis. Depression and Anxiety, 36(1), 39--53.
doi:10.1002/da.22842 Morris, M. W., & Peng, K. (1994). Culture and
cause: American and Chinese attributions for social and physical events.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 949--971.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.67.6.949 Morse, S., & Gergen, K. J. (1970). Social
comparison, self-consistency, and the concept of self. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 16, 148--156. doi:10.1037/ h0029862
Moscovici, S., & Zavalloni, M. (1969). The group as a polarizer of
attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 12, 125--135.
doi:10.1037/h0027568 Moscovici, S., Lage, S., & Naffrechoux, M. (1969).
Influence of a consistent minority on the responses of a majority in a
color perception task. Sociometry, 32, 365--380. doi:10.2307/2786541
Moscovitch, M., Nadel, L., Winocur, G., Gilboa, A., & Rosenbaum, R. S.
(2006). The cognitive neuroscience of remote episodic, semantic and
spatial memory. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 16(2), 179--190.
doi:10.1016/j.conb.2006.03.013 Moskalenko, Y., Mozhaev, S., Weinstein,
G., Kravenchko, T., Riabchikova, N., Feilding, A., Halvorson, P.,
Semernia, V., Panov, A., & Medvedev, S. (2008). Effects of cranial
trepanation on the functioning of cerebrovascular and cerebrospinal
fluid systems. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 69(3),
302--303. doi:10.1016/j.ijpsycho. 2008.05.301 Mössner, R., Schuhmacher,
A., SchulzeRauschenbach, S., Kühn, K.-U., Rujescu, D., Rietschel, M.,
Zobel, A., Franke, P., Wölwer, W., Gaebel, W., Häfner, H., Wagner, M., &
Maier, W. (2008). Further evidence for a REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-39

functional role of the glutamate receptor gene GRM3 in schizophrenia.
European Neuropsychopharmacology, 18(10), 768--772.
doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2008.05.007 Mota-Rolim, S. A., & Araujo, J. F.
(2013). Neurobiology and clinical implications of lucid dreaming.
Medical Hypotheses, 81(5), 751--756. doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2013.04.049
Mrazek, A. J., Chiao, J. Y., Blizinsky, K. D., Lun, J., & Gelfand, M. J.
(2013). The role of culture--gene coevolution in morality judgment:
examining the interplay between tightness--looseness and allelic
variation of the serotonin transporter gene. Culture and Brain, 1(2),
100--117. doi:10.1007/s40167013-0009-x Muehlenbein, M. P., & Bribiescas,
R. G. (2005). Testosterone-mediated immune functions and male life
histories. American Journal of Human Biology, 17(5), 527--558.
doi:10.1002/ajhb.20419 Mueller, P. A., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2014). The
pen is mightier than the keyboard: Advantages of longhand over laptop
note taking. Psychological Science, 25(6), 1159--1168.
doi:10.1177/0956797614524581 Mundorf, N., Weaver, J., & Zillmann, D.
(1989). Effects of gender roles and self perceptions on affective
reactions to horror films. Sex Roles, 20(11), 655--673. doi:10.1007/
BF00288078 Murdoch, B. B., Jr. (1962). The serial position effect in
free recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64, 482--488.
doi:10.1037/ h0045106 Murphy, J. M., Gilligan, C., & Puka, B. (1994).
Moral development in late adolescence and adulthood: A critique and
reconstruction of Kohlberg's theory. New York, NY Garland Publishing.
Murphy, K. D., Rose, M. W., Chinkes, D. L., Meyer III, W. J., Herndon,
D. N., Hawkins, H. K., & Sanford, A. P. (2007). The effects of
gammahydroxybutyrate on hypermetabolism and wound healing in a rat model
of large thermal injury. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery,
63(5), 1099--1107. doi:10.1097/TA.0b013e318157d9d0 Murray, H. A. (1938).
Explorations in personality. New York: Oxford University Press. Murray,
S. L., Holmes, J. G., Gellavia, G., Griffin, D. W., & Dolderman, D.
(2002). Kindred spirits? The benefits of egocentrism in close
relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82,
563--581. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.82.4.563 Murty, V. P., Calabro, F., &
Luna, B. (2016). The role of experience in adolescent cognitive
development: Integration of executive, memory, and mesolimbic systems.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 70, 46--58.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.07.034 Myers & Briggs Foundation (2020).
Misconceptions about the MBTI Assessment. https://www.myersbriggs.org
/more-about-personality-type/misconceptions -about-the-MBTI-assessment/.

R-40

Myers, C. R. (1982). Psychology at Toronto. In M. J. Wright & C. R.
Myers (Eds.) A History of Academic Psychology in Canada (pp. 68--99)
Toronto: C. F. Hogrefe. Myers, D. G. (1993). The pursuit of happiness.
New York: Avon. Nadig, A. S., Ozonoff, S., Young, G. S., Rozga, A.,
Sigman, M., & Rogers, S. J. (2007). A prospective study of response to
name in infants at risk for autism. JAMA Pediatrics, 161(4), 378--383.
doi:10.1001/archpedi.161.4.378 Nandam, L. S., Brazel, M., Zhou, M., &
Jhaveri, D. J. (2020). Cortisol and major depressive
disorder-translating findings from humans to animal models and back.
Frontiers in Psychiatry, 10, 974--974. doi:10.3389/ fpsyt.2019.00974
Nardi, B., Marini, A., Turchi, C., Arimatea, E., Tagliabracci, A., &
Bellantuono, C. (2013). Role of 5-HTTLPR polymorphism in the development
of the inward/outward personality organization: A genetic association
study. PloS One, 8(12), e82192. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0082192
National Guild of Hypnotists. (2016). 2016 NGH state law guide.
https://ngh.net/wp -content/uploads/2010/11/StateLawGuide.pdf National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHHD). (2003). SIDS:
Back to sleep campaign. http://www.nichd .nih.gov/sids/ National
Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). (2009). What causes ADHD? http://www
.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/attention
-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder/what-causes -adhd.shtml National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA). (2020). Alcohol facts
and statistics. https://www.niaaa.nih.gov
/publications/brochures-and-fact-sheets /alcohol-facts-and-statistics
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse & Alcoholism. (2018). Alcohol facts
and statistics \| National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA). https://www .niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/overview
-alcohol-consumption/alcohol-facts-and -statistics National Sleep
Foundation. (2009). Restless leg syndrome (RLS) and sleep. http://www
.sleepfoundation.org/article/sleep-related
-problems/restless-legs-syndrome-rls-and -sleep Nave, G., Jung, W. H.,
Karlsson Linnér, R., Kable, J. W., & Koellinger, P. D. (2019). Are
bigger brains smarter? Evidence from a large-scale preregistered study.
Psychological Science, 30(1), 43--54. doi:10.1177/0956797618808470 Neal,
D. T., & Chartrand, T. L. (2011). Embodied emotion perception:
Amplifying and dampening facial feedback modulates emotion perception
accuracy. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2(6), 673--678.
doi:10.1177/1948550611406138 Nedeltcheva, A. V., Kilkus, J. M.,
Imperial, J., Schoeller, D. A., & Penev, P. D. (2010).

Insufficient sleep undermines dietary efforts to reduce adiposity.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 153, 435--441. doi:10.7326/0003
-4819-153-7-201010050-00006 Nee, D. E., Brown, J. W., Askren, M. K.,
Berman, M. G., Demiralp, E., Krawitz, A., & Jonides, J. (2013). A
meta-analysis of executive components of working memory. Cerebral
Cortex, 23(2), 264--282. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhs007 Needham, B. L.,
Adler, N., Gregorich, S., Rehkopf, D., Lin, J., Blackburn, E. H., &
Epel, E. S. (2013). Socioeconomic status, health behavior, and leukocyte
telomere length in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey,
1999--2002. Social Science & Medicine, 85, 1--8. doi:10.1016/j.
socscimed.2013.02.023 Neigh, G. N., Gillespie, C. F., & Nemeroff, C. B.
(2009). The neurobiological toll of child abuse and neglect. Trauma,
Violence, & Abuse, 10(4), 389--410. doi:10.1177/1524838009339758
Neinstein, L. S., & Irwin, C. E. (2013). Young adults remain worse off
than adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health, 53(5), 559---561.
doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.08.014 Neisser, U., Boodoo, G., Bouchard
Jr, T. J., Boykin, A. W., Brody, N., Ceci, S. J., . . . Sternberg, R. J.
(1996). Intelligence: knowns and unknowns. American Psychologist, 51(2),
77--101. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.51.2.77 Nelson-Coffey, S. (2018). Married
. . . with children: The science of well-being in marriage and family
life. In E. Diener, S. Oishi, & L. Tay (Eds.), Handbook of well-being.
Salt Lake City, UT: Noba Scholar. Nelson, S. K., Kushlev, K., Dunn, E.
W., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2014). Parents are slightly happier than
nonparents, but causality still cannot be inferred: A reply to Bhargava,
Kassam, and Loewenstein (2014). Psychological Science, 25(1), 303--304.
doi:10.1177/0956797613508561 Nelson, S. K., Kushlev, K., English, T.,
Dunn, E. W., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2013). In defense of parenthood:
Children are associated with more joy than misery. Psychological
Science, 24(1), 3--10. doi:10.1177/0956797612447798 Neugarten, B. L.,
Moore, J. W., & Lowe, J. C. (1965). Age norms, age constraints, and
adult socialization. American Journal of Sociology, 70(6), 710--717.
doi:10.1086/223965 Neuner, F., Schauer, E., Catani, C., Ruf, M., &
Elbert, T. (2006). Post-tsunami stress: A study of posttraumatic stress
disorder in children living in three severely affected regions in Sri
Lanka. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 19, 339--347. doi:10.1002/jts.20121
Neville, H. J., Bavelier, D., Corina, D., Rauschecker, J., Karni, A.,
Lalwani, A., Braun, A., Clark, V., Jezzard, P., & Turner, R. (1998).
Cerebral organization for language in deaf and hearing subjects:
Biological constraints and effects of experience. Proceedings of the
National Academy

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

of Sciences of the United States of America, 95(3), 922--929.
doi:10.1073/pnas.95.3.922 Newcombe, T. M. (1929). Consistency of certain
extrovert-introvert behavior patterns in 51 problem boys. New York:
Columbia University Teachers College Press. Newell, A., & Simon, H.
(1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Kalogeropoulos, A., & Nielsen, R. (2019).
Reuters Institute Digital News Report 2019. http://www
.digitalnewsreport.org/ Newsom, C. R., Archer, R. P., Trumbetta, S., &
Gottesman, I. I. (2003). Changes in adolescent response patterns on the
MMPI/ MMPI-A across four decades. Journal of Personality Assessment,
81(1), 74--84. doi:10.1207/S15327752JPA8101_07 Newton-Howes, G., Cook,
S., Martin, G., Foulds, J. A., & Boden, J. M. (2019). Comparison of age
of first drink and age of first intoxication as predictors of substance
use and mental health problems in adulthood. Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 194, 238--243. doi:10.1016/j. drugalcdep.2018.10.012 Nguyen,
D. (2016). Brain death and true patient care. The Linacre Quarterly,
83(3), 258--282. doi:10.1080/00243639.2016.1188472 Nielsen Neuroscience.
(2017). Case study: The brains behind better ads--optimizing the cute
and cuddly. https://www.nielsen.com
/us/en/insights/case-study/2014/the-brains
-behind-better-ads-optimizing-the-cute-and -cuddly-2/# Nielsen, J., &
Wohlert, M. (1991). Sex chromosome abnormalities among 34,910 newborn
children: Results from a 13-year incidence study in Århus, Denmark.
Birth Defects: Original Article Series, 26, 209--223.
doi:10.1007/BF01213097 Nielsen, T. A., Zadra, A. L., Simard, V.,
Saucier, S., Stenstrom, P., Smith, C., & Kuiken, D. (2003). The typical
dreams of Canadian university students. Dreaming, 13(4), 211--235.
doi:10.1023/B:DREM. 0000003144.40929.0b Nilsson, K. W., Åslund, C.,
Comasco, E., & Oreland, L. (2018). Gene--environment interaction of
monoamine oxidase A in relation to antisocial behaviour: Current and
future directions. Journal of Neural Transmission, 125(11), 1601--1626.
doi:10.1007/s00702-018-1892-2 Nielsen, T. A., Zadra, A. L., Simard, V.,
Saucier, S., Stenstrom, P., Smith, C., & Kuiken, D. (2003). The typical
dreams of Canadian university students. Dreaming, 13(4), 211--235.
doi:10.1023/B:DREM.0000003144.40929.0b Noaghiul, S., & Hibbeln, J. R.
(2003). Crossnational comparisons of seafood consumption and rates of
bipolar disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160(12), 2222--2227.
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp. 160.12.2222 Noah, T., Schul, Y., & Mayo, R.
(2018). When both the original study and its failed replication are
correct: Feeling observed

eliminates the facial-feedback effect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 114(5), 657--664. doi:10.1037/pspa0000121 Noël, X., Brevers,
D., & Bechara, A. (2013). A neurocognitive approach to understanding the
neurobiology of addiction. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 23(4),
632--638. doi:10.1016/j.conb.2013.01.018 Noelle-Neumann, E. (1984). The
spiral of silence: Public opinion--Our social skin. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press. Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1987). Sex differences in unipolar
depression: Evidence and theory. Psychological Bulletin, 101(2), 259.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.101.2.259 Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1991). Responses to
depression and their effects on the duration of depressive episodes.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 100, 569--582.
doi:10.1037/0021843X.100.4.569 Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2003). Women who
think too much: How to break free of overthinking and reclaim your life.
New York: Henry Holt and Company. Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Girgus, J. S.
(1994). The emergence of gender differences in depression during
adolescence. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 424--443.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.115.3.424 Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Morrow, J. (1993).
Effects of rumination and distraction on naturally occurring depressed
mood. Cognition & Emotion, 7(6), 561--570. doi:10.1080/02699939308409206
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Larson, J., & Grayson, C. (1999). Explaining the
gender difference in depressive symptoms. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 77, 1061--1072. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.77.5.1061
Norcross, J. C., & Castle, P. H. (2002). Appreciating the Psy.D.: The
facts. Eye on Psi Chi, 7, 22--26. Nordenbæk, C., Jørgensen, M., Kyvik,
K. O., & Bilenberg, N. (2014). A Danish populationbased twin study on
autism spectrum disorders. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry,
23(1), 35--43. doi:10.1007/ s00787-013-0419-5 Norman, G. J., Berntson,
G. G., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2014). Emotion, somatovisceral afference, and
autonomic regulation. Emotion Review, 6(2), 113--123.
doi:10.1177/1754073913512006 Norman, W. T. (1963). Toward an adequate
taxonomy of personality attributes: Replicated factor structure in peer
nomination personality ratings. Journal of Abnormal & Social Psychology,
66, 574--583. doi:10.1037/ h0040291 Nosek, B. A. (2007). Understanding
the individual implicitly and explicitly. International Journal of
Psychology, 42(3), 184--188. doi:10.1080/00207590601068159 Nosek, B. A.,
Aarts, A. A., Alexander, A., Anderson, C. J., Anderson, J. E., Kappes,
H. B., et al.,. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of psychological
science. Science, 349(6251), aac4716. doi:10.1126/science.aac4716

Nowak, M. A. (2006). Five rules for the evolution of cooperation.
Science, 314, 1560--1563. doi:10.1126/science.1133755 O'Brien, T. B., &
DeLongis, A. (1996). The interactional context of problem-, emotion-,
and relationship-focused coping: The role of the Big Five personality
factors. Journal of Personality, 64(4), 775--813.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.1996.tb00944.x O'Donnell, S., Webb, J. K., &
Shine, R. (2010). Conditioned taste aversion enhances the survival of an
endangered predator imperilled by a toxic invader. Journal of Applied
Ecology, 47(3), 558--565. doi:10.1111/j.13652664.2010.01802.x O'Keefe,
J., & Nadel, L. (1978). The hippocampus as a cognitive map. Oxford,
U.K.: Oxford University Press. O'Rourke, N., & Cappeliez, P. (2005).
Marital satisfaction and self-deception: Reconstruction of relationship
histories among older adults. Social Behavior and Personality, 33(3),
273--282. doi:10.2224/ sbp.2005.33.3.273 Office of Juvenile Justice and
Deliquency Prevention (OJJDP; 2016). Child victims of stereotypical
kidnappings known to law enforcement. https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/sites/g
/files/xyckuh176/files/pubs/249249.pdf Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D.,
Fryar, C. D., & Flegal, K. M. (2015). Prevalence of obesity among adults
and youth: United States, 2011--2014. NCHS Data Brief, 219(219), 1--8.
Oh, J., Chopik, W. J., Konrath, S., & Grimm, K. J. (2020). Longitudinal
changes in empathy across the life span in six samples of human
development. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 11(2),
244--253. doi:10.1177/1948550619849429 Okely, J. A., & Deary, I. J.
(2018). Longitudinal associations between loneliness and cognitive
ability in the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936. The Journals of Gerontology:
Series B, 74(8), 1376--1386. doi:10.1093/geronb/gby086 Olatunji, B. O.,
Davis, M. L., Powers, M. B., & Smits, J. A. (2013). Cognitive-behavioral
therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis of treatment
outcome and moderators. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47(1), 33--41.
doi:10.1016/j. jpsychires.2012.08.020 Olsho, L. W., Koch, E. G., Halpin,
C. F., & Carter, E. A. (1987). An observer-based psychoacoustic
procedure for use with young infants. Developmental Psychology, 23,
627--640. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.23.5.627 Olson, K. R., Key, A. C., &
Eaton, N. R. (2015). Gender cognition in transgender children.
Psychological Science, 26(4), 467--474. doi:10.1177/0956797614568156
Opris, I., & Casanova, M. F. (2014). Prefrontal cortical minicolumn:
From executive control to disrupted cognitive processing. Brain, 137(7),
1863--1875. doi:10.1093/brain/ awt359 Ormel, J., Hartman, C. A., &
Snieder, H. (2019). The genetics of depression: Successful genome-wide
association studies introduce REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-41

new challenges. Translational Psychiatry, 9(1), 114.
doi:10.1038/s41398-019-0450-5 Orne, M. T., & Evans, F. J. (1965). Social
control in the psychological experiment: Antisocial behavior and
hypnosis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1(3), 189--200.
doi:10.1037/h0021933 Orr, A. G., Hsiao, E. C., Wang, M. M., Ho, K., Kim,
D. H., Wang, X., Guo, W., Kang, J., Yu, G.-Q., Adame, A., Devidze, N.,
Dubal, D. B., Maslieh, E., Conklin, B. R., & Mucke, L. (2015).
Astrocytic adenosine receptor A2A and Gs-coupled signaling regulate
memory. Nature Neuroscience, 18(3), 423--434. doi:10.1038/nn.3930
Ortigue, S., Sinigaglia, C., Rizzolatti, G., & Grafton, S. T. (2010).
Understanding actions of others: The electrodynamics of the left and
right hemispheres. A high-density EEG neuroimaging study. PLoS ONE,
5(8), e12160. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0012160 Osinsky, R., Reuter, M.,
Küpper, Y., Schmitz, A., Kozyra, E., Alexander, N., & Hennig, J. (2008).
Variation in the serotonin transporter gene modulates selective
attention to threat. Emotion, 8(4), 584--588. doi:10.1037/a0012826
Osório, C., Probert, T., Jones, E., Young, A. H., & Robbins, I. (2016).
Adapting to stress: Understanding the neurobiology of resilience.
Behavioral Medicine, 1--16. doi:10.1080/08964289.2016.1170661 Otsuka, Y.
(2014). Face recognition in infants: A review of behavioral and
near-infrared spectroscopic studies. Japanese Psychological Research,
56(1), 76--90. doi:10.1111/jpr.12024 Owen, A. M. (2019). The search for
consciousness. Neuron, 102(3), 526--528. doi:10.1016/j.
neuron.2019.03.024 Ozer, E. J., Best, S. R., Lipsey, T. L., & Weiss, D.
S. (2003). Predictors of posttraumatic stress disorder and symptoms in
adults: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 129(1), 52--73.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909.129.1.52 Pace, G. T., Lee, S. J., & Grogan-Kaylor,
A. (2019). Spanking and young children's socioemotional development in
low-and middle-income countries. Child Abuse & Neglect, 88, 84--95.
doi:10.1016/j.chiabu. 2018.11.003 Paolini, S., Harwood, J., & Rubin, M.
(2010). Negative intergroup contact makes group memberships salient:
Explaining why intergroup conflict endures. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 36(12), 1723--1738. doi:10.1177/0146167210388667
Papagno, C., Pisoni, A., Mattavelli, G., Casarotti, A., Comi, A.,
Fumagalli, F., Vernice, M., Fava, E., Riva, M., & Bello, L. (2016).
Specific disgust processing in the left insula: New evidence from direct
electrical stimulation. Neuropsychologia, 84, 29--35.
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia. 2016.01.036 Papp, L. A., Klein, D. F.,
Martinez, J., Schneier, F., Cole, R., Liebowitz, M. R., Hollander, E.,
Fryer, A. J., Jordan, F., & Gorman, J. M. (1993). Diagnostic and
substance specificity of carbon-dioxide-induced panic. American

R-42

Journal of Psychiatry, 150, 250--257. doi:10.1176/ajp.150.2.250 Paquet,
A., Golse, B., Girard, M., Olliac, B., & Vaivre-Douret, L. (2017).
Laterality and lateralization in autism spectrum disorder, Using a
standardized neuro-psychomotor assessment. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 42(1), 39--54. doi:10.1080/87565641.2016.1274317
Paracchini, S., Diaz, R., & Stein, J. (2016). Advances in dyslexia
genetics---New insights into the role of brain asymmetries. In T.
Friedmann, J. C. Dunlap, & S. F. Goodwin (Eds.), Advances in genetics
(Vol. 96, pp. 53--97). Cambridge, MA: Academic Press. Paradiso, S.,
Ostedgaard, K., Vaidya, J., Ponto, L. B., & Robinson, R. (2013).
Emotional blunting following left basal ganglia stroke: The role of
depression and frontolimbic functional alterations. Psychiatry Research:
Neuroimaging, 211(2), 148--159. doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.05.008
Pargament, K. I., & Krumrei, E. J. (2009). Clinical assessment of
clients' spirituality. In J. D. Aten & M. M. Leach (Eds.), Spirituality
and the therapeutic process: A comprehensive resource from intake to
termination. (pp. 93--120). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Paris, J. (2017). Is psychoanalysis still relevant to
psychiatry? The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 62(5), 308--312.
doi:10.1177/0706743717692306 Park, B., & Judd, C. M. (2005). Rethinking
the link between categorization and prejudice within the social
cognition perspective. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 9(2),
108--130. doi:10.1207/s15327957 pspr0902_2 Park, G., Schwartz, H. A.,
Eichstaedt, J. C., Kern, M. L., Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D. J., Ungar,
L. H., & Seligman, M. E. (2015). Automatic personality assessment
through social media language. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 108(6), 934--952. doi:10.1037/pspp0000020 Parker, E. S.,
Cahill, L., & McGaugh, J. L. (2006). A case of unusual autobiographical
remembering. Neurocase, 12(1), 35--49. doi:10.1080/13554790500473680
Parner, E. T., Baron-Cohen, S., Lauritsen, M. B., Jørgensen, M.,
Schieve, L. A., YearginAllsopp, M., & Obel, C. (2012). Parental age and
autism spectrum disorders. Annals of Epidemiology, 22(3), 143--150.
doi:10.1016/j. annepidem.2011.12.006 Pascual-Leone, A., & Torres, F.
(1993). Plasticity of sensorimotor cortex representation of the reading
finger in Braille readers. Brain, 116, 39--52.
doi:10.1093/brain/116.1.39 Pasterski, V. L., Geffner, M. E., Brain, C.,
Hindmarsh, P., Brook, C., & Hines, M. (2005). Prenatal hormones and
postnatal socialization by parents as determinants of male-typical toy
play in girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Child Development,
76(1), 264--278. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8624. 2005.00843.x

Patterson, F. (1978, October). Conversations with a gorilla. National
Geographic, 438--465. Patterson, F. (1984). Self-recognition by gorilla
(Gorilla gorilla). Gorilla, 7, 2--3. Patterson, F. G. P., & Cohn, R. H.
(1994). Selfrecognition and self-awareness in lowland gorillas. In S. T.
Parker, R. W. Mitchell, & M. L. Boccia (Eds.), Self-awareness in animals
and humans: Developmental perspectives (pp. 273--290). New York:
Cambridge University Press. Patterson, K. D., & Pyle, G. F. (1991). The
geography and mortality of the 1918 influenza pandemic. Bulletin of the
History of Medicine, 65(1), 4--21. doi:10.1086/651472 Pauker, K.,
Weisbuch, M., Ambady, N., Sommers, S. R., Adams, R. B., & Ivcevic, Z.
(2009). Not so black and white: Memory for ambiguous group members.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(4), 795--810.
doi:10.1037/a0013265 Paul, A. M. (2010). The cult of personality
testing: How personality tests are leading us to miseducate our
children, mismanage our companies, and misunderstand ourselves. New
York, NY: Simon and Schuster. Paulhus, D. I. (1998). Interpersonal and
intrapsychic adaptiveness of trait self-enhancement. A mixed blessing?
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1197--1208.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.5.1197 Paulhus, D. L., & Williams, K. M.
(2002). The dark triad of personality: Narcissism, Machiavellianism, and
psychopathy. Journal of Research in Personality, 36, 556--563.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.5.1197 Pauls, D. L., Abramovitch, A., Rauch, S.
L., & Geller, D. A. (2014). Obsessive--compulsive disorder: An
integrative genetic and neurobiological perspective. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 15(6), 410--424. doi:10.1038/ nrn3746 Pavlov, I. P.
(1906). The scientific investigation of the psychical faculties or
processes in the higher animals. Science, 24, 613--619.
doi:10.1126/science.24.620.613 Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned
reflexes. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press. Pearce, M. T., Ruiz, M.
H., Kapasi, S., Wiggins, G., & Bhattacharya, J. (2010). Unsupervised
statistical learning underpins computational, behavioural, and neural
manifestations of musical expectation. NeuroImage.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.019 Pearson Assessments. (2020).
MMPI-3. https:// www.pearsonassessments.com
/store/usassessments/en/Store/Professional -Assessments/Personality-%26
-Biopsychosocial/Minnesota-Multiphasic
-Personality-Inventory-3/p/P100000004 .html?tab=product-details
Pedersen, C. B., Mors, O., Bertelsen, A., Waltoft, B. L., Agerbo, E.,
McGrath, J. J., Mortensen, P. B., & Eaton, W. W. (2014). A comprehensive
nationwide study of the incidence rate and lifetime risk for treated
mental disorders. JAMA Psychiatry, 71(5), 573--581.
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.16

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Pegna, A. J., Khateb, A., Lazeyras, F., & Seghier, M. L. (2005).
Discriminating emotional faces without primary visual cortices involves
the right amygdala. Nature Neuroscience, 8(1), 24--25.
doi:10.1038/nn1364 Pelham Jr, W. E., & Fabiano, G. A. (2008).
Evidence-based psychosocial treatments for
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Clinical Child &
Adolescent Psychology, 37(1), 184--214. doi:10.1080/15374410701818681
Pelios, L. V., MacDuff, G. S., & Axelrod, S. (2003). The effects of a
treatment package in establishing independent academic work skills in
children with autism. Education and Treatment of Children, 26, 1--21.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/42900533 Peltokorpi, V. (2008). Transactive
memory systems. Review of General Psychology, 12(4), 378--394.
doi:10.1037/1089-2680.12.4.378 Peltokorpi, V., & Hood, A. C. (2019).
Communication in theory and research on transactive memory systems: A
literature review. Topics in Cognitive Science, 11(4), 644--667.
doi:10.1111/tops.12359 Penfield, W., & Boldrey, E. (1937). Somatic motor
and sensory representation in the cerebral cortex of man as studied by
electrical stimulation. Brain, 60(4), 389--443.
doi:10.1093/brain/60.4.389 Pepperberg, I. M. (2014). Interspecies
communication with Grey parrots: A tool for examining cognitive
processing. In G. Witzany (Ed.), Biocommunication of animals (pp.213--
232). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-7414-8_12
Perez, M. F., & Lehner, B. (2019). Intergenerationaland
transgenerational epigenetic inheritance in animals. Nature Cell
Biology, 21(2), 143--151. doi:10.1038 /s41556-018-0242-9 Perfect, T. J.,
& Askew, C. (1994). Print adverts: Not remembered but memorable. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 8(7), 693--703. doi:10.1002/acp.2350080707
Perikleous, E. P., Steiropoulos, P., Paraskakis, E., Constantinidis, T.
C., & Nena, E. (2018). E-Cigarette use among adolescents: An overview of
the literature and future perspectives. Frontiers in Public Health,
6(86). doi:10.3389/fpubh.2018.00086 Perry, R. J., Watson, P., & Hodges,
J. R. (2000). The nature and staging of attention dysfunction in early
(minimal and mild) Alzheimer's disease: Relationship to episodic and
semantic memory impairment. Neuropsychologia, 38(3), 252--271.
doi:10.1016/S0028-3932(99)00079-2 Perry, W. I. (1970). Forms of
intellectual and ethical development in the college years. New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Pervanidou, P., Kolaitis, G., Charitaki, S.,
Lazaropoulou, C., Papassotiriou, I., Hindmarsh, P., Bakoula, C.,
Tsiantis, J., & Chrousos, G. P. (2007). The natural history of
neuroendocrine changes in pediatric posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
after motor vehicle accidents:

Progressive divergence of noradrenaline and cortisol concentrations over
time. Biological Psychiatry, 62(10), 1095--1102. doi:10.1016/j.
biopsych.2007.02.008 Peters, R. (2006). Ageing and the brain.
Postgraduate Medical Journal, 82(964), 84--88.
doi:10.1136/pgmj.2005.036665 Petersen, S., Houston, S., Qin, H., Tague,
C., & Studley, J. (2017). The utilization of robotic pets in dementia
care. Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, 55, 569--574.
doi:10.3233/JAD-160703 Peterson, C. (2006). A primer in positive
psychology. New York, NY US: Oxford University Press. Peterson, C., &
Seligman, M. E. P. (2004). Character strengths and virtues: A handbook
and classification. Washington, D.C.: APA Press and Oxford University
Press. Peterson, C., & Whalen, N. (2001). Five years later: Children's
memory for medical emergencies. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 15(7),
S7-S24. doi:10.1002/acp.832 Peterson, L. R., & Peterson, M. J. (1959).
Shortterm retention of individual verbal items. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 58, 193--198. doi:10.1037/h0049234 Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo,
J. T. (1981). Attitudes and persuasion: Classic and contemporary
approaches. Dubuque, Iowa: Wm. C. Brown. Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T.
(1986). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 19, 123--205.
doi:10.1016/S00652601(08)60214-2 Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., &
Kasmer, J. (1988). The role of affect in the elaboration likelihood
model of persuasion. In L. Donohew, H. Sypher, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.),
Communication, social cognition, and affect (pp. 117--146). Hillsdale, N
J: Erlbaum. Peverly, S. T., Brobst, K. E., & Morris, K. S. (2002). The
contribution of reading comprehension ability and meta-cognitive control
to the development of studying in adolescence. Journal of Research in
Reading, 25(2), 203--216. doi:10.1111/1467-9817.00169 Phan, K. L.,
Wager, T., Taylor, S. F., & Liberzon, I. (2002). Functional neuroanatomy
of emotion: A meta-analysis of emotion activation studies in PET and
fMRI. NeuroImage, 16, 331--348. doi:10.1006/nimg.2002.1087 Phelps, E.
A., O'Connor, K. J., Cunningham, W. A., Funayama, E. S., Gatenby, J. C.,
Gore, J. C., & Banaji, M. R. (2000). Performance on indirect measures of
race evaluation predicts amygdala activation. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 12, 729--738. doi:10.1162/089892900562552 Phills, C. E.,
Hahn, A., & Gawronski, B. (2020). The bidirectional causal relation
between implicit stereotypes and implicit prejudice. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, doi:10.1177/0146167219899234. Pietrzak, R.
H., Goldstein, R. B., Southwick, S. M., & Grant, B. F. (2011).
Prevalence and Axis I comorbidity of full and partial posttraumatic
stress disorder in the

United States: Results from Wave 2 of the National Epidemiologic Survey
on Alcohol and Related Conditions. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25(3),
456--465. doi:10.1016/j. janxdis.2010.11.010 Pietschnig, J., & Voracek,
M. (2015). One century of global IQ gains: A formal metaanalysis of the
Flynn Effect (1909--2013). Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10(3),
282--306. doi:10.1177/1745691615577701 Pilgrim, J. L., Gerostamoulos,
D., & Drummer, O. H. (2011). Deaths involving MDMA and the concomitant
use of pharmaceutical drugs. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, 35(4),
219--226. doi:10.1093/anatox/35.4.219 Pinker, S. (1994). The language
instinct: The new science of language and mind. London, UK: Penguin.
Pittenger, D. J. (1993). Measuring the MBTI . . . and coming up short.
Journal of Career Planning and Employment, 54(1), 48--52. Pitts, F. N.,
& McClure, J. N. (1967). Lactate metabolism in anxiety neurosis. New
England Journal of Medicine, 277, 1329--1336.
doi:10.1056/NEJM196712212772502 Piven, J., Elison, J. T., & Zylka, M. J.
(2017). Toward a conceptual framework for early brain and behavior
development in autism. Molecular Psychiatry, 22(10), 1385--1394.
doi:10.1038/mp.2017.131 Plomin, R., & Spinath, F. M. (2004).
Intelligence: Genetics, genes, and genomics. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 86, 112--129. doi:10.1037/00223514.86.1.112 Plotnik,
J. M., de Waal, F. B. M., & Reiss, D. (2006). Self-recognition in an
Asian elephant. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 103(45), 17053--17057. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0608062103 Plous, S. (1993). The psychology of judgment and decision
making. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Pohl, R. F., Michalkiewicz, M.,
Erdfelder, E., & Hilbig, B. E. (2017). Use of the recognition heuristic
depends on the domain's recognition validity, not on the recognition
validity of selected sets of objects. Memory & Cognition, 45(5),
776--791. doi:10.3758/ s13421-017-0689-0 Polya, G. (1957). How to solve
it. Garden City, NY: Doubleday and Co. Pomar, L., Musso, D., Malinger,
G., Vouga, M., Panchaud, A., & Baud, D. (2019). Zika virus during
pregnancy: From maternal exposure to congenital Zika virus syndrome.
Prenatal Diagnosis, 39(6), 420--430. doi:10.1002/ pd.5446
Pomarol-Clotet, E., Salvador, R., Sarro, S., Gomar, J., Vila, F.,
Martinez, A., Guerrero, A., Ortiz-Gil, J., Sans-Sansa, B., Capdevila,
A., Cebamanos, J. M., & McKenna, P. J. (2008). Failure to deactivate in
the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia: Dysfunction of the default mode
network? Psychological

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-43

Medicine, 38(8), 1185--1194. doi:10.1017/ S0033291708003565 Porter, R.
H., Makin, J. W., Davis, L. B., & Christensen, K. M. (1991). An
assessment of the salient olfactory environment of formula-fed infants.
Physiology and Behavior, 50, 907--911. doi:10.1016/00319384(91)90413-I
Posner, M. I. (2018). Rehabilitating the brain through meditation and
electrical stimulation. Cortex. doi:10.1016/j.cortex. 2018.07.022
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1970). Retention of abstract ideas.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 83(2, Pt.1), 304--308.
doi:10.1037/h0028558 Poundstone, W. (1992). Prisoner's dilemma. New
York: Doubleday. Povinelli, D. J. (1993). Reconstructing the evolution
of mind. American Psychologist, 48, 493--509.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.48.5.493 Prasad, S., & Steer, C. (2008). Switching
from neurostimulant therapy to atomoxetine in children and adolescents
with attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder. Pediatric Drugs, 10(1),
39--47. doi:10.2165/00148581200810010-00005 Prata, D. P., Costa-Neves,
B., Cosme, G., & Vassos, E. (2019). Unravelling the genetic basis of
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder with GWAS: A systematic review.
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 114, 178--207.
doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2019.04.007 Pratt, L. A., Brody, D. J., & Gu,
Q. (2011). Antidepressant use in persons aged 12 and over: United
States, 2005--2008. NCHS Data Brief, 76, 1---8. Premack, D. (1965).
Reinforcement theory. In D. Levine (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation (Vol. 13, pp. 3--41). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska
Press. Premack, D. G., & Woodruff, G. (1978). Does the chimpanzee have a
theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1, 515--526.
doi:10.1017/S0140525X00076512 Priebe, S. (2006). The provision of
psychotherapy: An international comparison. http://
cep.lse.ac.uk/textonly/research/mentalhealth
/StefanPriebe_provision-of-incapacity -benefit.pdf Prinzie, P., Stams,
G. J. J. M., Deković, M., Reijntjes, A. H. A., & Belsky, J. (2009). The
relations between parents' Big Five personality factors and parenting: A
meta-analytic review. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
97(2), 351--362. doi:10.1037/a0015823 Prior, H., Schwarz, A., &
Güntürkün, O. (2008). Mirror-induced behavior in the magpie (Pica pica):
Evidence of self-recognition. PLoS Biology, 6(8), e202.
doi:10.1371/journal .pbio.0060202 prnewswire. (2020). New parent
coaching app helps parents with young children at home during COVID
manage daily routines and engage in activities that support child
development and well-being. https://www
.prnewswire.com/news-releases/new-parent
-coaching-app-helps-parents-with-young

R-44

-children-at-home-during-covid-manage
-daily-routines-and-engage-in-activities
-that-support-child-development-and-well -being-301040190.html Probst,
F., Meng-Hentschel, J., Golle, J., Stucki, S., Akyildiz-Kunz, C., &
Lobmaier, J. S. (2017). Do women tend while men fight or flee?
Differential emotive reactions of stressed men and women while viewing
newborn infants. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 75, 213--221.
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen .2016.11.005 Przybylski, A. K., & Weinstein, N.
(2013). Can you connect with me now? How the presence of mobile
communication technology influences face-to-face conversation quality.
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30(3), 237--246.
doi:10.1177/0265407512453827 Psychological Clinical Science
Accreditation System (PCSAS). (2020). Accredited programs.
http://www.pcsas.org/accredited -programs Public Broadcasting Service
(PBS). (2005). The story of . . . smallpox--and other deadly Eurasian
germs. http://www.pbs.org /gunsgermssteel/variables/smallpox.html Puts,
D. A., Pope, L. E., Hill, A. K., Cárdenas, R. A., Welling, L. L. M.,
Wheatley, J. R., & Marc Breedlove, S. (2015). Fulfilling desire:
Evidence for negative feedback between men's testosterone, sociosexual
psychology, and sexual partner number. Hormones and Behavior, 70,
14--21. doi:10.1016/j. yhbeh.2015.01.006 Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J.,
& Solomon, S. (1991). A terror management analysis of self-awareness and
anxiety: The hierarchy of terror. In R. Schwarzer & R. A. Wicklund
(Eds.), Anxiety and self-focused attention (pp. 67--85). Amsterdam,
Netherlands: Harwood Academic Publishers. Qiu, D.-l., & Knopfel, T.
(2007). An NMDA receptor/nitric oxide cascade in presynaptic parallel
fiber-Purkinje neuron long-term potentiation. The Journal of
Neuroscience, 27(13), 3408--3415. doi:10.1523/jneurosci. 4831-06.2007
Radant, A. D., Millard, S. P., Braff, D. L., Calkins, M. E., Dobie, D.
J., Freedman, R., Green, M. F., Greenwood, T. A., Gur, R. E., Gur, R.
C., Lazzeroni, L., Light, G. A., Meichle, S., Nuechterlein, K. H.,
Olincy, A., Seidman, L. J., Siever, L., Silverman, J., Stone, W. S., . .
. Tsuang, D. W. (2015). Robust differences in antisaccade performance
exist between COGS schizophrenia cases and controls regardless of
recruitment strategies. Schizophrenia Research, 163(1), 47--52.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2014.12.016 Raichle, M. E. (2015). The brain's
default mode network. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 38, 433--447.
doi:10.1146/annurev-neuro071013-014030 Raichle, M. E., & Gusnard, D. A.
(2002). Appraising the brain's energy budget. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,

99(16), 10237--10239. doi:10.1073/pnas. 172399499 Raichle, M. E., &
Snyder, A. Z. (2011). Intrinsic brain activity and consciousness. In S.
Laureys & G. Tononi (Eds.), The neurology of consciousness: Cognitive
neuroscience and neuropathology (pp. 81--88). Oxford, UK: Elsevier
Academic Press. Raichlen, D. A., & Alexander, G. E. (2017). Adaptive
capacity: An evolutionary neuroscience model linking exercise,
cognition, and brain health. Trends in Neurosciences, 40(7), 408--421.
doi:10.1016/j .tins.2017.05.001 Raine, A. (2019). The neuromoral theory
of antisocial, violent, and psychopathic behavior. Psychiatry Research,
277, 64--69. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2018.11.025 Raine, A., Lencz, T.,
Bihrle, S., LaCasse, L., & Colletti, P. (2000). Reduced prefrontal gray
matter volume and reduced autonomic activity in antisocial personality
disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57, 119--127.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.57.2.119 Raine, A., Stoddard, J., Bihrle, S., &
Buchsbaum, M. (1998). Prefrontal glucose deficits in murderers lacking
psychosocial deprivation. Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology, & Behavioral
Neurology, 11(1), 1--7. Rakic, P. (2000). Molecular and cellular
mechanisms of neuronal migration: Relevance to cortical epilepsies.
Advances in Neurology, 84, 1--14. Raleigh, M. J., Brammer, G. L.,
McGuire, M. T., Pollack, D. B., & Yuwiler, A. (1992). Individual
differences in basal cisternal cerebrospinal fluid F0HIAA and HVA in
monkeys: The effects of gender, age, physical characteristics, and
matrilineal influences. Neuropsychopharmacology, 7, 295--304.
doi:10.1016/0006-8993(91)90001-C Ramachandran, V. S., &
RogersRamachandran, D. (2000). Phantom limbs and neural plasticity.
Archives of Neurology, 57, 317--320. doi:10.1001/archneur.57.3.317
Ramírez-Esparza, N., García-Sierra, A., & Kuhl, P. K. (2014). Look who's
talking: Speech style and social context in language input to infants
are linked to concurrent and future speech development. Developmental
Science, 17(6), 880--891. doi:10.1111/desc.12172 Rammstedt, B., & John,
O. P. (2007). Measuring personality in one minute or less: A 10-item
short version of the Big Five Inventory in English and German. Journal
of Research in Personality, 41(1), 203--212. doi:10.1016/j.
jrp.2006.02.001 Ramo, S. (2005). Conquering complexity. London, UK:
University College London. Ramos, R. L., Fokas, G. J., Bhambri, A.,
Smith, P. T., Hallas, B. H., & Brumberg, J. C. (2011). Undergraduate
neuroscience education in the U.S.: An analysis using data from the
National Center for Education Statistics. Journal of Undergraduate
Neuroscience Education, 9(2), A66--A70. Ramsawh, H. J., Fullerton, C.
S., Mash, H. B. H., Ng, T. H. H., Kessler, R. C., Stein, M. B., &
Ursano, R. J. (2014). Risk for suicidal

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

behaviors associated with PTSD, depression, and their comorbidity in the
US Army. Journal of Affective Disorders, 161, 116--122.
doi:10.1016/j.jad.2014.03.016 Ramsey, E., Kelly-Vance, L., Allen, J. A.,
Rosol, O., & Yoerger, M. (2016). Autism spectrum disorder prevalence
rates in the United States: Methodologies, challenges, and implications
for individual states. Journal of Developmental and Physical
Disabilities, 28(6), 803--820. doi:10.1007/ s1088 Randall, K. (2011).
Rise of neurocinema: How Hollywood studios harness your brainwaves to
win Oscars. https://www.fastcompany .com/1731055/rise-neurocinema-how
-hollywood-studios-harness-your-brainwaves -win-oscars Randunu, R. S., &
Bertolo, R. F. (2020). The effects of maternal and postnatal dietary
methyl nutrients on epigenetic changes that lead to non-communicable
diseases in adulthood. International Journal of Molecular Sciences,
21(9), 3290. doi:10.3390/ijms21093290 Ranehill, E., Dreber, A.,
Johannesson, M., Leiberg, S., Sul, S., & Weber, R. A. (2015). Assessing
the robustness of power posing: No effect on hormones and risk tolerance
in a large sample of men and women. Psychological Science, 26(5),
653--656. doi:10.1177/0956797614553946 Rapkin, A. J., Mikacich, J. A.,
Moatakef-Imani, B., & Rasgon, N. (2002). The clinical nature and formal
diagnosis of premenstrual, postpartum, and perimenopausal affective
disorders. Current Psychiatry Reports, 4, 419--428.
doi:10.1007/s11920-002-0069-7 Rapoport, J. (1989). The boy who couldn't
stop washing: The experience and treatment of obsessive-compulsive
disorder. New York: Dutton. Rapoport, J. L., Giedd, J.N., Blumenthal,
J., Hamburger, S., Jeffries, N., Fernandez, T., Nicolson, R., Bedwell,
J., Lenane, M., Zijdenbos, A., Paus, T., & Evans, A. (1999). Progressive
cortical change during adolescence in childhood-onset schizophrenia. A
longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging study. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 56, 649--654. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.56.7.649 Rasch, B., &
Born, J. (2013). About sleep's role in memory. Physiological Reviews,
93(2), 681--766. doi:10.1152/physrev.00032.2012 Raschle, N. M., Chang,
M., & Gaab, N. (2011). Structural brain alterations associated with
dyslexia predate reading onset. NeuroImage, 57(3), 742--749.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage .2010.09.055 Rasmussen, T., & Milner, B.
(1977). The role of early left-brain injury in determining
lateralization of cerebral speech functions. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 299, 355--369.
doi:10.1111/j.17496632.1977.tb41921.x Rauthmann, J. F., Sherman, R. A.,
Nave, C. S., & Funder, D. C. (2015). Personality-driven situation
experience, contact, and construal: How people's personality traits
predict

characteristics of their situations in daily life. Journal of Research
in Personality, 55, 98--111. doi:10.1016/j.jrp.2015.02.003 Rawlins, W.
K. (2004). Friendships in later life. In J. F. Nussbaum & J. Coupland
(Eds.), Handbook of communication and aging research (2nd ed.).
(pp. 273--299). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. Raz,
A., Kirsch, I., Pollard, J., & Nitkin-Kaner, Y. (2006). Suggestion
reduces the Stroop effect. Psychological Science, 17(2), 91--95.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01669.x Raz, N., Lindenberger, U.,
Rodrigue, K. M., Kennedy, K. M., Head, D., Williamson, A., Dahle, C.,
Gerstorf, D., & Acker, J. D. (2005). Regional brain changes in aging
healthy adults: General trends, individual differences and modifiers.
Cerebral Cortex, 15(11), 1676--1689. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhi044 Raza, M.
H., Mattera, R., Morell, R., Sainz, E., Rahn, R., Gutierrez, J., Paris,
E., Root, J., Solomon, B., Brewer, C., Basra, M. A. R., Khan, S.,
Riazzudin, S., Braun, A., Bonifacino, J. S., & Drayna, D. (2015).
Association between rare variants in AP4E1, a component of intracellular
trafficking, and persistent stuttering. The American Journal of Human
Genetics, 97(5), 715--725. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.10.007 Read, J.,
Kirsch, I., & McGrath, L. (2020). Electroconvulsive therapy for
depression: A review of the quality of ECT versus sham ECT trials and
meta-analyses. Ethical Human Psychology and Psychiatry.
doi:10.1891/EHPP-D-19-00014 Redfield, A., & Thouin-Savard, M. I. (2017).
Electronic dance music events as modernday ritual. The International
Journal of Transpersonal Studies, 36, (1), 52--66.
doi:10.24972/ijts.2017.36.1.52. Reese, H. E., McNally, R. J., & Wilhelm,
S. (2010). Facial asymmetry detection in patients with body dysmorphic
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48(9), 936--940.
doi:10.1016/j.brat.2010.05.021 Regan, C. (2000). Intoxicating minds.
London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. Register, P. A., & Kihlstrom, J. F.
(1987). Hypnotic effects on hypermnesia. International Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, 35(3), 155--170.
doi:10.1080/00207148708416051 Reicher, S., & Haslam, S. A. (2006).
Rethinking the psychology of tyranny: The BBC prison study. British
Journal of Social Psychology, 45(1), 1--40. doi:10.1348/014466605X48998
Reinisch, J. M., Ziemba-Davis, M., & Sanders, S. A. (1991). Hormonal
contributions to sexually dimorphic behavioral development in humans.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 16, 213--278. doi:10.1016/0306-4530(91)90080-D
Reisenzein, R. (1983). The Schachter theory of emotion: Two decades
later. Psychological Bulletin, 94, 239--264. doi:10.1037/0033
-2909.94.2.239 Remez, R. E., Rubin, P. E., Pisoni, D. B., & Carell, T.
D. (1981). Speech perception without

traditional speech cues. Science, 212, 947-- 950.
doi:10.1126/science.7233191 Remington, A., & Fairnie, J. (2017). A sound
advantage: Increased auditory capacity in autism. Cognition, 166,
459--465. doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2017.04.002 Rendell, L., Boyd, R.,
Cownden, D., Enquist, M., Eriksson, K., Feldman, M. W., Fogarty, L.,
Ghirlanda, S., Lillicrap, T., & Laland, K. N. (2010). Why copy others?
Insights from the social learning strategies tournament. Science, 328,
208--213. doi:10.1126/science. 1184719 Rescorla, R. A. (1968).
Probability of shock in the presence and absence of CS in fear
conditioning. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 66,
1--5. doi:10.1037/h0025984 Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A
theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the effectiveness of
reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy
(Eds.), Classical conditioning, Vol. II: Current theory and research
(pp. 64--99). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. Reuveni, I., Nugent, A.
C., Gill, J., Vythilingam, M., Carlson, P. J., Lerner, A., Neumeister,
A., Charney, D. S., Drevets, W. C., & Bonne, O. (2018). Altered cerebral
benzodiazepine receptor binding in post-traumatic stress disorder.
Translational Psychiatry, 8(1), 206. doi:10.1038/s41398-018-0257-9
Reyna, V. F. (2008). A theory of medical decision making and health:
Fuzzy Trace Theory. Medical Decision Making, 28(6), 850--865.
doi:10.1177/0272989x08327066 Reyna, V. F., & Farley, F. (2006). Risk and
rationality in adolescent decision making: Implications for theory,
practice, and public policy. Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, 7(1), 1--44. doi:10.1111/j.1529-1006. 2006.00026.x Rhodes, N.,
& Wood, W. (1992). Self-esteem and intelligence affect influenceability:
The mediating role of message reception. Psychological Bulletin, 111,
156--171. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.111.1.156 Rhodewalt, F., Sandonmatsu, D.
M., Tschanz, B., Feick, D. L., & Waller, A. (1995). Selfhandicapping and
interpersonal trade-offs: The effects of claimed self-handicaps on
observers' performance evaluations and feedback. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 21, 1042--1050. doi:10.1177/01461672952110005
Richert, R. A., Robb, M. B., Fender, J. G., & Wartella, E. (2010). Word
learning from baby videos. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine,
164(5), 432--437. doi:10.1001/archpediatrics.2010.24 Riesco-Matías, P.,
Yela-Bernabé, J. R., Crego, A., & Sánchez-Zaballos, E. (2019). What do
meta-analyses have to say about the efficacy of neurofeedback applied to
children with ADHD? Review of previous meta-analyses and a new
metaanalysis. Journal of Attention Disorders,
doi:10.1177/1087054718821731 REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-45

Rijnbeek, B., de Visser, S. J., Franson, K. L., Cohen, A. F., & van
Gerven, J. M. A. (2003). REM sleep effects as a biomarker for the
effects of antidepressants in healthy volunteers. Journal of
Psychopharmacology, 17(2), 196--203. doi:10.1177/0269881103017002008
Rilling, J. K., & Sanfey, A. G. (2011). The neuroscience of social
decision-making. Annual Review of Psychology, 62(1), 23--48.
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.121208.131647 Rips, L. J. (1975). Inductive
judgments about natural categories. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 14(6), 665--681. doi:10.1016/S0022-5371(75)80055-7
Rips, L. J., & Collins, A. (1993). Categories and resemblance. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122(4), 468--486.
doi:10.1037/0096-3445.122.4.468 Riskind, J. H., Moore, R., & Bowley, L.
(1995). The looming of spiders: The fearful perceptual distortion of
movement and menace. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33(2), 171--178.
doi:10.1016/0005-7967(94)e0023-c Rivas-Drake, D., Seaton, E. K.,
Markstrom, C., Quintana, S., Syed, M., Lee, R. M., Schwartz, S. J.,
Umaña-Taylor, A. J., French, S., Yip, T., & Racial Identity in the 21st
Century Study Group. (2014). Ethnic and racial identity in adolescence:
Implications for psychosocial, academic, and health outcomes. Child
Development, 85(1), 40--57. doi:10.1111/ cdev.12200 Rivkin, M. J.,
Davis, P. E., Lemaster, J. L., Cabral, H. J., Warfield, S. K., Mulkern,
R. V., Robson, C. D., Rose-Jacobs, R., & Frank, D. A. (2008). Volumetric
MRI study of brain in children with intrauterine exposure to cocaine,
alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana. Pediatrics, 121(4), 741--750.
doi:10.1542/peds.2007-1399 Rivkin, M. J., Flax, J., Mozell, R.,
Osathanondh, R., Volpe, J. J., & Villa-Komaroff, L. (1995).
Oligodendroglial development in human fetal cerebrum. Annals of
Neurology, 38(1), 92--101. doi:10.1002/ana/410380116 Rizzo, L. B.,
Costa, L. G., Mansur, R. B., Swardfager, W., Belangero, S. I.,
GrassiOliveira, R., . . . Brietzke, E. (2014). The theory of bipolar
disorder as an illness of accelerated aging: Implications for clinical
care and research. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 42, 157-169.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.02.004 Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L.
(2004). The mirror-neuron system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 27(1),
169--192. doi:10.1146/ annurev.neuro.27.070203.144230 Rizzolatti, G., &
Sinigaglia, C. (2016). The mirror mechanism: A basic principle of brain
function. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 17, 757. doi:10.1038/nrn.2016.135
Robins, L. N., & Regier, D. A. (Eds.). (1991). Psychiatric disorders in
America: The Epidemiologic Catchment Area Study. New York: The Free
Press. Robinson, A., Bonnette, A., Howard, K., Ceballos, N., Dailey, S.,
Lu, Y., & Grimes, T. (2019). Social comparisons, social media

R-46

addiction, and social interaction: An examination of specific social
media behaviors related to major depressive disorder in a millennial
population. Journal of Applied Biobehavioral Research, 24(1), e12158.
doi:10.1111/jabr.12158 Roche, G. (2020), Abandoning endangered
languages: Ethical loneliness, language oppression, and social justice.
American Anthropologist, 122, 164--169. doi:10.1111/ aman.13372 Rodin,
J. (1986). Aging and health: Effects of the sense of control. Science,
233, 1271--1276. doi:10.1126/science.3749877 Roediger III, H. L., &
Butler, A. C. (2011). The critical role of retrieval practice in
longterm retention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(1), 20--27.
doi:10.1016/j.tics.2010.09.003 Roenneberg, T., Kuehnle, T., Pramstaller,
P. P., Ricken, J., Havel, M., Guth, A., & Merrow, M. (2004). A marker
for the end of adolescence. Current Biology, 14(24), R1038--R1039.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2004.11. 039 Roesch, S. C., & Amirkhan, J. H. (1997).
Boundary conditions for self-serving attributions: Another look at the
sports pages. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 27, 245--261.
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1997. tb00631.x Roese, N. J., & Summerville, A.
(2005). What we regret most . . . and why. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 31(9), 1273--1285. doi:10.1177/0146167205274693
Rogers, C. (1951). Client-centered therapy: Its current practice,
implications and theory. London: Constable. Rogers, C. A. (1980). A way
of being. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Rogers, C. R. (1942). Counseling and
psychotherapy: New concepts in practice. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, L. J. (2000). Evolution of hemispheric specialization:
Advantages and disadvantages. Brain and Language, 73, 236--253.
doi:10.1006/brln.2000.2305 Rogers, T. B., Kuiper, N. A., & Kirker, W. S.
(1977). Self-reference and the encoding of personal information. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 677--688.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.35.9.677 Rogers, T. B., Kuiper, N. A., & Kirker,
W. S. (1977). Self-reference and the encoding of personal information.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(9), 677--688.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.35.9.677 Rohrer, D., & Pashler, H. (2010). Recent
research on human learning challenges conventional instructional
strategies. Educational Researcher, 39(5), 406--412.
doi:10.3102/0013189x10374770 Rokeach, M. (1968-1969). The role of values
in public opinion research. Public Opinion Quarterly, 32, 547--559.
doi:10.1086/267645 Rolls, E. T. (2000). The orbitofrontal cortex and
reward. Cerebral Cortex, 10, 284--294. doi:10.1093/cercor/10.3.284

Rolls, E. T. (2015). Limbic systems for emotion and for memory, but no
single limbic system. Cortex, 62, 119--157. doi:10.1016/j.
cortex.2013.12.005 Ronald, A., & Hoekstra, R. A. (2011). Autism spectrum
disorders and autistic traits: A decade of new twin studies. American
Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics, 156(3),
255--274. doi:10.1002/ajmg.b.31159 Roney, J. R., Hanson, K. N., Durante,
K. M., & Maestripieri, D. (2006). Reading men's faces: Women's mate
attractiveness judgments track men's testosterone and interest in
infants. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series B:
Biological Sciences, 273, 2169--2175. doi:10.1098/rspb.2006.3569
Ronningstam, E. (2014). Beyond the diagnostic traits: A collaborative
exploratory diagnostic process for dimensions and underpinnings of
narcissistic personality disorder. Personality Disorders: Theory,
Research, and Treatment, 5(4), 434--438. doi:10.1037/per0000034
Roozendaal, B., McEwen, B. S., & Chattarji, S. (2009). Stress, memory
and the amygdala. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10(6), 423--433.
doi:10.1038/nrn2651 Rorschach, H. (1921). Psychodiagnostik: Methodik und
Ergebnisse eines wahrnehmungsdiagnostischen Experiments; (Deutenlassen
von Zufallsformen). (Psychodiagnostics: Methodology and results of a
diagnostic perception experiment suggesting random forms).In Arbeiten
zur angewandten Psychiatrie (Vol. 2). Bern: Bircher. Rosales, F.,
Reznick, J. S., & Zeisel, S. (2009). Understanding the role of nutrition
in the brain and behavioral development of toddlers and preschool
children: Identifying and addressing methodological barriers.
Nutritional Neuroscience, 12(5), 190--202. doi:10.1179/147683009x423454
Rosch, E. (1983). Prototype classification and logical classification:
The two systems. In E. Scholnick (Ed.), New trends in cognitive
representation: Challenges to Piaget's theory (pp. 73--86). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum. Rosch, E. H. (1973). Natural categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 4(3), 328--350. doi:10.1016/0010-0285(73)90017-0 Rose, D.,
Fleischmann, P., Wykes, T., Leese, M., & Bindman, J. (2003). Patients'
perspectives on electroconvulsive therapy: Systematic review. BMJ,
326(7403), 1363. doi:10.1136/ bmj.326.7403.1363 Rose, J. (2011). Diverse
perspectives on the Groupthink theory--a literary review. Emerging
Leadership Journeys, 4(1), 37--57. Rose, J. E., Behm, F. M., Murugesan,
T., & McClernon, F. J. (2010). Silver acetate interactions with nicotine
and non-nicotine smoke components. Experimental and Clinical
Psychopharmacology, 18(6), 462--469. doi:10.1037/a0021966 Roselli, C.
E., Larkin, K., Resko, J. A., Stellflug, J. N., & Stormshak, F. (2004).
The volume of a sexually dimorphic nucleus in the ovine medial preoptic
area/anterior hypothalamus varies

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

with sexual partner preference. Endocrinology, 145, 478--483.
doi:10.1210/en.2003-1098 Rosenberg, J., & Tunney, R. J. (2008). Human
vocabulary use as display. Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 538--549.
doi:10.1177/147470490800600318 Rosenberg, M., Schooler, C., &
Schoenbach, C. (1989). Self-esteem and adolescent problems: Modeling
reciprocal effects. American Sociological Review, 54, 1004--1018.
doi:10.2307/2095720 Rosenberg, S. D., Rosenberg, H. J., & Farrell, M. P.
(1999). The midlife crisis revisited. In S. L. Willis & J. D. Reid
(Eds.), Life in the middle (pp. 47--73). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Rosenstein, D., & Oster, H. (1988). Differential facial responses to
four basic tastes in newborns. Child Development, 59, 1555--1568.
doi:10.2307/1130670 Rosenthal, I. A., Hutcherson, C. A., Adolphs, R., &
Stanley, D. A. (2019). Deconstructing theory-of-mind impairment in
highfunctioning adults with autism. Current Biology, 29(3), 513--519.
e516. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2018.12.039 Roser, M., & Ritchie, H. (2019).
Homicides. https://ourworldindata.org/homicides Ross, D. C., Fischhoff,
J., & Davenport, B. (2002). Treatment of ADHD when tolerance to
methylphenidate develops. Psychiatric Services, 53(1), 102--102.
doi:10.1176/appi. ps.53.1.102 Ross, G. W., & Petrovitch, H. (2001).
Current evidence for neuroprotective effects of nicotine and caffeine
against Parkinson's disease. Drugs and Aging, 18(11), 797--806.
doi:10.2165/00002512-200118110-00001 Ross, L. (1977). The intuitive
psychologist and his shortcomings: Distortions in the attribution
process. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 10, pp. 174--221). New York: Academic Press. Rossion,
B., & Michel, C. (2011). An experience-based holistic account of the
otherrace face effect. In G. Rhodes, A. Calder, M. Johnson, & J. V.
Haxby (Eds.), Oxford handbook of face perception (pp. 215--244). New
York: Oxford University Press.doi:10.1093/
oxfordbh/9780199559053.013.0012 Roth, G., & Dicke, U. (2005). Evolution
of the brain and intelligence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(5),
250--257. doi:10.1016/j.tics. 2005.03.005 Rothbart, M. K. (2007).
Temperament, development, and personality. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 16(4), 207--212.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2007.00505.x Rothbart, M. K. (2011). Becoming
who we are: Temperament and personality in development. New York: The
Guilford Press. Rothbart, M. K., & Derryberry, D. (1981). Development of
individual differences in temperament. In M. E. Lamb & A. L. Brown
(Eds.), Advances in developmental psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 37--86).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Rothbart, M. K., Ahadi, S. A., & Evans, D. E.
(2000). Temperament and personality:

Origins and outcomes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
78(1), 122--135. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.1.122 Rothbart, M. K., Sheese,
B. E., Rueda, M. R., & Posner, M. I. (2011). Developing mechanisms of
self-regulation in early life. Emotion Review, 3(2), 207--213.
doi:10.1177/1754073910387943 Rothbaum, B. O., Rizzo, A. S., & Difede, J.
(2010). Virtual reality exposure therapy for combat-related
posttraumatic stress disorder. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1208(1), 126--132. doi:10.1111/ j.1749-6632.2010.05691.x
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus
external control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80, 1--27.
doi:10.1037/h0092976 Rowland, L. W. (1939). Will hypnotized persons try
to harm themselves or others? The Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 34(1), 114--117. doi:10.1037/h0055818 Rubia, K., Norman, L.,
Lukito, S., Carlisi, C., Mataix-Cols, D., & Radua, J. (2016). Top-down
control in ADHD: Disorderspecificity relative to CD, autism and OCD.
European Neuropsychopharmacology, 2(26), S149-S150.
doi:10.1016/S0924977X(16)30960-9 Rule, N. O., Ambady, N., Adams, R. B.,
Jr., Ozono, H., Nakashima, S., Yoshikawa, S., & Watabe, M. (2010).
Polling the face: Prediction and consensus across cultures. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 98(1), 1--15. doi:10.1037/a0017673
Ruscio, A., Stein, D., Chiu, W., & Kessler, R. (2010). The epidemiology
of obsessivecompulsive disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Molecular Psychiatry, 15(1), 53--63. doi:10.1038/mp.
2008.94 Rushton, D. H., Dover, R., Sainsbury, A. W., Norris, M. J.,
Gilkes, J. J., & Ramsey, I. D. (2001). Why should women have lower
reference limits for haemoglobin and ferritin concentrations than men?
British Medical Journal, 322, 1355--1357. doi:10.1136/bmj. 322.7298.1355
Rushton, J. P., Fulker, D. W., Neale, M. C., Nias, D. K. B., & Eysenck,
H. J. (1986). Altruism and aggression: The heritability of individual
differences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50,
1192--1198. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.50.6.1192 Russell, D. W. (1996). UCLA
Loneliness Scale (Version 3): Reliability, validity, and factor
structure. Journal of Personality Assessment, 66(1), 20--40.
doi:10.1207/ s15327752jpa6601_2 Russell, D., & Cutrona, C. (2010).
Stressful effects of where you live: Studying the influence of
neighborhood context over time. Paper presented at the World Conference
on Stress and Anxiety Research, Galway, Ireland. Russell, D., Peplau, L.
A., & Cutrona, C. E. (1980). The revised UCLA Loneliness Scale:
Concurrent and discriminant

validity evidence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(3),
472--480. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.39.3.472 Russell, J. A. (1980). A
circumplex model of affect. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 39, 1161--1178. doi:10.1037/ h0077714 Russell, J. A., &
Mehrabian, A. (1978). Approach-avoidance and affiliation as functions of
the emotion-eliciting quality of an environment. Environment and
Behavior, 10(3), 355--387. doi:10.1177/0013916578103005 Russell, J. A.,
Epstein, L. G., Greer, D. M., Kirschen, M., Rubin, M. A., & Lewis, A.
(2019). Brain death, the determination of brain death, and member
guidance for brain death accommodation requests. AAN Position Statement,
92(5), 228--232. doi:10.1212/wnl.0000000000006750 Russell, W. M. S., &
Burch, R. L. (1959). The principles of humane experimental technique.
London, UK: Methuen. Russo, R., & Mammarella, N. (2002). Spacing effects
in recognition memory: When meaning matters. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 49--59. doi:10.1080/09541440042000133 Rust, J.
(1999). Discriminant validity of the 'big five' personality traits in
employment settings. Social Behavior and Personality, 27(1), 99--108.
doi:10.2224/sbp.1999.27.1.99 Ruwaard, J., Lange, A., Schrieken, B.,
Dolan, C. V., & Emmelkamp, P. (2012). The effectiveness of online
cognitive behavioral treatment in routine clinical practice. PLoS One,
7(7), e40089. doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0040089 Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E.
L. (2001). On happiness and human potentials: A review of research on
hedonic and eudaimonic well-being. Annual Review of Psychology, 52(1),
141--166. doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.52.1.141 Rychlowska, M., Miyamoto,
Y., Matsumoto, D., Hess, U., Gilboa-Schechtman, E., Kamble, S., Muluk,
H., Masuda, T., & Niedenthal, P. M. (2015). Heterogeneity of
long-history migration explains cultural differences in reports of
emotional expressivity and the functions of smiles. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112(19),
E2429--E2436. doi:10.1073/pnas.1413661112 S. Laureys & G. Tononi (Eds.),
The neurology of consciousness: Cognitive neuroscience and
neuropathology (pp. 81--88). Oxford, UK: Elsevier Academic Press.
Saarimäki, H., Gotsopoulos, A., Jääskeläinen, I. P., Lampinen, J.,
Vuilleumier, P., Hari, R., . . .Nummenmaa, L. (2015). Discrete neural
signatures of basic emotions. Cerebral Cortex, 26(6), 2563--2573.
doi:10.1093/cercor/bhv086 Sabatini, R. M. E. (1997). The history of
lobotomy. http://www.cerebromente.org.br/n02/ historia/lobotomy.htm

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-47

Sacco, K. A., Termine, A., & Seyal, A. (2005). Effects of cigarette
smoking on spatial working memory and attentional deficits in
schizophrenia: Involvement of nicotinic receptor mechanisms Archives of
General Psychiatry, 62(6), 649--659. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.649
Sackeim, H. A. (2014). Autobiographical memory and ECT: Don't throw out
the baby. The Journal of ECT, 30(3), 177--186.
doi:10.1097/YCT.0000000000000117 Sackett, G. P. (1966). Monkeys reared
in isolation with pictures as visual input: Evidence for an innate
releasing mechanism. Science, 154, 1468--1473. doi:10.1126/
science.154.3755.1468 Sajatovic, M., Valenstein, M., Blow, F., Ganoczy,
D., & Ignacio, R. (2007). Treatment adherence with lithium and
anticonvulsant medications among patients with bipolar disorder.
Psychiatric Services, 58(6), 855--863. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.58.6.855
Sakai, Y., Shaw, C. A., Dawson, B. C., Dugas, D. V., Al-Mohtaseb, Z.,
Hill, D. E., & Zoghbi, H. Y. (2011). Protein interactome reveals
converging molecular pathways among autism disorders. Science
Translational Medicine, 3(86), 86ra49. doi:10.1126/ scitranslmed.3002166
Sakurai, T., Amemiya, A., Ishii, M., Matsuzaki, I., Chemelli, R. M.,
Tanaka, H., Williams, S. C., Richardson, J. A., Kozlowski, G. P.,
Wilson, S., Arch, J. R., Buckingham, R. E., Haynes, A. C., Carr, S. A.,
Annan, R. S., McNulty, D. E., Liu, W. S., Terret. J. A., Elshourbagy, N.
A., . . . Yanagisawa, M. (1998). Orexins and orexin receptors: a family
of hypothalamic neuropeptides and G proteincoupled receptors that
regulate feeding behavior. Cell, 92(5), 573--585.
doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80949-6 Salari, N., Hosseinian-Far, A.,
Jalali, R., VaisiRaygani, A., Rasoulpoor, S., Mohammadi, M., Rasoulpoor,
S., & Khaledi-Paveh, B. (2020). Prevalence of stress, anxiety,
depression among the general population during the COVID-19 pandemic: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Globalization and Health, 16(1),
57. doi:10.1186/s12992-020-00589-w Salgado, S., & Kaplitt, M. G. (2015).
The nucleus accumbens: A comprehensive review. Stereotactic and
Functional Neurosurgery, 93(2), 75--93. doi:10.1159/000368279 Salovey,
P., & Mayer, J. D. (1990). Emotional intelligence. Imagination,
Cognition and Personality, 9(3), 185--211. doi:10.2190/
DUGG-P24E-52WK-6CDG Sanchez-Roige, S., Gray, J. C., MacKillop, J., Chen,
C.-H., & Palmer, A. A. (2018). The genetics of human personality. Genes,
Brain and Behavior, 17(3), e12439. doi:10.1111/gbb.12439 Sandstrom, G.
M., & Dunn, E. W. (2014). Social interactions and well-being: The
surprising power of weak ties. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 40(7), 910--922. .. doi:10.1177/0146167214529799 Sanfey, A.
G., Rilling, J. K., Aronson, J. A., Nystrom, L. E., & Cohen, J. D.
(2003). The neural basis of economic decision-making in

R-48

the Ultimatum Game. Science, 300, 1755--1758.
doi:10.1126/science.1082976 Santosa, C. M., Strong, C. M., Nowakowska,
C., Wang, P. W., Rennicke, C. M., & Ketter, T. A. (2007). Enhanced
creativity in bipolar disorder patients: A controlled study. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 100(1--3), 31--39. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2006.10.013
Sapolsky, R. (2001). A primate's memoir. New York: Scribner. Sarnoff,
I., & Zimbardo, P. G. (1961). Anxiety, fear, and social isolation. The
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 62(2), 356--363.
doi:10.1037/h0046506 Satizabal, C. L., Beiser, A. S., Chouraki, V.,
Chêne, G., Dufouil, C., & Seshadri, S. (2016). Incidence of dementia
over three decades in the Framingham Heart Study. New England Journal of
Medicine, 374(6), 523--532. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1504327 Saunders, D. T.,
Roe, C. A., Smith, G., & Clegg, H. (2016). Lucid dreaming incidence: A
quality effects meta-analysis of 50 years of research. Consciousness and
Cognition, 43, 197--215. doi:10.1016/j.concog.2016.06.002 Saunders, E.
F., Ramsden, C. E., Sherazy, M. S., Gelenberg, A. J., Davis, J. M., &
Rapoport, S. I. (2016). Omega-3 and omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids
in bipolar disorder: A review of biomarker and treatment studies. The
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 77(10), 1301--1308.
doi:10.4088/JCP.15r09925 Savage-Rumbaugh, S., Shanker, S. G., & Taylor,
T. J. (1998). Apes, language, and the human mind. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press. Savin-Williams, R. C., & Vrangalova, Z. (2013). Mostly
heterosexual as a distinct sexual orientation group: A systematic review
of the empirical evidence. Developmental Review, 33(1), 58--88.
doi:10.1016/j.dr.2013.01.001 Savine, R., & Sönksen, P. (2000). Growth
hormone--hormone replacement for the somatopause? Hormone Research in
Paediatrics, 53(Suppl. 3), 37--41. doi:10.1159/000023531 Schachter, S.
(1951). Deviation, rejection, and communication. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 46, 190--207. doi:10.1037/h0062326 Schachter, S. (1959). The
psychology of affiliation: Experimental studies of the sources of
gregariousness (Vol. 1). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social and physiological
determinants of emotional state. Psychological Review, 69, 379--399.
doi:10.1037/h0046234 Schartner, M. M., Carhart-Harris, R. L., Barrett,
A. B., Seth, A. K., & Muthukumaraswamy, S. D. (2017). Increased
spontaneous MEG signal diversity for psychoactive doses of ketamine, LSD
and psilocybin. Scientific Reports, 7, 46421--46421.
doi:10.1038/srep46421 Scheepens, D. S., van Waarde, J. A., Lok, A., de
Vries, G., Denys, D. A. J. P., & van Wingen, G. A. (2020). The link
between structural and functional brain abnormalities in depression: A
systematic review of multimodal neuroimaging studies. Frontiers

in Psychiatry, 11(485). doi:10.3389/ fpsyt.2020.00485 Schenck, C. H.,
Bundlie, S. R., Ettinger, M. G., & Mohowald, M. (2002). Chronic
behavioral disorders of human REM sleep: A new category of parasomnia.
Sleep, 25(2), 119--119. doi:10.1093/sleep/9.2.293 Schifani, C.,
Pruessner, J., Tseng, H.-H., Rao, N., Tagore, A., Wilson, A. A., Houle,
S., Rusjan, P. M., & Mizrahi, R. (2019). Stress-induced cortical
dopamine response is altered in subjects at clinical high risk for
psychosis using cannabis. Addiction Biology, 25, e12812.
doi:10.1111/adb.12812 Schimmelmann, B. G., Friedel, S., Nguyen, T. T.,
Sauer, S., Vogel, C. I. G., Konrad, K., Wilhelm, C., Sinzig, J., Renner,
T. J., Romanos, M., Palmason, H., Dempfle, A., Walitza, S., Freitag, C.,
Meyer, J., Linder, M., Schäfer, H., Warnke, A., Lesch, K. P.,
Herpertz-Dalman, P., & Hebebrand, J. (2009). Exploring the genetic link
between RLS and ADHD. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 43(10), 941--945.
doi:10.1016/j. jpsychires.2009.01.003 Schjedlderup-Ebbe, T. (1922).
Beiträge zur Sozialpsychologie des Haushuhns (Contributions to the
social psychology of the house chicken). Zeitschrift für Psychologie,
88, 225--252. Schlaug, G., Forgeard, M., Zhu, L., Norton, A., Norton,
A., & Winner, E. (2009). Traininginduced neuroplasticity in young
children. Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 1169, 205--208.
doi:10.1111/j.17496632.2009.04842.x Schlaug, G., Jancke, L., Huang, Y.,
& Steinmetz, H. (1995). In vivo evidence of structural brain asymmetry
in musicians. Science, 267, 699--701. doi:10.1126/science.7839149
Schober, M. F., & Carstensen, L. L. (2010). Does being together for
years help comprehension? In E. Morsella (Ed.), Expressing
oneself/expressing one's self: Communication, cognition, language, and
identity. (pp. 107--124). Hove, U.K.: Psychology Press/Taylor& Francis.
Schön, D., Gordon, R., Campagne, A., Magne, C., Astésano, C., Anton,
J.-L., & Besson, M. (2010). Similar cerebral networks in language, music
and song perception. NeuroImage, 51(1), 450--461. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2010.02.023 Schroeder, S. (2008). Stranded in the periphery
---The increasing marginalization of smokers. New England Journal of
Medicine, 358(21), 2284--2286. doi:10.1056/ NEJMe0802708 Schroeder, V.,
& Kelley, M. (2009). Associations between family environment, parenting
practices, and executive functioning of children with and without ADHD.
Journal of Child and Family Studies, 18(2), 227--235.
doi:10.1007/s10826-008-9223-0 Schroder, G. (2001). Full solidarity with
the United States. http://ghdi.ghi-dc.org/sub
\_document.cfm?document_id=3724

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Schulte-Rüther, M., Otte, E., Adigüzel, K., Firk, C., Herpertz-Dahlmann,
B., Koch, I., & Konrad, K. (2017). Intact mirror mechanisms for
automatic facial emotions in children and adolescents with autism
spectrum disorder. Autism Research, 10(2), 298--310.
doi:10.1002/aur.1654 Schurz, G. (1985). Experimentelle Überprüfung des
Zusammenhangs zwischen Persönlichkeitsmerkmalen und der Bereitschaft zum
destruktiven Gehorsam gegenüber Autoritäten \[Experimental examination
of the relationship between personality characteristics and the
readiness to destructive obedience to authorities\]. Zeitschrift für
experimentelle und angewandte Psychologie, 32, 160--177. Schuster, M.
A., Stein, L. H., Jaycox, R. L., Marshall, G. N., Elliott, M. N., &
Zhou, J. e. a. (2002). After 9/11: Stress and coping across America.
http://www.rand.org/pubs/testimonies/2005/CT198.pdf Schwartz, B. (1984).
Psychology of learning and behavior (2nd ed.). New York: Norton.
Schwartz, C. E., Snidman, N., & Kagan, J. (1999). Adolescent social
anxiety as an outcome of inhibited temperament in childhood. Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38(8),
1008--1015. doi:10.1097/00004583199908000-00017 Schwarz, M., & Susswein,
A. J. (1992). Presence of conspecifics facilitates learning that food is
inedible in Aplysia fasciata. Behavioral Neuroscience, 106(2), 250--261.
doi:10.1037/0735-7044.106.2.250 Scott, J. G., Matuschka, L., Niemelä,
S., Miettunen, J., Emmerson, B., & Mustonen, A. (2018). Evidence of a
causal relationship between smoking tobacco and schizophrenia spectrum
disorders. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 9(607). doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2018.
00607 Scott, S. G., & Bruce, R. A. (1995). Decisionmaking style: The
development and assessment of a new measure. Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 55(5), 818--831.
doi:10.1177/0013164495055005017 Scott, V., & Gijsbers, K. (1981). Pain
perception in competitive swimmers. British Medical Journal, 283,
91--93. doi:10.1136/ bmj.283.6284.91 Scully, J. A., Tosi, H., & Banning,
K. (2000). Life event checklists: Revisiting the Social Readjustment
Rating Scale after 30 years. Educational and Psychological Measurement,
60, 864--876. doi:10.1177 /00131640021970952 Sczesny, S., Formanowicz,
M., & Moser, F. (2016). Can gender-fair language reduce gender
stereotyping and discrimination? Frontiers in Psychology, 7(25).
doi:10.3389/ fpsyg.2016.00025 Seeley, W. W., Matthews, B. R., Crawford,
R. K., Gorno-Tempini, M. L., Foti, D., Mackenzie, I. R., & Miller, B. L.
(2008). Unravelling Boléro: Progressive aphasia, transmodal creativity

and the right posterior neocortex. Brain, 131(1), 39--49.
doi:10.1093/brain/awm270 Segerstrom, S. C., & Miller, G. E. (2004).
Psychological stress and the human immune system: A meta-analytic study
of 30 years of inquiry. Psychological Bulletin, 130(4), 601--630.
doi:10.1037/0033-2909. 130.4.601 Seksel, K., & Lindeman, M. J. (2001).
Use of clomipramine in treatment of obsessivecompulsive disorder,
separation anxiety and noise phobia in dogs: A preliminary, clinical
study. Australian Veterinary Journal, 79, 252-- 256.
doi:10.1111/j.1751-0813.2001.tb11976.x Seligman, M. E. (1971). Phobias
and preparedness. Behavior Therapy, 2(3), 307--320.
doi:10.1016/s0005-7894(71)80064-3 Seligman, M. E. (2012). Flourish: A
visionary new understanding of happiness and wellbeing. New York, NY:
Simon and Schuster. Seligman, M. E. (2019). Positive psychology: A
personal history. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 15, 1--23.
doi:10.1146/annurevclinpsy-050718-095653 Seligman, M. E. P. (1987).
Predicting depression, poor health, and presidential elections. Paper
presented at the Science and Public Policy Seminar sponsored by the
Federation of Behavioral, Psychological and Cognitive Sciences,
Washington, D.C. Seligman, M. E. P. (1990). Learned optimism. New York:
Simon & Schuster. Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). Authentic happiness: Using
the new positive psychology to realize your potential for lasting
fulfillment. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster. Seligman, M. E. P., &
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An introduction.
American Psychologist, 55(1), 5--14. doi:10.1037/0003-066x.55.1.5 Selye,
H. (1975). Confusion and controversy in the stress field. Journal of
Human Stress, 1(2), 37--44. doi:10.1080/009784 0X.1975.9940406 Semple,
B. D., Blomgren, K., Gimlin, K., Ferriero, D. M., & Noble-Haeusslein, L.
J. (2013). Brain development in rodents and humans: Identifying
benchmarks of maturation and vulnerability to injury across species.
Progress in Neurobiology, 106--107, 1--16.
doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.04.001 Senju, A., Southgate, V., White, S.,
& Frith, U. (2009). Mindblind eyes: An absence of spontaneous theory of
mind in Asperger syndrome. Science, 325(5942), 883--885.
doi:10.1126/science.1176170 Seo, J. S., Wei, J., Qin, L., Kim, Y., Yan,
Z., & Greengard, P. (2017). Cellular and molecular basis for
stress-induced depression. Molecular Psychiatry, 22(10), 1440--1447.
doi:10.1038/mp.2016.118 Serbin, L. A., Poulin-Dubois, D., Colburne, K.
A., Sen, M. G., & Eichstedt, J. A. (2001). Gender stereotyping in
infancy: Visual preferences for and knowledge of genderstereotyped toys
in the second year. International Journal of

Behavioral Development, 25(1), 7--15. doi:10.1080/01650250042000078
Sereno, M. I., & Tootell, R. B. H. (2005). From monkeys to humans: What
do we now know about brain homologies? Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
15, 135--144. doi:10.1016/j.conb.2005.03.014 Sessa, B., & Johnson, M. W.
(2015). Can psychedelic compounds play a part in drug dependence
therapy? The British Journal of Psychiatry, 206(1), 1--3.
doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.114.148031 Sessa, B., Higbed, L., & Nutt, D. (2019).
A review of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-assisted
psychotherapy. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 10(138). doi:10.3389/
fpsyt.2019.00138 Setchell, J. M., & Wickings, E. J. (2005). Dominance,
status signals and coloration in male mandrills (Mandrillus sphinx).
Ethology, 111, 25--50. doi:10.1111/j.14390310.2004.01054.x Shadrina, M.,
Bondarenko, E. A., & Slominsky, P. A. (2018). Genetics factors in major
depressive disease. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 9(334).
doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00334 Shalev, A. Y., Gevonden, M.,
Ratanatharathorn, A., Laska, E., van der Mei, W. F., Qi, W., Lowe, S.,
Lai, B. S., Bryant, R. A., Delahanty, D., Matsuoka, Y. J., Olff, M.,
Schnyder, U., Seedat, S., deRoonCassini, T. A., Kessler, R. C., Koenen,
K. C., & International Consortium to Predict PTSD. (2019). Estimating
the risk of PTSD in recent trauma survivors: Results of the
International Consortium to Predict PTSD (ICPP). World Psychiatry,
18(1), 77--87. doi:10.1002/wps.20608 Shallice, T., & Warrington, E. K.
(1970). Independent functioning of verbal memory stores: A
neuropsychological study. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
22, 261--273. doi:10.1080/00335557043000203 Shaw, P. J., Cirelli, C.,
Greenspan, R. J., & Tononi, G. (2000). Correlates of sleep and waking in
Drosophila melanogaster. Science, 287(5459), 1834--1837.
doi:10.1126/science. 287.5459.1834 Shaw, P., Eckstrand, K., Sharp, W.,
Blumenthal, J., Lerch, J. P., Greenstein, D., Clasen, L., Evans, A.,
Giedd, J., & Rapoport, J. L. (2007). Attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder is characterized by a delay in cortical maturation. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
104(49), 19649--19654. doi:10.1073/pnas.0707741104 Shaw, P., Greenstein,
D., Lerch, J., Clasen, L., Lenroot, R., Gogtay, N., Evans, A., Rapoport,
J., & Giedd, J. (2006). Intellectual ability and cortical development in
children and adolescents. Nature, 440(7084), 676--679.
doi:10.1038/nature04513 Shaw, P., Malek, M., Watson, B., Greenstein, D.,
de Rossi, P., & Sharp, W. (2013). Trajectories of cerebral cortical
development in childhood and adolescence and adult
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 74(8),
599--606. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.04.007

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-49

Shaywitz, S. E. (1996). Dyslexia. Scientific American, 275, 98--105.
Shaywitz, S. E., & Shaywitz, B. A. (2005). Dyslexia (Specific Reading
Disability). Biological Psychiatry, 57(11), 1301--1309.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.01.043 Shaywitz, S. E., Shaywitz, B. A.,
Pugh, K. R., Fulbright, R. K., Constable, R. T., Mencl, W. E.,
Shankweiler, D. P., Liberman, A. M., Skudlarski, P., Fletcher, J. M.,
Katz, L., Marchione, K. E., Lacadie, C., Gatenby, C., & Gore, J. (1998).
Functional disruption in the organization of the brain for reading in
dyslexia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 95(5), 2636--2641. doi:10.1073/pnas.95.5.2636
Shechter, A., Kim, E. W., St-Onge, M.-P., & Westwood, A. J. (2018).
Blocking nocturnal blue light for insomnia: A randomized controlled
trial. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 96, 196--202. doi:10.1016/j.
jpsychires.2017.10.015 Shedler, J. (2012). The efficacy of psychodynamic
psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 65(2), 98--109. doi:10.1037/
a0018378 Sheldon, S., Farb, N., Palombo, D. J., & Levine, B. (2016).
Intrinsic medial temporal lobe connectivity relates to individual
differences in episodic autobiographical remembering. Cortex, 74,
206--216. doi:10.1016/j.cortex. 2015.11.005 Shepard, R. N. (1990). Mind
Sights: Original visual illusions, ambiguities, and other anomalies with
a commentary on the play of mind in perception and art. New York: W.H.
Freeman. Sher, L. (2006). Alcohol consumption and suicide. QJM: Monthly
Journal of the Association of Physicians, 99(1), 57--61.
doi:10.1093/qjmed/hci146 Sheridan, S. M., & Burt, J. D. (2009).
Familycentered positive psychology. In S. J. Lopez & C. R. Snyder
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of positive psychology (2nd ed.).
(pp. 551--559). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Sherif, M.,
Harvey, L. J., White, B. J., Hood, W. R., & Sherif, C. (1961). The
Robbers Cave experiment: Intergroup conflict and cooperation. Norman,
OK: University of Oklahoma Institute of Intergroup Relations. Sherman,
D. K., & Kim, H. S. (2005). Is there an "I" in "team"? The role of the
self in groupserving judgments. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 88(1), 108--120. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.88.1.108 Sherman, R.
A., Rauthmann, J. F., Brown, N. A., Serfass, D. G., & Jones, A. B.
(2015). The independent effects of personality and situations on
real-time expressions of behavior and emotion. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 109(5), 872--888. doi:10.1037/pspp0000036 Shi,
J., Potash, J., Knowles, J., Weissman, M., Coryell, W., Scheftner, W.,
Lawson, W. B., DePaulo Jr., D. P., Gejman, P. V., Sanders, A. R.,
Johnson, J. K., Adams, P., Chaudhury, S., Jancic, D., Evgrafov, O.,
Zvinyatskovskiy, A., Ertman, N., Gladis, M., Neimanis, K., . . .

R-50

Levinson, D. F. (2011). Genome-wide association study of recurrent
early-onset major depressive disorder. Molecular Psychiatry, 16(2),
193--201. doi:10.1038/mp.2009.124 Shields, M. (2004). Stress, health,
and the benefit of social support. Health Reports (Statistics Canada,
Catalogue 82--003), 15, 9--38. Shiota, M. N., & Levenson, R. W. (2007).
Birds of a feather don't always fly farthest: Similarity in Big Five
personality predicts more negative marital satisfaction trajectories in
long-term marriages. Psychology and Aging, 22(4), 666--675.
doi:10.1037/08827974.22.4.666 Shu, L. L., Gino, F., & Bazerman, M. H.
(2011). Dishonest deed, clear conscience: When cheating leads to moral
disengagement and motivated forgetting. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 37(3), 330--349. doi:10.1177/0146167211398138 Sia,
C.-L., Tan, B. C. Y., & Wei, K.-K. (2002). Group polarization and
computer-mediated communication: Effects of communication cues, social
presence, and anonymity. Information Systems Research, 13(1), 70--90.
doi:10.1287/isre.13.1.70.92 Siegel, J. M. (2001). The REM sleep-memory
consolidation hypothesis. Science, 294(5544), 1058--1063. doi:10.1126/
science.1063049 Siegel, J. Z., & Crockett, M. J. (2013). How serotonin
shapes moral judgment and behavior. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1299(1), 42--51. doi:10.1111/ nyas.12229 Siegel, S. (2016).
The heroin overdose mystery. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 25(6), 375--379. doi:10.1177/0963721416664404 Siegel, S.,
Hinson, R., Krank, M., & McCully, J. (1982). Heroin "overdose" death:
Contribution of drug-associated environmental cues. Science, 216(4544),
436--437. doi:10.1126/science.7200260 Siegfried, J. (2010). Airlines
might charge fat people higher fares. http://www.examiner
.com/airlines-airport-in-national/airlines
-might-charge-fat-peoplehigher-fares Siegle, G., Sagratti, S., &
Crawford, C. (1999). Effects of rumination and initial severity on
response to cognitive therapy for depression. Paper presented at the
Meeting of the Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy,
Toronto, ON. Siever, L. J. (2008). Neurobiology of aggression and
violence. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 165(4), 429--442.
doi:10.1176/ appi.ajp.2008.07111774 Silva, B. A., Mattucci, C.,
Krzywkowski, P., Cuozzo, R., Carbonari, L., & Gross, C. T. (2016). The
ventromedial hypothalamus mediates predator fear memory. The European
Journal of Neuroscience, 43(11), 1431--1439. doi:10.1111/ejn.13239
Silva, B. A., Mattucci, C., Krzywkowski, P., Murana, E., Illarionova,
A., Grinevich, V., Canteras, N. S., Ragozzino, D., & Gross, C. T.
(2013). Independent hypothalamic

circuits for social and predator fear. Nature Neuroscience, 16(12),
1731--1733. doi:10.1038/nn.3573 Silver, D., Huang, A., Maddison, C. J.,
Guez, A., Sifre, L., van den Driessche, G., Schrittwieser, J.,
Antonoglu, I., Panneershelvam, V., Lanctot, M., Dieleman, S., Grewe, D.,
Nham, J., Kalchbrenner, N., Sutskever, I., Lillicrap, T., Leach, M.,
Kavukcuoglu, K., Graepel, T., & Hassabis, D. Hassabis, D. (2016).
Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search.
Nature, 529(7587), 484--489. doi:10.1038/nature16961 Silvia, P. J.
(2005). Deflecting reactance: The role of similarity in increasing
compliance and reducing resistance. Basic and Applied Social Psychology,
27, 277--284. doi:10.1207/ s15324834basp2703_9 Simon, H. A. (1957).
Models of man: Social and rational; Mathematical essays on rational
human behavior in society setting: New York, NY: Wiley. Simons-Morton,
B. G., Bingham, C. R., Falk, E. B., Li, K., Pradhan, A. K., Ouimet, M.
C., Almani, F., Shope, J. T. (2014). Experimental effects of injunctive
norms on simulated risky driving among teenage males. Health Psychology
33(7), 616--627. doi:10.1037/ a0034837 Simons, D. J. (2014). The value
of direct replication. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9(1),
76--80. doi:10.1177/1745691613514755 Simons, L. G., & Conger, R. D.
(2007). Linking mother-father differences in parenting to a typology of
family parenting styles and adolescent outcomes. Journal of Family
Issues, 28(2), 212--241. doi:10.1177/0192513X06294593 Simonton, D. K.
(2008). Creativity and genius. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A.
Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research
(pp. 679--698). New York, NY: The Guilford Press. Simonton, D. K.
(2017). Creative productivity across the life span. In J. A. Plucker
(Ed.), Creativity and innovation: Theory, research, and practice
(pp. 119--132). Waco, TX: Prufrock Press. Simpson, D. (2005). Phrenology
and the neurosciences: Contributions of F. J. Gall and J. G. Spurzheim.
ANZ Journal of Surgery, 75(6), 475. doi:10.1111/j.1445-2197.2005.03426.x
Simpson, E. A., Maylott, S. E., Lazo, R. J., Leonard, K. A., Kaburu, S.
S. K., Suomi, S. J., Paukner, A., & Ferrari, P. F. (2019). Social touch
alters newborn monkey behavior. Infant Behavior and Development, 57,
101368. doi:10.1016/j.infbeh.2019.101368 Singer, M. I., Miller, D. B.,
Guo, S., Slovak, K., & Frierson, T. (1998). The mental health
consequences of children's exposure to violence. Cleveland, OH: Cayahoga
County Community Mental Health Research Institute, Mandel School of
Applied Social Sciences, Case Western Reserve University. Singer, T.,
Kiebel, S. J., Winston, J. S., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2004).
Brain responses

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

to the acquired moral status of faces. Neuron, 41, 653--662.
doi:10.1016/S08966273(04)00014-5 Sinha, Y., Silove, N., & Williams, K.
(2006). Chelation therapy and autism. BMJ: British Medical Journal,
333(7571), 756. doi:10.1136/bmj.333.7571.756 Skene, D. J., Lockley, S.
W., & Arendt, J. (1999). Use of melatonin in the treatment of phase
shift and sleep disorders. In G. Huether, W. Kochen, T. J. Simat, & H.
Steinhart (Eds.), Tryptophan, serotonin, and melatonin (pp. 79--84). New
York, NY: Springer. Skinner, B. F. (1953). Some contributions of an
experimental analysis of behavior to psychology as a whole. American
Psychologist, 8, 69--78. doi:10.1037/h0054118 Skinner, B. F. (1960).
Pigeons in a pelican. American Psychologist, 15, 28--37.
doi:10.1037/h0045345 Skinner, B. F. (1971). Beyond freedom and dignity.
New York: Knopf. Skodol, A. E., & Bender, D. S. (2003). Why are women
diagnosed borderline more than men? Psychiatric Quarterly, 74(4),
349--360. doi:10.1023/A:1026087410516 Skuse, D. H. (2000). Behavioural
phenotypes: What do they teach us? Archives of Disease in Childhood,
82(3), 222--225. doi:10.1136/ adc.82.3.222 Slattery, J., MacFabe, D.,
Kahler, S., & Frye, R. (2016). Enteric ecosystem disruption in autism
spectrum disorder: Can the microbiota and macrobiota be restored?
Current Pharmaceutical Design, 22(40), 6107--6121.
doi:10.2174/1381612822666160905123953 Slobodchikoff, C. N., Perla, B.
S., & Verdoli, J. L. (2009). Communication and community in an animal
society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Slomski, A. (2019).
Hypnotherapy provides IBS relief: Clinical trials update. JAMA, 321(4),
335--335. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.22028 Slotema, C. W., Dirk Blom, J.,
Hoek, H. W., & Sommer, I. E. (2010). Should we expand the toolbox of
psychiatric treatment methods to include repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation (rTMS)? A meta-analysis of the efficacy of rTMS in
psychiatric disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71(7), 873--884.
doi:10.4088/JCP.08m04872gre Slovic, P., Peters, E., Finucane, M. L., &
MacGregor, D. G. (2005). Affect, risk, and decision making. Health
Psychology, 24(4, Suppl), S35-S40. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.24.4.S35
Smeland, O. B., Bahrami, S., Frei, O., Shadrin, A., O'Connell, K.,
Savage, J., Watanabe, K., Krull, F., Bettella, F., Steen, N. E., Ueland,
T., Posthuma, D., Djurovic, S., Dale, A. M., & Andreassen, O. A. (2020).
Genome-wide analysis reveals extensive genetic overlap between
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and intelligence. Molecular Psychiatry,
25(4), 844--853. doi:10.1038/s41380-018-0332-x Smith, A. M., Floerke, V.
A., & Thomas, A. K. (2016). Retrieval practice protects memory against
acute stress. Science, 354(6315), 1046--1048.
doi:10.1126/science.aah5067

Smith, E. E., & Grossman, M. (2008). Multiple systems of category
learning. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 32(2), 249--264.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2007.07.009 Smith, E. E., Shoben, E. J., & Rips,
L. J. (1974). Structure and process in semantic memory: A featural model
for semantic decisions. Psychological Review, 81(3), 214--241.
doi:10.1037/h0036351 Smith, S., Ferguson, C., & Beaver, K. (2018). A
longitudinal analysis of shooter games and their relationship with
conduct disorder and self-reported delinquency. International Journal of
Law and Psychiatry, 58, 48--53. doi:10.1016/j.ijlp.2018.02.008 Smith,
T., & Lovaas, I. (1998). Intensive early behavioral intervention with
autism: The UCLA Young Autism Project. Infants and Young Children, 10,
67--78. doi:10.1007/ s10803-008-0596-0 Smith, V., & Wanless, A. (2020).
Unmasking the truth: Public health experts, the coronavirus, and the
raucous marketplace of ideas. https://
carnegieendowment.org/2020/07/16/unmasking
-truth-public-health-experts-coronavirus-and
-raucous-marketplace-of-ideas-pub-82314 Smoller, J. W. (2016). The
genetics of stress-related disorders: PTSD, depression, and anxiety
disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology, 41(1), 297--319.
doi:10.1038/npp.2015.266 Sneed, J. R., Whitbourne, S. K., & Culang, M.
E. (2006). Trust, identity, and ego integrity: Modeling Erikson's core
stages over 34 years. Journal of Adult Development, 13 (3--4), 148--157.
doi:10.1007/s10804-0079026-3 Snyder, C. R. (1994). The psychology of
hope: You can get there from here. New York, NY: Free Press. Snyder, C.
R., Berg, C., Woodward, J. T., Gum, A., Rand, K. L., Wrobleski, K. K.,
Brown, J. Hackman, A. (2005). Hope against the cold: Individual
differences in trait hope and acute pain tolerance on the cold pressor
task. Journal of Personality, 73(2), 287--312.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-6494.2005.00318.x Snyder, C. R., Rand, K. L., &
Sigmon, D. R. (2002). Hope theory: A member of the positive psychology
family. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive
psychology (pp. 257--276). New York, NY US: Oxford University Press.
Society for Neuroscience. (2019). For press. http://www.sfn.org:443/For
Press Solomon, Z., Mikulincer, M., & Hobfoll, S. E. (1986). Effects of
social support and battle intensity on loneliness and breakdown during
combat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(6), 1269--1276.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.51.6.1269 Son, J. Y. (2018, February 6).
Influential living psychologists: Women + POC. https://
jaeyoungson.com/psychblog -jelly/2018/1/30/influential-living
-psychologists-women-poc Song, M., Dieckmann, N. F., & Nigg, J. T.
(2019). Addressing discrepancies between

ADHD prevalence and case identification estimates among U.S. children
utilizing NSCH 2007--2012. Journal of Attention Disorders, 23(14),
1691--1702. doi:10.1177/1087054718799930 Soon, C. S., Brass, M., Heinze,
H.-J., & Haynes, J.-D. (2008). Unconscious determinants of free
decisions in the human brain. Nature Neuroscience, 11(5), 543--545.
doi:10.1038/ nn.2112 Sorell, G. T., & Montgomery, M. J. (2001). Feminist
perspectives on Erikson's theory: Their relevance for contemporary
identity development research. Identity: An International Journal of
Theory and Research, 1(2), 97--128. doi:10.1207/ S1532706XID0102_01
Soria, V., Martinez-Amoros, E., Escaramis, G., Valero, J., Perez-Egea,
R., Garcia, C., Gutiérrez-Zotes, A.,Puigdemont, D., Bayés, M., Crespo,
J. M., Martorell, L., EVilella, E., Labad, A., Vallejo, J. Pérez, V.,
Menchón, J. M., Estivill, X., Gratacòs, M., & Urretavizcaya, M. (2010).
Differential association of circadian genes with mood disorders: CRY1
and NPAS2 are associated with unipolar major depression and CLOCK and
VIP with bipolar disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 35(6), 12791289.
doi:10.1038/npp.2009.230 Soutschek, A., Ruff, C. C., Strombach, T.,
Kalenscher, T., & Tobler, P. N. (2016). Brain stimulation reveals
crucial role of overcoming self-centeredness in self-control. Science
Advances, 2(10), e1600992. doi:10.1126/ sciadv.1600992 Sowislo, J. F., &
Orth, U. (2013). Does low self-esteem predict depression and anxiety? A
meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 139(1),
213--240. doi:10.1037/a0028931 Spearman, C. (1904). General intelligence
objectively determined and measured. American Journal of Psychology, 15,
107--197. doi:10.2307/1412107 Spearman, C. E. (1904). 'General
intelligence' objectively determined and measured. American Journal of
Psychology, 5, 201--293. doi:10.2307/1412107 Spears, R. (2017).
Deindividuation. In S. G. Harkins, K. D. Williams, & J. M. Burger
(Eds.), Oxford library of psychology. The Oxford handbook of social
influence (pp. 279--297). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Speiser, P. W., Arlt, W., Auchus, R. J., Baskin, L. S., Conway, G. S.,
Merke, D. P., MeyerBahlburg, H. F. L., Miller, W. L., Murad, M. H.,
Oberfield, S. E., & White, P. C. (2018). Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
due to steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency: An Endocrine Society Clinical
Practice Guideline. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism,
103(11), 4043--4088. doi:10.1210/jc.2018-01865 Spence, S. A., Brooks, D.
J., Hirsch, S. R., Liddle, P. F. Meehan, J., & Grasby, P. M. (1997). A
PET study of voluntary movement in REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-51

schizophrenic patients experiencing passivity phenomena (delusions of
alien control). Brain Research: Brain Research Reviews, 120, 1997--2011.
doi:10.1093/ brain/120.11.1997 Spencer, S. J., Logel, C., & Davies, P.
G. (2016). Stereotype threat. Annual Review of Psychology, 67, 415--437.
doi:10.1146 /annurev-psych-073115-103235 Sperling, G. (1960). The
information available in brief visual presentations. Psychological
Monographs, 74 (whole no. 11), 1--29. doi:10.1037/h0093759 Sperry, R. W.
(1982). Some effects of disconnecting the cerebral hemispheres. Science,
217, 1223--1226. doi:10.1007/BF01115112 Spieker, L. E., Sudano, I.,
Hürlimann, D., Lerch, P. G., Lang, M. G., Binggeli, C., Corti, R.,
Ruschitzka, F., Lüscher, T. F., & Noll, G. (2002). High-density
lipoprotein restores endothelial function in hypercholesterolemic men.
Circulation, 105, 1399--1402. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000013424.28206.8F
Spira, J. L., Pyne, J. M., Wiederhold, B., Wiederhold, M., Graap, K., &
Rizzo, A. (2006). Virtual reality and other experiential therapies for
combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Primary Psychiatry, 13(3),
58--64. Sprengnether, M. (1990). The spectral mother: Freud, feminism
and psychoanalysis. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Springer, S.
P., & Deutsch, G. (1998). Left brain, right brain (5th ed.). New York:
Freeman. Squire, L. R. (1987). Memory and the brain. New York: Oxford
University Press. Stader, S. R., & Hokanson, J. E. (1998). Psychosocial
antecedents of depressive symptoms: An evaluation using daily
experiences methodology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 107(1), 17--26.
doi:10.1037/0021-843x.107.1.17 Stanley, S. A., Connan, F., Small, C. J.,
Murphy, K. G., Todd, J. F., Ghatei, M., & al., e. (2003). Elevated
circulating levels of cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript
(CART) in anorexia nervosa. Endocrine Abstracts, 5, OC30. Stanton, C.
A., Keith, D. R., Gaalema, D. E., Bunn, J. Y., Doogan, N. J., Redner,
R., Kurti, A. N., Roberts, M. E., & Higgins, S. T. (2016). Trends in
tobacco use among US adults with chronic health conditions: National
Survey on Drug Use and Health 2005--2013. Preventive Medicine, 92,
160--168. doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2016.04.008 Statista Research Department.
(2020). Murder rate in U.S. cities with 250k or more residents in 2018.
https://www.statista.com /statistics/718903/murder-rate-in-us
-cities-in-2015/ Steblay, N. M., Dysart, J., Fulero, S., & Lindsay, R.
C. L. (2001). Eyewitness accuracy rates in sequential and simultaneous
lineup presentations: A meta-analytic comparison. Law and Human
Behavior, 25, 459--474. doi:10.1023/A:1012888715007 Steele, C. M.
(1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity
and

R-52

performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613--629.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.52.6.613 Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995).
Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of African
Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 797--811.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.69.5.797 Stefanucci, J. K., & Proffitt, D. R.
(2009). The roles of altitude and fear in the perception of height.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
35(2), 424--438. doi:10.1037/ a0013894 Steiger, B. (2000). American
Indian medicine dream book. Atglen, PA: Whitford Press. Steigerwald, S.,
Wong, P. O., Cohen, B. E., Ishida, J. H., Vali, M., Madden, E., &
Keyhani, S. (2018). Smoking, vaping, and use of edibles and other forms
of marijuana among U.S. adults. Annals of Internal Medicine, 169(12),
890--892. doi:10.7326/m18-1681 Stein-Behrens, B., Mattson, M. P., Chang,
I., Yeh, M., & Sapolsky, R. (1994). Stress exacerbates neuron loss and
cytoskeletal pathology in the hippocampus. Journal of Neuroscience, 14,
5373--5380. doi:10.1523 /JNEUROSCI.14-09-05373 Stein, D. J., Lim, C. C.
W., Roest, A. M., de Jonge, P., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Al-Hamzawi, A.,
Alonso, J., Benjet, C., Bromet, E. J., Bruffaerts, R., de Girolamo, D.,
Florescu, S., Gureje, O., Haro, J. M., Harris, M. G., He, Y., Hinkov,
H., Horiguchi, I., Hu, C., . . . WHO World Mental Health Survey
Collaborators (2017). The cross-national epidemiology of social anxiety
disorder: Data from the World Mental Health Survey Initiative. BMC
medicine, 15(1), 143--143. doi:10.1186/s12916-017-0889-2 Steinberg, L.,
& Levine, A. (1997). You and your adolescent: A parents' guide for ages
10 to 20. New York, NY: Harper Perennial. Stephan, W. S., & Stephan, C.
W. (2000). An integrated threat theory of prejudice. In S. Oskamp (Ed.),
Reducing prejudice and discrimination (pp. 23--46). New York, NY:
Psychology Press. Sternberg, R. J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory
of human intelligence. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. (2004). A triangular theory of love. In H. T. Reis & C.
D. Rusbult (Eds.), Close relationships: Key readings (pp. 213--227).
Philadelphia, PA: Taylor & Francis. Sternberg, R. J., & Salter, W.
(1982). Conceptions of intelligence. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook
of human intelligence (pp. 3--28). New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press. Sternberg, S. (1966). High speed scanning in human memory.
Science, 153, 652--654. doi:10.1126/science.153.3736.652 Sternberg, S.
(1967). Retrieval of contextual information from memory. Psychonomic
Science, 8, 55--56. doi:10.3758/BF03330664 Sternberg, S. (1969). Memory
scanning: Mental processes revealed by reaction-time

experiments. American Scientist, 57, 421-- 457.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/27828738 Sternglanz, R. W., Morris, W. L.,
Morrow, M., & Braverman, J. (2019). A review of metaanalyses about
deception detection. In T. Docan-Morgan (Ed.), The Palgrave handbook of
deceptive communication (pp. 303--326). Cham, Switzerland: Springer
International Publishing. Stevens, M. C., Levy, H. C., Hallion, L. S.,
Wootton, B. M., & Tolin, D. F. (2020). Functional neuroimaging test of
an emerging neurobiological model of hoarding disorder. Biological
Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 5(1), 68--75.
doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2019.08.010 Stevens, S. S. (1960). Psychophysics of
sensory function. American Scientist, 48, 226-252.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/27827540 Stewart, S. T., Cutler, D. M., &
Rosen, A. B. (2009). Forecasting the effects of obesity and smoking on
U.S. life expectancy. New England Journal of Medicine, 361(23),
2252--2260. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa0900459 Stewart, W. K., & Fleming, L. W.
(1973). Features of a successful therapeutic fast of 382 days' duration.
Postgraduate Medical Journal, 49, 203--209. doi:10.1136/ pgmj.49.569.203
Steyn, P., Wallstrom, A., & Pitt, L. (2010). Consumer-generated content
and source effects in financial services advertising: An experimental
study. Journal of Financial Services Marketing, 15(1), 49--61.
doi:10.1057/fsm.2010.3 Stickgold, R., & Walker, M. P. (2007).
Sleepdependent memory consolidation and reconsolidation. Sleep Medicine,
8(4), 331--343. doi:10.1016/j.sleep.2007.03.011 Stickgold, R., James,
L., & Hobson, J. A. (2000). Visual discrimination learning requires
sleep after training. Nature Neuroscience, 3, 1237--1238.
doi:10.1038/81756 Stoet, G., & Geary, D. C. (2012). Can stereotype
threat explain the gender gap in mathematics performance and
achievement? Review of General Psychology, 16(1),93--102.
doi:10.1037/a0026617 Stokes, P. E. (1995). The potential role of
excessive cortisol induced by HPA hyperfunction in the pathogenesis of
depression. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 5, 77--82.
doi:10.1016/0924-977x(95)00039-r Stoller, R. J., & Herdt, G. H. (1985).
Theories of origins of male homosexuality. A cross-cultural look.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 42, 399--404. doi:10.1001/
archpsyc.1985.01790270089010 Stomp, W., ten Duis, H.-J., & Nijsten, M.
W. N. (2010). The impact of the lunar cycle on the incidence of trauma.
Trauma, 13(2), 121--124.doi:10.1177/1460408610384655 Stoodley, C.
(2014). Distinct regions of the cerebellum show grey matter decreases in
autism, ADHD and developmental dyslexia. Frontiers in Systems
Neuroscience, 8, 92. doi:10.3389/fnsys.2014.00092

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Storebà, O. J. (2019). Methylphenidate benefits and harms in children
and adolescents with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder: Two
Cochrane systematic reviews. Movement and Nutrition in Health and
Disease, 3, 21--25. doi:10.5283/mnhd.15 Storebø, O. J., Pedersen, N.,
Ramstad, E., Krogh, H. B., Moreira-Maia, C. R., Magnusson, F. L.,
Holmskov, M., Gerner, T., Skoog, M., Rosendal, S., Groth, C., Gillies,
D., Rasmussen, K. B., Gauci, D., Zwi, M., Kirubakaran, R., Håkonsen, S.
J., . . . Gluud, C. (2016). Methylphenidate for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children and adolescents-Assessment of
harmful effects in non-randomised studies. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, 2, CD012069. doi:10.1002/14651858. CD012069. Strack,
F., Martin, L. L., & Stepper, S. (1988). Inhibiting and facilitating
conditions of the human smile: A nonobtrusive test of the facial
feedback hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
54(5), 768--777. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.54.5.768 Strait, D. L., Kraus,
N., Parbery-Clark, A., & Ashley, R. (2010). Musical experience shapes
top-down auditory mechanisms: Evidence from masking and auditory
attention performance. Hearing Research, 261(1-2), 22--29.
doi:10.1016/j.heares.2009.12.021 Strasburger, V. C. (2007). First do no
harm: Why have parents and pediatricians missed the boat on children and
media? The Journal of Pediatrics, 151(4), 334--336.
doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2007.05.040 Straus, S. E., Richardson, W. S.,
Glasziou, P., & Haynes, R. B. (2005). Evidence-based medicine: how to
practice and teach EBM. (4th ed.). Edinburgh, UK: Churchill Livingstone.
Strickland, B. R. (1992). Women and depression. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 1, 132--135. doi:10.1111/1467-8721. ep10769766
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18(6), 643--662.
doi:10.1037/h0054651. Stuss, D. T. (2011). Traumatic brain injury:
Relation to executive dysfunction and the frontal lobes. Current Opinion
in Neurology, 24(6), 584--589. doi:10.1017/ S1355617711000695 Sugden,
K., Arseneault, L., Harrington, H., Moffitt, T. E., Williams, B., &
Caspi, A. (2010). Serotonin transporter gene moderates the development
of emotional problems among children following bullying victimization.
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 49(8),
830--840. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2010.01.024 Sung, H.-Y., Prochaska, J. J.,
Ong, M. K., Shi, Y., & Max, W. (2011). Cigarette smoking and serious
psychological distress: A population-based study of California adults.
Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 13(12), 1183--1192. doi:10.1093/ntr/ntr148

Sunstein, C. R. (2002). Probability neglect: Emotions, worst cases, and
law. The Yale Law Journal, 112(1), 61--107. Suomi, S. J. (2006). Risk,
Resilience, and gene × environment interactions in rhesus monkeys.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1094(1), 52--62.
doi:10.1196/ annals.1376.006 Super, C. M. (1976). Environmental effects
on motor development: A case of African infant precocity. Developmental
Medicine and Child Neurology, 18, 561--567.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-8749.1976.tb04202.x Susswein, A. J., Schwarz, M., &
Feldman, E. (1986). Learned changes of feeding behavior in Aplysia in
response to edible and inedible foods. Journal of Neuroscience, 6,
1513--1527. doi:10.1523/ JNEUROSCI.06-05-01513 Sutton, R. M., & Douglas,
K. M. (2005). Justice for all, or just me? More evidence of the
importance of the self-other distinction in just world beliefs.
Personality and Individual Differences, 39, 637--645. doi:10.1016/j.
paid.2005.02.010 Svenningsson, P., Kim, Y., Warner-Schmidt, J., Oh,
Y.-S., & Greengard, P. (2013). p11 and its role in depression and
therapeutic responses to antidepressants. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience,
14(10), 673--680. doi:10.1038/nrn3564 Swaminathan, R., Burrows, G., &
McMurray, J. (1982 ). Energy cost of sodium pump activity in man: An in
vivo study of metabolic rate in human subjects given digoxin. IRCS
Medical Science, 10, 949. Swap, W. C. (1977). Interpersonal attraction
and repeated exposure to rewarders and punishers. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 3, 248--251. doi:10.1177/014616727700300219
Syvalahti, E. K. G. (1994). I. The theory of schizophrenia: Biological
factors in schizophrenia. British Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 9--14.
Szalavitz, M. (2016). The genes for pot addiction have been identified.
Time. https://time. com/4275880/the-genes-for-pot
-addiction-have-been-identified/ Szeszko, P. R., Lehrner, A., & Yehuda,
R. (2018). Glucocorticoids and hippocampal structure and function in
PTSD. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 26(3)142-157.
doi:10.1097/HRP.0000000000000188 Szymanski, L., & King, B. H. (1999).
Practice parameters for the assessment and treatment of children,
adolescents, and adults with mental retardation and comorbid mental
disorders. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry, 38(12), 5S-31S. doi:10.1016/S0890-8567 (99)80002-1 Taheri,
S., & Mignot, E. (2002). The genetics of sleep disorders. The Lancet
Neurology, 1(4), 242--250. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(02) 00103-5 Tajfel, H.
(1982). Social psychology of intergroup relations. Annual Review of

Psychology, 33(1), 1--39. doi:10.1146/ annurev.ps.33.020182.000245
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup
conflict. In W. G. Austin & S. Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of
intergroup relations (pp. 33--47). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole. Takano,
Y., & Osaka, E. (2018). Comparing Japan and the United States on
individualism/collectivism: A follow-up review. Asian Journal of Social
Psychology, 21(4), 301--316. doi:10.1111/ajsp.12322 Takooshian, H.,
Plous, S., Gielen, U. P., Rich, G. J., & Velayo, R. S. (2016).
Internationalizing undergraduate psychology education: Trends,
techniques, and technologies. American Psychologist, 71(2), 136--147.
doi:10.1037/a0039977 Talhelm, T., Zhang, X., Oishi, S., Shimin, C.,
Duan, D., Lan, X., & Kitayama, S. (2014). Large-scale psychological
differences within China explained by rice versus wheat agriculture.
Science, 344(6184), 603--608. doi:10.1126/science.1246850 Tallal, P.,
Ross, R., & Curtiss, S. (1989). Familial aggregation in specific
language impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 54(2),
167--173. doi:10.1044/jshd.5402.167 Tamnes, C. K., Herting, M. M.,
Goddings, A. L., Meuwese, R., Blakemore, S. J., Dahl, R. E., Güroğlu,
B., Raznahan, A., Sowell, E. R., Crone, E. A., & Mills, K. L. (2017).
Development of the cerebral cortex across adolescence: A multisample
study of inter-related longitudinal changes in cortical volume, surface
area, and thickness. Journal of Neuroscience, 37(12), 3402--3412.
doi:10.1523/jneurosci.3302-16.2017 Tang, Y.-Y., & Posner, M. I. (2009).
Attention training and attention state training. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 13(5), 223--227. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2009.01.009 Tarumi, S.,
Ichimiya, A., Yamada, S., Umesue, M., & Kuroki, T. (2004). Taijin
kyofusho in university students: Patterns of fear and predispositions to
the offensive variant. Transcultural Psychiatry, 41(4):533--546.
doi:10.1177/1363461504047933 Taylor, D. A., & Altman, I. (1987).
Communication in interpersonal relationships: Social penetration
processes. In M. E. Roloff & G. R. Miller (Eds.), Interpersonal
processes: New directions in communication research (pp. 257--277).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Taylor, D. A., & Genkov, K. A. (2019).
Hypnotherapy for the treatment of persistent pain: A literature review.
Journal of the American Psychiatric Nurses Association, 26(2):157--161.,
1078390319835604. doi:10.1177/1078390319835604 Taylor, L. E.,
Swerdfeger, A. L., & Eslick, G. D. (2014). Vaccines are not associated
with autism: An evidence-based meta-analysis of case-control and cohort
studies. Vaccine, 32(29), 3623--3629. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine. 2014.04.085

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-53

Taylor, L., Faraone, S. V., & Tsuang, M. T. (2002). Family, twin, and
adoption studies of bipolar disease. Current Psychiatry Reports, 4,
130-- 133. doi:10.1007/s11920-002-0046-1 Taylor, S. E. (2006). Tend and
befriend: Biobehavioral bases of affiliation under stress. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 15(6), 273--277.
doi:10.1111/j.14678721.2006.00451.x Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D.
(1988). Illusion and well-being: A social psychological perspective on
mental health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193--210.
doi:10.1037/00332909.103.2.193 Teasdale, J. D., Segal, Z. V., Williams,
J. M. G., Ridgeway, V. A., Soulsby, J. M., & Lau, M. A. (2000).
Prevention of relapse/recurrence in major depression by
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 68(4), 615--623. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.68.4.615 Temple, J.
L., Bernard, C., Lipshultz, S. E., Czachor, J. D., Westphal, J. A., &
Mestre, M. A. (2017). The safety of ingested caffeine: A comprehensive
review. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 8(80). doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00080
Terman, L. (1916). The measurement of intelligence. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin. Terman, L. (1925). Genetic studies of genius: Vol. 1. Mental
and physical traits of a thousand gifted children. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press. Terman, L., & Oden, M. H. (1959). Genetic
studies of genius: Vol. 5. The gifted group at midlife. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press. Terrace, H. S. (1979). How Nim Chimpsky
changed my mind. Psychology Today, 13(6), 65--76. Terry, D. J. (1994).
Determinants of coping: The role of stable and situational factors.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66(5), 895--910.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.66 .5.895 Thannickal, T. C., Moore, R. Y.,
Nienhuis, R., Ramanathan, L., Gulyani, S., Aldrich, M., Cornford, M., &
Siegel, J. M. (2000). Reduced number of hypocretin neurons in human
narcolepsy. Neuron, 27(3), 469--474. doi:10.1016/S0896-6273(00)00058-1
The Premier's Highly Skilled Workforce Panel (2016). Building the
workforce of tomorrow. https://www.ontario.ca/page
/building-workforce-tomorrow-shared -responsibility The World Bank.
(2017). Fertility rate, total (births per woman) \| Data. https://data.
worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN? end=2017&start=1960&view=chart
Theusch, E., Basu, A., & Gitschier, J. (2009). Genome-wide study of
families with absolute pitch reveals linkage to 8q24.21 and locus
heterogeneity. American Journal of Human Genetics, 85(1), 112--119.
doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.06.010 Thierry, B. (1994). Emergence of social
organizations in non-human primates. Revue Internationale de Syste
mique, 8, 65--77. Thomaes, S., Bushman, B. J., De Castro, B. O., &
Stegge, H. (2009). What makes

R-54

narcissists bloom? A framework for research on the etiology and
development of narcissism. Development and Psychopathology, 21(04),
1233--1247. doi:10.1017/S0954579409990137 Thomas, A., & Chess, S.
(1977). Temperament and development. New York, NY: Brunner/ Mazel.
Thomas, J. L., Wilk, J. E., Riviere, L. A., McGurk, D., Castro, C. A., &
Hoge, C. W. (2010). Prevalence of mental health problems and functional
impairment among Active Component and National Guard soldiers 3 and 12
months following combat in Iraq. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67(6),
614--623. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.54 Thomas, L. A., De
Bellis, M. D., Graham, R., & LaBar, K. S. (2007). Development of
emotional facial recognition in late childhood and adolescence.
Developmental Science, 10(5), 547--558.
doi:10.1111/j.14677687.2007.00614.x Thomas, M. M., Harpaz-Rotem, I.,
Tsai, J., Southwick, S. M., & Pietrzak, R. H. (2017). Mental and
physical health conditions in US combat veterans: Results from the
National Health and Resilience in Veterans Study. The Primary Care
Companion for CNS Disorders, 19(3),17m02118. doi:10.4088/ PCC.17m02118
Thompson, M. A., Callaghan, P. D., Hunt, G. E., Cornish, J. L., &
McGregor, I. S. (2007). A role for oxytocin and 5-HT(1A) receptors in
the prosocial effects of 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine ("ecstasy").
Neuroscience, 146(2), 509--514. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.02.032
Thompson, P. M., Vidal, C., Giedd, J. N., Gochman, P., Blumenthal, J.,
Nicolson, R., Toga, A. W., & Rapoport, J. L. (2001). Mapping adolescent
brain change reveals dynamic wave of accelerated gray matter loss in
very early-onset schizophrenia. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 11650--11655.
doi:10.1073/pnas.201243998 Thorndike, E. L. (1913). Educational
psychology: Briefer course. New York, NY: Teachers College, Columbia
University. Thornhill, R., & Gangestad, S. W. (1994). Fluctuating
asymmetry correlates with lifetime sex partner numbers and age at first
sex in Homo sapiens. Psychological Science, 5, 297--303.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.1994.tb00629.x Thorpe, W. H. (1963). Learning
and instinct in animals (2nd ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press. Thyer, B. A. (2004). What is evidence-based practice? Brief
Treatment and Crisis Intervention, 4(2), 167---176. doi:10.1093
/brief-treatment/mhh013 Tickell, A., Ball, S., Bernard, P., Kuyken, W.,
Marx, R., Pack, S., Strauss, C., Sweeney, T., & Crane, C. (2020). The
effectiveness of mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) in
real-world healthcare services. Mindfulness,

11(2), 279--290. doi:10.1007/s12671-0181087-9 Tien, A. Y. (1991).
Distribution of hallucinations in the population. Social Psychiatry and
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 26(6), 287--292. doi:10.1007/bf00789221
Tinbergen, N. (1951). The study of instinct. New York: Oxford University
Press. Titone, D., Levy, D. L., & Holzman, P. S. (2000). Contextual
insensitivity in schizophrenic language processing: Evidence from
lexical ambiguity. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 761--767.
doi:10.1037/0021843X.109.4.761 Todorova, R., & Zugaro, M. (2019).
Isolated cortical computations during delta waves support memory
consolidation. Science, 366(6463), 377--381. doi:10.1126/science.aay0616
Tolman, E. C. (1948). Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychological
Review, 55, 189--208. doi:10.1037/h0061626 Tolman, E. C. (1959).
Principles of purposive behavior. In S. Koch (Ed.), Psychology: A study
of a science (Vol. 2, pp. 92--157). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. Tolman,
E. C., Richie, B. F., & Kalish, D. (1946). Studies in spatial learning:
II. Place learning vs. response learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 36, 221--229. doi:10.1037/h0060262 Tomova, L., Majdandžić,
J., Hummer, A., Windischberger, C., Heinrichs, M., & Lamm, C. (2016).
Increased neural responses to empathy for pain might explain how acute
stress increases prosociality. Social Cognitive and Affective
Neuroscience, 12(3), 401--408. doi:10.1093/scan/nsw146 Toro, J. M.
(2016). Something old, something new: Combining mechanisms during
language acquisition. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
25(2), 130--134. doi:10.1177/0963721416629645 Touitou, Y., Reinberg, A.,
& Touitou, D. (2017). Association between light at night, melatonin
secretion, sleep deprivation, and the internal clock: Health impacts and
mechanisms of circadian disruption. Life Sciences, 173, 94--106.
doi:10.1016/j.lfs.2017.02.008 Travis, F. (2001). Autonomic and EEG
patterns distinguish transcending from other experiences during
Transcendental Meditation practice. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 42(1), 1--9. doi:10.1016/ S0167-8760(01)pp143-X
Travis, F. (2020). Temporal and spatial characteristics of meditation
EEG. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy ,
12(2), 111--115. doi:10.1037/ tra0000488 Treffert, D. A., & Wallace, G.
L. (2002). Islands of genius. Scientific American, 286(6), 76--85.
Treynor, W., Gonzalez, R., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2003). Rumination
reconsidered: A psychometric analysis. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
27(3), 247--259. ´ doi:10.1023/A:1023910315561 Trimble, J. E.,
Stevenson, M. R., & Worrell, J. P. (2003). Toward an inclusive
psychology:

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Infusing the introductory psychology textbook with diversity content.
Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. Triplett, N.
(1898). The dynamogenic factors in pacemaking and competition. American
Journal of Psychology, 9, 507--533. doi:10.2307/1412188 Trivers, R. L.
(1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. The Quarterly Review of
Biology, 46(1), 35--57. doi:10.2307/2822435 Trivers, R., & Burt, A.
(1999). Kinship and genomic imprinting. Results and Problems in Cell
Differentiation, 25, 1--21. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-69111-2_1 Trockel, M.
T., Barnes, M. D., & Egget, D. L. (2000). Health-related variables and
academic performance among first-year college students: Implications for
sleep and other behaviors. Journal of American College Health, 49(3),
125--131. doi:10.1080/07448480009596294 Tsang, J.-A., Carpenter, T. P.,
Roberts, J. A., Frisch, M. B., & Carlisle, R. D. (2014). Why are
materialists less happy? The role of gratitude and need satisfaction in
the relationship between materialism and life satisfaction. Personality
and Individual Differences, 64, 62--66. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2014.02.009
Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. In E. Tulving & W.
Donaldson (Eds.), Organization and memory (pp. 381--403). New York, NY:
Academic Press. Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. Oxford,
England: Clarendon Press/Oxford University Press. Tulving, E. (1985).
How many memory systems are there? American Psychologist, 40, 385--398.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.40.4.385 Tulving, E. (1989). Memory: Performance,
knowledge, and experience. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 1,
3--26. doi:10.1080/09541448908403069 Tulving, E. (1995). Organization of
memory. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The cognitive neurosciences
(pp. 839--853). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Tulving, E., & Psotka, J.
(1971). Retroactive inhibition in free recall: Inaccessibility of
information available in the memory store. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 87, 1--8. doi:10.1037/h0030185 Tulving, E., & Thomson, D.M.
(1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory.
Psychological Review, 80, 352--373. doi:10.1037/h0020071 Turkheimer, E.,
Haley, A., Waldron, M., d'Onofrio, B., & Gottesman, I. I. (2003).
Socioeconomic status modifies heritability of IQ in young children.
Psychological Science, 14(6), 623--628.
doi:10.1046/j.0956-7976.2003.psci_1475.x Turnbaugh, P. J., Ley, R. E.,
Mahowald, M. A., Magrini, V., Mardis, E. R., & Gordon, J. I. (2006). An
obesity-associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy
harvest. Nature, 444(7122), 1027--1131. doi:10.1038/nature05414

Turnbull, H. W. (1959). The correspondence of Isaac Newton (Vol. 1).
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press for the Royal Society. Turner,
C. E., Byblow, W. D., Stinear, C. M., & Gant, N. (2014). Carbohydrate in
the mouth enhances activation of brain circuitry involved in motor
performance and sensory perception. Appetite, 80(0), 212--219.
doi:10.1016/j.appet.2014.05.020 Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973).
Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and probability.
Cognitive Psychology, 5(2), 207--232. doi:10.1016/0010-0285(73) 90033-9
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty:
Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157), 1124--1131. doi:10.1126/
science.185.4157.1124 Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1987). Rational
choice and the framing of decisions. In R. M. Hogarth & M. W. Reder
(Eds.), Rational choice: The contrast between economics and psychology
(pp. 67--94). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Twenge, J. M.
(2013). The evidence for Generation Me and against Generation We.
Emerging Adulthood, 1(1), 11--16. doi:10.1177/2167696812466548 Twenge,
J. M. (2014). Generation me: Why today's young Americans are more
confident, assertive, entitled--and more miserable than ever before. New
York, NY: Simon & Schuster. Twenge, J. M., & Campbell, W. K. (2009). The
narcissism epidemic: Living in the age of entitlement . New York, NY:
Simon and Schuster. Twenge, J. M., & Crocker, J. (2002). Race and
self-esteem: Meta-analyses comparing Whites, Blacks, Hispanics, Asians,
and American Indians. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 371--408.
doi:10.1037/00332909.128.3.371 Twenge, J. M., Baumeister, R. F., Tice,
D. M., & Stucke, T. S. (2001). If you can't join them, beat them:
Effects of social exclusion on aggressive behavior. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 81(6), 1058--1969.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.81.6.1058 Twenge, J. M., Campbell, W. K., &
Foster, C. A. (2003). Parenthood and marital satisfaction: A
meta-analytic review. Journal of Marriage and Family, 65(3), 574--583.
doi:10.1111/j.1741-3737.2003.00574.x Twenge, J. M., Cooper, A. B.,
Joiner, T. E., Duffy, M. E., & Binau, S. G. (2019). Age, period, and
cohort trends in mood disorder indicators and suicide-related outcomes
in a nationally representative dataset, 2005--2017. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 128(3), 185--199. doi:10.1037/abn0000410 Ueda, Y., Chen, L.,
Kopecky, J., Cramer, E. S., Rensink, R. A., Meyer, D. E., Kitayama, S.,
& Saiki, J. (2018). Cultural differences in visual search for geometric
figures. Cognitive Science, 42(1), 286--310. doi:10.1111/ cogs.12490

Ullman, L. P., & Krasner, L. (1965). Case studies in behavior
modification. New York, NY: Holt. Rinehart and Winston. Uncapher, H., &
Areán, P. A. (2000). Physicians are less willing to treat suicidal
ideation in older patients. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society,
48(2), 188--192. doi:10.1111/j.1532-5415.2000.tb03910.x Underwood, B. J.
(1957). Interference and forgetting. Psychological Review, 64, 49--60.
doi:10.1037/h0044616 United Nations. (2020). World population prospects:
The 2019 revision. https://population .un.org/wpp/Maps/ UNODC. (2019).
Global study on homicide. Vienna, Austria: United Nations. U. S.
Department of Education Office of Educational Research and Improvement.
(1993). National excellence: A case for developing America's talent.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. US Department of Health
and Human Services. (2014). The health consequences of smoking---50
years of progress: A report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: US
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Presention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
(2014). Mexican Wolf Recovery Program: Progress report #17.
https://www.fws.gov/southwest/es /mexicanwolf/pdf/2014_MW_Progress
\_Report.pdf Üstün, T. B., Ayuso-Mateos, J. L., Chatterji, S., Mathers,
C., & Murray, C. J. L. (2004). Global burden of depressive disorders in
the year 2000. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 184(5), 386--392.
doi:10.1192/bjp.184.5.386 Vaillant, G. E. (2003). A 60-year follow-up of
alcoholic men. Addiction, 98(8), 1043--1051.
doi:10.1046/j.1360-0443.2003.00422.x Vaillant, G. E., & Koury, S. H.
(1993). Late midlife development. In G. H. Pollock & S. I. Greenspan
(Eds.), The course of life, Vol. 6: Late adulthood (rev. and exp. ed.).
(pp. 1--22). Madison, CT US: International Universities Press, Inc.
Vaitl, D., Birbaumer, N., Gruzelier, J., Jamieson, G. A., Kotchoubey,
B., Kübler, A., Lehmann, D., Miltner, W. H. R., Ott, U., Pütz, P.,
Sammer, G., Strauch, I., Strehl, U., Wackermann, J., & Weiss, T. (2005).
Psychobiology of altered states of consciousness. Psychological
Bulletin, 131(1), 98--127. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.131.1.98 Valenstein, E.
S. (1986). Great and desperate cures. New York, NY: Basic Books. Van
Cauter, E., Leproult, R., & Plat, L. (2000). Age-related changes in slow
wave sleep and REM sleep and relationship with growth hormone and
cortisol levels in healthy men. JAMA, 284(7), 861--868. doi:10.1001/
jama.284.7.861 Van Erp, T. G., Walton, E., Hibar, D. P., Schmaal, L.,
Jiang, W., Glahn, D. C., Pearlson, G.

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-55

D., Yao, N., Fukunaga, M., Hashimoto, R., Okada, N., Yamamori, H.,
Bustillo, J. R., Clark, V. P., Agartz, I., Mueller, B. A., Cahn, W., de
Zwarte, S. M. C., . . . Turner, J. A. (2018). Cortical brain
abnormalities in 4474 individuals with schizophrenia and 5098 control
subjects via the Enhancing Neuro Imaging Genetics Through Meta Analysis
(ENIGMA) Consortium. Biological Psychiatry, 84(9), 644--654.
doi:10.1016/j. biopsych.2018.04.023 Van Haren, N., Cahn, W., Hulshoff
Pol, H., & Kahn, R. (2013). Confounders of excessive brain volume loss
in schizophrenia. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 37(10),
2418--2423. doi:10.1016/j.neubio rev.2012.09.006 Van Haren, N. E., Cahn,
W., Hulshoff Pol, H. E., & Kahn, R. S. (2013). Confounders of excessive
brain volume loss in schizophrenia. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 37(10, Part 1), 2418--2423. doi:10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2012.09.006 Van Horn, J. D., Irimia, A., Torgerson, C. M.,
Chambers, M. C., Kikinis, R., & Toga, A. W. (2012). Mapping connectivity
damage in the case of Phineas Gage. PLoS ONE, 7(5), e37454.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0037454 Van Knippenberg, D., & Wilke, H.
(1992). Prototypicality of arguments and conformity to ingroup norms.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 22, 141--155. doi:10.1002/
ejsp.2420220204 van Londen, L., Goekoop, J. G., van Kempen, G. M. J.,
Frankhuijzen-Sierevogel, A. C., Wiegant, V. M., van der Velde, E. A., &
De Wied, D. (1997). Plasma levels of arginine vasopressin elevated in
patients with major depression. Neuropsychopharmacology, 17, 284--292.
doi:10.1016/S0893-133X (97)00054-7 van Rijn, S. (2019). A review of
neurocognitive functioning and risk for psychopathology in sex
chromosome trisomy (47, XXY, 47, XXX, 47, XYY). Current Opinion in
Psychiatry, 32(2), 79--84. doi:10.1097/ YCO.0000000000000471 Vandesande,
S., Bosmans, G., Schuengel, C., & Maes, B. (2019). Young children with
significant developmental delay differentiate home observed attachment
behaviour towards their parents. Journal of Applied Research in
Intellectual Disabilities, 32(1), 106--120. doi:10.1111/jar.12513
VanRullen, R., & Reddy, L. (2019). Reconstructing faces from fMRI
patterns using deep generative neural networks. Communications Biology,
2(1), 193. doi:10.1038/s42003-019-0438-y Vasconcelos-Moreno, M. P.,
Fries, G. R., Gubert, C., Dos Santos, B., Fijtman, A., Sartori, J., . .
. Guma, F. (2017). Telomere length, oxidative stress, inflammation and
BDNF levels in siblings of patients with bipolar disorder: Implications
for accelerated cellular aging. The International Journal of
Neuropsychopharmacology. 20(6):445-454. doi:10.1093/ijnp/pyx001

R-56

Vater, A., Moritz, S., & Roepke, S. (2018). Does a narcissism epidemic
exist in modern western societies? Comparing narcissism and self-esteem
in East and West Germany. PloS One, 13(1), e0188287.
doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0188287 Vega, M. L., Newport, G. C.,
Bozhdaraj, D., Saltz, S. B., Nemeroff, C. B., & Newport, D. J. (2020).
Implementation of advanced methods for reproductive pharmacovigilance in
autism: A meta-analysis of the effects of prenatal antidepressant
exposure. American Journal of Psychiatry, 177(6), 506--517.
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2020. 18070766 Velickovic, K., Wayne, D., Leija, H.
A. L., Bloor, I., Morris, D. E., Law, J., Budge, H., Sacks, H., Symonds,
M. E., & Sottile, V. (2019). Caffeine exposure induces browning features
in adipose tissue in vitro and in vivo. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 9104.
doi:10.1038/ s41598-019-45540-1 Verdejo-Garcia, A., Clark, L., & Dunn,
B. D. (2012). The role of interoception in addiction: A critical review.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(8), 1857--1869.
doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.05.007 Vermetten, E., Schmahl, C.,
Southwick, S. M., & Bremner, J. D. (2007). Positron tomographic emission
study of olfactory induced emotional recall in veterans with and without
combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychopharmacology
Bulletin, 40(1), 8--30. Verweij, K. J., Abdellaoui, A., Nivard, M. G.,
Cort, A. S., Ligthart, L., Draisma, H. H., Minică, C. C., International
Cannabis Consortium, Gillespie, N. A., Willemsen, G., Hottenga, J.-J.,
Boomsma, D. I., & Vink, J. M. (2017). Genetic association between
schizophrenia and cannabis use. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 171,
117--121. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.09.022 Vescio, T. K., Judd, C.
M., & Kwan, V. S. Y. (2004). The crossed-categorization hypothesis:
Evidence of reductions in the strength of categorization, but not
intergroup bias. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40(4),
478--496. doi:10.1016/j. jesp.2003.09.005 Vestergaard-Poulsen, P., van
Beek, M., Skewes, J., Bjarkam, C. R., Stubberup, M., Bertelsen, J., &
Roepstorff, A. (2009). Long-term meditation is associated with increased
gray matter density in the brain stem. NeuroReport, 20(2), 170--174.
doi:10.1097/ WNR.0b013e328320012a Vijayan, S., Lepage, K. Q., Kopell, N.
J., & Cash, S. S. (2017). Frontal beta-theta network during REM sleep.
eLife, 6, e18894. doi:10.7554/eLife.18894 Virués-Ortega, J. (2010).
Applied behavior analytic intervention for autism in early childhood:
Meta-analysis, meta-regression and dose--response meta-analysis of
multiple outcomes. Clinical Psychology Review, 30(4), 387--399.
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2010.01.008 Visser, B. A., Ashton, M. C., & Vernon, P.
A. (2006). Beyond g: Putting multiple

intelligences theory to the test. Intelligence, 34(5), 507--510.
doi:10.1016/j. intell.2006.02.004 Visser, S. N., Danielson, M. L.,
Bitsko, R. H., Holbrook, J. R., Kogan, M. D., Ghandour, R. M., Perou,
R., & Blumberg, S. J. (2014). Trends in the parent-report of health care
provider-diagnosed and medicated attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder: United States, 2003--2011. Journal of the American Academy of
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 53(1), 34--46.
doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2013.09.001 Vivanti, A. J., Vauloup-Fellous, C.,
Prevot, S., Zupan, V., Suffee, C., Do Cao, J., Benachi, A., & De Luca,
D. (2020). Transplacental transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nature
Communications, 11(1), 3572. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17436-6 Voineagu,
I., Wang, X., Johnston, P., Lowe, J. K., Tian, Y., Horvath, S., Mill,
J., Cantor, R. M., Blencowe, B. J., & Geschwind, D. H. (2011).
Transcriptomic analysis of autistic brain reveals convergent molecular
pathology. Nature, 474(7351), 380--384. doi:10.1038/nature10110 Volk, D.
W., & Lewis, D. A. (2016). The role of endocannabinoid signaling in
cortical inhibitory neuron dysfunction in schizophrenia. Biological
Psychiatry, 79(7), 595--603. doi10. 1016/j.biopsych.2015.06.015 Volkow,
N. D., Swanson, J. M., Evins, A. E., DeLisi, L. E., Meier, M. H.,
Gonzalez, R., Bloomfield, M. A. P., Curran, H. V., & Baler, R. (2016).
Effects of cannabis use on human behavior, including cognition,
motivation, and psychosis: A review. JAMA Psychiatry, 73(3), 292--297.
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry. 2015.3278 Volkow, N. D., Wang, G.-J.,
Fowler, J. S., & Ding, Y.-S. (2005). Imaging the effects of
methylphenidate on brain dopamine: New model on its therapeutic actions
for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biological Psychiatry,
57(11), 1410--1415. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.11.006 Volkow, N. D.,
Wang, G.-J., Kollins, S. H., Wigal, T. L., Newcorn, J. H., Telang, F.,
Fowler, J. S., Zhu, W., Logan, J., Ma, Y., Pradhan, K., Wong, C., &
Swanson, J. M. (2009). Evaluating dopamine reward pathway in ADHD:
Clinical implications. JAMA, 302(10), 1084--1091. doi:10.1001/
jama.2009.1308 Vorstman, J. A., Parr, J. R., Moreno-De-Luca, D., Anney,
R. J., Nurnberger Jr, J. I., & Hallmayer, J. F. (2017). Autism genetics:
Opportunities and challenges for clinical translation. Nature Reviews
Genetics, 18, 362--376. doi:10.1038/nrg.2017.4 Vries, S. K., & Meule, A.
(2016). Food addiction and bulimia nervosa: New data based on the Yale
Food Addiction Scale 2.0. European Eating Disorders Review, 24(6),
518--522. doi:10.1002/erv.2470 Vrij, A. (2015). A cognitive approach to
lie detection. In P. Granhag, V. A., & B. Verschuere (Eds.), Deception
detection:

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Current challenges and new approaches (pp. 205--229). Malden, MA:
Wiley-Blackwell. Wade, M., Fox., N. A., Zeanah, C. H., & Nelson, C. A.
(2018). Effect of foster care intervention on trajectories of general
and specific psychopathology among children with histories of
institutional rearing: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 75,
1137--1145.doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry. 2018.2556 Wadee, A. A., Kuschke,
R. H., Kometz, S., & Berk, M. (2001). Personality factors, stress and
immunity. Stress and Health. Journal of the International Society for
the Investigation of Stress, 17(1), 25--40.
doi:10.1002/1532-2998(200101) 17:1\<25::AIDSMI873\>3.0.CO;2-N
Wagenmakers, E.-J., Beek, T., Dijkhoff, L., Gronau, Q. F., Acosta, A.,
Adams, Jr., R. B., Alborn, D. N., Allard, E. S., Benning, S. D.,
Blouin-Hudon, E.-M., Bulnes, L. C., Caldwell, T. L., Calin-Jageman, R.
J., Capaldi, C. A., Carfagno, N. S., Chasten, K. T., Cleeremans, A.,
Connell, L., DeCicco, J. M., Dijkstra, K., ... Zwaan, R. A. (2016).
Registered replication report: Strack, Martin, & Stepper (1988).
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 11(6), 917--928.
doi:10.1177/1745691616674458 Wager, T. D., & Barrett, L. F. (2017). From
affect to control: Functional specialization of the insula in motivation
and regulation. bioRxiv, 102368. doi:10.1101/102368 Wagner, D. R.
(1996). Disorders of the circadian sleep--wake cycle. Neurologic
Clinics, 14(3), 651--670. doi:10.1016/S0733-8619 (05)70278-4 Wainer, H.,
& Steinberg, L. (1992). Sex differences in performance on the
mathematics section of the Scholastic Aptitude Test: A bidirectional
validity study. Harvard Educational Review, 62(3), 323--337.
doi:10.17763/haer.62.3.1p1555011301r133 Waite, L. J., Luo, Y., & Lewin,
A. C. (2009). Marital happiness and marital stability: Consequences for
psychological well-being. Social Science Research, 38(1), 201--212.
doi:10.1016/j.ssresearch.2008.07.001 Waite, L., & Gallagher, M. (2001).
The case for marriage: Why married people are happier, healthier, and
better off financially. New York, NY: Random House. Waldinger, R. J., &
Schulz, M. S. (2010). What's love got to do with it? Social functioning,
perceived health, and daily happiness in married octogenarians.
Psychology and Aging, 25(2), 422--431. doi:10.1037/a0019087 Walker, A.,
& Shipman, P. (1996). The wisdom of the bones: In search of human
origins. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. Walker, J. (2001). Control
and the psychology of health: Theory, measurement and applications.
Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press Walster, E., Aronson, V., &
Abrahams, D. (1966). Importance of physical attractiveness in dating
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 508--516.
doi:10.1037/h0021188

Walters, S. (1994). Algorithms and archetypes: Evolutionary psychology
and Carl Jung's theory of the collective unconscious. Journal of Social
and Evolutionary Systems, 17(3), 287--306. doi:10.1016/1061-7361
(94)90013-2 Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2011). A brief
social-belonging intervention improves academic and health outcomes of
minority students. Science, 331(6023), 1447--1451.
doi:10.1126/science.1198364 Walton, K., Kleinman, K. P., Rifas-Shiman,
S. L., Horton, N. J., Gillman, M. W., Field, A. E., Austin, S. B.,
Neumark-Sztainer, D., & Haines, J. (2016). Secular trends in family
dinner frequency among adolescents. BMC Research Notes, 9(1), 35.
doi:10.1186/ s13104-016-1856-2 Wang, C. X., Hilburn, I. A., Wu, D.-A.,
Mizuhara, Y., Cousté, C. P., Abrahams, J. N. H., Bernstein, S. E.,
Matani, A., Shimojo, S., & Kirschvink, J. L. (2019). Transduction of the
geomagnetic field as evidenced from alpha-band activity in the human
brain. eneuro, 6(2), ENEURO.0483-0418.2019.
doi:10.1523/eneuro.0483-18.2019 Wang, Q. (2008). Emotion knowledge and
autobiographical memory across the preschool years: A cross-cultural
longitudinal investigation. Cognition, 108(1), 117--135.
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2008.02.002 Wang, R., Yang, F., & Haigh, M. M.
(2017). Let me take a selfie: Exploring the psychological effects of
posting and viewing selfies and groupies on social media. Telematics and
Informatics, 34(4), 274--283. doi:10.1016/j. tele.2016.07.004 Ward, A.
F., Duke, K., Gneezy, A., & Bos, M. W.(2017). Brain drain: The mere
presence of one's own smartphone reduces available cognitive capacity.
Journal of the Association for Consumer Research, 2, 140--154.
doi/10.1086/691462 Ward, B. W., Dahlhamer, J. M., Galinsky, A. M., &
Joestl, S. S. (2014). Sexual orientation and health among US adults:
National Health Interview Survey, 2013. National Health Statistics
Report, 77(77), 1--10. Ward, D. (2013). Risk factors and stuttering:
Evaluating the evidence for clinicians. Journal of Fluency Disorders,
38(2), 134--140. doi:10.1016/j.jfludis.2013.02.007 Warren, F., Kuyken,
W., Taylor, R. S., Whalley, B., Crane, C., Bondolfi, G., Hayes, R.,
Huijbers, M., Ma, H., Schweizer, S., Segal, Z., Speckens, A., Teasdale,
J. D., van Heeringen, K., Williams, M., Byford, S., Byng, R., &
Dalgheish, T. (2016). Efficacy and moderators of mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy in prevention of depressive relapse: an individual
patient data meta-analysis from randomized trials. JAMA Psychiatry,
73(6), 565--574. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.0076 Wasserman, R. C.,
Kelleher, K. J., Bocian, A., Baker, A., Childs, G. E., Indacochea, F.,
Stulp, C., & Gardner, W. P. (1999). Identification of attentional and
hyperactivity problems

in primary care: A report from pediatric research in office settings and
the ambulatory sentinel practice network. Pediatrics, 103, E 38.
doi:10.1542/peds.103.3.e38 Watkins, C. E., Campbell, V. L., &
Nieberding, R. (1995). Contemporary practice of psychological assessment
by clinical psychologists. Professional Psychology: Research and
Practice, 26, 54--60. doi:10.1037/0735-7028. 26.1.54 Watkins, E., &
Brown, R. G. (2002). Rumination and executive function in depression: An
experimental study. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry,
72, 400--402. doi:10.1136/jnnp.72.3.400 Watkins, L. E., Sprang, K. R., &
Rothbaum, B. O. (2018). Treating PTSD: A review of evidence-based
psychotherapy interventions. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience,
12(258). doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00258 Watson, J. B., & Rayner, R.
(1920). Conditioned emotional reactions. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 3, 1--14. doi:10.1037/h0069608 Watts, T. W., Duncan, G. J.,
& Quan, H. (2018). Revisiting the marshmallow test: A conceptual
replication investigating links between early delay of gratification and
later outcomes. Psychological Science, 29(7), 1159--1177. doi:10.
1177/0956797618761661 Waxenberg, S. E., Drellich, M. G., & Sutherland,
A. M. (1959). The role of hormones in human behavior. I. Changes in
female sexuality after adrenalectomy. The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology & Metabolism, 19(2), 193--202. doi:10.1210/ jcem-19-2-193
Weber, W., & Newmark, S. (2007). Complementary and alternative medical
therapies for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism.
Pediatric Clinics of North America, 54(6), 983--1006. doi:10.
1016/j.pcl.2007.09.006 Wechsler, D. (1943). Non-intellective factors in
general intelligence. The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
38(1), 101--103. doi:10.1037/h0060613 Wedekind, C., & Füri, S. (1997).
Body odour preferences in men and women: Do they aim for specific MHC
combinations or simple heterogeneity? Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London, Series B, 264, 1471--1479. doi:10.1098/rspb.1997.0204 Wegner,
D. M. (1986). Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis of the group
mind. In B. Mullen & G. R. Goethals (Eds.), Theories of group behavior
(pp. 185--208). New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. Wegner, D. M. (1994).
Ironic processes of mental control. Psychological Review, 101, 34--52.
doi:10.1037/0033-295X.101.1.34 Wegner, D. M., Erber, R., & Raymond, P.
(1991). Transactive memory in close relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 61(6), 923--929.
doi:10.1037/00223514.61.6.923 Wegner, D. M., Giuliano, T., & Hertel, P.
(1985). Cognitive interdependence in close relationships. In W. J. Ickes
(Ed.), Compatible and REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-57

incompatible relationships (pp. 253--276). New York, NY:
Springer-Verlag. Weiner, I. B., & Greene, R. L. (2017). Handbook of
personality assessment. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Incorporated.
Weingartner, H., Miller, H., & Murphy, D. L. (1977).
Mood-state-dependent retrieval of verbal associations. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 86, 276--284. doi:10.1037/0021843X.86.3.276
Weinstein, A. M., & Gorelick, D. A. (2011). Pharmacological treatment of
cannabis dependence. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 17(14), 1351--1358.
doi:10.2174/138161211796150846 Weinstock, M. (2005). The potential
influence of maternal stress hormones on development and mental health
of the offspring. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 19(4), 296--308.
doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2004.09.006 Weisberg, P., & Waldrop, P. B. (1972).
Fixedinterval work habits of Congress. Journal of Applied Behavior
Analysis, 5, 93--97. doi:10.1901/jaba.1972.5-93 Weiser, E. B. (2015). \#
Me: Narcissism and its facets as predictors of selfie-posting frequency.
Personality and Individual Differences, 86, 477--481. doi:10.1016/j.
paid.2015.07.007 Weiss, A. (2018). Personality traits: A view from the
animal kingdom. Journal of Personality, 86(1), 12--22.
doi:10.1111/jopy.12310 Weiss, S. R. B., Blanco, C., & Wargo, E. M.
(2017). Clarifying the link between cannabis use and risk for psychosis.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 136(1), 3--4. doi:10.1111/acps. 12764
Weissman, M. M., Warner, V., Wickramaratne, P., Moreau, D., & Olfson, M.
(1997). Offspring of depressed parents: 10 years later. Journal of
Affective Disorders, 15, 269--277.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1997.01830220054009 Weitlauf, A. S., Vehorn, A. C.,
Taylor, J. L., & Warren, Z. E. (2014). Relationship satisfaction,
parenting stress, and depression in mothers of children with autism.
Autism, 18(2), 194--198. doi:10.1177/1362361312458039 Wells, A. (2006).
Metacognitive therapy for worry and generalised anxiety disorder. In G.
C. L. Davey & A. Wells (Eds.), Worry and its psychological disorders:
Theory, assessment and treatment. (pp. 259--272). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley
Publishing. Wells, G. L., Memon, A., & Penrod, S. D. (2006). Eyewitness
evidence: Improving its probative value. Psychological Science in the
Public Interest, 7(2), 45--75. doi:10.1111/j.1529-1006.2006.00027.x
Wenhart, T., Bethlehem, R. A. I., Baron-Cohen, S., & Altenmüller, E.
(2019). Autistic traits, resting-state connectivity, and absolute pitch
in professional musicians: shared and distinct neural features.
Molecular Autism, 10(1), 20. doi:10.1186/s13229-019-0272-6 Wernicke, C.
(1874). Der aphasische symptomenkomplex: Eine psychologische Studie auf
anatomischer Basis \[Aphasias: A

R-58

psychological study of their anatomical basis\]. Breslau, Poland: Cohn &
Weigart. Wetzel, E., Brown, A., Hill, P. L., Chung, J. M., Robins, R.
W., & Roberts, B. W. (2017). The narcissism epidemic is dead; Long live
the narcissism epidemic. Psychological Science, 28(12), 1833--1847.
doi:10.1177/0956797617724208 White, G. L. (1980). Physical
attractiveness and courtship progress. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 39, 660--668. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.39.4.660 Whorf, B. L.
(1956). Science and linguistics. InJ. B. Carroll (Ed.), Language,
thought, and reality: Selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf
(pp. 207--219). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Widmeyer, W. N., & Loy, J. W.
(1988). When you're hot, you're hot: Warm-cold effects in first
impressions of persons and teaching effectiveness. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 80(1), 118--121. doi:10.1037/0022-0663.80.1.118
Widom, C. (1978). A methodology for studying non-institutionalized
psychopaths. In R. D. Hare & D. Schalling (Eds.), Psychopathic
behaviour: Approaches to research (pp. 71--84). Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Wiech, K. (2016). Deconstructing the sensation of pain: The influence of
cognitive processes on pain perception. Science, 354(6312), 584--587.
doi:10.1126/science.aaf8934 Wiederhold, B. K., & Riva, G. (2019).
Virtual reality therapy: Emerging topics and future challenges.
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 22(1), 3--6.
doi:10.1089/ cyber.2018.29136.bkw Wielgosz, J., Goldberg, S. B., Kral,
T. R. A., Dunne, J. D., & Davidson, R. J. (2019). Mindfulness meditation
and psychopathology. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 15(1),
285--316. doi:10.1146/annurev -clinpsy-021815-093423 Wigfield, A.,
Eccles, J. S., Fredricks, J. A., Simpkins, S., Roeser, R. W., &
Schiefele, U. (2015). Development of achievement motivation and
engagement. In M. E. Lamb & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of child
psychology and developmental science: Socioemotional processes
(p. 657--700). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc. Wilbanks, C. A.
(2014). Alternative methods of predator control. http://agrilife.org
/texnatwildlife/coyotes/table-of-contents
/alternative-methods-of-predator-control/ Wilensky, A. E., Schafe, G.
E., Kristensen, M. P., & LeDoux, J. E. (2006). Rethinking the fear
circuit: The central nucleus of the amygdala is required for the
acquisition, consolidation, and expression of Pavlovian fear
conditioning. Journal of Neuroscience, 26(48), 12387--12396.
doi:10.1523/ JNEUROSCI.4316-06.2006 Wilent, W. B., Oh, M. Y.,
Buetefisch, C. M., Bailes, J. E., Cantella, D., Angle, C., & Whiting, D.
M. (2010). Induction of panic attack by stimulation of the ventromedial

hypothalamus. 112(6), 1295--1298. doi:10.3171/2009.9.Jns09577 Wilke, A.,
Hutchinson, J. M. C., Todd, P. M., & Kruger, D. J. (2006). Is risk
taking used as a cue in mate choice? Evolutionary Psychology, 4,
367--393. doi:10.1177/ 147470490600400130 Wilkinson, G. S. (1984).
Reciprocal food sharing in the vampire bat. Nature, 308,
181--184.doi:10.1038/308181a0 Wilkinson, G. S. (1990). Food sharing in
vampire bats. Scientific American, 62, 76--82. Williams, H., Conway, M.
A., & Cohen, G. (2008). Memory in the real world. In G. Cohen & M. A.
Conway (Eds.), Memory in the real world (pp. 21--90). New York:
Psychology Press. Williams, K. D. (2007). Ostracism. Annual Review of
Psychology, 58, 425--452. doi:10.1146 /annurev.psych.58.110405.085641
Williamson, A. M., & Feyer, A.-M. (2000). Moderate sleep deprivation
produces impairments in cognitive and motor performance equivalent to
legally prescribed levels of alcohol intoxication. Occupational and
Environmental Medicine, 57(10), 649--655. doi:10.1136/oem.57.10.649
Williamson, R. A., Jaswal, V. K., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2010). Learning the
rules: Observation and imitation of a sorting strategy by 36-month-old
children. Developmental Psychology, 46(1), 57--65. doi:10.1037/ a0017473
Willis, J., & Todorov, A. (2006). First impressions: Making up your mind
after a 100-ms exposure to a face. Psychological Science, 17(7),
592--598. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280. 2006.01750.x Wilson, A. E., & Ross,
M. (2000). The frequency of temporal and social comparisons in people's
personal appraisals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78,
928--942. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.78.5.928 Wilson, E. O. (1975).
Sociobiology: The new synthesis. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press. Wilson, G., Hill, M., & Kiernan, M. (2018). Loneliness
and social isolation of military veterans: Systematic narrative review.
Occupational Medicine, 68(9), 600--609. doi:10.1093/occmed/kqy160
Wimmer, H., & Perner, J. (1983). Beliefs about beliefs: Representation
and constraining function of wrong beliefs in young children's
understanding of deception. Cognition, 13, 103--128. doi:10.1016/0010
-0277(83)90004-5 Wimmer, R. D., Schmitt, L. I., Davidson, T. J.,
Nakajima, M., Deisseroth, K., & Halassa, M. M. (2015). Thalamic control
of sensory selection in divided attention. Nature, 526(7575), 705--709.
doi:10.1038/ nature15398 Winkelman, M. (2003). Complementary therapy for
addiction: "Drumming out drugs." American Journal of Public Health,
93(4), 647--651. doi:10.2105/ajph.93.4.647

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Winkler, A. D., Spillmann, L., Werner, J. S., & Webster, M. A. (2015).
Asymmetries in blueyellow color perception and in the color of 'the
dress'. Current Biology, 25(13), R547-- 548.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2015.05.004 Wirz-Justice, A. (2018). Seasonality in
affective disorders. General and Comparative Endocrinology, 258,
244--249. doi:10.1016/j. ygcen.2017.07.010 Witkiewitz, K., Pearson, M.
R., Wilson, A. D., Stein, E. R., Votaw, V. R., Hallgren, K. A., Maisto,
S. A., Swan, J. E., Schwebel, F. J., Aldridge, A., Zarkin, G. A., &
Tucker, J. A. (2020). Can alcohol use disorder recovery include some
heavy drinking? A replication and extension up to 9 years following
treatment. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 44(9),
1862--1874. doi:10.1111/acer.14413 Wittchen, H.-U., & Hoyer, J. (2001).
Generalized anxiety disorder: Nature and course. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 62(Suppl.11), 15--19. Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical
investigations (G. E. M. Anscombe, Trans.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Wixted, J. T., Mickes, L., Clark, S. E., Gronlund, S. D., & Roediger
III, H. L. (2015). Initial eyewitness confidence reliably predicts
eyewitness identification accuracy. American Psychologist, 70(6),
515--526. doi:10.1037/ a0039510 Wobber, V., Wrangham, R., & Hare, B.
(2010). Bonobos exhibit delayed development of social behavior and
cognition relative to chimpanzees. Current Biology, 20(3), 226--230.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2009.11.070 Wolpe, J. (1958). Psychotherapy by
reciprocal inhibition. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Wolraich, M. L., Wilson, D.B., & White, J.W. (1996). The effect of sugar
on behavior or cognition in children. A meta-analysis. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 274, 1617--1621. doi:10.1001
/jama.1995.03530200053037 Wood, E. K., Higley, J. D., Champoux, M.,
Marsiske, M., Olsen, J. A., Suomi, S. J., & Kay, D. B. (2020).
Multi-group multi-time point confirmatory factor analysis of the triadic
structure of temperament: A nonhuman primate model. Developmental
Psychobiology. doi:10.1002/dev.21985 Wood, J. M., Lilienfeld, S. O.,
Nezworski, M. T., Garb, H. N., Allen, K. H., & Wildermuth, J. L. (2010).
Validity of Rorschach Inkblot scores for discriminating psychopaths from
nonpsychopaths in forensic populations: A meta-analysis. Psychological
Assessment, 22(2), 336--349. doi:10.1037/a0018998 Wood, J. M.,
Nezworski, M. T., & Lilienfeld, S. O. (2003). What's wrong with the
Rorschach?: Science confronts the controversial inkblot test. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Woolley, A. W., Chabris, C. F., Pentland,
A., Hashmi, N., & Malone, T. W. (2010). Evidence for a collective
intelligence factor in the performance of human groups.

Science, 330(6004), 686--688. doi:10.1126/ science.1193147 World Health
Organization (WHO). (2003). WHO definition of health. http://www.who
.int/about/definition/en/print.html World Health Organization (WHO).
(2018). International classivication of diseases for mortality and
morbidity statistics (11th Revision).
https://icd.who.int/browse11/l-m/en World Health Organization (WHO).
(2020a). Obesity and overweight. https://www.who
.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail /obesity-and-overweight World
Health Organization (WHO). (2020b). Tobacco.
https://www.who.int/news-room /fact-sheets/detail/tobacco Wortham, J. M.
(2020). Characteristics of persons who died with COVID-19---United
States, February 12--May 18, 2020. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 69. Wright, G. A., Baker, D. D., Palmer, M. J., Stabler, D.,
Mustard, J. A., Power, E. F., Borland, A. M., & Stevenson, P. C. (2013).
Caffeine in floral nectar enhances a pollinator's memory of reward.
Science, 339(6124), 1202--1204. doi:10.1126/science.1228806
Wrzesniewski, A., McCauley, C., Rozin, P., & Schwartz, B. (1997). Jobs,
careers, and callings: People's relations to their work. Journal of
Research in Personality, 31(1), 21--33. doi:10.1006/jrpe.1997.2162 Wu,
P.-L., & Chiou, W.-B. (2008). Postformal thinking and creativity among
late adolescents: A post-Piagetian approach. Adolescence, 43(170),
237--251. Xie, W., Campbell, S., & Zhang, W. (2020). Working memory
capacity predicts individual differences in social-distancing compliance
during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 202008868.
doi:10.1073/ pnas.2008868117 Xiong, T., Chen, H., Luo, R., & Mu, D.
(2016). Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for people with autism spectrum
disorder (ASD). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 10,CD010922.
doi:10.1002/14651858. CD010922.pub2.0 Yakeley, J. (2018). Current
understanding of narcissism and narcissistic personality disorder.
BJPsych Advances, 24(5), 305--315. doi:10.1192/bja.2018.20 Yalom, I. D.
(1995). The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (4th ed.). New
York, NY: Basic Books. Yamakawa, M., Tsujimura, S.-i., & Okajima, K.
(2019). A quantitative analysis of the contribution of melanopsin to
brightness perception. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 7568.
doi:10.1038/s41598-019-44035-3 Yanagisawa, M. (1998). Orexins and orexin
receptors: a family of hypothalamic neuropeptides and G protein-coupled
receptors that regulate feeding behavior. Cell, 92(5), 573--585.
doi:10.1016/S00928674(00)80949-6

Yang, B.-Z., Zhang, H., Ge, W., Weder, N., Douglas-Palumberi, H.,
Perepletchikova, F., Gelernter, J., & Kaufman, J. (2013). Child abuse
and epigenetic mechanisms of disease risk. American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 44(2), 101--107. doi:10.1016/j. amepre.2012.10.012
Yang, M.-L., & Chiou, W.-B. (2010). Looking online for the best romantic
partner reduces decision quality: The moderating role of choice-making
strategies. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 13(2),
207--210. doi:10.1089/cyber.2009.0208 Yee, N. (2006). The demographics,
motivations and derived experiences of users of massively-multiuser
online graphical environments. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, 15, 309--329. doi:10.1162/ pres.15.3.309 Yehuda, R.,
Engel, S. M., Brand, S. R., Seckl, J., Marcus, S. M., & Berkowitz, G. S.
(2005). Transgenerational effects of posttraumatic stress disorder in
babies of mothers exposed to the World Trade Center attacks during
pregnancy. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 90(7),
4115-- 4118. doi:10.1210/jc.2005-0550 Yeoh, S. L., Eastwood, J., Wright,
I. M., Morton, R., Melhuish, E., Ward, M., & Oei, J. L. (2019).
Cognitive and motor outcomes of children with prenatal opioid exposure:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Network Open, 2(7),
e197025--e197025. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.7025 Yerkes, R. M., &
Dodson, J. D. (1908). The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity
of habit-formation. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology,
18, 459--482. doi:10.1002/cne.920180503 Yoo, J. H., Valdovinos, M. G., &
Schroeder, S. R. (2012). The epidemiology of psychopathology in people
with intellectual disability: A forty-year review. International Review
of Research in Developmental Disabilities, 42, 31--56.
doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-3942845.00002-4 Yoon, J. H., Grandelis, A., &
Maddock, R. J. (2016). Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex GABA concentration
in humans predicts working memory load processing capacity. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 36(46), 11788--11794.
doi:10.1523/jneurosci.1970-16.2016 Yoon, Y. B., Shin, W.-G., Lee, T. Y.,
Hur, J.-W., Cho, K. I. K., Sohn, W. S., Kim, S.-G., Lee, K.-H., & Kwon,
J. S. (2017). Brain structural networks associated with intelligence and
visuomotor ability. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 2177.
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-02304-z Yotsutsuji, T., Saitoh, O., Suzuki, M.,
Hagino, H., Mori, K., Takahashi, T., Kurokawa, K., Matsui, M., Seto, H.,
& Kurachi, M. (2003). Quantification of lateral ventricular subdivisions
in schizophrenia by high-resolution three-dimensional magnetic resonance
imaging. Psychiatry Research, 122, 1--12.
doi:10.1016/S0925-4927(02)00105-1

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-59

Young, P. C. (1952). Antisocial uses of hypnosis. In L. M. LeCron (Ed.),
Experimental hypnosis (pp. 376--409). New York, NY: Macmillan Young, S.
G., & Claypool, H. M. (2010). Mere exposure has differential effects on
attention allocation to threatening and neutral stimuli. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 46(2), 424--427. doi:10.1016/j
.jesp.2009.10.015 .. Youngman, J. F. (2017). The use and abuse of
pre-employment personality tests. Business Horizons, 60(3), 261--269.
doi:10.1016/j. bushor.2016.11.010 Youyou, W., Kosinski, M., & Stillwell,
D. (2015). Computer-based personality judgments are more accurate than
those made by humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 112(4), 1036--1040. doi:10.1073/
pnas.1418680112 Yudell, M., Roberts, D., DeSalle, R., & Tishkoff, S.
(2016). Taking race out of human genetics. Science, 351(6273), 564--565.
doi:10.1126/science.aac4951 Yurgelun-Todd, D. (2007). Emotional and
cognitive changes during adolescence. Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
17(2), 251--257. doi:10.1016/j.conb.2007.03.009 Zager, A., Andersen, M.
L., Ruiz, F. S., Antunes, I. B., & Tufik, S. (2007). Effects of acute
and chronic sleep loss on immune modulation of rats. American Journal of
Physiology. Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology, 293(1),
R504--509. doi:10.1152/ ajpregu.00105.2007 Zajonc, R. B. (1965). Social
facilitation. Science, 149, 269--274. doi:10.1126/science.149.3681. 269
Zajonc, R. B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology Monograph Supplement, 9, 1--27.
doi:10.1037/h0025848

R-60

Zajonc, R. B., & Sales, S. M. (1966). Social facilitation of dominant
and subordinate responses. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
2(2), 160--168. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(66)90077-1 Zaval, L., Li, Y.,
Johnson, E., & Weber, E. (2015). Complementary contributions of fluid
and crystallized intelligence to decision making across the life span.
In T. H. Hess, J. Strough, & C. E. Lockenhoff (Eds.), Aging and decision
making: Empirial and applied perspectives (pp. 149--168). Boston, MA:
Elsevier. Zebrowitz, L. A. (2017). First impressions from faces. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 26(3), 237--242.
doi:10.1177/0963721416683996 Zebrowitz, L. A., Wang, R., Bronstad, P.
M., Eisenberg, D., Undurraga, E., Reyes-García, V., & Godoy, R. (2012).
First impressions from faces among US and culturally isolated
Tsimane'people in the Bolivian rainforest. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 43(1), 119--134. doi:10.1177/0022022111411386 Zelazo, P. R.
(1998). McGraw and the development of unaided walking. Developmental
Review, 18(4), 449--471. doi:10.1006/ drev.1997.0460 Zerjal, T., Xue,
Y., Bertorelle, G., Wells, S., Bao, W., Suling, Z., Qamar, R., Ayub, Q.,
Mohyuddin, A., Fu, S., Li, P., Yuldasheva, N., Ruzibakiev, R., Xu, J.,
Shu, Q., Du, R., Yang, H., Hurles, M. E., Robinson, E., ... Tyler-Smith,
C. (2003). The genetic legacy of the Mongols. American Journal of Human
Genetics, 72, 717-721. doi:10.1086/367774 Zhang, T. Y., Chrétien, P.,
Meaney, M. J., & Gratton, A. (2005). Influence of naturally occurring
variations in maternal care on prepulse inhibition of acoustic startle
and the medial prefrontal cortical dopamine response to stress in adult
rats. The Journal

of Neuroscience, 25, 1493--1502. doi:10.1523/ JNEUROSCI.3293-04.2005
Zhang, Y., Proenca, R., Maffei, M., Barone, M., Leopold, L., & Friedman,
J. M. (1994). Positional cloning of the mouse obese gene and its human
homologue. Nature, 372, 425--432. doi:10.1038/372425a0 Zigler, E.
(1967). Familial mental retardation: A continuing dilemma. Science,
155(3760), .. 292--298. doi:10.1126/science.155.3760.292 Zimbardo, P. G.
(1969). The human choice: Individuation, reason, and order vs.
deindividuation, impulse and chaos. In W. J. Arnold & D. Levine (Eds.),
Nebraska symposium on motivation (pp. 237--307). Lincoln, NE: University
of Nebraska Press. Zimmer, C. (2009). On the origin of tomorrow.
Science, 326, 1334--1336. doi:10.1126/ science.326.5958.1334 Zimmerman,
F. J., Christakis, D. A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2007). Associations between
media viewing and language development in children under age 2 years.
The Journal of Pediatrics, 151(4), 364--368.
doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2007/04.071 Zimmerman, F. J., Gilkerson, J.,
Richards, J. A., Christakis, D. A., Xu, D., Gray, S., & Yapanel, U.
(2009). Teaching by listening: The importance of adult-child
conversations to language development. Pediatrics, 124(1), 342--349.
doi:10.1542/peds.2008-2267. Zubin, J., & Spring, B. (1977).
Vulnerability: A new view of schizophrenia. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 86, 103--126. doi:10.1037/0021-843X.86.2.103 Zuscho, H.
(1983). Posttraumatic anosmia. Archives of Otolaryngology---Head and
Neck Surgery, 4, 252--256. doi:10.1001/ archotol.1982.00790500026006

REFERENCES

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Name Index Page numbers followed by f and t indicate figure and table

A

Aafjes-van Doorn, K., 634 Aaker, J. L., 679 Abbeduto, L., 401
Abdellaoui, A., 566 Abdi, H., 181, 187 Abdolmaleky, H. M., 86 Aberson,
C. L., 489 Aboujaoude, E., 604 Abraham, G. E., 256 Abraham, S., 670, 675
Abrahams, D., 532 Abrahamsm J. N. H., 178 Abramovitch, A., 581
Abramovitz, R., 644 Abramson, L. Y., 571 Abramson, R., 442 Abramzon, Y.
A., 367 Abutalebi, J., 390, 391 Accero, C. S., 416f Acebo, C., 202
Achor, S., 640, 641 Acker, J. D., 450 Adamantidis, A., 354 Adamovich,
S., 349 Adams, J., 182, 466 Adams, M. J., 455, 455f Adams, R. B., Jr.,
504, 504f Adiguzel, K., 557 Adil, J., 583 Adisetiyo, V., 560 Adler, A.
B., 267, 500, 645, 657 Adler, N. E., 649 Adolph, K. E., 422, 423
Adolphs, R., 93, 117, 118, 118f, 239, 240, 242, 243f, 397, 432
Adrian-Ventura, J., 476 Agay, N., 222 Agerbo, E., 260 Agnew, C. R., 682
Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., 578, 584 Ahadi, S. A., 433, 475 Ahanonu, B., 182
Ahern, E., 607 Ahern, J., 584 Ahorani, E., 123 Aiello, A. E., 583
Aigner, M., 261 Aihara, M., 653 Ainsworth, M., 401, 434 Ajzen, I., 513
Akane, A., 77 Akers, K. G., 206 Akerstedt, T., 202 Akula, S., 557
Akyildiz-Kunz, C., 649

Al-Hamzawi, A., 578 Al-Issa, I., 552 Al-Shawaf, I., 225 Albano, A. M.,
578 Albarracin, D., 269 Albert, D., 444 Albillos, A., 83 Albouy, B., 204
Alcaniz, M., 630, 630 Austin Alchon, S., 105 Alcock, J., 61 Alda, M.,
624 Alderson-Day, B., 564 Aldinger, K. A., 115 Aldrich, M., 209 Aldwin,
C., 658 Alexander-Bloch, A., 136 Alexander, G. M., 423 Alexander, N.,
460 Alexander, R. D., 96 Algren, M. H., 649 Allan, J. N., 374 Allen, J.
A., 555 Allen, K., 657 Allen, L. A., 630, 632 Allen, L. S., 266 Allen,
M. S., 620 Allen, N. B. Allen, T. A., 476 Allen, W. D., 578 Allgulander,
C., 629 Allison, T., 195 Allmon, D., 632 Alloway, R. G., 355 Alloway, T.
P., 355 Allport, G. W., 21, 36, 37, 468, 521, 680 Ally, B. A., 330
Almli, L. M., 583 Alonso, J., 584 Alper, C., 649 Alpers, G. W., 577
Alptuzun, V., 349 Altamura, A. C., 572 Altenmuller, E., 177, 556 Altman,
I., 533 Altman, J. D., 270 Alvarez, E., 219 Alwin, D. F., 526 Amaral, D.
G., 242, 243 Ambady, N., 504, 504f Ambeskovic, M., 83 Ameis, S. H., 560
Amemiya, A., 256 American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), 210

Ames, A., 164 Ames, E., 8 Amico, J. A., 263 Amirkhan, J. H., 508
Ammentorp, J., 604 Ammon, K., 193 Amstadter, A. B., 583 An, Y., 354
Anacker, C., 625 Anand, B., 256 Anddreassen, O. A., 563 Andersen, H. R.,
413 Andersen, M. L., 206 Andersen, P. T., 649 Anderson, C., 524
Anderson, C. A., 53 Anderson, I. M., 629 Anderson, J. A., 413 Anderson,
J. R., 93 Anderson, K. N., 391 Anderson, M. C., 320, 324 Anderson, M.
L., 270 Anderson, N. E., 123 Anderson, S. W., 122, 586 Anderton, B. H.,
450 Andlauer, T. F., 390 Andreasen, N. C., 563 Andrew, M., 119 Andrews,
B., 592 Andrews, J. A., 436, 437, 437f Andrykowski, M. A., 651 Angel
Martinez-Gonzalez, M., 86 Angel, F., 604 Angelakis, E., 259 Angelakis,
I., 582 Angeles-Castellanos, M., 200 Angermeyer, M., 561, 578, 583
Angle, C., 242 Angley, M., 556, 557f Angold, A., 559 Annas, P., 577f
Annese, J., 45 Anney, R. J., 556 Annunziato, A., 85 Anokhin, A. P., 248
Ansaro, A., 299 Anthony, J. C., 561, 583 Anton, J.-L., 240 Antonova, I.,
346 Antunes, I. B., 206 Apodaca, J., 388 Araujo, J. F., 208 Arbib, M.
A., 124 Arch, J., 256 Archer, R. P., 447

Arean, P. A., 452 Arena, J. P., 256 Arendt, J., 200 Arevalo, J. M. G.,
106, 652 Argo, A., 250 Argote, L., 354 Ariel, B., 485 Arimatea, E., 460
Aristotle, 8, 108 Aritake-Okada, S., 206 Armstrong, H. E., 632
Armstrong, L., 259 Arnett, J. J., 438, 445, 446, 448 Arnett, K. H., 336
Arnold, S. J., 567 Arnsten, A. F., 621 Arnulf, I., 208 Aron, A., 235,
475, 534 Aron, E. N., 475, 534 Aronson, E., 522 Aronson, J., 518, 520f
Aronson, J. A., 537 Aronson, V., 532 Arora, N., 412 Arora, R., 678
Arpin-Cribbie, C., 626 Arseneault, L., 75, 459 Arslan, R. C., 486, 487
Ary, D. V., 664, 664 Asch, S. E., 471, 523, 523f Aschwanden, D., 496,
496f Asendorpf, J. B., 477 Aserinsky, E., 208 Ashley-Koch, A. E., 583
Ashley, R., 176 Ashton, J. R., 534 Ashton, M. C., 482 Ashwood, P., 115
Askren, M. K., 347 Aslan, S., 567 Aslin, R. N., 167 Astesano, C., 240
Atherton, J., 390 Atkinson, L. Z., 625 Atkinson, Q. D., 383, 384f
Atkinson, R. C., 319, 321f Atri, A., 349 Avants, B., 367 Averbach, E.,
321 Averill, A. J., 651 Avila, C., 476 Avinun, R., 476 Axelrod, R., 537
Axelsson, J., 200 Ayduk, O., 370 Ayres, M. M.

N-1 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Ayuso-Mateos, J. L., 568, 569f Azuine, R. E., 413, 558, 560

B

Baars, B. J., 195 Babad, E., 248 Babb, S. D., 663, 664, 664f Babb, S.
M., 564 Babenko, O., 83 Babyak, M. A., 669 Bachman, J. G., 490 Bachrach,
D. G., 354 Baddeley, A., 320, 322, 323, 324, 324f, 337, 337f Baer, D.
M., 620 Bahnick, S., 42 Bahrami, S., 563 Bahrick, H. P., 343 Bahrick, L.
E., 418f Baicker, K., 545 Bailes, J. E., 242 Bailey, A. A., 540 Bailey,
C. H., 346, 346f Bailey, J. S., 305 Bailey, J.M., 265, 265f, 266
Baillargeon, R. 430, 431f Baio, J., 555, 556f Bak, C. K., 649 Baker, A.,
556, 557f, 559 Baker, L., 196 Baker, M., 500 Baker, S. W., 425 Baker, T.
B., 601, 602, 608 Bakker, A., 578 Baldo, J. V., 386 Baldwin, D. S., 629
Baler, R., 217 Ball, S., 627 Ballantyne, P. F., 11 Balogh, S., 189
Balschuna, D., 349 Balthazart, J., 266 Banaji, M. R., 501, 518 Bandelow,
B., 629 Bandettini, P.A., 646 Bandura, A., 310, 311, 472, 541 Banerjee,
D., 593 Banerjee, T. D., 560 Bangee, M., 189 Banks, E., 449 Banning, K.,
644 Banos, R. M., 630 Banse, R., 477 Bar-On, R., 395 Barabasz, A. F.,
224 Baravaszm A. F., 522 Barber, J. P., 607 Barber, S. J., 455 Barclay,
P., 24 Bard, P., 235 Barger, W. A., 289 Barkley, R. A., 559, 560 Barlow,
C., 77 Barlow, D. H., 576, 578 Barnea-Goraly, N., 557

N-2

Barnes, J., 224 Barnes, M. D., 48 Baron-Cohen, S., 48, 177, 419, 432,
556, 619 Baron, R. S., 530 Barone, M., 256 Barresi, J., 431 Barrett, A.,
561 Barrett, A. B., 218 Barrett, J. L., 680 Barrett, L. F., 243, 245
Barrick, M. R., 469 Barry, D. T., 607 Barry, J. A., 604 Bartels, A., 67,
116 Barthel, M., 514 Bartle-Haring, S., 454 Bartlett, F. C., 334, 338
Bartone, P. T., 659, 659f Bartoshuk, L. M., 186 Baruch, I., 291 Bashore,
T. R., 24 Baskin-Sommers, A. R., 632 Bass, D. I., 340 Bassett, R., 524
Bastian, L. S., 257 Bastos, M. L., 222 Basu, A., 177 Bateman, A. W., 632
Batenhorst, R. L., 183 Bateson, M., 485f Battaglia, F. P., 354 Baud, D.,
414 Bauer, P. J., 430 Bauer, R. M., 211 Baugh, J., 388 Baum, M. A., 514
Baumann, D. J., 538 Bauman, M. L., 45, 115 Baumeister, R. F., 267, 489,
490, 679 Baumrind, D., 436 Bava, S., 440 Bavel, J. J. V., 545 Bavelas,
J. B., 513 Bavelier, D., 391 Baxter, L. R., Jr., 597 Baze, W. B., 421
Bazerman, M. H., 345 Beacham, A. O., 651 Beaman, A. L., 485 Beaton, A.,
80 Beauchamp, G. K., 188, 419 Becerra, L., 180 Bechara, A., 122, 215,
245, 378, 379, 395, 584, 586 Beck, A. T., 540, 570, 580, 613, 614, 626,
673 Becker, A., 261 Becker, J., 390 Becker, M., 488 Beckerman, S., 99
Bedell, M. A., 90 Bedford, R., 168 Beech, B. M., 669 Beevers, C. G., 460

Begemann, M. J., 617 Behm, F. M., 290 Beiser, A. S., 451 Beitel, M., 607
Bekes, V., 634 Bell, R. M., 183 Bellantuono, C., 460 Bellis, M. A., 534
Bellon, J. A., 580 Bellugi, U., 391 Belmonte-de-Abreu, P., 126 Belsky,
J., 435, 469 Bem, D. J., 61, 90, 486 Benbow, C. P., 63, 401 Bender, D.
S., 587 Benjamin, D. J., 62 Benjet, C., 584 Benkler, Y., 514 Bennett, R.
L., 183 Bennett, W., 220f Benson, H., 225 Bentros, M. E., 414 Berg, C.,
680 Bergeman, C. S., 657 Berger, H., 21 Berglas, S., 486, 488 Bergman,
H., 390 Bergman, K. S., 597 Bergmann, M. M., 663 Berinsky, A. J., 514
Berk, M., 86, 650 Berkowitz, G. S., 644 Berkun, M. M., 53 Berman, K. F.,
563 Berman, M. G., 343, 347 Bernal, P., 619 Bernard, C., 218, 220
Bernard, P., 627 Bernhardt, P. C., 262, 518 Bernieri, F., 248 Bernstein,
B. O., 401 Bernstein, D. A., 37, 467 Bernstein, M. J., 42, 336 Berntson,
G. G., 40, 93, 105, 116, 130, 238, 241, 242, 290, 650, 651, 653, 654,
682 Berry, D. S., 535 Berscheid, E., 513, 533, 675 Bersoff, D. M., 443
Bertelsen, J., 225 Bertolo, R. F., 665 Besch, N. F., 540 Besson, M., 240
Best, R., 543 Betancourt, H., 27 Bethlehem, R. A. I., 177, 556
Bewernick, B. H., 616 Bhambri, A., 109 Bhattacharya, J., 176
Bhattacharya, T., 669 Bialek, H. M., 53 Bialy, L., 209 Bialystok, E.,
391 Bianchi-Demicheli, F., 41, 144, 263f, 264 Bickman, L., 525

Biederman, I., 163 Bierderman, J., 576 Biezonski, D. K., 222 Biglan, A.,
664, 664 Bihrle, S., 122 Bijanki, K. R., 340 Bilenberg, N., 81 Bilker,
W., 250 Binau, S. G., 552 Binder, J. R., 347 Bindman, J., 615 Binet, A.,
20, 392 Binggeli, C., 651 Bingham, C. R., 444 Birbaumer, N., 203, 226,
227 Birchler, G. R., 449, 613 Bisanz, J., 429, 430 Bischofberger, J.,
354 Bisson, J. I., 119 Bitsko, R. H., 622 Bivens, B. A., 183 Bjork, R.
A., 480 Bjornsson, A. S., 582 Bjorvatn, B., 209 Blackburn, E. H., 649
Blagev, D. P., 664 Blagovechtchenski, E., 511 Blaha, C. D., 115 Blair,
R. J., 586 Blair, R. J. R., 118, 250 Blais, R. J., 440, 441f Blake, W.,
567 Blakemore, S.-J., 379, 440, 444 Blanchard, R., 266 Blanco, C., 217,
551, 553, 553f Blatt, G. J., 115 Blau, K., 537 Blaut, M. Bledowski, C.,
348 Blehar, M. C., 434 Bleidorn, W., 486, 487 Blevins, J. E., 257 Bliss,
T. V. P., 346 Blizinsky, K. D., 459, 460, 460f Blomgren, K., 440 Bloom,
P., 386 Bloor, L., 42 Blow, F., 624 Blum, K., 118 Blumberg, S. J., 622
Blumenthal, J., 564f Blumenthal, J. A., 627f, 669 Boardman, J. D., 499
Bobo, W. V., 391, 413, 598, 623 Bocharov, A. V., 203 Bocian, A., 559
Boddy, C. R., 588 Boden, J. M., 28, 84, 217, 217f, 490, 540, 667 Boeing,
H., 663f Bogaert, A. F., 482 Bogen, J. E., 125, 197 Boggio, P. S., 545
Bohart, A., 611 Boker, S. M., 657 Boksem, M. A. S., 361

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Boldrey, E., 180, 181 Bolduc, E. A., 576 Bolger, N., 658 Boller, A., 367
Bolmont, M., 264, 544 Bolnick, D. A., 89 Bolte, S., 413 Bolz, L., 354
Bomar, J. M., 77 Bomfim, I. L., 209 Bonanno, G. A., 683, 683f
Bondarenko, E. A., 572 Bonds, Barry, 128 Bonne, O., 583, 584 Bonnette,
A., 38 Boodoo, G., 398 Boomsma, D. I., 102, 268, 500, 501 Boone, K., 492
Booth-LaForce, C., 395 Booth, A., 262 Bor, D. H., 671 Borbely, A. A.,
575, 575f Borden, R. J., 489 Boreham, J., 665 Boring, E. G., 385
Borjigin, J., 213 Born, J., 206, 349 Borsa, V. M., 390 Borsboom, D., 510
Borsini A., 648 Borsook, D., 180 Bosch, J. A., 650 Bosmans, G., 401
Bossard, J. H. S., 531 Bossini, L., 583, 648 Botella, C., 630 Bouchard,
C., 661f, 668f, 669, 669 Bouchard, T. J., Jr., 81, 398, 422, 475, 510
Bouchard, V., 627 Boucher, H. C., 493 Bouwman, M., 630 Bowen, R., 485
Bower, G. H., 485 Bowlby, J., 401, 434 Bowley, L., 577 Boyack, K. W., 5
Boyce, C. J., 472 Boyce, R., 354 Boyd, R., 523 Boydell, J., 565 Boykin,
A. W., 398 Boyle, E. A., 90 Boyle, G., 635 Bozhdaraj, D., 413 Brackbill,
R. M., 583 Bradley, C., 620 Bradstreet, J. J., 620 Brady, K. T., 215
Braff, D. L., 563 Brainerd, C. J., 339f Bralten, J., 560 Brammer, G.L.,
540 Brand, S. R., 644

Brandler, W., 390 Brandon, T. H., 664 Brannon, S. M., 504, 511
Branscombe, N. R., 488 Bransford, J. D., 335 Brashier, N., 336 Brass,
M., 181, 193 Bratsberg, B., 93 Brauer, J., 390 Braverman, J., 250 Bray,
R. M., 529 Brazel, M., 573 Brazil, I. A., 632 Breakefield, X., 84
Breedlove, S. M., 265, 265f, 266 Breen, G., 262 Breier, A., 623 Breit,
S., 130 Breiter, H., 180 Brekke, N., 395, 396 Breland, K., 307 Breland,
M., 306, 307 Brembs, B., 537 Bremner, J. D., 187, 583, 648 Brereton, J.,
322 Breslow, R. A., 671 Breuer, J., 600 Brevers, D., 215 Brewer, J. A.,
225 Brewer, M. B., 493, 522 Brewer, N., 341, 556 Brewin, C. R., 592
Bribiescas, R. G., 91 Briceno, E. M., 648 Brigham, J. C., 336
Bringsjord, S., 197 Brink, J., 586 Brinol, P., 509 Brittain, J.-S., 378
Brobeck, J. R., 256 Brobst, K. E., 442 Broca, P., 385 Brody, D. J.,
598f, 625 Brody, N., 398 Broersma, M., 387 Bromet, E., 583, 644 Bromet,
E. J., 584 Bronen, R. A., 648 Bronstad, P. M., 501 Brooks-Gunn, J., 195
Brooks, L., 367 Brosnan, S. F., 183, 537 Brotzman, E., 527 Broussard,
B., 565 Brown, A., 447 Brown, G. W., 573 Brown, J. D., 486 Brown, J. W.,
347 Brown, Jerry, 123 Brown, K. A., 270 Brown, K. T., 522 Brown, N. A.,
471 Brown, P., 300, 378 Brown, R., 488 Brown, R. G., 570, 570f Brown, R.
W., 338

Brown, S. L., 660 Brown, T. N., 522 Brown, W. J., 668 Browne, D., 402,
418 Brownell, D. K., 108 Brownstein, M., 518 Brozek, J., 272 Bruce, R.
A., 380 Bruchmann, M., 244 Bruck, M., 341 Bruckbauer, T., 348 Brugha, T.
S., 598 Bruine de Bruin, W., 374 Brumberg, J. C., 109 Brummelman, E.,
297 Brune, M., 581 Brunelin, J., 564 Brunelli, M., 346 Brunner, H., 84
Bryant, C. M., 532 Bryant, F. B., 679 Bryant, G. A., 371 Brysbaert, M.,
384, 385f Bu, Q., 663 Buchanan, R. W., 623 Buchanan, T. W., 243f, 640
Buchowski, M. S., 669 Buckingham, R. E., 256 Bucuvalas, M., 584 Bucy,
P., 242 Buetefisch, C. M., 242 Buhs, E. S., 682 Buijs, R. M., 200
Bujanda, L., 83 Bulik, C. M., 262 Bulling, D. J., 645 Bullmore, E. T.,
581 Bundlie, S. R., 205 Bunford, N. Bunn, J. Y., 220 Buoli, M., 572
Burch, M. R., 305 Burge, D., 436 Burger, J. M., 524, 526 Burgess, E.,
261 Burgess, H., 18, 305 Burke, S. C., 671 Burkholder, L., 367 Burrell,
S., 213f Burrows, G., 140 Burt, A., 97 Burt, D., 604 Burt, J. D., 682
Burton, L. A., 540 Burton, P. C., 584 Burwell, R. A., 261 Buscemi, N.,
209 Busch, A. S., 265 Bush, G., 225 Bushdid, C., 185 Bushman, B. J.,
297, 543, 590 Buss, D. M., 476, 534 Bustillo, J. R., 624 Buti, M., 83
Butler, A. C., 352

Butler, P. E., 137 Byblow, W. D., 184 Byer, C. O., 219f Bynum, W. F., 76
Byrkjedal, I. K., 209 Byrne, D., 531

C

Cabral, H. J., 414 Cacioppo, J. T., 25, 26, 30, 40, 41, 93, 101, 105,
106, 116, 118, 125, 130, 144, 145, 184, 188, 189, 238, 241, 242, 264,
267, 268, 290, 291, 326, 448, 491 500, 499, 501, 502, 509, 515, 544,
572, 650, 651, 652, 653, 654, 657, 668, 669, 669f 645, 677, 682
Cacioppo, S., 101, 106, 125, 144, 145, 188, 189, 263f, 264, 267, 448,
499, 500, 501, 502, 515, 532, 544, 572, 645, 657, 669, 669f Caetano, J.
M., 182 Cahn, W., 217 Cai, X. J., 256 Cain, W. S., 186 Calcagni, E., 651
Caldwell, D. F., 386 Caldwell, D. W., 257 Caldwell, M. C., 386 Calhoun,
V. D., 123 Calkins, M. E., 563 Calkins, M. W., 12, 20 Call, J., 431
Callaghan, P. D., 222, 564 Calossi, S., 583, 648 Calver, S., 620 Calvin,
W. H., 92 Calvo-Enrique, L., 181 Cameron, G. T., 514 Campagne, A., 240
Campbell, A. M., 340 Campbell, J. D., 490 Campbell, S., 355 Campbell, V.
L., 482 Campbell, W. K., 588, 589, 676 Canary, D. J., 533 Canfell, K.,
449 Canini, M., 390 Canli, T., 649 Cannon, T. D., 397 Cannon, W., 235,
253, 254, 255, 641, 642 Cantalupo, C., 386 Cantella, D., 242 Cantone,
L., 572 Cantor, A. D., 336 Capek, C. M., 391 Capela, J. P., 222
Capitanio, J. P., 242, 500, 501, 657 Capon, A., 664 Cappelletti, M.,
144, 262 Capraro, V., 545 Capshew, J. H., 307 NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-3

Caramazza, A., 367, 368f Cardenas-Inguez, C., 189 Cardenas, R. A., 262
Cardin, V., 391 Cardoso, G., 584 Carell, T. D., 177 Carew, T. J., 286,
346 Carhart-Harris, R. L., 218 Carlisle, R. D., 675 Carlsen, E. B., 604
Carlsmith, J. M., 53, 511 Carlson, A. D., 425 Carlson, J., 481 Carlson,
P. J., 583, 584 Carlstrom, E., 266 Carneal, M., 45 Carney, D. R., 235
Carpenter, T. P., 675 Carr, T. S., 540 Carrier, C. M.., 228 Carrier, J.,
228 Carrigan, M. H., 215 Carroll, D., 654 Carroll, M. D., 257, 665, 665,
666f, 666f Carskadon, M. A., 202 Carson, W. E., 650 Carstensen, L. L.,
452, 534, 669 Carter, C. S., 93 Carter, E. A., 177 Caruso, C. C., 200
Carvalho, C., 182 Carvalho, F., 222 Carvalho, L. A., 625 Carver, C. S.,
491, 674 Casanova, M. F., 557 Cascio, C. J., 179 Casey, B. J., 442 Cash,
S. S., 205 Casper, R. C., 59 Caspi, A., 28, 75, 84, 459, 586 Cassano, G.
B., 614, 615 Cassol, H., 213 Castellucci, V., 346 Castle, P. H., 602
Castleberry, E. H., 336 Castonguay, L. G., 607 Castro, C. A., 583, 592,
645 Castrogiovanni, P., 583 Catalan, J., 524, 525f Catani, C., 644
Caterina, M. J., 181, 184 Cattaneo, A., 625 Cattell, J. K., 20 Cattell,
R. B., 468 Cavalli-Sforza, L., 209 Cavanaugh, J. C., 420f
Ceballos-Baumann, A., 244 Ceballos, N., 38 Ceccarelli, M., 625 Ceci, S.
J., 341, 398 Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC), 223, 258,
404, 556, 558, 560, 598, 622, 625, 661, 663, 664, 665, 666, 671

N-4

Cerella, J., 430 Cervilla, J., 580 Chaar, D., 557 Chabris, C. F., 398,
399f Chagnon, N. A., 99 Chaimani, A., 625 Chait, B. T., 257 Chamberlain,
S. R., 581 Chambers, M. C., 122 Champagne, F., 85, 648 Champoux, M., 432
Chan, M. Y., 674 Chandler, K., 557 Chang, E., 674 Chang, I., 647, 675
Chang, K. D., 567 Chang, M., 390 Chang, Y. S., 200 Channell, M. M., 401
Chaplin, J. P., 13 Chapman, B., 392 Charcot, M., 600 Charitaki, S., 644
Charland-Verville, V., 213 Charles, S. T., 452 Charman, T., 168 Charney,
D. S., 583 Chartrand, T. L., 236, 237 Chase, W. G., 325 Chatrian, G.,
212 Chattarji, S., 341 Chaudhari, N., 184, 290 Chavez, M., 208
Chawabpaiboon, S., 412 Chazan, S., 583 Chazin, S. M., 584 Cheek, J. M.,
590 Cheeran, B., 378 Chein, J., 444 Chemelli, R. M., 256 Chemtob, C. M.,
644 Chen, B., 663 Chen, C., 354 Chen, C., -H., 475, 476 Chen, H., 620
Chen, H.-Y., 189, 267, 500, 502, 515, 645, 657 Chen, J. A., 574 Chen, K.
Y., 668 Chen, L., 169 Chen, M. C., 346, 346f Chen, R., 228 Chen, S.,
493, 549, 683 Chen, T. J., 626 Chene, G., 451 Cherasse, Y., 206 Cherkas,
L., 99 Cherkassky, V. I., 198 Chertkow, H., 390 Chess, S., 432f Chetty,
R., 670 Chia, R., 367 Chiao, J. Y., 107, 459, 460, 460f Child, I. L.,
466 Childs, G. E., 559 Chin, B., 675

Chinkes, D. L., 206 Chiou, W.-B., 403, 446 Chiu, C.-Y., 508 Chiu, L.-H,
169 Chiu, W., 581 Chiu, W. T., 551, 567, 576, 578, 579, 580
Chlevin-Thiele, C., 481 Cho, K., 200 Cho, K. I. K., 397 Choi, I., 508
Choi, J., 387 Choi, S., 354 Chomsky, N., 21, 388 Chopik, W. J., 447
Chouinard-Decorte, F., 397 Chouraki, V., 451 Chrea, C., 187 Chretien,
P., 469 Christakis, D. A., 387 Christakis, N. A., 259, 474, 499, 675
Christensen, A. C., 75 Christensen, K. M., 419 Christensen, U., 651, 651
Christidis, P., 28, 29, 603f Christie, J., 391 Christoff, K., 208
Christoforou, C., 361 Chrousos, G. P., 644 Chua, A., 436 Chua, H. F.,
665 Chudler, E., 14 Chun, K., 106 Chung, J. M., 447 Church, C. L., 668f,
669 Church, T. S., 661f, 669 Cialdini, R. B., 489, 513, 524, 525f, 538
Cichetti, D. V., 195 Cichocka, A., 545 Cikara, M., 545 Cipolli, C., 208
Cipriani, A., 623, 625 Cirelli, C., 195 Clark, D. M., 578 Clark, K., 27
Clark, L., 215 Clark, M., 27 Clark, R., 664 Clark, S. E., 341 Clark, T.
K., 61 Clarke, A., 137 Clasen, L., 397 Claypool, H. M., 531 Clegg, H.,
624 Clementz, B. A., 567 Clifton, J., 370 Clifton, S., 58 Cnaan, A.,
583, 644 Coan, J. A., 188 Cobb, ly, 128 Coccia, C., 437 Cofer, J., 540
Coffey, S., 215 Cogsdill, E. J., 501

Cohen, A. F., 572 Cohen, B. E., 217 Cohen, E., 583 Cohen, G., 329, 330
Cohen, G. L., 444, 655, 655f Cohen, J. D., 537 Cohen, M. X., 616 Cohen,
S., 649, 651, 662, 676 Cohen, S. L., 257 Cohn, D., 450 Cohn, M. A., 660
Cohn, R. H., 196 Cokely, E. T., 374 Cola, P., 623 Colburne, K. A., 423
Cole, F. S., 412 Cole, J., 126 Cole, J. C., 200 Cole, R., 578 Cole, S.
W., 106, 500, 501, 652, 652, 657 Coleman, R. M., 206f Colledge, E.,
118f, 586 Colletti, P., 122 Collins, A., 333, 333f, 365, 538 Colosio,
M., 511 Colwell, K., 251 Comings, D. E., 118 Comoutos, N., 626 Conant,
L. L., 347 Conger, R. D., 436 Conley, D., 499 Connan, F., 261
Connell-Jones, G., 620 Conner, M., 510 Connolly, T., 375 Constable, R.
T., 389, 390 Constantinidis, T. C., 220 Constantinidou, F., 361 Conti,
G., 652 Conway, A. M., 660 Conway, B. R., 149 Conway, M. A., 329, 330
Cook, S., 667 Cooke, J. E., 644 Coons, H. L., 644 Cooper, A., 561
Cooper, A. B., 552 Cooper, C. M., 339f Cooper, H., 469, 674 Cooper, R.,
119 Cooper, R. P., 177 Cooper, S. E., 584 Cooper, S. J., 257 Copas, A.,
58 Coppola, G., 77 Corballis, M. C., 383, 388 Corbett, A., 557 Corbett,
M., 47 Corbin, W. R., 108 Corder, G., 182 Cordone, S., 204 Cordonier,
L., 523 Coren, S., 127t, 201, 206 Corina, D., 391 Corkin, S., 45, 317,
318

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cornford, F. M., 36 Cornish, J. L., 222, 564 Correa, J. B., 664 Corsi,
D. J., 414, 557 Cort, A. S., 566 Corti, R., 651 Corvin, A., 562 Coryell,
W., 571 Coskunpinar, A., 477 Cosme, G., 83 Cosmides, L., 95, 319
Costa-Neves, B., 83 Costa, P. T., Jr., 467f, 468, 475 Costello, E. J.,
559 Costumero, V., 476 Coto, C. A., 217 Cotting, D. I., 645 Council, J.
R., 224, 522 Courchesne, E., 115 Courtet, P., 626 Couste, C. P., 178
Couto, B., 264, 544 Cowan, N., 322 Cowen, P. J., 648 Cownden, D., 523
Cox, D., 559 Cox, M. J., 435 Coyne, J. C., 645 Craddock, N., 567 Craig,
A., 35 Craig, C. L., 668f, 669 Craig, I. W., 28, 84, 540, 571, 583, 586
Craighead, W. E., 669 Craighero, L., 124 Craik, F. I., 325, 326, 326f,
391 Cramer, E. S., 169 Crane, C., 627 Craske, M. G., 576 Crawford, C.,
570 Crawford, R. K., 567 Crego, A., 617 Cremeens, J., 671 Crespin, T.R.,
650 Crick, F., 197 Crimmins, E. M., 451 Crisafio, A., 565 Cristofaro,
S., 565 Crockett, M. J., 540 Crow, T. J., 126 Crum, A. J., 108, 640, 641
Crumpler, D., 561 Cruwys,T., 488 Csikszentmihalyi, M., 672, 679, 680
Cuddy, A. J. C., 235 Cuddy, P., 518f Cui, M., 437 Culang, M. E., 451
Cully, D. F., 256 Cumming, G., 63 Cunha, L., 182 Cunitz, A. R., 327--328
Cunningham, W. A., 518 Cuperman, R., 494, 495f Curtin, L. R., 671

Curtiss, S., 389 Cutler, A., 387 Cutler, D., 670, 675 Cutler, J., 66
Cutrona, C., 502, 657 Cvencek, D., 486 Cyders, M. A., 477 Czachor, J.
D., 218, 220 Czarnecka, M., 653, 653 Czeisler, C. A., 200

D

d eVries, A. P., 583, 644 D'Andrea, G., 625 d'Haenens, L., 683 D'Mello,
A.M., 390 D'Onofrio, B., 399 Dabbs, J. M., Jr., 262, 513, 518, 540 Dahl,
R. E., 209, 440 Dahlhamer, J. M., 264, 265 Dahmen, B., 204 Dailey, S.,
38 Dalege, J., 510 Dalen, L., 561 Dalrymple, S., 527 Daly, M., 472 Daly,
R., 603 Damasio, A. R., 122, 241, 242, 243, 243f, 245, 386, 391, 586
Damasio, H., 122, 242, 244, 245, 391, 586 Damian, R. I., 465 Dang-Vu, T.
T., 204 Dani, J. A., 220 Daniel, D. G., 563 Daniele Fallin, M., 130
Daniels, J. L., 557 Daniels, S. R., 665 Danielson, M. L., 622 Danielson,
P. E., 256 Dann, M., 186 Dansky, B. S., 215 Danziger, K., 11 Darby, B.
L., 524, 525f Darby, R. R., 212, 542 Darley, J. M., 539 Darling, C. A.,
437 Darrow, C. M., 448 Darwin, C., 12, 14, 89, 95, 97, 98, 239, 240,
245, 535, 538 Das, R., 412 Dator, J., 270 Dauvilliers, Y., 210
Davenport, B., 621 Davey Smith, G., 654 Davidson, C. L., 674 Davidson,
R. J., 93, 188, 225, 540, 572, 586 Davies, P. G., 518, 519 Davila, J.,
436 Davis, C. G., 680 Davis, J. A., 675 Davis, J. L., 532 Davis, J. M.,
59, 208

Davis, L. B., 419 Davis, M., 177 Davis, P. E., 414 Davis, S. L., 648
Dawkins, R., 21, 313, 538 Dawson, B. C., 549, 556 De Bellis, M. D., 440
de Bruin, W. B., 442 De Castro, B. O., 590 de Gelder, B., 240 De
Gennaro, L., 204 De Geus, E. J. C., 650, 650 De Graaf, R., 561, 583 de
Jonge, P., 578 de Kloet, E. R., 644 de la Fuente Revenga, M., 219 de
Lecea, L., 256 De Luca, D., 415 De Rossi, P., 560 De Valois, K. K., 162
De Valois, R. L., 162 de Villiers, P. A., 363 de Visser, S. J., 572 de
Voogd, L. D., 119 de Vries, A. P., 644 de Vries, G., 571 De Waal, F. B.,
196, 537 De Wied, C., 263 Dean, K. K., 508 Deary, I. J., 392, 397
Deater-Deckard, K., 300 Deboeck, P. R., 657 DeBruine, L. M., 262, 532
DeCasper, A. J., 412 Decety, J., 93, 491 DeCharms, R., 253 Deci, E. L.,
253, 267, 674 Deckert, J., 579 Deese, J., 345 DeFilippis, M., 618
Degenhardt, E., 83 Dejong, K., 414, 416f Del Maschio, N., 391 del Prado,
A., 524 DeLamater, J., 449 Deldin, P., 370 Delion, P., 562 DeLisi, L.
E., 217 DeLisi, M., 586 Della Rosa, P., 390 Delmaire, C., 562 DeLongis,
A., 658, 659 Dement, W., 207, 207f, 208. 209 Demiralp, E., 347 Demler,
O., 551, 567, 575, 576, 578, 579, 580 Demyttenaere, K., 561, 583 den
Boer, J. A., 629 den Houting, J., 619 Denburg, N. L., 395 DeNeve, K. M.,
469, 674 Deng, P., 663 Denissen, J. J., 486, 487 Dennett, D., 197
Dennis, E. L., 648 Denny, C. H., 416f

Denys, D. A. J. P., 571 Deocampo, J., 430 Derntl, B., 540 Derogatis, L.
R., 644 Derryberry, D., 475 Desai, R. H., 347 DeSalle, R., 80 Descartes,
R., 106 Deschamps, J. C., 522 Deschrijver, E., 181 Desseilles, M., 204
DeStefano, F., 559f Deutsch, G., 126 Dew, J., 676 DeYoung, C. G., 474,
476 Di Forti, M., 566, 566f Di Martino, A., 560 Di Noto, P. M., 181 Di
Pellegrino, G., 124 Diamond, A., 427 Diamond, D. M., 340 Diamond, L. M.,
263, 265, 265f Dias, B. G., 87 Diaz, R., 390 Dick, A. S., 391 Dicke, U.,
93 Dickens, A. P., 679 Dickens, W. T., 398 Dickhaus, J., 270
Dickinson-Anson, H., 330 Dickinson, J., 635 DiClemente, C., 664 Didie,
E. R., 582 Dieckmann, N. F., 559 Diefendorf, A. R., 563 Diekelmann, S.,
349 Diener, E., 485, 658, 674, 675, 676f Dierks, T., 562 Dietrich, A.,
225, 578 Difede, J., 584 DiGilio, D. A., 452 diGrande, L., 583 Dijk,
D.-J., 200 DiLalla, L. F., 576 Dill, K. E., 53 Dinan, T. G., 562 Dincan,
L. E., 583 Ding, Y.-S., 560, 621 Dion, K., 513 Dirk Blom, J., 616 Dixon,
D. R., 620 Dixon, L., 664 Do Cao, J., 415 Dobie, D. J., 563 Dobson, D.,
614 Dobson, K. S., 614 Dodet, P., 208 Dodge, K. A., 300 Dodge, R., 563
Dodson, J. D., 240, 528 Doise, W., 522 Dolan, C. B., 268 Dolan, C. V.,
101 Dolan, R. J., 537 Dold, M., 261 NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-5

Dolderman, D., 532 Dolezal, C., 245 Dolinoy, D. C., 72, 259 Doll, R.,
665 Domanski, C. W., 385 Domes, G., 133 Domhoff, G. W., 208 Domingue, B.
W., 499 Dominguez-Clave, E., 219 Domschke, K., 579 Donahue, M. J., 330
Donders, F. C., 11 Donelle, J., 414, 557 Dong, C. Y., 224 Donlea, J.,
194 Donohoe, G., 562 Doogan, N. J., 220 Dorr, L., 390 Dorus, S., 93
Doty, R. I., 186 Dougherty, J. D., 557 Douglas, K. M., 508 Dourish, C.
T., 257 Dove, H., 422 Dover, R., 262 Downey, C., 674 Downs, D. L., 489
Draisma, H. H., 566 Drane, D. L., 340 Drayna, D., 35 Dresler, M., 208,
354 Dronkers, N. F., 386 Droog, W., 218 Druckman, D. E., 480 Druett, J.,
535 Drummer, O. H., 222 Drury, A. J., 586 du Hoffmann, J., 35 Duan, D.,
507, 507f Dubernard, J.-M., 137 Duberstein, P., 392 Dubois, J., 397
Dudai, Y., 344 Dudukovic, N. M., 343 Duffy, M. E., 552 Dufouil, C., 451
Dugas, D. V, 549, 556 Dugre, J. R., 221 Duka, T., 421 Dulaney, S., 582
Dumais, A., 221 Dumontheil, I., 442 Dunbar, R. I. M., 93, 500 Duncan, G.
J., 395 Duncan, T. E., 664, 664 Dunn, A., 664 Dunn, B. D., 215 Dunn, E.
W., 314, 676, 677 Dunne, J. D., 225 Dunning, D., 488 Durante, K. M., 98
Durbin, C. E., 474f Duriez, B., 436, 437, 437f Dutcher, A. M., 567
Dutton, D. G., 235 Dweck, C. S., 269, 396

N-6

Dysart, J., 341 Dyson-Hudson, N., 543 Dyson-Hudson, R., 543

E

Easterbrook, M. J., 488 Eastwick, P. W., 500 Eastwood, J., 414 Eaves, L.
J., 577 Eberhardt, J. L., 518, 519f Eberhart, C. G., 618 Eccles, J. S.,
268, 269 Eckel, R. H., 259 Eckert, E. D., 59 Edelstein, B. A., 455
Edwards, A., 180 Edwards, E. M., 668 Egger, H. L., 559 Egget, D. L., 48
Ehlers, C. L., 667 Ehrensvard, M., 604 Eibl, L., 208 Eichel, S. K. D.,
604 Eichstedt, J. A., 423 Eid, J., 659, 659f Einstein, A., 363, 466
Eirich, R., 644 Eisen, A. R., 578 Eisenberg, D., 552 Eisenberg, D., 459,
501 Ekelund, U., 668 Ekholm, O., 649 Ekirch, A. R., 200 Ekman, P., 234,
245, 248, 250 El-Chaar, D., 414 Elbert, M. J., 586 Elbert, T., 181, 644
Elder, C., 472 Elenkov, I., 651 Elices, M., 219, 220 Elion, J., 29
Elison, J. T., 557 Elizabeth, A. Y., 674 Elkind, D., 485 Elkins, G. R.,
224 Ellamil, M., 225 Eller, A., 522, 522 Ellinghaus, D., 83 Elliot, A.
J., 269, 270 Elliot, R., 300 Elliott, M. N., 644, 657 Ellis Weismer, S.,
554, 556 Ellis, A., 613, 614, 673 Ellis, H. C., 321 Ellis, M. S., 224
Ellsworth, P. C., 239, 247, 248 Elman, C., 449 Emery, G., 626 Emery, N.
J., 116, 242 Emery, S. L., 218 Emlen, S. T., 98 Emmelkamp, P. M. G., 630
Emmerson, B., 221 Emmons, R. A., 675, 680 Eng, C., 556

Eng, M. Y., 667 Engel, S. M., 557, 644 English, T., 246, 676, 677
Ennaceur, A., 200, 200 Enoch, M. A., 668 Enquist, M., 523, 523 Enseleit,
F., 651 Eppig, C., 398 Epprecht, M., 265, 265f, 266 Epstein, L. G., 212
Erber, R., 356 Erdberg, P., 482 Erdfelder, E., 372 Erhard, P., 244
Erickson, C. A., 618 Erickson, P. I., 99 Erikson, E. H., 443, 444, 449,
451, 485 Eriksson, K., 523, 523 Erkanli, A., 559 Ernst, M. E., 90, 201
Erol, R. Y., 444, 445f, 488 Ersboll, A. K., 649 Escobar, C., 200 Eshun,
S., 675 Eskelinen, M. H., 220 Esler, A., 55 Eslick, G. D., 558, 567
Eslinger, P. J., 122 Espensen-Sturges, T., 584 Espitia-Bautista, E., 200
Esposito, L., 211 Ettinger, M. G., 205 Evans, A. C., 420 Evans, D. E.,
475 Evans, F. J., 224 Evans, P. D., 93 Evans, S. W., 621 Evins, A. E.,
217, 564 Eyal, N., 390 Eysenck, H. J., 476, 539 Eysenck, M. W., 320, 324

F

Fabiano, G. A., 622 Fadiga, G., 124 Fadiga, L., 124 Fagerland, M. W.,
668 Fairnie, J., 556 Falangola, M. F., 560 Falcone, G., 225 Falk, E. B.,
444 Fallon, J. H., 330 Fan, J., 107f Fan. C., -C., 475, 475f Farah, M.
J., 491 Faraone, S. V., 560, 576 Farb, N., 348 Farley, F., 442 Farnham,
S. D., 488, 488f Farrar, S., 538 Farrar, W. A., 485 Farrell, M. S., 83
Farstad, S. M., 262 Fastow, A., 588

Fatemi, S. H., 115 Faubion, S., 626 Faul, J. D., 451 Faulkerson, J. A.,
444 Fechner, G. T., 9, 153 Feeney, J. A., 435 Fehr, E., 538 Feick, D.
L., 488 Feighner, S. D., 256 Feinberg, D. R., 532 Feinberg, I., 492
Feinstein, J. A., 528 Fejfar, M. C., 485 Feldman, E., 278 Feldman, H.,
621, 622 Feldman, M. W., 523 Feltz, A., 374 Fender, J. G., 402 Fenton,
N., 371 Feranil, A. B., 262 Ferguson, C., 47, 48 Ferguson, C. J., 54,
586 Fergusson, D. M., 28, 84, 217, 217f, 540, 565 Fernald, A., 388, 419
Fernandes, E., 222, 392 Fernandez-Aranda, F., 261 Fernandez, G., 119
Ferrara, M., 208 Ferrari, P. F., 312, 433, 434 Ferriero, D. M., 440
Ferriter, M., 620 Ferrucci, P., 270 Festinger, L., 486, 509, 511 Feyer,
A.-M., 206 Fidler, D. J., 395 Field, A. E., 444 Field, Y., 90 Fielden,
J.A., 262, 518 Fifer, W. P., 177, 412 Figueredo, A. J., 476 Fincham, F.
D., 437 Fink, G. R., 348 Fink, K., 209 Finkel, E. J., 500 Finn, L., 202
Finucane, M., 375 Firk, C., 557 Fiscella, K., 392 Fischer, C. F., 208
Fischer, H., 518, 577f Fischer, P., 378 Fischhoff, B., 374, 442
Fischhoff, J., 621 Fisher, C. I., 262 Fisher, H. E., 264 Fisher, M. L.,
264 Fisher, P. A., 86 Fisher, R. P., 251 Fisher, S. E., 388 Fishman, S.,
180 Fiske, A. P., 582 Fiske, S. T., 517, 518f Fitz, S. D., 578 Flaum,
M., 563 Flax, J., 411

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Flegal, K. M., 257 Fleischman, J., 121 Fleischmann, P., 615 Fleming, L.
W. Fletcher, J., 499 Fletcher, J. M., 389, 390 Fletcher, R., 514
Flexser, A. J., 337 Flick, C., 65 Floerke, V. A., 353, 353f Flom, R.,
418f Florisse, E. J., 617 Flynn, J. R., 54, 93, 392, 398 Fogassi, I.,
124 Fokas, G. J., 109 Forbach, G. B., 270 Formanowics, M., 382
Formisano, E., 562 Forrest, A. D., 217 Forsyth, D. R., 490, 508 Fortin,
G., 627 Fosse, N. E., 235 Fosshage, J. L., 610 Foster, B. B., 586
Foster, C.A., 676 Foster, T. S., 183 Foti, D., 567 Foulds, J. A., 667
Foulkes, D., 208 Foutz, A., 209 Fowler, J. H., 259, 474, 499, 675
Fowler, J. S., 560, 621 Fox, K. C., 208 Fox, M. C., 392, 393f Fox, M.
D., 212, 542 Fox, P. W., 422 Foye, P. E., 256 Frady, R. L., 540 Fraga,
M. F., 83 Fragoza, R., 549 Fraley, R. C., 476 Frances, A., 554, 585
Franceschini, R., 390 Francis, D. D., 85, 648 Franco, Z. E., 537 Frank,
D. A., 414 Frank, L. R., 440 Frank, M. G., 248 Frank, R., 122 Franken,
D., 680, 681 Frankenhuis, W. E., 371 Frankhuijzen-Sierevogel, A. C., 263
Frankl, V. E., 656, 659 Franks, N. R., 196 Franson, K. L., 572 Franz,
C., 475, 475f Franzen, L., 209 Fratta, P., 367 Frazier, T. W., 556, 557
Frederick, D. A., 371 Fredman, S. J., 592 Fredricks, J. A., 268, 269
Fredrickson, B. L., 660 Freedman, D. G., 245 Freedman, R., 563

Freedson, P. S., 668 Freeman, H. L., 564, 623 Freeman, S., 489 Freeman,
T. P., 566, 566f Frei, O., 563 French, J. E., 403 French, S. A., 444
Freud, S., 13--14, 16, 195, 208, 443, 463, 600, 612 Fricchione, G. L.,
225 Frick, P. J., 632 Friedel, S., 210 Friedman, J. M., 256, 257
Friedrikson, M., 577f Friedson, M., 437 Frierson, T., 541 Friesen, C.,
209 Friesen, W. V., 234, 248 Frijda, N. H., 239 Frisch, M. B., 675
Frisch, R. E., 439 Frith, C. D., 537 Frith, U., 556 Froberg, J. E., 202
Frost, P., 90 Frum, C., 41, 263f, 264, 544 Fryar, C. D., 257, 665, 666f
Frye, R., 130, 386 Fryer, R., 254 Fujita, Y., 206 Fulbright, R. K., 389,
390 Fulero, S., 341 Fulker, D. W., 539 Fullerton, C. S., 645 Funayama,
E. S., 518 Funder, D. C., 472, 505 Fung, H. H., 452, 508, 565 Fung, L.
K., 619 Furi, S., 101, 499 Furnham, A., 481 Furtner, M. R., 588
Furukawa, T. A., 625

G

Gaab, N., 390 Gaalema, D. E., 220 Gabriel, P. O., 293 Gabrieli, J. D.,
390 Gabrieli, J. D. E., 475 Gaceres, M., 77 Gainotti, G., 125 Gajiwala,
K. S., 257 Galaburda, A. M., 122 Galanis, P., 620 Galbally, M., 644
Galdi, P., 397 Galea, S., 584 Galinsky, A. M., 264, 265 Gallagher, M.,
675 Gallagher, P. R., 583, 644 Gallese, V., 124 Galli, R., 583 Gallup,
G. G., 196 Galovski, T., 592 Galperin, A., 371

Galton, F., 73 Galvan, A., 442 Gamez, W., 469 Gan, W., -B., 207
Gandevia, S. C., 193 Ganguly-Fitzgerald, I., 194 Ganna, A., 265 Ganoczy,
D., 624 Gant, N., 185 Gantt, W. H., 293 Gao, F., 77 Gao, X., 256 Gao,
Z., 90 Garabedian, M. J., 625 Garb, H. N., 482 Garbinsky, E. N., 679
Garcia-Leon, M. A., 659 Garcia-Palacios, A., 630 Garcia-Retamero, R.,
374 Garcia-Rios, M. d. C., 659 Garcia-Sierra, A., 388 Garcia, J., 288,
293 Garcia, J. R., 264 Garcia, N. L., 391 Gard, D., 370 Gard, T., 225
Gardner, A., 385 Gardner, B., 386 Gardner, H., 393 Gardner, W. L., 184,
493 Gardner, W. P., 559 Garmezy, N., 659, 660 Gasquet, I., 561, 583
Gasquoine, P. G., 243 Gatenby, J. C., 518 Gates, B., 196 Gatz, M., 452
Gaughan, E. T., 589 Gaulin, S. J. C., 91 Gaulton, K. J., 90 Gautam, P.,
50 Gawronski, B., 504, 506, 511, 517, 518 Gayer-Anderson, C., 566, 566f
Gazzaniga, M. S., 123, 125, 194, 195 Geary, D. C., 63, 519 Gebauer, J.
E., 486, 487 Geddes, J. R., 623, 625 Geiselman, R. E., 251 Geiser, S.,
57 Gelenberg, A. J., 208 Gelfand, M. J., 460, 460f Gellavia, G., 532
Geller, D. A., 581 Gena, A., 620 Gendron, M., 245 Genkov, K. A., 224
Gennaro, L., 208 Genovese, K., 538 Gent, J. F., 186 Gentile, B., 589
Genzel, L., 354 George, T. P., 664 Gerbier, E., 207 Gergen, K. J., 486

Gerlach, A. L., 577 Gerlicher, A. M. V., 244 Gernsbacher, M. A., 63
Gerolimatos, L. A., 455 Gerostamoulos, D., 222 Gershoff, E. T., 299, 300
Gershon, A. S., 209 Gersten, M., 576 Geschwind, D. H., 77, 556 Gest, S.
D., 659 Gettler, L. T., 262 Geuze, E., 476 Gevonden, M., 583 Gewirtz, J.
C., 291 Geyer, 523 Ghandour, R. M., 622 Ghatei, M., 261 Ghazal, S., 374
Gherig, Lou, 128 Ghosh, A., 181 Gialluisi, A., 390 Gianaros, P. J., 660
Giancola, P. R., 540 Gibb, B. E., 460 Gibbons, T., 669 Gibson, M. A., 98
Giedd, J. N., 136, 564f Gieddd, J., 397 Giesbrecht, T., 585 Gigerenzer,
G., 371, 372 Gijsbers, K., 183 Gilbert, D. T., 43, 505, 506 Gilbert, L.
R., 447 Gilbert, S. L., 93 Gilboa-Schechtman, E., 249, 249f, 348 Gilboa,
A., 347 Gilkerson, J., 387 Gilkes, J. J., 262 Gill, J., 583, 584 Gill,
M., 562 Gillespie, C. F., 86, 648 Gilligan, M., 453 Gilligan, S. G., 485
Gillihan, S. J., 491 Gillin, J. C., 575, 575f Gillman, M. W., 444
Gilman, S. E., 261 Gilovich, T., 231, 485 Gimlin, K., 440 Gino, F., 345
Giordani, B., 648 Giorgi, R., 259 Girard, M., 126 Girdler, S., 413
Girgus, J. S., 570 Gitschier, J., 177 Giuliano, T., 354 Glahn, D. C.,
564 Glanzer, M., 327--328 Glascher, J., 118f Glasgow, S. D., 354
Glasziou, P., 601 Gleason, C. A., 193 Gleeson, M., 669 Gleick, J., 401
NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-7

Glenn, A. L., 586 Glenn, N. D., 454 Glick, P., 518f Gliga, T., 168
Glover, G., 442 Glunt, E. K., 519 Gochman, P., 564f Godden, D. R., 337,
337f Goddings, A. L., 440 Godoy, R., 501 Goebel, R., 562 Goekoop, J. G.,
263 Goetz, C. G., 564 Goff, D. C., 564 Goffin, K. C., 567 Gogtay, N.,
136, 397 Golan, D., 90 Gold, J., 584 Goldberg, S. B., 225 Goldberg, S.
C., 59 Goldman-Rakic, P. S., 427 Goldstein, D. G., 372 Goldstein, E. B.,
185 Goldstein, N. J., 524 Goldstein, R. B., 643f, 656 Goleman, D., 395
Golgi, C., 109 Golightly, R. T., 293 Gollan, J. K., 116, 572, 650 Golle,
J., 649 Gollub, R. L., 225 Golmard, J., -L., 208 Golosheykin, S., 248
Golse, B., 126 Gone, J. P., 607 Gonzalez-Perez, R., 659 Gonzalez-Tapia,
M. L., 84 Gonzalez, R., 217, 370, 391 Good, B., 579 Goodall, J., 46
Goodfriend, W., 682, 683 Gooding, P. A., 582 Goodman, G., 633 Goodwin,
G. M., 624 Goossens, L., 500, 501 Goostman, E., 197 Gordon, A. M., 682
Gordon, J. I., 259 Gordon, N., 36 Gordon, R., 240 Gore, J. C., 518
Gorelick, D. A., 218 Gorgoni, M., 204 Goriounova, N. A., 398 Gornik, A.
E., 474f Gorno-Tempini, M. L., 567 Gorski, R. A., 266 Goschke, T., 378
Gosling, S. D., 476, 486, 487 Gosselin, F., 243f Gosseries, O., 204
Gotow, N., 185 Gotsopoulos, A., 245 Gottesman, I. I., 208, 399, 447,
562, 563f Gottman, J., 273, 533, 534, 634

N-8

Gould, C. E., 455 Gouldner, A., 524 Goyal, M., 657 Graap, K., 630
Grabowski, T. J., 122, 245 Graff, J., 338 Graffunder, C. M., 653, 664f
Grafton, S. T., 124, 203 Graham-Bermann, S. A., 541 Graham, J., 443
Graham, R., 440, 441 Grandelis, A., 350 Grandin, T., 363 Granpeesheh,
D., 620 Granrud, C. E., 167 Grant, A. M.., 469, 480 Grant, B. F., 553,
553f, 577, 643f, 656 Grass, J. A., 290 Grassi, S., 572 Gratton, A., 469
Graves, D. A., 183 Graves, K. D., 651 Graves, N., 527 Graves, W. W., 347
Gray, J., 604 Gray, J. A., 291, 476 Gray, J. C., 475, 476 Gray, J. R.,
225, 398, 476 Gray, P. B., 262 Gray, S., 387 Green, A. L., 378, 616
Greenberg, J., 53, 489 Greene, R. L., 482 Greengard, P., 573 Greenhill,
K. M., 514 Greenspan, R. J., 195 Greenspoon, J., 337 Greenstein, D.,
397, 560 Greenwald, A. G., 486, 488, 488f Greer, D. M., 212, 213
Greicius, M. D., 198, 348, 349 Greider, C., 389 Grewe, B. F., 182
Grewen, K. M., 263 Griffin, D. W., 532 Griffith, J., 645
Grigg-Damberger, M. M., 207 Griggs, R. A., 526 Grill, J. T., 200 Grimes,
T., 38 Grimm, K. J., 447 Grimshaw, K., 561 Grinevich, V., 242
Griskevicius, V., 271f, 273, 274, 676 Grissom, C. K., 664 Grizzard, M.,
280 Grogan-Kaylor, A., 300, 541 Gronli, J., 209 Gronlund, S. D., 341
Gross, C. T., 242 Gross, J. J., 246, 247, 248 Grossman, M., 54, 330, 367
Groth-Marnat, G., 602 Group, B. D. C., 397

Group, L. S. B. W., 668 Grover, S., 675 Grubert, C., 616 Grundy, J. G,
413 Gruzelier, J., 203, 226, 227 Gu, Q., 625 Guenther, C. A., 90 Guez,
L., 378f Guglielmi, R. S., 395, 396 Guidotti Breting, L. M., 648 Guidry,
D. W., 664 Guignard, J.-H., 446, 448 Guillen, V., 630 Guillory, J. E.,
63, 64 Gulmezoglu, A. M., 412 Gulyani, S., 209 Gum, A., 680 Gunderson,
J., 632 Gunderson, J. G., 587 Gunnar, M.R., 657 Gunturkun, O., 196, 469
Guo, Q., 354, 616 Guo, S., 541 Gur, R., 250 Gur, R. C., 63, 540 Gurung,
R., 6, 23, 24, 27 Gusnard, D. A., 93 Gustavson, C. R., 293 Gustin,
M.-P., 207 Guth, A., 202 Gutierrez, B., 580 Gutterrrez, J., 35 Guynn, M.
J., 336 Guze, B. H., 597

H

Haake, J. J., 167 Habel, U., 540 Haber, R. B., 363 Haber, R. N., 363
Hackenberg, T. D., 613 Hacker, M. R., 414 Hackman, A., 680 Hadrysiewicz,
B., 616 Haemer, M. A., 665 Hafetz, J., 540 Hagino, H., 563 Hahn, A., 517
Hahn, A. C., 262 Hahn, L., 280 Haidt, J., 443 Haier, R. J., 397f Haigh,
M. M., 487 Haines, J., 444 Hakim, N., 137 Hakun, J., 250 Halaas, J. L.,
257 Halbert, P., 293 Hale, S., 430 Hales, C. M., 665, 666f Haley, A.,
399 Hall, C. S., 462 Hall, G., 198 Hall, G. S., 20 Hallas, B. H., 109

Hallgren, K. A., 668 Hallion, L. S., 378 Hallmayer, J. F., 556 Halmi, K.
A., 59 Halonen, J., 340 Halperin, J. M., 430 Halpern-Felsher, B. L., 442
Halpern, D. F., 63 Halpin, C. F., 177 Halverson, M. S., 89 Hamamura, T.,
493 Hamani, C., 616 Hamann, S., 340 Hamburg, P., 261 Hamel, M., 482
Hamermesh, D. S., 513 Hamilton, P. J., 649 Hamilton, W. D., 537, 538
Hammen, C., 436 Hampson, S. E., 436, 437, 437f Hamre, B., 209 Han, S.,
107f Han, T. -U., 35 Hancock. J. T., 63, 64 Handel, G. F., 567 Haney,
523 Hansen, J., 489f Hanson, K. N., 98 Hardan, A. Y., 556, 557, 619
Hardison, P., 137 Hare, B., 183 Hare, R., 588 Hare, R. D., 586 Hare, T.,
442 Harenski, C. L., 123 Hargrove, M. F., 540 Hari, R., 245 Hariri, A.
R., 476 Harkins, S., 528 Harlow, H., 434, 500 Harlow, M. K., 500 Harms,
P. D., 645, 680 Harpaz,-Rotem, I., 645 Harper, F. K., 651 Harrington,
H., 75, 459 Harris, D., 664 Harris, D. E., 613 Harris, R. A., 220
Harris, T., 500 Harris, T. O., 573 Harrison, G., 624 Harrison, J., 270
Harrold, J., 256 Hart, A. J., 518 Hart, B., 388, 603f Hart, W., 269
Hartman, C. A., 571 Hartmann-Boyce, J., 224 Harvey, A., 578 Harvey, L.
J., 521, 521f Harwood, J., 517, 522 Haselton, M. G., 371 Hashimoto, R.,
564 Hashmi, A., 207 Hashmi, N., 398, 399f

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Hashtroudi, S., 340 Hasiao, E. C., 349 Hasin, D.S., 553, 553f, 578
Haslam, A., 523 Haslam, C., 488 Haslam, S. A., 488, 526 Haslinger, B.,
244 Hatfield, E., 144 Hatzigeorgiadis, A., 626 Haubrich, 338 Haug, T.
T., 628f Hause, K. S., 533 Havel, M., 202 Hawes, S. W., 391 Hawken, S.,
414, 557 Hawker, G., 209 Hawking, S., 196 Hawkins, H. K., 206 Hawkins,
R. D., 346 Hawkins, S. S., 414 Hawkley, L. C., 30, 268, 452, 501, 502,
571, 652, 668, 677 Hawrylewics, K., 413 Haxby, J. V., 347, 367 Hayes, J.
A., 607 Hayes, J. P., 648 Hayes, M. G., 459 Haynes, J.-D., 193 Haynes,
R. B., 601 Haythorn, W., 336 Head, D., 450 Healey, K. M., 250 Healy, M.,
489 Heard, H. L., 632 Heath, A., 248 Heatherton, T. F., 491 Hecht, S.,
158 Heckman, J. J., 652 Hedden, T., 475 Heider, F., 505 Heigele, S., 354
Heinrichs, M., 133, 640 Heinz, A., 540 Heinz, A. J., 540 Heinze, H.-J.,
193 Heiss, W.D., 348 Held, B. S., 682 Helliwell, J. F., 658, 675, 677,
678f Helpern, J. A., 560 Hemsley, D. R., 291 Henderson, G. V., 213
Henderson, V. K., 435 Hendin, H. M., 590 Henin, A., 576 Hening, W., 349
Henkel, L. A., 345 Henley, T., 11, 15 Hennenlotter, A., 244 Hennig, C.,
93 Hennig, J., 460 Henninger, D., 540 Henry, M., 259 Henschel, A., 272
Herbert, T. B., 651 Herdt, G. H., 265

Herek, G. M., 519 Hergenhahn, B., 11, 15 Herian, M., 680 Herian, M. N.,
645 Herman, S., 669 Hermann, K. L., 149 Hermans, D., 576 Hermans, E. J.,
119 Hernandez, T. L., 259 Herndon, D. N., 206 Herndon, J. G., 453
Herpertz-Dahlmann, B., 557 Herpertz, S. C., 246, 587 Herrnstein, R. J.,
304, 363, 385 Hershberger, S. L., 422 Herskovits, M. J. Hertel, P., 354
Herting, M. M., 421, 440 Herxheimer, A., 200 Herz, D. M., 378 Herz, R.,
185 Herzog, D. B., 261 Heslop, P., 654 Hess, U., 249, 249f Hevevrabd,
J., 210 Heyman, G. M., 304 Heyman, R. E., 534 Hibar, D. P., 560, 564
Hibbeln, J. R., 567, 568f, 624, 666 Hibi, M., 206 Hichwa, R. D., 245,
563 Higbed, L., 222 Higgins, S. T., 220 Higley, J. D., 432 Hilbig, B.
E., 372 Hilburn, I. A., 178 Hill, A. K., 262 Hill, D. E., 549, 556 Hill,
F., 472 Hill, P. L., 447 Himelboim, I., 529 Hindmarsh, P., 644 Hinds, D.
A., 475, 475f Hines, M., 266, 423, 424f Hinney, A., 262 Hinson, R., 292
Hinton, D. E., 579 Hirata, S., 431 Hiripi, E., 260 Hirsch, J., 674
Hirsch, J. K., 674 Hirsch, N., 212 Hirshfeld-Becker, D. R., 576
Hirshfeld, D. R., 576 Hirshkowitz, M., 205 Hiscock-Anisman, C., 251
Hitch, G. J., 323, 324, 324f Ho, K., 349 Ho, M. Y., 508, 565 Ho, S. S.,
665 Hobfoll, S. E., 645 Hobson, J., 208, 354 Hoch, J. E., 422, 423
Hochberg, F., 99 Hodges, 523 Hodges, J. R., 347

Hodgkin, A. L., 138 Hoebel, B. G., 257 Hoeft, F., 390 Hoek, H. W., 616
Hoekstra, R. A., 556 Hofer, S. M., 451 Hoffman, B. J., 589 Hoffmann, P.,
390 Hofling, C. K., 527 Hofmann, S. G., 627 Hofmann, W., 491 Hofstede,
G., 273, 493, 494f Hogan, C. L., 669 Hogan, D., 412 Hogan, N., 349 Hoge,
C. W., 583 Hokanson, J. E., 652 Holbrook, J. R., 622 Holcomb, J., 514
Holder, M. K., 126 Holguin, Roberto., 123 Holingue, C., 130 Hollon, S.
D., 626 Holmes, J. G., 532 Holowacz, E., 454 Holt-Lunstad, J., 500 Holt,
L. H., 384 Holtmann, O., 244 Holttum, J., 209 Holtzman, N. S., 588
Holzel, B. K., 225 Holzgrabe, U., 349 Holzman, P. S., 562, 566 Home, J.,
204f Hong, X., 413, 558 Hood, A. C., 354 Hood, W.R., 521, 521f Hoogman,
M., 560 Hooshmand, F., 567 Hopkins, C. A., 576 Hopkins, W. D., 386
Hopper, K., 624 Horan, W. P., 624 Horn, J. L., 451 Horne, J., 204
Horney, K., 465 Horton, N. J., 444 Horvath, S., 556 Horwitz, A. V., 675
Horwitz, J., 675 Horwood, L. J., 28, 84, 217, 217f, 540, 565 Hosobuchi,
Y., 182 Hosseinian-Far, A., 644 Hostinar, C. E., 657 Hottenga, J. -J.,
566 Hou, W., 413, 558, 560 Hou, Y., 241 House, J. S., 267 Houser, D.,
536, 537 Houston, S., 657 Houston, S. M., 421 Hove, M. J., 227 Howard,
A. D., 256 Howard, K., 38 Howell-White, S., 675

Howell, R. T., 675 Howes, O. D., 564 Hoyer, J., 580 Hoyle, R. H., 485
Hrdy, S. B., 93 Hsing, C., 447 Hsu, C. Y., 200 Hsu, H., 414, 557 Hu, C.,
560 Hu, Y., 241 Hu, Z., 663 Huang, C. J., 378f Huang, D., 72, 259 Huang,
H., 677, 678f Huang, T. T., 665 Hubbard, J. J., 659 Hubel, D. H., 159
Huchinson, E. B., 35 Hudson, J. I., 260 Hudson, M., 80 Hudson, N. W.,
476 Hudspeth, A., 174 Huff, S., 213 Hugdahl, K., 564 Hugenberg, K., 336
Hughes, J. R., 290 Hughes, K., 534 Hughes, M., 564, 583, 644 Hughes, M.
E., 677 Hughes, S., 534 Hull, C. L., 253 Hulme, C., 430 Hummer, A., 640
Hunt, G. E., 222, 321, 564 Hunt, H. T., 208 Hunt, J., 552 Hunt, M., 587
Hunt, P. D., 200 Hupka, R. B., 246 Hur, J., -W., 397 Hurd, P. L., 540
Hurlemann, R., 616 Hurlimann, D., 651 Hurst, C., 469 Hurst, J. A., 388
Hussey, E. P., 330 Hutcherson, C. A., 432 Hutchinson, J. M. C., 99
Hutchinson, S., 513 Hutchison, K.A., 246 Huttenlocher, P. R., 421f
Huttunen, M., 397 Huweler, R., 577 Huxley, A. F., 138 Hwang, H. S., 537
Hyatt, C. S., 589 Hyde, J. S., 63 Hylton, E., 658 Hystad, S. W., 659,
659f

I

Iacono, W., 476 Ida, I., 653 Idzik, P., 280 Igielnik, R., 68 NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-9

Ignacio, R., 624 Illarionova, A., 242 Ilnytskyy, Y., 83 Imperial, J.,
653, 653f Impett, E. A., 682 Indacochea, F., 559 Ingberg-Sachs, Y., 291
Inman, C. S., 340 Insel, T. R., 583 Invernizzi, P., 83 Ioannou, C. C.,
96, 472 Ionica, C., 433 Irimia, A., 122 Ironson, G., 658 Irwin, C. E.,
446 Irwin, W., 572 Ishida, J. H., 217 Ishii, M., 256 Ishunina, T. A.,
263 Israel, S., 476 Ito, T. A., 242 Ittleson, W. H., 164 Ivanova, M. V.,
386 Ivelva, E. I., 567 Iveson, C., 605

J

Jaaskelainen, I. P., 245 Jacka, F. N., 86 Jackson, B., 651 Jackson, J.
H., 109 Jackson, J. J., 474 Jackson, J. S., 522 Jackson, S. L., 33
Jacobs, D. R., Jr., 651 Jacobs, R., 47, 48 Jacobus, J., 440 Jagnow, C.
P., 188 Jahanshad, N., 560 Jalali, R., 644 Jamal, A., 663, 664, 664f
James, L., 312, 354 James, W., 12--13, 20, 21, 22, 95, 195, 233, 234,
466, 483, 493, 672--673 Jamieson, G. A., 203, 226, 227 Jana, N., 412
Janak, P. H., 290 Janca, A., 624 Jancke, L., 248 Jandl, M., 562 Jang, K.
L., 475 Janik, V. M., 196, 386 Janis, I. L., 513, 529, 530 Janszky, I.,
202 Janusonis, S., 130 Jaques, E., 448 Jaramillo, L., 99 Jardi, R., 562,
564 Jarvis, W. B. G., 528 Jasinska, A. J., 665 Jastrow, J., 20 Jaswal,
V. K., 432 Jayathilake, K., 623 Jaycox, L., 644, 657

N-10

Jeffries, A. R., 648 Jeglic, E. L., 674 Jegou, A., 204 Jenkins, S., 259
Jenkins, W. M., 180 Jenkinson, C. E., 679 Jennings, C. L., 180 Jensen,
J. H., 560 Jensen, R., 18, 305 Jensen, T. K., 413 Jeon-Slaughter, H.,
567 Jepson, T. L., 201 Jerabeck, J. M., 54 Jergensen, M., 48 Jernigan,
T. L., 389 Jerram, M., 225 Jetten, J., 488 Jewsbury Conger, K., 453
Jhaveri, D. J., 573 Ji, Y., 413, 558, 560 Jia, F., 443 Jiang C., 574
Jiang, W., 564 Jimenez-Murcia, S., 261 Jirtle, R. L., 72, 259 Jo, B.,
619 Joas, E., 624 Joel, S., 682 Joels, M., 340, 640 Joestl, S. S., 264,
265 John, O. P., 246, 248, 470, 475 Johns, M. W., 204 Johnsen, B.H.,
659, 659f Johnson, A. K., 586 Johnson, E., 451 Johnson, J. A., 505
Johnson, M. H., 168 Johnson, M. K., 335, 340 Johnson, M. W., 219
Johnson, P. L., 578 Johnson, S., 565 Johnson, S. L., 518 Johnson, S. P.,
167 Johnson, W., 397, 476 Johnson, W. G., 262 Johnston, P., 556 Joiner,
T. E., 552 Jones, A. B., 471 Jones, B. C., 262, 532 Jones, E., 648
Jones, E. E., 486, 505, 506 Jones, J. M., 488 Jones, K., 679 Jones, M.
C., 289 Jonides, J., 347 Jonsson, Z. O., 77 Jorgensen, M., 81 Jorm, A.
F., 598 Jouriles, E. N., 541 Jr. R. B. A., 42 Jrambeck, H.-J., 537 Judd,
C. M., 522 Judge, T. A., 469 Julius, D., 181, 184 Jung, C., 480 Jung, C.
G., 465

Jung, W. H., 397 Just, M. A., 198 Juster, R.-P., 654, 654f, 660, 661f
Juul, A., 413 Juvonen, J., 489, 490

K

Kabeto, M. U., 451 Kable, J. W., 397 Kaburu, S. S. K., 434 Kaczkurkin,
A. N., 584 Kaelen, M., 218 Kaestle, C. E., 445 Kagan, J., 245, 246, 576
Kahle, E. R., 674 Kahler, S., 130, 386 Kahn, D., 203, 483, 491 Kahn, I.,
343 Kahn, R., 217 Kahn, R. E., 632 Kahneman, D., 372, 373, 376, 376f
Kai-shek, Chiang, 272 Kail, R. V., 420f, 429, 430 Kaiser, J., 348
Kaiser, T., 452 Kalenscher, T., 491, 640 Kalil, A., 677 Kalinowsky, L.
B., 615 Kalisch, R., 244 Kalish, D., 305 Kalogeropoulos, A., 514 Kamble,
S., 249, 249f Kamin, L. J., 287, 299 Kan, E. C., 50 Kana, R. K., 198
Kandel, E. R., 156, 286, 346, 349 Kandil, F. I., 577 Kandrik, M., 262
Kane, J. M., 564, 623 Kanen, J. W., 119 Kang, C., 35 Kanner, A. D., 645
Kanner, L., 555 Kano, F., 431 Kant, I., 183 Kao, C. F., 528 Kapasi, S.,
176 Kapkova, P., 349 Kaplan, H., 422 Kaplan, R. M., 675 Kaplitt, 244
Kaptchuk, T. J., 182 Karama, S., 397 Karanti, A., 624 Karasik, L. B.,
422 Karau, S. J., 469, 528 Karlsen, T. H., 83 Karlsson Linner, R., 397
Karney, B. R., 500, 533 Karni, A., 391 Karraker, A., 449 Kasikci, Z.,
207 Kasper, S., 261

Kass, A. E., 261 Kassam-Adams, N., 583, 644 Kastner, L., 391 Kato, B.
S., 259 Kato, M., 552 Katoudi, S., 620 Katzenberg, D., 202 Katzmarzyk,
P. T., 668f, 669 Kaufman, A. S., 392 Kaufmann, N., 248 Kauppi, K., 475,
475f Kawachi, I., 392 Kawecki, T. J., 319 Kay, D. B., 432 Kayser, S.,
616 Kealy, D., 633 Kearney, C. A., 578 Kearns, D. N., 285 Kearsley, R.
B., 245 Keast, A., 341 Kecklund, G., 200 Keehn, D., 436, 438 Keele, S.
W., 365 Keenan, J. P., 492, 492f Keith Campbell, W., 589 Keith, D. R.,
220 Keith, S. J., 565, 624 Kekst CNC, 404 Kelder, A., 650 Kelleher, K.
J., 559 Keller, A., 185 Keller, H., 172 Keller, T. A., 198 Kelley, M.,
561 Kelley, M. E., 565 Kelley, W. M., 491 Kellner, C. H., 615 Kellogg,
L. A., 386 Kellogg, W. N., 386 Kelly-Vance, L., 555 Kelly, D. J., 293
Kelly, J. F., 395 Kelly, M. W., 201 Kelly, T. L., 200 Keltner, D., 245,
682 Kendler, K. S., 580 Kendzerska, T., 209 Kennedy, D. P., 118f
Kennedy, G. C., 256 Kennedy, K. M., 450 Kennedy, M. A., 84, 540 Kennedy,
S. H., 198, 616 Kennis, M., 476 Kenrick, D. T., 271f, 273, 274, 538, 676
Kenwood, C., 513 Kern, R. P., 53 Kesey, K., 615 Keshavan, M. S., 557
Kessler, J., 348 Kessler, R., 581 Kessler, R. C., 260, 434, 551, 561,
567, 576, 578, 579, 580, 583, 584, 644, 645 Ketay, S., 475 Ketch, L. L.,
259

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Ketter, T. A., 567 Kety, S. S., 563 Keuleers, E., 384, 385f Keyhani, S.,
217 Keys, A., 272 Khaledi-Paveh, B., 644 Khalsa, G., 225 Khan, S., 583
Kharlamova, A., 477f Khateb, A., 646 Khatri, P., 669 Khoury, B., 627
Khundrakpam, B. S., 397 Kiebel, S. J., 537 Kiehl, K. A., 123 Kiel, K.
A., 586, 587f Kiely, E., 514 Kihlstrom, J. F., 224 Kikinis, R., 122
Kikkert, M. A., 121 Kilduff, T. S., 256 Kilham, W., 526 Kilkus, J. M.,
653, 653f Kilma, E. S., 391 Kilpatrick, D., 584 Kim, D. H., 349 Kim, E.
W., 209 Kim, H., 455, 494 Kim, H. S., 508 Kim, S., 576 Kim, S. Y., 416f
Kim, Y., 573 Kim, Y.-H., 508 King-Casa, B., 589f King, B. A., 663, 664,
664f King, B. H., 400 King, D. P., 202 King, G., 43 King, J. E., 476
King, L., 674 King, P. M., 447 Kingerlee, R., 604 Kingsley, D. M., 90
Kinsella, S., 607 Kirchhoff, B. A., 349 Kirk, K., 266 Kirker, W. S.,
484, 484f Kirsch, I., 182, 224, 615 Kirsch, P., 133 Kirschen, M., 212
Kirschvink, J. L., 178 Kitaichi, Y., 354 Kitamura, R, 552 Kitayama, S.,
494, 507, 507f Kitchener, K. S., 447 Kitlinska, J. B., 653 Kittelson, J.
M., 259 Kittok, R., 262 Kivipelto, M., 220 Klabunde, M., 261 Klarr, D.,
213 Klauke, B., 579 Klei, L., 549 Klein, D. F., 578 Klein, D. J., 238
Klein, E. B., 448

Klein, R. A., 42 Klein, R. M., 391 Klein, S. B., 319 Kleinman, K., 444
Kleinmuntz, B., 250 Kleitman, N., 208 Klentz, B., 485 Kleuender, K. R.,
384 Kline, P., 464 Klucharev, V., 511 Kluver, H., 242 Kneer, J., 47, 48
Knickmeyer, R., 419 Knight, D. C., 646 Knodt, A. R., 476 Knopfel, T.,
349 Knowles, J., 571 Knowlton, B. J., 349 Knyazev, G. C., 203
Kobayakawa, T., 185 Kober, H., 225 Koch, C., 197 Koch, E. G., 177 Koch,
I., 557 Kochanek, K. D., 670 Koeda, T., 323 Koelling, K. W., 288
Koellinger, P. D., 397 Koenen, K. C., 583, 584 Koenig, O., 207
Koenigsberg, H. W., 653 Koffka, K., 12, 163 Kofoed, P.-E., 604 Kogan, M.
D., 622 Kohlberg, L., 442, 443 Kohler-Forsberg, O., 414 Kohler, C. G.,
250 Kohler, W., 12 Kohn, G., 388 Kokis, J. V., 442 Kolaitis, G., 644
Kolb, B., 83 Kolko, R. P., 261 Koller, S. H., 488 Komarraju, M., 469
Kometz, S., 650 Konopka, G., 77 Konrad, K., 210, 557 Konrath, S., 447,
588, 590 Konrath, S. H., 447 Kooyman, M., 617 Kopecky, J., 169 Kopell,
B. H., 616 Kopell, N. J., 205 Kopelman, M. D., 584 Kosinski, M., 478
Kosslyn, S. M., 363 Kotchoubey, B., 203, 226, 227 Koudstaal, P. J., 121
Koury, S. H., 451 Kovalchuk, I., 83 Kozak, C., 664 Kozuma, K., 206
Kozyra, E., 460 Kraft, I., 390

Kral, T. R. A., 225 Kramer, A D. I., 63, 64 Kramer, B. J., 658 Krank,
M., 292 Krasikova, D. V., 680 Krasner, A., 619 Krasner, L., 612
Krasnewich, D., 35 Kraus, N., 176 Krause, N., 658 Kravitz, D. A., 528
Krawiec, T. S., 13 Krawitz, A., 347 Krebs, H., 349 Krettenauer, T., 443
Kriegbaum, M., 651 Krijn, M., 630 Kristensen, M.P., 646 Kroes, M. C.,
354 Krogh, H. B., 620, 622 Krommidas, C., 626 Kronick, R. G., 675 Kross,
E., 370 Krotov, R., 469 Krous, H., 210 Krueger, J. L., 490 Krueger, R.
F., 476 Kruger, D. J., 99 Kruger, J., 488 Kruggel, E., 330 Krumrei, E.
J., 680 Krupenye, C., 431 Kryspin-Exner, I., 540 Krzywkowski, P., 242
Kubler, A., 203, 226, 227 Kubzansky, L. D., 651 Kudo, L., 77 Kuehnle,
T., 202 Kugelmann, E., 349, 352 Kuhl, B. A., 343 Kuhl, P., 419 Kuhl, P.
K., 307, 387, 387f, 388 Kuhl, U., 390 Kuhn, D., 440 Kuhn, K.-U., 564
Kuiper, N. A., 484, 484f Kulik, J. A., 268 Kumano, H., 653 Kunert, H.
J., 246 Kuo, L. E., 653 Kupper, Y., 460 Kurihara, T., 552 Kurland, J.
A., 538 Kurtz, J. E., 479 Kurtz, R. G., 257f Kurzban, R., 536, 537
Kuschke, R. H., 650 Kushlev, K., 676, 677 Kuster, J. M., 35 Kusumi, I.,
354 Kuyken, W., 627 Kuzawa, C. W., 262 Kvetnansky, R., 653 Kwan, V. S.
Y., 522 Kwon, J. S., 397

Kwong, A. S. F., 455, 455f Kyhl, H. B., 413 Kyvik, K. O., 81

L

La Cascia, C., 566, 566f La Tona, G., 250 LaBar, K. S., 440 Laberg, J.
C., 659, 659f LaCasse, L., 122 Lachmann, F. M., 610 Lachuer, J., 77
Ladd, G. W., 682 Lafer-Sousa, R., 149 Laganiere, S., 212, 542
Lagerspetz, K. M. J., 539 Lagerspetz, K. Y. H., 539 Lahey, B. B., 296
Lahn, B. T., 93 Lai, C. S., 388 Lai, M. -C., 560 Laird, A. R., 581 Lake,
C. J., 481 Lakin, J. L., 227 Laland, K. N., 523 Lalumiere, M. L., 24
Lalwani, A., 391 Lamb, F., 209 Lamm, C., 640 Lampinen, J., 245 Lampinen,
J.M., 339f Lan, X., 507, 507f Landen, M., 624 Landis, K. R., 268
Landlin, A. M., 184 Lane, A., 556, 557f Lane, R. E., 472 Lanfermann, H.,
562 Lang, M. G., 651 Langa, K. M., 451 Lange, C. G., 233 Langenecker, S.
A., 648 Langford, G., 209, 490 Langleben, D., 250 Langley, J., 129
Langlois, J. H., 532 Langstrom, N., 266 Lansford, J. E., 300 Lanspa, M.
J., 664 Lanzetta, M., 137 Largo, R. H., 422 Larkin, K., 267 Larkina, M.,
430 Larner, A. J., 64 Larsen, J. T., 242 Larsen, R. J., 534 Larson, C.
L., 540, 586 Larson, E. B., 451 Larsson, H., 560 Laska, E., 583 Lassek,
W. D., 91 Latane, B., 528, 539 Lau, J., 40 Laumann, E. O., 264 Lauri,
G., 204 NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-11

Lauriello, J., 624 Lauritsen, M. B., 48 Lavie, C. J., 657, 657f Law, C.
K., 259 Law, J., 42 Law, M., 309 Law, P., 556 Layous, K., 679 Lazar, S.
W., 225 Lazaropoulou, C., 644 Lazarus, A. A., 614 Lazarus, R. S., 643,
645, 656 Lazer, D. M., 514 Lazeyras, F., 646 Lazo, R. J., 434 Le, N.,
369 Lea, M., 528 Leary, M. R., 267, 489 LeBlanc, S. A., 541 Leborgne,
L., 385 Lecomte, T., 221, 627 LeDoux, J. E., 646 Lee, H., 514 Lee, J.
H., 496, 496f Lee, J. M., 354 Lee, J., -Y., 354 Lee, K., 482 Lee, L. C.,
130 Lee, M. A., 623 Lee, S. J., 300 Lee, T. Y., 397 Lee, U., 213 Lee,
W., 560 Lee, W. -S., 35 Lee, Y.-A., 514 Leese, M., 615 Leffert, N., 444
Leffler, A., 184 Lehner, B., 87 Lehrner, A., 583 Leichsenring, F., 610
Leichtman, M., 477 Leija, H. A. L., 42 Leitner, L., 611 Lemaster, J. L.,
414 Lencz, T., 122 Lenroot, R., 397 Lenton, A. P., 246 Leonard, K. A.,
434 Leopold, L., 256 Lepage, K. Q., 205 LePine, J. A., 489 LePort, A.
K., 330 Leppa, V., 262 Leproult, R., 206, 653 Leptourgos, P., 564 Lerch,
J., 397, 560 Lerch, P. G., 651 Lerner, A., 583, 584 Lerner, M., 583
Lerner, M. J., 508 Leroi, A. M., 413 Lervag, A., 430 Leslie, L. M., 460
Leslie, M., 261 Lester, P. B., 267, 500, 645, 657, 680

N-12

Leu-Semenescu, S., 208 Leucht, S., 623 Leung, A. K.-Y., 508 Leung, R.
S., 209 Leurgans, S., 564 LeVay, S., 266f, 267 Levenson, R. W., 234,
494, 495 Levine, A., 445 Levine, B., 348 Levine, D. A., 451 Levine, J.
D., 181, 184 Levine, M., 538, 543 Levinson, D., 448 Levinson, M. H., 448
Levy, D. L., 562 Levy, H. C., 378 Lewin, A. C., 675 Lewin, K., 471
Lewis, A., 212 Lewis, A. J., 644 Lewis, C. M., 565 Lewis, D. A., 217
Lewis, J. D., 397 Lewis, J. W., 41, 263f, 264, 544 Lewis, K., 354 Lewis,
M., 195 Lewis, S., 524, 525f Ley, R. E., 259 Li, C., 354 Li, H., 663 Li,
K., 444 Li, S.-C., 394f Li, W., 207 Li, Y., 451, 663 Liang, F.-X., 228
Liberator, P. A., 256 Liberzon, I., 244, 665 Libet, B., 193 Libon, D.
J., 367 Lichtenberg, J. D., 610 Lichtenstein, E., 613 Lichtenstein, P.,
266, 624 Lidbetter, N., 629 Liddle, P. E., 586 Liddon, L., 604
Lieberman, J. D., 53 Liebowitz, M. R., 578 Light, K. C., 263 Ligthart,
L., 566 Liguori, A., 290 Likert, R., 479 Lilienfeld, S. O., 482, 585,
631 Lim, B. C., 460 Lim, C. C. W., 578 Lin, L., 28, 29, 202, 603f Lin,
L. -y., 228 Lin, N., 674 Lin, S., 670, 675 Linchitz, R., 182 Lind, J.
N., 391, 413 Lindeman, M. J., 581 Linden, D. E., 562 Lindenberger, U.,
450 Lindsay, D. S., 340 Lindsay, R. C. L., 341 Lindstrom, R. C., 259

Linehan, M. M., 632 Link, B. G., 644 Lipshultz, S. E., 218, 220 Lissek,
S., 584 Little, A. C., 532 Liu, C. H., 574, 574f Liu, S.-M., 553, 553f
Liu, T., 213 Liu, Y., 549 Liversedge, T., 212 Livesley, W. J., 475
Livingston, B. A., 469 Livingston, E. H., 260 Livingstone, M. S., 159
Livshits, G., 259 Ljung, R., 202 Lo Re, G., 250 Lo, J. O., 414, 416f Lo,
M.-T., 475, 475f Lo, S. L., 474f Lobmaier, J. S., 649 Locke, B. D., 607
Locke, J., 8 Lockhart, R. S., 325 Lockley, S. W., 200 Loe, I., 622
Loehlin, J. C., 475 Loftus, E., 333, 333f, 338, 339f, 341, 345, 631
Logel, C., 519 Logie, R. H., 322 Logue, M. W., 648 Lok, A., 571 Loll,
F., 369 Lombardelli, A., 583 Lomo, T., 346 Long, K., 99 Lopez-Castroman,
J., 626 Lopez, J. M., 181 Lopez, R. B., 491 Lopez, S. R., 27 Lorenz, T.,
626 Lotspeich-Younkin, F., 454 Lotto, A., 384 Lovaas, O. I., 309, 619
Love, R. W., Jr., 454 Lovegreen, L. D., 449, 450f Lovett, M. C., 369,
370 Lovie, A. D., 64 Lovie, P., 64 Lowe, D. J. E., 664 Lowe, J. C., 454
Lowe, J. K., 556 Lowry, R., 673 Loy, J. W., 504 Lozano, A. M., 616 Lu,
K., 514 Lu, Y., 38 Lubart, T., 446, 448 Lubinski, D., 401 Lubow, R. E.,
286, 291 Lucas, R. E., 676f Lucatch, A. M., 664 Lucette, A., 658
Luchetti, M., 496, 496f Luczak, S. E., 667

Luhmann, M., 452 Luk, G., 391 Lukas, G., 246 Lukowski, A. F., 430
Lumbiganon, P., 412 Lun, J., 459, 460, 460f Lund, R., 651 Luo, L., 90
Luo, R., 620 Luo, S., 494, 495, 675 Luo, Y., 675 Lupien, S. J., 654,
654f, 660, 661f Lutter, C. D., 262, 518 Luyckx, K., 77t, 436, 437, 437f
Lydholm, C. N., 414 Lykken, D. T., 81, 475, 476f, 510, 586, 674 Lynam,
D. R., 589 Lynn, M., 524 Lynn, S. J., 585, 631 Lyons, J. A., 592 Lyoo,
I. K, 625f Lyu, W., 68 Lyubomirsky, S., 674, 676, 677, 679

M

Ma, J., 106, 541 Ma, L., 207 Ma, Y., 107 Maccoby, E. E., 436 Maccoby,
M., 588 MacDonald, A., 213f MacDonald, G., 682 MacFabe, D., 130
MacGregor, A. J., 99 MacGregor, D. G., 375 Mach, H., 669 Machado, A. G.,
616 Machado, C. J., 242 MacKenzie, I. R., 567 MacKillop, J., 475, 476
Macleod, J., 654 Macpherson, R., 442 MacQueen, G., 198 Macrae, C. N.,
203 Madden, E., 217 Maddi, S., 659 Maddison, A., 378f Maddock, R. J.,
350 Madey, S. F., 231 Madigan, S., 402, 644 Madva, A., 518 Maeda, T.,
418 Maenner, M. J., 555, 556f Maes, B., 401 Maes, J. H. R., 632
Maestripieri, D., 98 Maffei, M., 256, 257 Maggard, M. A., 260 Maglione,
M., 260 Magnasco, M. O., 185 Magne, C., 240 Magnin, M., 207 Magnusson,
F. L., 620, 622

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Magrini, V., 259 Mahajan, R., 619 Maher, B., 393, 622 Mahler, G., 567
Mahler, H. I. M., 268 Mahon, B. Z., 367, 368f Mahoney, D. E., 616
Mahowald, M. W., 259 Mai, H. L., 187 Maier, R., 265 Maier, S. F., 569
Maier, W., 564 Maimon, E., 583 Majdandžic, J., 640 Mak, L. E., 198
Makin, J. W., 419 Makrygianni, M. K., 620 Malcom, C. M., 93 Malek, M.,
560 Malhi, G. S., 624 Malinger, G., 414 Malle, B. F., 506 Malmberg, A.
B., 184 Malmberg, K. J., 319 Malone, P. S., 505, 506 Malone, T. W., 398,
399f Maloney, S. E., 557 Malt, B. C., 365 Mammarella, N., 352 Manbeck,
A. B., 584 Mandera, P., 384, 385f Maner, J., 47 Mankowski, T. A., 486
Mann, L., 526 Manning, R., 538 Mannix, R., 112 Manns, J. R., 340
Mansell, W., 578 Mansson, H., 35 Mansvelder, H. D., 398 Mantell, D. M.,
525 Mantyla, T., 336 Manuel, W. J., 522 Maples, J., 589 Mar, A., 85, 648
Maran, T., 588 Maraninchi, M., 259 Marc Breedlove, S., 262 Marconi, A.,
565 Marcus, S. M., 644 Mardis, E. R., 259 Margand, N. A., 435 Margittai,
Z., 640 Margoni, F., 430 Marighetto, A., 349 Marini, A., 460 Mariske,
M., 432 Mark, K. P., 262, 264 Markowitsch, H. J., 348 Markowitz, J. C.,
626 Marks, G. A., 207 Markus, H., 484 Markus, H. R., 494 Marmot, M. G.,
649 Marner, L., 118 Mars, R. B., 632

Marschik, P. B., 413 Marsden, P. V., 675 Marsh, A. A., 118, 250 Marsh,
B.U., 40 Marsh, E. J., 336 Marshall-Goodell, B. S., 291 Marshall, G. D.,
237 Marshall, G. N., 644, 657 Martial, C., 213 Martin, A., 348, 367
Martin, B., 528 Martin, E. A., 250 Martin, G., 667 Martin, J., 28, 84,
586 Martin, J. A., 436 Martin, W. J., 184 Martinez, J., 578 Martinez,
R., 542 Marx, R., 627 Mash, H. B. H., 645 Mashour, G. A., 213 Masi, C.
M., 502 Maslow, A. H., 14, 22, 271, 272, 466, 676 Mason, M. F.., 203
Mason, W. A., 242 Masse, M., 627 Masten, A. S., 659 Masuda, T., 508
Mata, J., 669 Mather, M., 345 Mathers, C., 568, 569f Matheson, D. H.,
513 Matsa, K. E., 514 Matsumoto, D., 246, 247f, 249, 249f, 537
Matsuzaki, I., 256 Mattera, R., 35 Mattevi, B. S., 124 Mattfeld, A. T.,
330 Matthews-Ewald, M. R., 260 Matthews, B. R., 567 Matthews, C. E., 668
Mattucci, C., 242 Matusch, A., 616 Matuschka, L., 221 Maurer, C., 418
Maurer, D., 418 Maurer, J. M., 123 Mavridis, D., 623 Max, W., 664
Maxwell, R., 631 May, R. W., 437 Mayberg, H. S., 616 Mayer, D., 395
Mayer, J., 248, 256 Maylott, S. E., 434 Mazur, A., 262, 535 Mazure, C.
M., 573 Mazza, S., 207 Mazziotta, J. C., 597 McAleavey, A. A., 607
McArthur, L. Z., 535 McArthur, M. J., 421 McCain, J. L., 589 McCall, M.,
524

McCann, D., 561 McCarley, R. W., 207, 208 McCarthy-Jones, S., 562
McCarthy, M. I., 90 McCauley, C., 681 McClay, I., 28 McClay, J., 84, 586
McClelland, D. C., 268, 269 McClernon, F. J., 290 McClintock, M. K., 93
McClung, C. A., 572 McClure, J. N., 578 McComb, K., 196 McConnell, R.A.,
61 McCrae, R. R., 467f, 468, 475, 479 McCullough, K. B., 557 McCully,
J., 292 McCusker, R., 669 McCutcheon, R., 564 McDade, T. W., 262
McDaniel, M. A., 336 McDonald, N. D., 472 McDonald, R., 526, 541
McDuffie, A., 401 McEwen, B. S., 54f, 341, 660, 661f, 6546 McFall, R.
M., 601, 602, 608 McGann, J. P., 183 McGaugh, J. L., 330 McGeary, J. E.,
460 McGeown, L. M., 262 McGlone, F., 179 McGrath, J. J., 260 McGrath,
L., 615 McGraw, A. P., 231 McGreery, S., 529 McGregor, H. A., 53
McGregor, I. S., 222, 564 McGue, M., 81, 475, 476f, 510 McGuire, M. T.,
540 McGurk, D., 267, 500, 583, 592, 657 McHugh, R. K., 615 McInerney, S.
C., 518 McKay, D., 610 McKay, K. E., 430 McKee, B., 448 McKenna, C., 534
McLean, D. E., 644 McMillan, C., 367 McMurray, J., 140 McNally, R. J.,
582 McNamara, R. K., 567 McNaughton, N., 476 McNeely, H. E., 616
McNeill, D., 338 McNulty, J. K., 533 McQueeny, T., 440 McRobbie, H., 224
Meaney, M. J., 469, 640, 648 Mecca, A. M., 490 Medda, P., 615 Meddis,
R., 209 Meduna, L., 615 Medvec, V. H., 231, 485

Meehan, W. P. III., 112 Meeus, W. H. J., 525 Mehrabian, A., 240 Meier,
B. P., 590 Meier, M. H., 217 Meisel, A., 222 Meissner, C. A., 336
Mekel-Bobrov, N., 93 Melhuish, E., 414 Mellers, B. A., 231 Mellin, A.,
444 Meltzer, A. L., 403 Meltzer, H. Y., 598, 623 Meltzoff, A. N., 307,
388, 432, 486 Melzack, R., 182 Melzer, N., 244 Memon, A., 251, 341 Mena,
I., 492 Mencl, W. E., 389, 390 Menczer, F., 514 Mendel, G., 89 Mendoza,
S. P., 242 Mendrek, A., 586 Meng-Hentschel, J., 649 Mennella, J. A.,
188, 419 Mennes, M., 560 Menon, V., 198, 348 Menzel, E. W., 306 Menzies,
L., 581 Mercer, C. H., 58 Merckelbach, H., 585, 631 Meredith, T., 264
Merrow, M., 202 Merskey, H., 631 Mery, F., 319 Merzenich, M. M., 180
Mesmer, F. A., 600 Messer, S. C. Messian, N., 524 Mestre-Bach, G., 261
Mestre, M. A., 218, 220 Metcalfe, C., 654 Metz, G. A. S., 83 Meule, A.,
261 Meuwese, R., 440 Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F., 266, 425 Meyer-Lindenberg,
A., 133, 540 Meyer, D. E., 169, 331, 331f Meyer, J. S., 222 Meyer, W.
J., III., 206 Mezzofanti, G. C., 390 Miao, Q., 228 Micco, J. A., 576
Michalek, J., 262 Michalkewicz, M., 372 Micheau, J., 349 Michel, C., 336
Micheli, L., 625 Mick, E., 576 Mickelsen, O., 272 Mickes, L., 341
Middleton, F., 560 Mieda, M., 200 Miettunen, J., 221 Mignot, E., 202,
209, 210 Mikacich, J. A., 569 NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-13

Mikels, J. A., 660 Mikulincer, M., 645 Mikuni, M., 653 Milani, I., 419f
Milani, R. V., 657, 657f Milev, R., 198 Milevsky, A., 436, 438 Milgram,
S., 471, 525, 526f Milich, R., 561 Milinski, M., 537 Mill, J., 28, 84,
586 Millard, K., 526 Millard, S. P., 563 Miller, A., 607 Miller, A. L.,
28, 84, 540 Miller, B. L., 492, 567 Miller, D. B., 541 Miller, D. J.,
421 Miller, D. T., 506, 508 Miller, G., 21 Miller, G. A., 322, 323
Miller, G. E., 640, 650, 651 Miller, H., 337 Miller, I. W., 460 Miller,
J., 524 Miller, J. D., 589 Miller, J. G., 443 Miller, K. D., 354 Miller,
M. W., 648 Miller, N. E., 272 Miller, R., 203 Miller, S., 567 Miller, S.
L., 520 Million, M., 259 Mills, K. L., 440, 444 Millstein, S. G., 442
Millward, C., 620 Milne, M., 80 Milner, B., 125, 127, 317, 347, 348f
Miltner, W. H. R., 244 Mindess, A., 178 Mineka, S., 576 Minick, P. E.,
578 Minshew, N. J., 557 Minuzzi, L., 198 Miranda, R., 674
Mirza-Schreiber, N., 390 Mischel, W., 473 Mitchell, A., 514 Mitchell, A.
A., 391, 413 Mitchell, B. A., 449, 450f Mitchell, D. G., 118, 586
Mitchell, K. R., 58 Mitchum, A. L., 392, 393f Mitler, M. N., 209
Mitropoulou, V., 653 Miyamoto, Y., 249, 249f Mizrahi, R., 217 Mizuhara,
Y., 178 Moatakef-Imani, B., 569 Moberg, P. J., 250 Mochizuiki, Y., 206
Moffitt, T. E., 75, 84, 459, 586 Mogensen, D. M., 413 Mohammadi, M., 644

N-14

Mohowald, M., 205 Mohtaseb, Z., 549, 556 Mojtabai, R., 598 Molaison, H.,
45, 317, 328, 347, 348f, 349 Moldofsky, H., 206 Molendijk, M., 86
Molero, P., 86 Molina, E., 580 Moll, K., 390 Mollaghan, D. M., 476
Moller, A., -B., 412 Monaco, A. P., 388 Monig, C., 244 Monpetit, M. A.,
657 Monson, C. M., 592 Montgomery, M. J., 444 Monti, M. M., 213f Moon,
C., 177, 412 Moon, H. Y., 354 Moon, R. Y. & Task Force on Sudden Infant
Death Syndrome, 210 Moore, A. U., 286 Moore, C., 431 Moore, C. A., 205
Moore, D., 179 Moore, J. W., 454 Moore, K. A., 669 Moore, P. J., 268
Moore, R., 577 Moore, R. Y., 209, 210 Moore, T., 371 Moors, A., 239
Moreau, D., 576 Moreira-Maia, C. R., 620, 622 Morell, R., 35
Moreno-De-Luca, D., 556 Moreno, B., 580 Morey, R. A., 648 Morgan, B.,
367 Morgan, E. M., 448 Mori, C., 402, 418 Mori, K., 563 Moriarty, D.,
293 Moriarty, J. C., 250 Morin, C. M. 228 Moritz, S., 447 Morres, I. D.,
626 Morris, D. E., 42 Morris, D. W., 562 Morris, K. S., 442 Morris, M.
W., 508 Morris, N., 556 Morris, R., 540 Morris, W. L., 250 Morrow, J.,
370 Morrow, M., 250 Mors, O., 260 Morse, S., 486 Mortensen, P.B., 414
Morton, G. J., 257 Morton, R., 414 Moscovici, S., 529, 529f Moscovitch,
M., 347 Moser, F., 382, 540

Moskalenko, Y., 615 Moss, C., 196 Mossner, R., 564 Most, D. E., 395
Mota-Rolim, S. A., 208 Mount, M. K., 469 Movellan, J., 307 Mozell, R.,
411 Mrazek, A. J., 459, 460, 460f Mu, D., 620 Mucke, D., 477 Mucke, L.,
349 Muehlenbein, M. P., 91 Mueller, E., 535 Mueller, P. A., 351, 351f
Mueller, V., 541 Muennig, P., 392 Mulder, R., 632 Mulkern, R. V., 414
Munch, Edvard, 579 Mundorf, N., 362 Mundorff, J., 35 Munford, P., 597
Munoz, M., 388 Murana, E., 242 Murayama, K., 269 Murdoch, B. B., Jr.,
327 Murphy, D. L., 337 Murphy, J., 583 Murphy, K., 218 Murphy, K. D.,
206 Murphy, K. G., 261 Murphy, S., 488 Murphy, S. L., 670 Murray, C. J.
L., 565, 568, 569f Murray, H. A., 267, 268 Murray, I., 586 Murray, L.,
118 Murray, R. M., 564, 565 Murray, S. H., 262, 264 Murray, S. L., 532
Murugesan, T., 290 Musial, Stan, 128 Musk, Elon, 196 Musso, D., 414
Mustonen, A., 221 Muthukumaraswamy, S. D., 218 Mychack, P., 492 Myers,
D. G., 678 Myhra, L. L., 607

N

Nadam, L. S., 573 Nadel, L., 306, 347 Nader, K., 338 Nadig, A. S., 177
Naimi, T. S., 416f Nakagawa, S., 247f, 354 Nakashima, S., 504, 504f
Nardi, B., 460 Narr, K. L, 397 National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development (NICHHD), 210

National Sleep Foundation, 210 Navalta, C., 653 Nave, C. S., 472 Nave,
G., 397 Nazar, B. P., 261 Nazeer, A., 583 Neal, D. T., 236, 237 Neal, J.
W., 474f Neale, M. C., 539, 580 Nedeltcheva, A. V., 653, 653f Nee, D.
E., 347 Neef, N. E., 390 Neff, L. A., 533 Neff, L. J., 663, 664, 664f
Neigh, G. N., 86, 648 Neil, M., 371 Neinstein, L. S., 446 Neisser, U.,
18, 19, 22, 398 Nelen, M., 84 Nelsen, 417 Nelson-Coffey, S., 448 Nelson,
A., 492, 492f Nelson, C. B., 583, 644 Nelson, S. K., 676, 677, 679
Nemeroff, C. B., 86, 413, 557, 648 Nena, E., 220 Nere, A., 207 Neri, D.
F., 200 Netter, S., 436, 438 Nettle, D., 485f Nettles, T., 524 Neuberg,
S. L., 271f, 273, 274, 676 Neugarten, B. L., 454 Neumark-Sztainer, D.,
444 Neuner, F., 644 Neville, D. A., 119 Neville, H. J., 391 New, A. S.,
653 New, M. I., 425 Newcombe, T. M., 473 Newell, A., 19 Newill, C., 130
Newman, N., 514 Newman, T. K., 432f Newmark, S., 620 Newport, D. J.,
413, 557 Newport, G. C., 413, 557 Newsom, C. R., 447 Newton-Howes, G.,
667 Nezworski, M. T., 482 Ng, T. H. H., 645 Nguyen, D. H., 187 Nguyen,
H. T., 646 Nguyen, T. T., 210, 213 Nias, D. K. B., 539 Nicolas, M. M.,
349 Nicolaus, L., 293 Nicolson, R., 564f Nieberding, R., 482 Niedenthal,
P. M., 249 Nielsen, J., 417 Nielsen, L., 649 Nielsen, R., 514 Nielsen,
T. A. 7 Niemela, S., 221

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Nienhuis, R., 209 Nigg, J. T., 559 Nijeboer, S., 208 Nijsten, M. W., 48
Nikulin, V. V., 511 Nilssson, C. J., 651 Nilsson, K. W., 28 Nilsson,
L.-G., 336 Nimmo-Smith, I., 322 Nisbett, R. E., 506, 508 Nishii, L., 460
Nitkin-Kaner, Y., 224 Nivard, M. G., 265, 566 Noaghiul, S., 567, 568f,
624, 666 Noah, T., 43 Noble-Haeusslein, L. J., 440 Noble, A. M., 529
Nodtvedt, O, 209 Noel, X., 215 Noelle-Neumann, E., 510 Nolen-Hoeksema,
S., 370, 568, 570 Noller, P., 435 Nomura, Y., 644 Nopoulos, P., 563
Norcross, J. C., 602 Nordahl, C. W., 243 Nordenbak, C., 81 Nordentoft,
M., 414 Norenzayan, A., 508 Norman, C. C., 534 Norman, G. J., 241
Norman, K. A., 349 Norman, W. T., 468 Norris, C. J., 116, 650 Norris, M.
J., 262 Northoff, G., 491 Northstone, K., 455, 455f Norton, M., 677,
678f Norton, M. I., 203 Nosek, B. A., 42, 43, 443 Nowak, M. A., 538
Nowakowska, C., 567 Nozzolillo, A., 619 Nugent, A. C., 583, 584
Nummenmaa, L., 245 Nurnberger, J. I., Jr., 556 Nutt, D., 222 Nutt, D.
J., 218, 629 Nyengaard, J. R., 118 Nystrom, L. E., 537

O

O'Brien, E. H., 447 O'Brien, L., 444 O'Brien, T. B., 658, 659 O'Connell,
K., 563 O'Connor, K. J., 518 O'Connor, M., 492, 492f O'Donnell, S., 293
O'Donovan, M. C., 83 O'Hara, M., 611 O'Keefe, J., 306 O'Leary, D. S.,
563 O'Malley, G., 123

O'Malley, P. M., 490 O'Reardon, J. P., 617f O'Sullivan, M., 248, 250
Obbels, J., 615 Obeid, J. S., 425 Obel, C., 48 Oberle, E., 679 Obsuth,
I., 84 Ochiai, R., 206 Odbert, H. S., 468 Odegard, T. N., 339f Oden, M.
H., 401 Oei, J. L., 414 Ogawa, H., 185 Ogawa, W., 625 Ogden, C. L., 257,
665, 666f Ogrodniczuk, J. S., 633 Oh, J., 447 Oh, M. Y., 242 Oh, Y. -S.,
573 Oishi, S., 507, 507f Oksenberg, A., 207 Okuda, M., 553, 553f
Olafsson, R. P., 630 Olatunji, B. O., 629 Olfson, M., 553, 553f, 576
Olliac, B., 126 Olsen, J. A., 432 Olsho, L. W., 177 Olsson, T., 209
Olyaei, A., 414, 416f Ong, M. K., 664 Ophoff, R. A., 83 Oppenheimer, D.
M., 351, 351f Opris, I., 557 Orey, D., 623 Orfanidou, E., 391 Oring, L.
W., 98 Ormel, J., 571 Orne, M. T., 224 Orobio de Castro, B., 297 Orr, M.
T., 349 Orth, U., 444, 445f, 486, 488 Ortigue, S., 124 Ortuno
Sanchez-Pedreno, F., 86 Osaka, E., 494 Osathanondh, R., 411 Oshima, A.,
653 Osinsky, R., 460 Oskina, I., 477f Osnaya-Ramirez, I., 200 Osorio,
C., 648 Ospina, M., 209 Ossmy, O., 422 Ossyra, J., 669 Ostedgaard, K.,
244 Oster, H., 186 Otsuka, Y., 419 Ott, U., 225 Otte, E., 557 Otto, M.
W., 615 Ou-yang, X., -y., 228 Ouimet, M. C., 444 Outhred, T., 624
Overbeek, G., 297

Owe, E., 488 Owen, A. M., 212 Owen, E. R., 137 Owen, M. J., 83, 564
Owen, M. T., 435 Owen, N., 668 Ozery, D. H., 40 Ozono, H., 504, 504f
Ozonoff, S., 177

P

Pace, G. T., 300 Pack, S., 627 Pakkenberg, B., 118 Pal, D., 213
Pallavicini, C., 213 Pallesen, S., 209 Palmer, A. A., 475, 476 Palmer,
J. C., 338, 339f, 341 Palombo, D. J., 348 Pan, Y., 241 Panaioti, M., 582
Panchaud, A., 414 Panlilio, L. V., 285 Pantev, C., 181 Paolini, S., 517,
522 Papadopoulos, T. C., 361 Papagno, C., 243 Papassotiriou, I., 644
Papp, L. A., 578 Pappert, E., J., 564 Paquet, A., 126 Paracchini, S.,
390 Paradiso, S., 244 Paraskakis, E., 220 Parbery-Clark, A., 176 Parcet,
M. A., 476 Pargament, K. I., 658 Pargament, K., I., 680 Pariante, C. M.,
625, 648 Paris, J., 610 Park, B., 522 Park, C. R., 340 Park, G., 25
Park, S.-A., 514 Parker, A. M., 442 Parker, A., M., 374, 513 Parkvall,
M., 391 Parner, E. T., 48 Parr, J. R., 556 Parvizi, J., 245
Pascual-Leone, A., 112, 181, 212, 492, 492f, 542 Pascual, J. C., 219
Pashler, H., 352, 354 Pasricha, P. J., 130 Pate, W. E., 603f Patel, S.,
524 Patrick, W., 116, 267 Patten, S. B., 598 Patterson, F., 386
Patterson, F. G. P., 196 Patterson, K. D., 105 Patton, R., 454 Paukmer.
A., 433

Paukner, A., 312 Paul, A. M., 480 Paul, L. K., 397 Paulhus, D. I., 489,
588 Pauli, P., 579 Pauls, D. L., 581 Paulsen, J. S., 349 Pavlov, I. P.,
16--17, 20, 22, 38, 41, 281, 285, 476 Pawlowski, M., 208 Pearce, M. T.,
176 Pearl, D. K., 193 Pearson, A., 209, 490 Pearson, M. R., 668 Pearson,
R. M., 455, 455f Peckham, A. D., 615 Pedersen, C. B., 260 Pedersen, N.,
620, 622 Pegna, A. J., 645 Pelham, W. E., 622 Pelios, L. V., 305
Peltokorpi, V., 354 Pence, B., 669 Penev, P. D., 653, 653f Penfield, W.,
180, 181 Peng, K., 508 Penke, L., 397 Penrod, S. D., 341 Pentland, A.,
398, 399f Pentland, B. T., 354 Peplau, L. A., 675 Pepperberg, I. M., 387
Peralta-Ramirez, M. I., 659 Perez-Marmol, J. M., 659 Perez, M. F., 87
Perfoli, L., 572 Perikleous, E. P., 220 Permack, D. G., 431 Perner, J.,
431 Perrin, M. A., 583 Perry, R. J., 347 Perry, W. I., 447 Perugi, G.,
615 Pervanidou, P., 644 Peters, E., 375 Peters, R., 450 Petersen, L.,
414 Petersen, S., 657 Peterson-Zeitz, K. R., 184 Peterson, C., 341, 680,
681 Peterson, L. R., 321, 323f Peterson, M., 436, 437, 437f Peterson, M.
J., 321, 323f Peto, R., 665 Petrova, D., 374 Petrovitch, H., 220
Pettigrew, S., 43 Petty, R. E., 291, 326, 509, 512, 528 Petzold, M., 412
Peverly, S. T., 442 Peyron, C., 256 Pfaus, J. G., 41, 263f, 264 Pfeifer,
M. A., 255f Phan, K. L., 244 Phelps, E. A., 518 NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-15

Phillips, K. A., 582 Phillips, N., 390 Phills, C. E., 517 Piacenza, L.,
557 Piaget, J., 21, 426 Pierce, C. M., 527 Pietrzak, R. H., 643f, 645,
656 Pietschnig, J., 399f Pihl, M. B., 413 Pilgrim, J. L., 222 Pinel, P.,
554f Pinker, S., 386, 388 Pinkwart, N., 369 Pins, D., 562 Piper, A., 631
Pipitone, J., 560 Pirenne, M. H., 158 Pisoni, D. B., 177 Pitt, L., 514
Pittenger, D. J., 480 Pitts, F. N., 578 Piven, J., 557 Plant, E. A., 520
Plat, L., 206, 653 Plazzi, G., 208 Plomin, R., 82 Plous, S., 373f
Poehlmann, K. M., 242 Pohl, R. F., 372 Poizner, H., 349, 391 Pol, H. H.,
217 Polanco-Roman, L., 674 Polizzotto, N. R., 583 Polk, T. A., 665
Pollack, D. B., 540 Pollard, J., 224 Polya, G., 369 Pomar, L., 414
Ponto, L. B., 244, 245 Ponto, L. L. B., 563 Pope, H. G., Jr., 260 Pope,
L. E., 262 Port, R. V., 80 Porter, R., 76 Porter, R. H., 419 Posner, M.
I., 365, 475, 657 Postman, L. J., 36, 37 Potash, J., 571 Potenza, M. N.,
261 Potter, J., 486, 487 Potvin, S., 221 Poulin-Dubois, D., 423 Poulton,
R., 28, 84 Poundstone, W., 536 Povinelli, D. J., 196 Powell, K. E., 668
Prabhu, S., 280 Pradham, A. K., 444 Prah, P., 58 Pramstaller, P. P., 202
Prasad, S., 212, 542, 621 Prata, D. P., 83 Pratt, C., 304 Pratt, L. A.,
598f, 625 Premack, D., 296 Preston, S. D., 640

N-16

Preussner, J., 217 Prevot, S., 415 Prewett, J., 251 Price, C. S., 559f
Priebe, S., 605 Prinzie, P., 469 Prior, H., 196 Prittie, B. A., 270
Prnewswire, 402 Probert, T., 648 Probst, F., 649 Prochaska, J. J., 664
Proenca, R., 256 Proffitt, D. R., 577 Pruden, S. M., 391 Przybylski, A.
K., 500 Psotka, J., 344 Pugh, K. R., 389, 390 Purdie-Vaughns, V. J., 518
Putnam, K. M., 540, 586 Puts, D. A., 262 Putz, P., 203, 226 Pyle, G. F.,
105 Pyle, N., 335 Pylkova, L. V., 203 Pyne, J. M., 630 Pyszczynski, T.,
489

Q

Qi, W., 583 Qin, H., 657 Qin, L., 573 Qiu, D.-L., 349 Qualter, P., 189
Quan, H., 395 Quattrone, D., 566, 566f Quero, S., 630 Quigley, H., 566,
566f Quigley, K.S., 130 Qunaibi, M., 246

R

Raaijmakers, J. G. W., 319 Raaijmakers, Q. A. W., 525 Rabinowitz, D.,
257 Rabung, S., 610 Racine, N., 402, 418, 644 Radant, A. D., 563
Rademaker, A. R., 476 Rae, D. S., 565 Raggatt, P., 419 Rahm, B., 348
Rahman, Q., 266 Rahn, R., 35 Raichle, M. E., 93, 198 Raine, A., 122, 586
Rajendran, K., 644 Rakic, P., 411 Raleigh, M. J., 540 Ramachandran, V.
S., 180 Raman, R., 564 Ramanathan, L., 209 Ramiao, F., 222
Ramirez-Esparza, N., 388 Ramirez, J. M., 336

Ramirez, M., 659 Rammstedt, B., 470 Ramon y Cajal, S., 109 Ramos, R. L.,
109 Ramsawh, H. J., 645 Ramsden, C. E., 208 Ramsey, E., 555 Ramsey, I.
D., 262 Ramstad, E., 620, 622 Rancher, C., 541 Rand, K. L., 680 Randall,
K., 361 Rands, S. A., 472 Randunu, R. S., 665 Ranyard, R., 337 Rao, N.,
217 Rao, V., 123 Raoult, D., 259 Rapkin, A. J., 569 Rapoport, J., 581
Rapoport, J. L., 136, 440, 564f Rapoport, S. I., 208 Rapson, R. L., 144
Rasband, A., 607 Rasch, B., 206 Raschle, N. M., 390 Rasgon, N., 569
Rasmussen, B., 633 Rasmussen, T., 125 Rasoulpoor, S., 644
Ratanatharathorn, A., 583 Ratliff, K. A., 42 Rauch, S. L., 518, 581
Rauschecker, J., 391 Rauthmann, J. F., 471, 472, 588 Raver, J. L., 460
Rawlins, W. K., 453 Ray, J. V., 632 Raymond, P., 356 Raynor, R., 289
Raz, A., 224 Raz, N., 450 Raza, M. H., 35 Raznahan, A., 136 Read, J.,
615 Reagan, A., 648 Rebouta, P., 182 Reddy, L., 109 Redfield, A., 227
Redmond, J. C., 77 Redner, R., 220 Reefhuis, J., 391, 413 Reese, H. F.,
582 Regalado, J., 99 Regan, C., 628 Regier, D. A., 565, 578 Register, P.
A., 224 Reicher, S., 523 Reicher, S. D., 526 Reid, A., 397 Reif, A., 579
Reinberg, A., 200 Reinisch, J. M., 540f Reinkemeier,M., 348 Reis, H. T.,
500

Reisenzein, R., 238 Reiss, A. L., 198, 348, 557 Reiss, D., 196 Remez, R.
E., 177 Remington, A., 556 Rendell, L., 523 Rennicke, C. M., 567
Rensink, R. A., 169 Rentfrow, P. J., 486, 487 Rescorla, R., 284, 287
Resko, J. A., 267 Resnick, H., 584 Ressler, K. J., 87 Restak, R., 7
Reuter, M., 460 Reuveni, I., 583, 584 Reverby, S., 66 Reverger, R., 552
Reyes-Garcia, V., 501 Reyes, L. D., 35 Reyna, V. F., 339, 339f, 442
Rezai, A. R., 616 Reznick, J. S., 576 Rhodes, N., 513 Rhodewalt, F.,
486, 488 Riazuddin, S., 35 Riba, J., 219 Ribbers, G. M., 121 Richards,
S. H., 679 Richardson, J. A., 200, 387 Richardson, W. S., 601 Richert,
R. A., 402 Richie, B. F., 305 Richter, F., 623 Ricken, J., 202 Ridder,
E.M., 565 Rieger, M. A., 557 Riehle-Colarusso, T., 391, 413
Riesco-Matias, P., 617 Rieser-Danner, L. A., 532 Rietschel, M., 564
Rifas-Shiman, S. L., 444 Rijnbeek, B., 572 Rilling, J. K., 378, 537
Rips, L., 364, 365, 367 Rishworth, A., 341 Riskind, J. H., 577 Risley,
T. R., 388, 620 Ritchie, H., 539 Riva, G., 630 Rivas-Drake, 444 Rivera,
M., 580 Rivi, S. L., 633f Riviere, L. A., 583, 592 Rivkin, M. J., 411,
414 Rizzo, A., 630 Rizzo, A. S., 584 Rizzo, L. B., 567 Rizzolatti, G.,
124 Robb, M. B., 402 Robbins, I., 648 Robbins, T. W., 379 Robero, V.,
489 Roberson, D., 245 Roberts, B. W., 447, 465

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Roberts, D., 80 Roberts, G., 485f Roberts, J. A., 675 Roberts, M., 161
Roberts, N. P., 119 Robertson, L., 514 Robins, L. N., 578 Robins, R. W.,
447 Robinson, A., 38 Robinson, J. D., 213 Robinson, R., 244 Robinson,
S., 540 Rochat, P., 524 Roche, G., 383 Rockstroh, B., 181 Rod, N. H.,
651 Rodin, J., 656 Rodrigue, K. M., 450 Roe, C. A., 624 Roeder, K., 549
Roediger Lii, H. L., 341, 352 Roelofs, K., 119 Roenneberg, T., 202
Roepke, S., 447 Roepstorff, A., 225 Roesch, S. C., 508 Roese, N. J., 403
Roeser, R. W., 268, 269 Roest, A. M., 578 Roffwarg, H. P., 207f
Rogeberg, O., 93 Rogers-Ramachandran, D., 180 Rogers, C. R., 15, 16, 21,
466, 601, 610 Rogers, M., 679 Rogers, S. J., 177 Rogers, T. B., 354,
484, 484f Roggman, L. A., 532 Rohrer, D., 352 Rokeach, M., 680 Rolls, E.
T., 116, 185 Romanski, L. M. Ronald, A., 556 Ronnberg, J., 391
Ronningstam, E., 632 Roosevelt, E., 272 Root, J., 35 Roozendaal, B., 341
Roper, S. D., 184 Ropers, H., 84 Rorschach, H., 481 Rose Markus, H., 475
Rose, A., 481 Rose, D., 615 Rose, G., 649 Rose, J., 529, 530 Rose, J.
E., 290 Rose, M. W., 206 Roselli, C. E., 267 Roseman, L., 218 Rosen, H.
J., 492 Rosen, T. A., 181, 184 Rosenbaum, J. F., 576 Rosenbaum, R. S.,
347 Rosenberg, H. J., 448

Rosenberg, J., 99 Rosenberg, R., 620f Rosenblum, C. I., 256 Rosendal,
S., 620, 622 Rosenfield, D., 541 Rosenstein, D., 186 Rosenthal, D., 563
Rosenthal, I. A., 432 Rosenthal, R., 248 Roser, M., 539 Rosol, O., 555
Ross, D., 310, 311 Ross, D. C., 621 Ross, G. W., 220 Ross, L, 506 Ross,
M., 487 Ross, R., 389 Ross, S. A., 310, 311 Rossion, B., 336 Roth, G.,
93 Rothbart, M. K., 432, 433, 473, 475 Rothbaum, B. O., 584, 630
Rothschild, D., 514 Rotter, J. B., 472 Rousseau, J.-J., 14
Rovee-Collier, C., 24 Rowland, L. W., 224 Rozga, A., 177 Rozhdaraj, D.,
557 Rozin, P., 257f, 681 Rubin, M., 517, 522 Rubin, M. A., 212 Rubin, P.
E., 177 Rudner, M., 391 Rueda, M. R., 475 Ruf, M., 644 Ruff, C. C., 491
Ruggiero, A., 312 Ruggiero, A. M., 652 Ruiz, F. S., 206 Ruiz, M. H., 176
Rujescu, D., 564 Rule, N. O., 504, 504f Rullo, J., 626 Ruparel, K., 250
Rusbult, C. E., 532 Ruscio, A., 581 Rush, A., 626 Rush, B., 602 Rushton,
D. H., 262 Rushton, J. P., 539 Russell, D. W., 232, 502, 657 Russell, J.
A., 212, 240 Russell, K., 80 Russo, R., 352 Ruth,Babe, 128 Ryan, R. M.,
253, 267, 674 Rychlowska, M., 249, 249f Ryman, D., 200

S

Saarimaki, H., 245 Sabatini, R. M. E., 616 Sacco, D. F., 336

Sacco, K. A., 665 Sackeim, H. A., 615 Sackett, G. P., 246 Sadato, N.,
323 Sadeh, N., 648 Sagratti, S., 570 Sahakian, B. J., 581 Sahuque, L.
L., 290 Saiki, J., 169 Sainsbury, A. W., 262 Sainz, E., 35 Saito, S.,
185 Saitoh, O., 563 Sajatovic, M., 624 Sakaguchi, M., 206 Sakai, N., 185
Sakai, Y., 549, 556 Sakamoto, S., 552 Sakurai, T., 206, 256 Salanti, G.,
625 Salari, N., 644 Salat, D., 648 Salerno, S., 250 Sales, S. M., 527
Salgado, S., 244 Salovey, P., 108, 248, 395, 640, 641 Salsman, J. M.,
651 Salstein-Orda, N., 291 Salter, W., 393 Saltz, S. B., 413, 557
Sanchez-Roige, S., 475, 476 Sanchez-Zaballos, E., 617 Sanders, A., 571
Sanders, S. A., 540f Sandonmatsu, D. M., 488 Sandstrom, G., 314 Sanfey,
A. G., 378, 537 Sanford, A. P., 206 Sanghani, S., 578 Santosa, C. M.,
567 Sanz, C., 213 Sapolsky, R., 643, 648 Sarasso, S., 204 Sarnoff, I.,
268 Sartorius, N., 624 Satisabal, C. L., 451 Sattler, K. M., 299 Sauer,
S., 210 Saunders, D. T., 624 Saunders, E. F., 208 Savage-Rumbaugh, S.,
386 Savage, J., 563 Savin-Williams, R. C., 265 Savine, R., 206 Savitsky,
K., 485 Sayigh, L. S., 196, 386 Scarisbrick, P., 206 Scaroekku, S., 204
Schaadt, G., 390 Schabus, M., 204 Schachter, S., 236, 237, 238, 268,
500, 523 Schaefer, C., 645 Schaefer, H. S., 188 Schafe, G. E., 646
Schaller, M., 271f, 273, 274, 676

Schallmo, M.-P., 648 Schapiro, S. J., 421 Schartner, M. M., 218 Schauer,
E., 644 Scheepens, D. S., 571 Scheftner, W., 571 Scheiber, J., 349
Scheier, M. F., 491, 674 Schenck, C. H., 205 Scherer, K. R., 239
Scherrer, G., 182 Schiefele, U., 268, 269 Schieve, L. A., 48 Schifani,
C., 217 Schilling, E. A., 658 Schimmelmann, B. G., 210 Schindler, C. W.,
285 Schlechter, M., 436, 438 Schlenker, B. R., 508 Schmaal, I., 564
Schmahl, C., 187 Schmahl, D. P., 613 Schmeck, R. R., 469 Schmidt, F.,
469 Schmidt, J. E., 651 Schmitt, D. P., 534 Schmitt, E., 136 Schmitz,
A., 460 Schneier, F., 578 Schnitker, S.A., 680 Schnitzer, M. J., 182
Schober, J. M., 424 Schober, M. F., 534 Schoeller, D. A., 653, 653f
Schon, D., 240 Schonert-Reichl, K. A., 679 Schooler, C., 522 Schroeder,
S., 665 Schroeder, S. R., 401 Schroeder, U., 244 Schroeder, V., 561
Schuengel, C., 401 Schuerkens, A., 246 Schuhmacher, A., 564 Schuhmacher,
M. A., 184 Schulsinger, F., 563 Schulte-Ruther, M., 557 Schultz, D. H.,
93, 125 Schultz, S. J., 235 Schulz, M. S., 453 Schulze-Rauschenbach, S.,
564 Schumacher, M. A., 181 Schuman-Olivier, Z., 225 Schumann, C. M., 243
Schumm, L. P., 452 Schurz, G., 525 Schuster, M. A., 644, 657
Schvanevelt, R. W., 331, 331f Schwabe, L., 640 Schwartz, B., 299, 681
Schwartz, C. E., 576 Schwartz, C. R., 449 Schwartz, D., 644 Schwartz, J.
M., 597 Schwartz, S. T., 430 Schwarz, A., 196 NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-17

Schwarz, M., 278 Schweinsburg, A. D., 440 Schweinsburg, B. C., 440
Schweren, L. S., 560 Schwindt, W., 244 Schyns, P., 243f Scott, J. G.,
221, 380 Scott, V., 183 Scuderi, B., 670, 675 Scully, J. A., 644
Sczesny, S., 382 Searle, J., 196 Seckl, J., 644 Sedeno, L., 264, 544
Sedikides, C., 472 Seeley, W. W., 492, 567 Seelig, D., 250 Segal, N. L.,
81, 475, 476f, 510 Segal, Z. V., 627 Segerstrom, S. C., 640, 650, 651,
674 Seghier, M. L., 646 Seid, M., 682 Seifer, R., 202 Sejnowski, T. J.,
307 Seki, A., 323 Seksel, K., 581 Self, W.T., 509f Seligman, M. E. P.,
569, 571, 577, 658, 673, 678, 680 Sellers, R. M., 522 Selye, H., 642
Semin, G. R., 40 Seminowicz, D., 616 Semkovska, M., 607 Semmann, D., 537
Semple, B. D., 440 Sen, M. G., 423 Sengupta, S., 412 Senju, A., 556 Seo,
J. S., 573 Serati, M., 572 Serbin, L. A., 423 Sereno, M. I., 156
Serfass, D. G., 471 Seshadri, S., 451 Sesker, A. A., 496, 496f Sessa,
B., 219, 222 Setchell, J. M., 535 Seth, A. K., 218 Sexton, H. R., 300
Seyal, A., 665 Shadrin, A., 563 Shadrina, M., 572 Shaffer, T. W., 482
Shaffery, J. P., 207 Shafran, R., 578 Shainberg, L. W., 219f Shalev, A.
Y., 583 Shallice, T., 328 Shaman, P., 186 Shanker, S. G., 386 Shannon,
S., 454 Shao, X., 663 Shapiro, Francine, 119 Sharma, V., 430

N-18

Sharp, W., 560 Shaw, B., 626 Shaw, C. A., 549, 556 Shaw, K. A., 555,
556f Shaw, P., 397, 560 Shaw, P. J., 194, 195 Shaywitz, B. A., 389, 390
Shaywitz, S. E., 389, 390 Shckhar, A., 578 Shechterm, M., 209 Shedler,
J., 610 Sheeran, E., 17 Sheese, B. E., 475 Shekelle, P. G., 260 Sheldon,
S., 348 Shelley, G., 262 Shepard, R. N., 170 Sher, L., 540 Sherazy, M.
S., 208 Sheridan, S. M., 682 Sherif, C., 521, 521f Sherif, M., 521, 521f
Sherman-Slate, E., 583, 644 Sherman, D. K., 508 Sherman, R. A., 471, 472
Sherman, S., 349 Sherry, J. L., 280 Sherwood, C. C., 421 Shestakova, A.,
511 Shi, J., 571 Shi, Y., 664 Shields, M., 656 Shiffrin, R. M., 319,
321f Shimin, C., 507, 507f Shin, L. M., 518 Shin, W. G., 397 Shine, R.,
293 Shiner, R. L., 474 Shiota, M. N., 494, 495 Shipley, M., 649 Shlaer,
S., 158 Shoben, E. J., 364 Shoda, Y., 473 Shoham, V., 601, 602, 608
Shope, J. T., 444 Shryne, J. E., 266 Shu, L. L., 345 Shugarman, L. R.,
260 Sia, C. -L., 529 Sibinga, E. S., 657 Siegel, J. M., 207, 209 Siegel,
J. Z., 540 Siegel, S., 292 Siegle, G., 570 Sienaert, P., 615 Siever, L.
J., 653 Sifre, G., 378f Sigman, M., 177 Sigmon, D. R., 680 Silove, N.,
620 Silva, B. A., 242 Silveira, A., 209 Silver, D., 378f Silvia, P. J.,
513 Simeone, R., 391 Simeone, R. M., 413

Simion, F., 419f Simon, H. A., 19, 325, 403 Simon, T., 20, 392
Simons-Mortan, B. G., 444 Simons, D. J., 43 Simons, L. G., 436 Simons,
T., 524 Simonton, D. K., 401, 451 Simpkins, S., 268, 269 Simpson, D.,
108 Simpson, E. A., 434 Singer, J., 236, 237, 238 Singer, M. I., 541
Singer, T., 537 Singer, W., 562 Singh, Fauja, 451 Singh, R., 509f Singh,
S., 657 Sinha, Y., 620 Sinigaglia, C., 124 Sinnott-Armstrong, W., 123
Skakkebaek, N. E., 413 Skeide, M. A., 390 Skene, D. J., 200 Skewes, J.,
225 Skinner, B. F., 18--19, 21, 295, 295f, 296, 300, 305, 307, 308, 313,
465 Sklar, P., 83, 567 Skodol, A. E., 587 Skuse, D. H., 473 Slattery,
J., 130 Slish, M. L., 674 Sloan, L. R., 489 Slobodchikoff, C. N., 386
Slobodskoj-Plusnin, J. Y., 203 Slomaski, A., 224 Slominsky, P. A., 572
Slotema, C. W., 616 Slovak, K., 541 Slovic, P., 375 Smailes, D., 562
Small, C. J., 261 Smart, L., 490 Smart, S. A., 486 Smeland, O. B., 563
Smidts, A., 361 Smith, A. M., 353, 353f, 586 Smith, A. P., 651 Smith,
B., 80 Smith, D., 455, 455f Smith, E. E., 54, 330, 364, 365 Smith, G.,
624 Smith, H. L., 676f Smith, M., 529 Smith, P., 392 Smith, P. B., 488
Smith, P. T., 109 Smith, T., 619 Smith, T. B., 500 Smith, T. W., 675
Smith, V., 545 Smolkowski, K., 664 Smoller, J. W., 576 Smothers, B. A.,
671 Smyer, M. A., 452

Sneed, J. R., 451 Sneider, H., 571 Snider, A. G., 675 Snidman, N., 576
Snieder, H., 99 Snyder, A., Z., 198 Snyder, C. R., 680 Soenens, B., 436,
437, 437f Sohn, W. S., 397 Soler, J., 219 Solomon, B. C., 474 Solomon,
J., 434 Solomon, S., 53, 489 Solomon, Z., 645 Solomonova, E., 208
Sommer, I. E., 616, 617 Song, B., 241 Song, J., 181, 624 Song, M., 559
Sonksen, P., 206 Sonnega, A., 583, 644 Soon, C. S., 193 Sorell, G. T.,
444 Soria, V., 572 Sottile, V., 42 South, S., 476 Southgate, V., 556
Southwick, S. M., 187, 643f, 645, 656 Soutschek, A., 491 Sowell, E. R.,
50, 421 Sowislo, J. F., 486 Spain, S. M., 645 Sparks, C., 99 Spearman,
C. E., 64, 392, 466 Spears, R., 528 Spector, T. D., 99, 259 Spelke, E.
S., 501 Spence, M. J., 412 Spence, S. A., 493 Spencer, S. J., 519
Sperling, G., 321, 322f Sperry, R. W., 126 Spiegel, D., 224, 522
Spieker, L. E., 651 Spillmann, L., 149 Spinath, F. M., 82 Spineli, L.,
623 Spinhoven, P., 578, 630 Spira, J. L., 630 Spoormaker, V. I., 208
Sprang, K. R., 630 Sprecher, S., 500 Sprengnether, M., 464 Spring, B.,
573 Springer, S. P., 126 Squire, L. R., 330, 349 Srinivasan, S., 206
Srivastava, G., 198 St-Onge, M. -P., 209 Stader, S. R., 652 Stafford,
L., 533 Stahl, R., 244 Stallone, S., 132 Stamm, K., 28, 29, 603f

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Stams, G. J. J. M., 469 Stangl, D., 648 Stanley, D. A., 432 Stanley, S.
A., 261 Stanovich, K. E., 442 Stanton, C. A., 220 Stark, C. E. L., 330
Starkman, M. N., 648 Stathi, A., 626 Stavraki, M., 509 Steblay, N. M.,
341 Steele, C. M., 518, 520f Steele, V. R., 123 Steene-Johannessen, J.,
668 Steer, C., 621 Stefanucci, J. K., 577 Stegge, H., 590, 592 Steiger,
A., 208 Steiger, B., 225 Steigerwald, S., 217 Stein-Behrens, B., 647
Stein, D., 581 Stein, E. R., 668 Stein, J., 390 Stein, L. H., 644, 657
Stein, M. B., 645 Steinberg, L., 63, 444, 445 Steiropoulos, P., 220
Stellflug, J. N., 267 Stelzer, J., 227 Stemer, A. B., 564 Stephan, C.W.,
518 Stephan, W. S., 518 Stephan, Y., 496, 496f Stephenson, D, 500
Stepner, M., 670, 675 Sternberg, R. J., 393, 398, 533 Sternberg, S., 335
Sternglanz, R. W., 250 Sterzer, P., 540 Stevens, C., 574 Stevens, J. S.,
648 Stevens, M., 384 Stevens, M. C., 378 Stevens, P., 385f Stevens, S.
S., 176 Stevenson, J., 561 Steyn, P., 514 Stickgold, R., 206, 354
Stillwell, D. J., 478 Stimpson, C. D., 421 Stob, N. R., 259 Stocker, C.
M., 453 Stoet, G., 519 Stojanovic, M., 180 Stokes, M., 648 Stoller, R.
J., 265 Stomp, W., 48 Stoodley, C., 557 Storeba, O. J., 620 Storebo, O.
J., 622 Stormshak, F., 267 Story, M., 444 Strack, F., 43

Strait, D. L., 176 Strand, S., 392 Strasburger, V. C., 541 Straube, T.,
244 Straus, S. E., 601 Strauss, G. P., 599f Strebe, S., 388 Strecher, V.
J., 665 Strickhouser, J. E., 496, 496f Strickland, B. R., 568 Strombach,
T., 640 Strong, C. M., 567 Stroop, J. R., 224 Strosser, G. L., 336
Stubberup,M., 225 Stucke, T. S., 267 Stucki, S., 649 Studley, J., 657
Studley, R., 57 Stuss, D. T., 348 Su, S. E., 200 Suarez, A., 632 Suarez,
S. D., 196 Sucha, E., 414, 557 Sudano, I., 651 Sue, S., 27 Suffee, C.,
415 Sugarman, L. R., 260 Sugden, K., 75, 459 Suh, C. K., 200 Suh, M.,
676f Sullivan, P. E., 83 Sullivan, R. M., 657 Sulmont-Rosse, C., 187
Summerville, A., 403 Sumner, F. C., 14, 21 Sung, H.-Y., 664 Sunstein, C.
R., 404 Suomi, S. J., 432, 433, 434, 652 Super, C. M., 422, 423 Surian,
L., 430 Susswein, A. J., 278 Sutcliffe, J. G., 256 Sutherland, A., 485
Sutherland, I., 665 Sutherland, M. T., 391 Sutton, J., 576 Sutton, R.
M., 508 Suttorp, M., 260 Suzuki, M., 563 Svanum, S., 485 Svenningsson,
P., 573 Swaab, D. F., 263 Swaminathan, R., 140 Swanson, C., 534 Swanson,
J. M., 217 Swanson, K., 534 Swap, W. C., 531 Sweeney, M., 293 Swenson,
M., 349 Swerdfeger, A. L., 567 Swerdlow, N. R., 349, 352 Syvalahti, E.
K. G., 564 Szakacs, A., 209

Szalavitz, M., 82 Szeszko, P. R., 583 Szuba, M. P., 597 Szucko, J. J.,
250 Szymanski, L., 400

T

T. van Erp, 397 Taft, C. T., 592 Tagliabracci, A., 460 Tagliazucchi, E.,
213 Tagore, A., 217 Tague, C., 657 Taheri, S., 209, 210 Tajfel, H., 517
Takahashi, J. S., 202 Takahashi, K., 653 Takahashi, T., 563 Takano, Y.,
494 Takooshian, H., 6 Talati, Z., 604 Talhelm, T., 507, 507f Tallal, P.,
389 Tam, K.-P., 508 Tambor, E. S., 489 Tamborini, R., 280 Tamis-LeMonda,
C. S., 422 Tamminga, C. A., 623 Tamnes, C. K., 440 Tan, B. C. Y., 529
Tan, H., 378 Tanabe, K., 206 Tanaka, K., 200 Tanaki, H., 256 Tang, J.,
309 Tang, S. H., 200 Tang, Y., 118 Tang, Y.-Y., 225, 657 Tantan, C., 58
Tapert, S. F., 440 Tapias, M. P., 493 Tarbox, J., 620 Tarumi, S., 578
Tasic, B., 90 Task Force on Sudden Infant Death Syndrome, 210, 354
Tassinary, L. G., 291 Taub, E., 181 Tavanti, M., 583 Taylor, D. A., 224,
533 Taylor, H. L., 272 Taylor, J. L., 448 Taylor, K., 419 Taylor, L.,
251 Taylor, L. E., 558, 567 Taylor, M. J., 560 Taylor, P., 450 Taylor,
P. J., 543 Taylor, R. S., 679 Taylor, S. E., 649 Taylor, S. F., 244, 486
Taylor, T. J., 386 Team, B., 168 Teasdale, J. D., 571, 627 Teicher, M.
H., 653

Teitelbaum, P., 257, 257f Tejada-Vera, B., 670 Telis, N., 90 Tellegen,
A., 81, 475, 476f, 510, 659, 674 Temple, J. L., 218, 220 ten Duis,
H.-J., 48 Terdal, S. K., 489 Terman, L., 392, 394, 401 Termine, A., 665
Terracciano, A., 496, 496f Terranova, M. C., 250 Terry, D. J., 658
Tetlock, P. E., 231, 509f Thacher, P. V., 204 Thalji, L., 583
Thannickal, T. C., 209 Tharp, G., 262 Thase, M. E., 626 Thelen, S. M.,
581 Theodorakis, C., 626 Theodorou, M., 361 Therien, P., 627 Theusch,
E., 177 Thiagalingam, S., 86 Thierry, B., 419 Thisted, R. A., 501, 571,
668, 677 Thomaes, S., 297, 590 Thomas, A., 432f Thomas, A. K., 352, 353f
Thomas, J. L., 267, 500, 583, 592, 645, 657 Thomas, L. A., 440 Thomas,
M. M., 645 Thomas, P., 562 Thompson-Coon, J., 679 Thompson, L., 556
Thompson, M. A., 56, 222 Thompson, P. M., 397, 564f Thompson, W. K., 391
Thomson, D. M., 337 Thorndike, E. L., 17, 18, 20, 295, 296 Thorne, A.,
489 Thornton, Hannah, 314 Thornton, L. C., 632 Thorpe, L. E., 583
Thouin-Savard, M. I., 227 Thunberg, G., 429 Thuret, S., 625, 648
Thurman, A. J., 401 Thyer, B. A., 601 Tian, Y., 556 Tiberio, S. S., 657
Tice, D. M., 267 Tickell, A., 627 Tien, A. Y., 562 Tilan, J. U., 653
Tildesley, E. A., 436, 437, 437f Tilling, K., 455, 455f Timpson, N. J.,
455, 455f Tinbergen, N., 279 Tirone, F., 625 Tishkoff, S., 80 Titchener,
E., 12 Titone, D., 562 NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-19

Tobler, P. N., 491 Todd, J. F., 261 Todd, P. M., 99 Todorov, 501
Todorov, A. T., 501 Todorova, R., 354 Toga, A. W., 122 Tolman, E. C.,
305 Tomasello, M., 431 Tominaga, M., 181, 184 Tomlinson, G., 209 Tomova,
L., 640 Tonomi, G., 207 Tononi, G., 195 Tooby, J., 95, 319 Tootell, R.
B. H., 156 Toplak, M. E., 442 Topolinski, S., 489f Toppino, T. C., 207
Torgersem. S., 587 Torgerson, C. M., 122 Toro, J. M., 386 Torres, F.,
181, 580 Torrey, E. F., 563 Tosi, H., 644 Tough, S., 402, 418 Touitou,
D., 200 Touitou, Y., 200 Trafton, J., 184 Tran, Y., 35 Tranel, D., 242,
243f, 395, 586 Travis, F. T., 225 Traynor, B. J., 367 Treanor, J. J.,
649 Treasure, J., 261 Treffert, D. A., 393 Trestman, R., 653 Treynor,
W., 370 Trimble, J. E., 27 Triplett, N., 307, 527 Tripoli, G., 566, 566f
Trivers, R., 97, 538 Trockel, M. T., 48 Trubnick, L., 209 Truglia, I.,
204 Truitt, W., 578 Trumbetta, S., 447 Trut, L., 477f Tsang, J.-A., 675
Tschanz, B., 488 Tseng, H., -H., 217 Tsujimura, S, -i., 159 Tubman, H.,
210 Tubman, M., 209 Tucker, J. A., 668 Tufik, S., 206 Tulving, E., 325,
326, 326f, 329, 337, 344, 348 Tung, J. Y., 475, 475f Tunney, R. J., 99
Turati, C., 419f Turchi, C., 460 Turing, A., 197 Turkheimer, E., 399
Turnbaugh, P. J., 259

N-20

Turnbull, H. W., 41 Turner, C. E., 184 Turner, J., 517 Turner, N., 670,
675 Turner, R. B., 649 Turton, R., 261, 391 Tversky, A., 372, 373, 376,
376f Twenge, J. M., 267, 270, 447, 447f, 552, 589, 676 Tyler, V., 49
Tyrrell, D. A., 651 Tyszka, J. M., 118f Tzischinsky, O., 202

U

Uchida, S., 206 Uchiyama, H., 323 Uckert, K., 444 Uecker, J. E., 454
Ueda, Y., 169 Uhrenfeldt, L., 604 Ullman, L., 612 Umberson, D., 267
Umilta, C., 419f Uncapher, H., 452 Underwood, B. J., 344 Undurraga, E.,
501 Ungerleider, L. G., 347, 367 Urland, G. R., 517 Ursano, R. J., 645
Ustun, T. B., 561, 568, 583

V

V. P. Poutanen, M., 397 Vaez-Azizi, L. M., 93 Vago, D. R., 225 Vaidya,
J., 244 Vail-Smith, K., 671 Vaillant, G. E., 451, 668 Vaisi-Raygani, A.,
644 Vaitl, D., 203, 226, 227 Vaivre-Douret, L., 126 Valdovinos, M. G.,
401 Valenstein, E. S., 616 Valenstein, M., 624 Valentin, D., 187
Valentine, J. D., 592 Valero, R., 259 Vali, M., 217 Vallender, E. J., 93
van Balkom, A. J., 578 Van Beek, M., 225 Van Cauter, E., 206, 653 van
den Berg, H., 510 Van Den Driessche, G., 378f Van der Does, W., 86 van
der Maas, H. L., 510 van der Mei, W. F., 583 Van der Ploeg, L. H. T.,
256 van der Velde, E. A., 263 van der Vyver, J. M., 245 van Dongen, J.
D. M., 632 van Dyck, R., 578 Van Dyne, L., 489 Van Erp, T. G., 564

van Gerven, J. M. A., 572 van Gerwen, L. J., 630 Van Gilder, J., 391 Van
Haren et al, 566 Van Haren, N. E., 217, 566 van Harreveld, F., 510 Van
Horn, J. D., 122, 203 Van Kempen, G. M. J., 263 Van Knippenberg, D., 513
Van Lange, P. A. M., 476 van Londen, L., 263 van Lutterveld, R., 617 van
Oost, b., 84 van Rijn, S., 418 Van Rooji, S. J. H., 583, 583f, 648 van
Rossum, E. F., 644 van Waarde, J. A., 571 van Wingen, G. A., 571 van
Wingerden, M., 640 Vandermeer, B., 209 Vandesande, 401 Vanhove, A. J.,
680 VanRullen, R., 109 Vansteenwegen, D., 576 Varelas, P. N., 213
Vargha-Khadem, F., 388 Vasconcelos-Moreno, M. P., 567 Vasey, P. L., 265,
265f, 266 Vassos, E., 83, 565 Vater, A., 447 Vauloup-Fellous, C., 415
Vega, M. L., 413, 557 Vehorn, A. C., 448 Velasco-Ramos, M., 200
Velickovic, K., 42 Verdejo-Garcia, A., 215 Vermetten, E., 187, 583
Vernon, P. A., 475 Vernuccio, F., 250 Veroff, J., 679 Verweij, K. J.,
265, 566 Vescio, T. K., 522 Vestergaard-Poulsen, P., 225 Vianello, M.,
42 Vidal, C., 564f Videsott, G., 390 Vignoles, V. L., 488 Vijayan, S.,
205 Vilain, E., 265, 265f, 266 Villa-Komaroff, L., 411 Vincent, G. M.,
123 Vincent, J., 524, 525f Virues-Ortega, J., 621f Visalberghi, E., 312
Vivanti, A.J., 415 Viviano, J. D., 560 Vlahov, D., 584 Vogel, C. I. G.,
210 Vogel, J. P., 412 Vogel, P. J., 125 Vohs, K. D., 490, 679 Voineagu,
I., 556 Volckmar, A.-L., 262 Volk, D. W., 217 Volkow, N. D., 217, 560,
621 Volpe, J. J., 411

von Helmholtz, H., 8--9, 10, 11, 14 von Ranson, K. M., 262 Voon, V., 616
Voracek, M., 399f Vorstman, J. A., 556 Voss, H., 442 Vosshall, L. B.,
185 Votaw, V. R., 668 Vouga, M., 414 Vowels, L. M., 262, 264 Vrangalova,
Z., 265 Vries, S. K., 261 Vrij, A., 251 Vu, N. L., 541 Vuilleumier, P.,
245 Vygotsky, L. S., 429 Vythilingam, M., 583, 584

W

Wadee, A. A., 650 Wagenmakers, E.-J., 43 Wager, T., 243, 244 Wagner, A.
D. Wagner, A. R., 287 Wagner, D. D., 491 Wagner, D. R., 200 Wagner, K.
D., 618 Wahl, J. M., 613 Wainer, H., 63 Waite, L., 677 Waite, L. J., 675
Wakita, M., 185 Waldinger, R. J., 453 Waldron, M., 399 Waldrop, P. B.,
302 Walker, A., 416 Walker, E. F., 565 Walker, J. B., 250 Walker, M.,
414, 557 Walker, M. P., 206 Walker, M. R., 489 Walker, N., 224 Wall, P.
D., 182 Wall, S., 434 Wall, T. L., 667 Wallace, G. L., 393 Wallen, K.,
144, 262 Waller, A., 488 Wallston, K., 472 Wallstrom, A., 514 Walster,
E., 513, 532 Walters, E. E., 551, 567, 576, 578, 579, 580 Walters, S.,
465 Waltoft, B. L., 260 Walton, E., 564 Walton, G. M., 655, 655f Wan, C.
R., 565 Wang, A., 250 Wang, C. X., 178 Wang, G., 413, 558, 560 Wang,
G.-J., 560, 621 Wang, H., 262 Wang, H. H., 213

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Wang, J., 228, 354, 549, 616 Wang, M. M., 349 Wang, P. W., 567 Wang,
P.O.., 389 Wang, Q., 408 Wang, R., 487, 501 Wang, S., 677, 678f Wang,
T., 227 Wang, X., 349, 413, 556, 558, 560 Wang, Y., 475, 475f Wanless,
A., 545 Ward, B. W., 260, 264, 265 Ward, D., 36 Ward, M., 414 Warfield,
S. K., 414 Wargo, E. M., 217 Warner-Schmidt, J., 573 Warner, T. D., 50
Warner, V., 576 Warren, Z. E., 448 Warrington, E. K., 328 Wartella, E.,
402 Washburn, A. L., 254, 255 Wasserman, R. C., 559 Watable, M., 504
Waterhouse, J., 200 Waters, E., 434 Waters, F., 564 Watkins, C. E., 482
Watkins, E., 570, 570f, 578 Watkins, G. L., 563 Watkins, L. E., 630
Watson, B., 560 Watson, D., 469, 675 Watson, J. B., 16--17, 20, 289
Watson, P., 347 Watson, S. J., 644 Watts, T. W., 395 Wayne, D., 42
Weaver, J., 225, 362 Webb, J. K., 293 Weber, E., 451 Weber, E. U., 440,
441f Weber, R., 280 Weber, W., 620 Webster, M. A., 149 Wechsler, D., 394
Wedekind, C., 101, 499 Wedrow, R., 265 Weekes, B. S., 390 Wegner, D. M.,
203, 356, 491 Wehby, G. L., 68 Wehrle, R., 208 Wei, J., 573 Wei, K. -K.,
529 Weideman, R., 633 Weige, J. A., 567 Weinberger, D. R., 563
Weinbruch, C., 181 Weindl, A., 244 Weiner, I. B., 482 Weingartner, H.,
337 Weinstein, A. M., 218 Weinstein, N., 500 Weinstock, M., 644

Weintraub, E. S., 559f Weir, D. R., 451 Weisberg, P., 302 Weisenbach, S.
L., 648 Weiser, E. B., 589 Weisleder, A., 388 Weiss, A., 476 Weiss, S.
J., 285 Weiss, S. R. B., 217 Weissman, M., 571, 576 Weisz, R., 236
Weitlauf, A. S., 448 Welge, J. A., 615 Welling, L. L. M., 262 Wellings,
K., 58 Wells, A., 580 Wells, G. L., 341 Wells, R. S., 196, 386 Welsh, J.
P., 115 Welsh, R. C., 665 Wender, P. H., 563 Wenhart, T., 177, 556
Werge, T., 83 Werner, J. S., 149 Wernicke, C., 385 Werth, U., 246
Wertheimer, M., 12, 20 West, R. F., 442 Westen, D., 534 Westphal, J. A.,
218, 220 Westwood, A. J., 209 Wetzel, E., 447 Wetzel, W., 349 Whalen,
N., 341 Whalen, P. J., 518 Wheatley, J. R., 262 Wheeler, D., 525f
Whitbourne, S. K., 451 White, B. J., 521, 521f White, G. L., 533 White,
H. R., 675 White, S., 556 White, W., 521f Whitehead, V., 390 Whiting, D.
M., 242 Whitman, C., 542 Whitmill, J., 663, 664, 664f Whitton, S. W.,
615 Whorf, B. L., 382, 383 Wickings, E. J., 535 Wickramaratne, P., 576
Widdowson, P. S., 256 Widmeyer, W. N., 504 Widom, C, 586 Wiech, K., 182
Wiederhold, B., 630 Wiederhold, M., 630 Wiegant, V. M., 263 Wielgosz,
J., 225 Wiersema, J. R., 181 Wiesel, T. N., 159 Wigfield, A., 268, 269
Wiggins, G., 176 Wiggs, C. L., 347, 367 Wijdicks, E. E. M., 213 Wik, G.,
577f

Wilbanks, C. A., 293 Wilcox, W. B., 676 Wilensky, A. E., 646 Wilent, W.
B., 242 Wilfley, D. E., 261 Wilhelm, S., 582 Wilk, J. E., 583, 592
Wilke, A., 99, 371 Wilke, A. E., 620 Wilke, H., 513 Wilkinson, G. S.,
538 Willemsen, G., 101, 268 Willer, R., 545 Williams, A., 538 Williams,
B., 75, 459 Williams, D. L., 257 Williams, G., 256 Williams, H., 329,
330 Williams, J. M., 627 Williams, K., 560, 620 Williams, K. D., 500,
528 Williams, K. M., 588 Williams, S., 298, 312, 354 Williams, S. C.,
200 Williams, Ted, 128 Williamson, A., 450 Williamson, A. M., 206
Williamson, R. A., 432 Willie, J. T., 340 Willingham, B., 246 Willis, J.
501 Wilson, A. A., 217 Wilson, A. D., 668 Wilson, A. E., 487 Wilson, S.,
256 Wilson, S. G., 259 Wilson, T. D., 43 Wimmer, H., 431 Winden, K., 77
Windischberger, C., 540, 640 Wingate, L. R., 674 Winkelman, M., 227
Winkler, A. D., 149 Winocur, G., 347 Winston, F. K., 583, 644 Winston,
J. S., 537 Winzeler, S., 489f Wirz-Justice, A., 201 Wisse, B. E., 257
Witkiewitz, K., 668 Witmans, M., 209 Wittchen, H.-U., 580 Wittgenstein,
L., 364 Wixted, J. T., 341 Wobber, V., 183 Wohlert, M., 417 Wolf, E. J.,
648 Wolf, M. M., 620 Wolfson, A. R., 202 Wolfson, C., 390 Woll, B., 391
Wolpe, J., 290, 630 Wolraich, M. L., 561 Wong, P. O., 217 Wong, S. H.,
574 Wood, A. M., 472

Wood, E. K., 432 Wood, J. M., 482 Wood, W., 513 Woodruff, G., 431
Woods,J., 669 Woodward, J. T., 680 Wooleey, C., 671 Woolfolk, R. L.,
630, 632 Woolley, A. W., 398, 399f Wootton, B. M., 378 Worhunsky, P. D.,
225 Worth, K., 264 Wortham, J. M., 455 Wrangham, R., 183 Wright, C.,
553, 553f Wright, E. W., 193 Wright, G. A., 350 Wright, I. M., 414
Wright, R. J., 651 Wright, T., 388 Wrobleski, K., 452 Wrobleski, K. K.,
680 Wrzesniewski, A., 681 Wu, D., 583 Wu, D. A., 178 Wu, P.-L., 446 Wu,
Y. H., 200 Wundt, W., 10--11, 12, 14, 15, 20, 163 Wurtman, R. J. Wurtz,
R. H., 156 Wyatt, G., 27 Wykes, T., 615 Wylie, B. J., 414

X

Xie, W., 355 Xiong, T., 620 Xu, D., 387 Xu, J., 518f, 670

Y

Yagi, K., 53 Yakeley, J., 590 Yalom, I. D., 606 Yamagata, S., 479
Yamaguchi, S., 460 Yamakawa, M., 159 Yan, Z., 573 Yanagisawa, M., 200
Yang, F., 487 Yang, G., 207 Yang, L. L., 200 Yang, M. -L., 403 Yap, A.
J., 235 Yasui, M., 574 Yeargin-Allsopp, M., 48 Yee, N., 304 Yehuda, R.,
583, 644 Yela-Bernabe, J. R., 617 Yeoh, S. L., 414 Yerkes, R. M., 240,
528 Yoerger, M., 554 Yolken, R. H., 414 Yonas, A., 167 NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

N-21

Yoo, J. H., 401 Yoo, S. H., 247f, 350 Yoon, Y. B., 397 Yoshikawa, S.,
504 Yost, J., 99 Yotsutsuji, T., 563 Young, A. H., 648 Young, G. S., 177
Young, P. C., 224 Young, R., 556, 557f Young, R. L., 556 Young, S. G.,
336, 531 Young, T., 202 Youngman, J. E., 482 Youngstrom, E. A., 556
Youyou, W., 478 Yu, H., 549 Yudell, M., 80 Yurgelun-Todd, D., 440

N-22

Yuuki, N., 653 Yuwiler, A., 540

Z

Zager, A., 206 Zajonc, R. B., 307, 527, 531, 531f Zamberlan, F., 213
Zanarini, M. C., 587 Zanello, S., 615 Zapala, M. A., 77 Zaval, L., 451
Zavalloni, M., 529, 529f Zebrowitz, L. A., 501 Zeelenberg, M., 375 Zeki,
S., 67, 116 Zelazo, P. R., 245, 416 Zerbo, S., 250 ZerJal et al, 98

Zerjal, T., 98 Zhang, G., 494, 495, 675 Zhang, J., 107f Zhang, M, -D.,
181 Zhang, T. Y., 469 Zhang, W., 355 Zhang, X., 507, 507f Zhang, Y.,
256, 558 Zhang, Z.-X., 508 Zhao, L., 397 Zhou, J., 644, 657 Zhou, J.-R.,
86 Zhou, M., 573 Zhu, Y., 107f Ziebell, S. Zielaskowski, K., 520
Ziemba-Davis, M., 540, 540f Zietsch, B. P., 265 Zigler, E., 400

Zillmann, D., 362 Zimbardo, P., 523 Zimbardo, P. G., 237, 268, 528, 537
Zimmer, C., 89 Zimmerman, F. J., 387 Zoghbi, H. Y., 549, 556 Zoladz, P.
R., 340 Zubin, J., 573 Zugaro, M., 354 Zukowska, Z., 653 Zullig, K. J.,
260 Zunszain, P. A., 625 Zupan, V., 415 Zuscho, H., 183 Zuschrattera,
W., 349 Zwiers, M. P., 560 Zylka, M. J., 557

NAME INDEX

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Subject Index/Glossary Note: Page numbers with f and t indicate figures
and tables, respectively. Page numbers following bold terms indicate
definitions.

A

ABA. See also applied behavior analysis (ABA); also known as behavior
modification. Abnormal psychology, 551. The study of psychological
disorders. Absence seizures, 214 Absolute threshold, 153. The smallest
amount of stimulus that can be detected. measuring perception and, 153,
154f Accommodation, 427. The incorporation of new learning into an
existing schema that requires revision of the schema. Acetylcholine
(ACh), 143, 349, 350f Achievement motivation, 268. A desire to excel or
outperform others, 269--270 Acoustic codes, 320 Acquisition, 283. The
development of a learned response, 283--284, 283f Action potential, 137.
The electrical signal arising in a neuron's axon, 137, 139, 139f
Activation-synthesis theory, 208--209 Actor-observer bias, 506.
Emphasizing dispositional attributions to explain the behavior of others
while emphasizing situational attributions to explain our own behavior,
508 Adaptation, 91. A change because of natural selection, 91--92, 94
Adderall, 222. See also amphetamine salts. Addiction, 215. Brain
networks for, 216f conditioning and, 290--291 consequences of, 215
decision-making and, 378--379 tolerance and, 215 withdrawal and, 215
ADHD. See Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)

Adolescence, 438. A period of development beginning at puberty and
ending at young adulthood. decision-making and, 379, 379f eating
disorders and, 261 physical development in, 439--440 self-injury, 296
Adolescents alcohol consumption, 666 cognitive development, 442--443
highlight of, 456 identity formation, 443--444 ethnic, 444--445, 445f
family and, 444--445, 445f influences on, 445 peer groups and, 444--445
psychosocial stages, 443, 444, 444t moral reasoning, 442--443 physical
development in, 439--442 brain growth, 439--441, 441f puberty and, 439,
439f sex and gender development, 439 risk-taking, 440f--441f
schizophrenia and, 564 smoking and, 664 social and emotional
development, 443--445 Adoption studies, 81 Adrenal glands, 132
Adulthood. See Late adulthood; Midlife; Young adulthood Adverse
Childhood Experiences (ACE) survey, 671f Affect heuristic, 374. A rule
of thumb in which we choose between alternatives based on emotional or
"gut" reactions to stimuli. Affiliation, 267. Being associated with
other people. motivation and, 267--268 stress and, 268 Aggression, 539.
The conscious intent to harm another. biological psychology of, 539--541
catharsis theories of, 543 defensive, 539 imitation and, 311--312
instrumental, 539 learning and, 541 maternal, 539 media and, 541
observational learning and, 311--312 passive, 539

prenatal exposure to testosterone and, 540, 540f preventing, 541, 543
relational, 539 Agoraphobia, 579. Unrealistic fear of open spaces, being
outside the home alone, or being in a crowd. Agouti gene, 72, 83, 86
Agreeableness, 469. A Big Five personality trait characterized by
trustworthiness, altruism, trust, compliance, modesty, and tender
mindedness, 467, 468, 472, 495 Alarm reaction, 643. The first stage of
the general adaptation syndrome (GAS), characterized by sympathetic
arousal and mental clarity, 642 Alcohol, 222--223 Alcohol consumption
abuse of, 666--667 adolescent, 666 aggression and, 540 dependence on,
666--667 health and, 666--668, 667f pregnancy and, 414, 415t, 416f
social factors in, 667 suicide and, 540 treatment for, 668 Algorithm,
371. A precise, stepby-step set of rules that will reliably generate a
solution to a problem. Alien hand syndrome, 121 Allele, 74. One of
several versions of a gene, as in having an A, B, or O blood type
allele, 73f for blond hair, 89--90, 90f bullying and, 75, 76f, 459
dominant, 74, 74f, 76f eye color and, 82, 82f in genetics, 74--76
hemophilia, 77, 77f heterozygous, 74, 74f homozygous, 74, 74f long (L)
SERT, 459--460 recessive, 74, 74f, 77 short (S) SERT, 459--460 Allport,
Gordon, 21f Alpha coma, 212 Alpha waves, 202. A waveform of 9 to 12
cycles per second recorded by electroencephalogram that usually
indicates relaxed waking, 202--203

AlphaGo program, 377, 378f Altered consciousness dancing and, 227
drumming and, 227 environmental conditions and, 225--226 hallucinogens
and, 219 hypnosis and, 224--225 meditation and, 225, 226f psychoactive
drugs and, 216--218, 219f, 220--223 raves and, 227 spinning and,
225--226 trance states and, 226 vision quests and, 225 Altruism, 96.
Behavior on behalf of another that fails to benefit or harms the
individual performing it, 96--97 helping and, 537--539 heroism and,
537--538 psychological, 538 reciprocal, 97, 538 Alzheimer's disease
Acetylcholine (ACh) and, 143, 349 bilingualism and, 390--391 caffeine
and, 220 American Psychological Association (APA), 5 American Sign
Language (ASL), 178, 391 Ames room, 164, 165f Amphetamine salts
(Adderall), 222, 560, 620 Amphetamines, 221--222 Amygdala, 117. A
subcortical structure located in the temporal lobe believed to
participate in emotional processing. damage to, 117--118, 118f damage
to, results of, 242--243, 242f emotions and, 242--243 fear and, 646f
fear and aggression, 118 insula and, 242 stress and, 645--646
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 367 Anandamide, 218 Androgen
insensitivity syndrome (AIS), 417 Animal research attachment and, 434
Bisphenol A (BPA) study, 72 care and, 63 ethics and, 65--66 purpose and,
66 self-awareness and, 195--196

s-1 Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be
copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic
rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Animals collective intelligence, 196 imitation and, 312 instincts and,
279 language ability of, 386--387 reflexes and, 278 response to
environment, 278--279 vision and, 151f, 163f Anorexia nervosa, 260. An
eating disorder characterized by the maintenance of unusually low body
weight and a distorted body image. Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 117,
123, 581 Antidepressant medication, 625. A medication designed to
alleviate symptoms of depression, but often prescribed for other types
of conditions, 625f Antisocial personality disorder (ASPD), 583. A
disorder characterized by an unusual lack of remorse, empathy, or regard
for normal social rules and conventions. causes of, 586 diagnosis of,
586 emotions and, 586 orbitofrontal cortex and, 586 prefrontal cortex
and, 122 treatment for, 632 Anxiety disorder, 576. A disorder featuring
anxiety that is not proportional to a person's circumstances.
agoraphobia, 576, 578, 579 GABA and, 628 generalized, 580 genetics and,
576 panic disorder, 578, 579 race and ethnicity and, 574, 574f social
anxiety disorder, 577--578 specific phobias and, 576--577, 577f
treatment for, 578, 628--629, 628f, 636 Anxiety, during pandemic, 228
Anxious-ambivalent attachment, 434 Aphasia, 385. The loss of the ability
to speak or understand language, 391 Aplysia californica sea slug, 286
Applied behavior analysis (ABA); also known as behavior modification,
612--613 Appraisal, 239. The detection and assessment of stimuli that
are relevant to personal well-being. Approach and avoidance, 271
Aristotle, 8, 9 Arousal, 240f Artificial consciousness, 196--197
Artificial intelligence, 196--197 Artificial lighting, 200 Artificial
selection, 89

s-2

Artificiality in research, 52, 56 ASD. See Autism spectrum disorder
(ASD) ASPD. See Antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) Assimilation,
427. The incorporation of new learning into an existing schema without
the need to revise the schema. Association cortex, 120 Associative
learning, 280. The formation of associations, or connections, among
stimuli and behaviors. classical conditioning, 280 operant conditioning,
280 Astigmatism, 168, 168f Atkinson-Shiffrin Model of Memory, 321f
Attachment, 435. Emotional bond linking an infant to a parent or
caregiver, 434--436 anxious-ambivalent, 434--435 avoidant, 434--435
behavior, evolution of, 433 child development and, 433--436
disorganized, 434--435 ecological approaches to, 435 evolution of, 433
insecure, 434 parenting and, 434 rhesus monkeys and, 433 secure, 434
universal approaches to, 435 Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), 558. A disorder characterized by either unusual inattentiveness,
hyperactivity with impulsivity, or both, 558--561, 560f basal ganglia
and, 116 brain and, 560 causes of, 560--561 diagnosis of, 558--560, 560f
divided attention and, 152 food additives and, 561 medications for, 222,
560, 620--622, 622f restless legs syndrome (RLS), 210 symptoms of,
560--561 treatment for, 620--622, 636 Attitude, 509. A positive or
negative evaluation that predisposes behavior toward an object, person,
or situation, 509--510 cognitive consistency and, 511--512 cognitive
dissonance and, 510--512 conditioning and, 290--291 elements of, 510
formation of, 510 Attitude alignment, 532 Attraction and liking,
531--533, 531f

Attribution, 505. A judgment about the cause of a person's behavior.
correspondence bias and, 505--506 cultural influences on, 508--509
defensive, 506, 508 depression and, 571 dispositional, 505 fundamental
attribution error, 505--506 just-world belief, 508 situational, 505
Attribution error, 516 Audition, 172. The sense of hearing. biology of,
172--175 auditory canal, 172 auditory cortex, 175f auditory nerve, 174
basilar membrane, 174 cochlea, 174 organ of Corti, 174 oval window, 173
parts of the ear, 173f pinna, 172 thalamus, 174 tympanic membrane, 173f,
174, 174f developmental and individual differences in, 177 Auditory
cortex, 119, 121f, 123, 174--175, 175f Auditory nerve, 174. The nerve
carrying sound information from the cochlea to the brain. Authoritarian
parenting, 436--437 Authoritative parenting, 436--437 Autism spectrum
disorder (ASD), 555. A disorder characterized by deficits in social
relatedness and communication skills that are often accompanied by
repetitive, ritualistic behavior, 555--558 amygdala and, 243 brain and,
556--557 causes of, 556--558 diagnosis of, 555--559 early behavioral
intervention outcomes, 621f environmental factors and, 557--558 facial
expressions and, 250 genetics and, 556 increase in, 555, 556f
interactomes and, 549--550 medications for, 620f response to stimuli,
168 sensory sensitivity in, 557f serotonin and, 130 superior visual
search in, 168f symptoms of, 558--559 touch and, 181 treatment for,
618--620, 620f, 636 vaccinations and, 558, 559f Autobiographical memory,
330. Semantic or episodic

memories that reference the self. Autonomic nervous system, 129--130.
The division of the peripheral nervous system that directs the activity
of glands, organs, and smooth muscles. 131f. emotions and, 241--242
enteric nervous system, 130, 131f parasympathetic nervous system, 130,
131f sympathetic nervous system, 129 Autonomy, 526 Availability
heuristic, 372. A rule of thumb in which the frequency of an event's
occurrence is predicted by the ease with which the event is brought to
mind, 373f COVID-19 and, 404 Aversion therapy, 290. An application of
counterconditioning in which a conditioned stimulus (CS) formerly paired
with a pleasurable unconditioned stimulus (UCS) is instead paired with
an unpleasant UCS. Avoidance, approach and, 271 Avoidant attachment, 434
Axon, 134. The branch of a neuron that is usually responsible for
transmitting information to other neurons. action potential and,
137--138 auditory nerve and, 174 myelinated, 136, 139--140 squid, 138
synapses and, 143 unmyelinated, 136, 139--140 white matter and, 134 Axon
terminal action potential and, 141 synaptic vesicles in, 134 Ayahuasca,
219

B

Basal ganglia, 116. A collection of subcortical structures that
participate in the control of movement, 116f cingulate cortex and,
243--244, 244f procedural memory and, 348--349 Basilar membrane, 174.
Membrane in the cochlea on which the organ of Corti is located.
Bask-in-reflected glory (BIRG) effect, 489 Battle fatigue. See
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Behavior bad habits and, 309 brain
and, 109

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

building blocks of, 73--75 evolution and, 95, 103 health and (see Health
psychology) influencing others to behave toward us, 313 social (see
Social behavior) unconscious, 227 Behavior modification; also known as
applied behavior analysis (ABA), 612--613 Behavior therapy, 612.
Applications of classical and operant conditioning principles to the
treatment of symptoms of psychological disorder and adjustment problems,
612--613 Behavioral approach system (BAS), 477 Behavioral genetics, 78.
The scientific field that attempts to identify and understand links
between genetics and behavior. concordance rates and, 81--82
heritability and, 78--79 twin studies in, 81 Behavioral inhibition
system (BIS), 477 Behavioral neuroscience, 19f, 23, 107 Behaviorism, 15.
An approach that features the study and careful measurement of
observable behaviors, 15--19 behavioral neuroscience and, 19f
personality and, 465--466 Behaviorists, 15--18 "black box" model and,
19f Pavlov, 16--17 Simon, 19 Thorndike, 17, 18f, 20f Watson, 16--17, 17f
Berger, Hans, 21f Beta waves, 202. A waveform of 15 to 30 cycles per
second recorded by electroencephalogram that usually indicates alert
waking, 202--203 Bias actor-observer, 506, 508 correspondence, 505--506
self-serving, 506--507 shooter, 520 Big Five theory, 468. A trait theory
that identifies five main characteristics that account for most
individual differences in personality, 468f, 470t--471t, 475--476 Big
Five traits, 483 Bilingual, 390. Proficient in two languages. Binet,
Alfred, 20f Binge-eating disorder, 261. An eating disorder characterized
by eating abnormally large

amounts of food at one sitting and feeling that eating is out of
control, without compensatory behaviors such as induced vomiting or the
use of laxatives. Binocular cues, 165. A depth cue that requires the use
of both eyes, 164, 166 Binocular disparity, 167 Biological clock, 199.
An internal mechanism that provides an approximate schedule for various
physical processes, 200 Biological psychology, 22. The psychological
perspective that focuses on the relationships between mind and behavior,
as well as their underlying biological processes, including genetics,
biochemistry, anatomy, and physiology; also known as behavioral
neuroscience, 23, 23f contemporary approaches in, 109 criminal justice
and, 123 decision-making and, 377--379 early attempts to understand, 108
influence of, 106--108 research methods in, 110t Biological therapies
brain stimulation, 616 electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 615 medication
and, 615 neurofeedback, 617 psychosurgery, 615--616 Biopsychosocial
approach, 614. An integrated approach to therapy that combines
treatments addressing the biological, personal, and social underpinnings
of psychological disorders. Biopsychosocial model, 660. A model that
sees health as the result of biological, psychological, and social
factors, 661f Bipolar disorder, 567. A mood disorder characterized by
alternating periods of mania and depression. causes of, 567 creativity
and, 567 diet and, 567 genetics and, 567 mania and, 567 medications for,
624 norepinephrine activity and, 143 rates of, 567, 567f symptoms of,
575 treatment for, 567, 636 Birth rate, 98f Bisphenol A (BPA), 72 Black
box model, 19f Blind spots, 158

Blocking, 352 Blond allele, 90, 90f Blood-brain barrier, 135, 136f Body
dysmorphic disorder, 582. A disorder characterized by the unrealistic
perception of physical flaws, 580 symptoms of, 594 treatment for, 630,
636 Body language, 240--241, 241f Body mass index (BMI), 257. A
height-to-weight ratio used to identify healthy weight, underweight,
overweight, and obesity, 258f, 261, 665 Borderline personality disorder
(BPD), 586. A disorder characterized by instability in interpersonal
relationships, self--image, and emotion, 589f treatment for, 632 Botox,
143, 236f, 237, 237f Bottom-up processing, 152. Perception based on
building simple input into more complex perceptions, 153 Brain. See also
specific parts adolescent, 439--441, 441f anxiety disorders and, 580f
appearance of, 106, 111--112 associated with sexual desire and romantic
love, 144, 144f behavior and, 109 cannabinoid receptors in, 216f
concepts and, 367 consciousness and, 197, 198, 198f, 199 culture and,
107, 107f decision-making and, 377--379 default mode network in, 198,
198f, 199, 225, 226f endorphins and, 144 evolution of, 92--93, 92f
fusiform face area, 212 hemisphere dominance, 126 human, contemporary,
93 human, evolution of, 92--93, 92f insula, 144 intelligence and, 93,
395, 397f lateralization, 124--126 law, responsibility and, 123 left,
124--126 lonely, 145 long-term memory and, 347--349 meditation and, 225,
226f perception and, 151--152 personality and, 476--477 right, 124--126
right-left brain myths, 126 self and, 491--493 semantic memories and,
349f sexual orientation and, 266, 266f social cognition in, 145 spinal
cord, 111--112 split-brain operation, 124f study of, 5 subcortical
structures, 116--118 top-down processing and, 152 ventricles of, 112,
112f, 113 working memory and, 347

Brain damage brain death and, 212--213 Capgras syndrome, 211--212 coma,
212 consciousness and, 211--214 face recognition and, 211 intelligence
and, 395 language deficits, 385--386, 388 memory and, 347 near-death
experiences and, 213, 214 prosopagnosia, 212 seizures and, 213--214
semantic information and, 368f vegetative state and, 213, 213f Brain
death, 213, 213f Brain imaging aggression and, 540--541 intelligence
and, 397 meditation and, 225 REM sleep and, 209 research in, 144 Brain
stimulation, 616--617 Brain-imaging technologies, 35--36, 124. See also
Electroencephalogram (EEG); Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
Brainstem, 114. The part of the brain containing the midbrain, pons, and
medulla. cerebellum, 113--114, 115 medulla, 115, 174 midbrain, 115--116
pons, 115 reticular formation, 116 structure of, 115f Brief therapy,
605. Psychotherapy provided over a short time frame, usually between
three and five sessions. British empiricists, 10. Broca's aphasia, 385,
391 Broca's area, 121f, 121, 123, 385--386 Bulimia nervosa, 260. An
eating disorder characterized by bingeing, purging, and having feelings
of depression, disgust, and lost control. Bullying, 75, 76f Bystander
intervention, 538. The study of situational variables related to helping
a stranger, most notably the decreased likelihood of helping as the
number of bystanders increases, 539, 543

C

Caffeine, 218, 220 sources of, 219f Calkins, Mary Whiton, 12f, 20f
Candidate gene, 82. A gene that has a greater impact on a trait of
interest than other genes, 83

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-3

Cannabinoid receptors, 216, 217f Cannabinoids, 216--217 Cannabis. See
Marijuana (Cannabis) Cannon-Bard theory, 235. A theory of emotion
featuring the simultaneous and independent occurrence of physical
sensations and subjective feelings during an emotional experience.
physical responses and subjective feelings of, 233f, 235--236 Cannon,
Walter, 253, 255f Capgras syndrome, 211--212 Capilano Canyon experiment,
235, 236 Case study, 44. An in-depth analysis of the behavior of one
person or a small number of people. Cataplexy, 209 Catharsis, 234. A
theory of emotion that views emotion as a reservoir that fills up and
spills over; it predicts that expressing an emotion will reduce arousal.
CBT. See Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) Cell body, 134. The large,
central mass of a neuron, containing the nucleus. Centers for Disease &
Prevention, 291 Central nervous system (CNS), 110 The brain and spinal
cord. brain and, 111--112, 124--126 brainstem, 113--114, 115, 115f
cerebellum, 113--115, 115f cerebral cortex, 117f, 118--123 cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF), 112 corpus callosum, 118 functions of, 111--112 myelination
in, 136--137 spinal cord, 110--116 spinal reflexes, 114 structures of,
111--1112, 128 subcortical structures, 116--118 Central tendency, 55
Cerebellum, 115. A structure attached to the brainstem that participates
in skilled movement and, in humans, complex cognitive processing
Cerebral cortex, 118. The thin layer of neurons covering the outer
surface of the cerebral hemispheres. convolution of, intellect and, 120f
declarative memories and, 347--348 emotions and, 244--245 episodic
memory and, 347--348 functions of, 117f lobes, 118, 121, 121f

s-4

localization of functions in, 119--120 views of, 120f Cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF), 112 Chaining, 305 Challenge, in hardiness, 659 Chemical
senses. See also Gustation; Olfaction biology of, 183, 185 developmental
and individual differences in, 186--187 perception and cognition, 185
sociocultural influences on, 187--188 Chemical signaling, 141, 142f, 143
Childhood development cognitive (see Cognitive development) gender
development, 423--424 highlights of, 438 myelination in, 421, 422f
physical development, 419--420, 420f, 421--423 motor development,
420--423, 423f nervous system development, 421 social and emotional
behavior changes in, 432--438 attachment, 433--436 parenting and, 432f,
434--437 temperament, 432--433, 432f synaptic pruning, 421f Childhood
psychological disorders attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
558--561 autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 555--558 Children aggression
and, 371 emotions and, 245--246, 248 holistic reasoning and, 169
intellectual disabilities and, 401 language gap, 388 physical
punishment, 300 play networks, 474f posttraumatic stress disorder and,
580, 644 praise and, 297 temperament, 474f Chlorpromazine (Thorazine),
623 Cholecystokinin (CCK), 257 Chomasky, Noam, 21f Chromosomes, 73, 76,
417 Chunking, 323. The process of grouping similar or meaningful
information together, 324, 355 Cingulate cortex, 117. A subcortical
structure above the corpus callosum. Its anterior (forward) segment
participates in decision making and emotion, and its posterior (rear)
segment participates in memory and visual processing. anterior cingulate
cortex (ACC), 117 basal ganglia and, 244f emotions and, 243--244

posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), 117 Circadian rhythms, 199. A daily
biological rhythm, 200 artificial lighting and, 200, 202 biological
clocks and, 199--200 daylight savings time and, 201 depression and, 571
eating patterns and, 200 individual variations in, 201--202 jet lag and,
200, 201f major depressive disorder with seasonal pattern and, 201
modern living and, 200--201 Classical conditioning, 16. A type of
learning in which associations are formed between two stimuli that occur
sequentially in time. 17, 280 applying, 289--293 addiction, 290
attitudes and prejudices, 290--291 counterconditioning, 289--290
creativity and schizophrenia, 291 overcoming fear, 289--290 cognitive
and biological influences on, 286--289 conditioned stimuli and
responses, 281--282 element of surprise, 287 learning and, 280 opioid
overdose and, 292, 292f Pavlovian, 16, 281--282 phenomena, 294
acquisition, 283--284 contingency, 284f discrimination, 285--286, 286f
extinction, 284 generalization, 285--286, 286f higher-order
conditioning, 286 inhibition, 285 latent inhibition, 286 spontaneous
recovery, 284 taste aversion, 288--289, 293 terminology of, 282--283,
282f unconditioned stimuli and responses, 283 wildlife conservation and,
293 Client-centered therapy, 15 Clinical assessment, 602 Clinical
psychology, 26. A psychological perspective that seeks to explain,
define, and treat abnormal behaviors, 32 Closure, in Gestalt psychology,
164, 165f Coaching, 604 Cocaine addictive properties of, 215, 220--221
in commercial products, 222 effects of, 221 withdrawal from, 215

Cochlea, 174. The structure in the inner ear that contains auditory
receptors. Codeine, 223 Cognition, 362. Internal mental processes
including information processing, thinking, reasoning, and problem
solving, 362--363 attitudes and, 510--512 biological psychology of,
106--108 cerebellum and, 115 interpersonal relationships and, 403
phobias and, 577 psychology of, 23f, 24 schizophrenia and, 562 social,
502 social loafing and, 528 stress and, 585 thinking and, 362--363
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 614. A combination of cognitive
restructuring with behavioral treatments that has been shown to be
effective in reducing symptoms of many psychological disorders, 614f
depression and, 626 obsessive-compulsive disorder and, 597--598
Cognitive consistency, 511. A preference for holding congruent attitudes
and beliefs. Cognitive development adolescent, 442--443 childhood,
425--432 information processing and, 429--430 late adulthood, 450--451
naive theories, 430, 431f Piaget's theory, 426--429 accommodation and,
427 assimilation and, 427 concrete operational stage, 427t conservation
and, 428 criticism of, 428--429 egocentrism and, 427t formal operational
stage, 427t object permanence, 427 preoperational stage, 427t
sensorimotor stage, 427t stages of, 427t postformal thought, 446--448
theory of mind, 430--432, 431f Vygotsky and, 429 young adulthood,
446--447 zone of proximal development, 430f Cognitive dissonance, 511.
The uncomfortable state that occurs when behavior and attitudes do not
match and that can be resolved through attitude change, 510--512

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Cognitive maps, 305--306 Cognitive neuroscience, 19, 29 Cognitive
psychologists, 16--17 Neisser, 19, 21f Newell, 19 Skinner, 18, 21f
Cognitive psychology, 24. A psychological perspective that investigates
information processing, thinking, reasoning, and problem solving, 23f
Cognitive Psychology (Neisser), 18 Cognitive resolution, behaviorists
and, 17--22 Cognitive restructuring, 613. A technique used in cognitive
therapies in which new, rational beliefs replace earlier, irrational
beliefs held by the client. Cohort effects, 54 Collective intelligence,
196, 398--399 Collectivist culture, 459, 493--494, 494f, 508 Color
afterimages, 160, 160f, 161 Color deficiency Ishihara Color Test, 161f
red-green, in females, 161 red-green, in males, 161 trichromatic theory
and, 160 Color vision, 160--161 animals and, 151f color deficiency in,
160 differences in, 161 infants and, 166--167 opponent process theory
and, 160--161 perception and, 160f, 161 trichromatic theory and,
160--161 web design and, 161--162 Colorblind, 160 Coma, 212. An abnormal
state of deep unconsciousness. alpha coma, 212 brain death and, 212 EEG
recordings and, 212, 212f seizures and, 214 vegetative state and, 212
Commitment, 533 Communication of science, 41 social media and, 514
Comorbid, 551. Two or more disorders in the same individual.
Companionate love, 533 Competition choosing, 536--537 cooperation and,
535--539, 546 cultural influences on, 536 individual differences in, 536
Competitiveness, participation trophies and, 270 Compliance, 524.
Agreement with a request from a person with no perceived authority
Compulsion, 581. Repetitive, ritualistic behavior

associated with high anxiety. Computer models, decisionmaking and, 377
Concept, 363. An organizing principle derived from experience, 363--365
approaches to, 365--366, 365t, 366 brain and, 367 exemplars and,
365--367 prototypes and, 365--366 schemas and, 367 as theories, 366--367
thoughts as, 363--365 Concordance rates, 81. The statistical probability
that a trait in one person will be shared by another; usually discussed
in relation to identical and fraternal twins. Concrete operational
stage, 427. Jean Piaget's stage of development beginning at the age of 6
years and ending at the age of 12 years and characterized by logical but
not abstract reasoning, 428 Conditioned reinforcers, 297. A reinforcer
that gains value from being associated with other things that are
valued; also known as a secondary reinforcer, 297--298 Conditioned
response (CR), 283. A response learned through classical conditioning,
283f, 284f Conditioned stimulus (CS), 283. An environmental event whose
significance is learned through classical conditioning, 283f, 284f
Cones, 158. A photoreceptor in the retina that processes color and fine
detail, 158f, 159 Confidentiality, 66 Confirmation bias, 37. The
tendency to notice and remember instances that support your beliefs.
Conformity, 523. Matching behavior and appearance to perceived social
norms, 523--524, 523f Confounding variable, 51. A variable that are
irrelevant to the hypothesis being tested but can alter a researcher's
conclusions, 52 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 266, 418, 424f
Conscientiousness, 469. A Big Five personality trait characterized by
competence, order, dutifulness, achievement

striving, self-discipline, and deliberation. Conscious awareness, 464f
Consciousness, 194. A state of awareness. altered, 214--227 artificial,
196--197 as awareness of ongoing sensations, 195 in the brain, 197--198,
198f, 199 brain damage and, 211--214 circadian rhythms and, 199--202
definitions of, 199 evolution of, 195--196 interpersonal relationships
and, 227 meaning and, 194--195 psychologists and, 193, 194 rouge test
and, 195 seizures and, 213--214 as self-awareness, 194, 195--196 sleep
and, 199--200, 212 sleep disorders and, 205, 209--211 transcranial
magnetic stimulation and, 193 as variations in alertness, 195 vegetative
state and, 212, 213f waking and, 199--200, 213 Consequences, operant
conditioning and, 295--296 Conservation, 428. The ability to understand
that changing the form or appearance of an object does not change its
quantity. Consummate love, 534, 534f Contingency, 284f Continuity
vs. discontinuity, 409--410, 410f in Gestalt psychology, 164, 165f
Control group, 51. A group that experiences all experimental procedures,
with the exception of exposure to the independent variable. Control, in
hardiness, 659 Conventional morality, 443. Lawrence Kohlberg's stage of
moral development in which moral choices are made according to law or
public opinion. Cooperation advantages of, 535 altruism and, 537--539
choosing, 536--537 competition and, 535--539, 546 cultural influences
on, 536 dominance and, 535 individual differences in, 536 reduction of
prejudice and, 519, 521--522, 521f selfishness and, 538 as social
behavior, 93--94 Cornea, 157. The clear surface at the front of the eye
that begins the process of directing light to the retina. Corporate
psychopaths, 585

Corpus callosum, 118, 125. A wide band of nerve fibers connecting the
right and left cerebral hemispheres. Correlation, 48. A measure of the
direction and strength of the relationship between two variables. brain
imaging and, 67, 67f measurement of, 48 third variables and, 50 twin
studies, 81f unethical experiments and, 50, 50f variables measured in,
48, 49f Correspondence bias, 505. The tendency to view behavior as the
result of disposition, even when the behavior can be explained by the
situation in which it occurs, 505--506 Cortisol, 647. A hormone released
into the bloodstream from the adrenal glands, 639--640, 653 Counseling,
601. A treatment originally proposed by humanistic therapists that
includes a focus on personal strengths and development; the term is now
used to refer to treatment for adjustment problems, as opposed to
treatment for severe psychological disorders. Counterconditioning,
289--290 Couples therapy, 606. A type of family therapy that focuses on
intimate relationships, 634 COVID-19 Pandemic. anxiety across lifespan,
455, 455f availability heuristic and, 404 genetics and responses to
COVID-19 social distancing, 102 obsessive compulsive disorder and, 583
online therapy during, 635 personality and responses to, 496, 496f
persuasion during, 545 priorities during, 273 prioritizing motives
during, 274 research methods for studying, 88 resilience in the face of,
683 sleep during, 228 social distancing, loneliness, and nervous system,
145 tracking the problem of, 31 Cranial nerves, 129, 129f Creativity,
latent inhibition and, 291 Criminal justice, 123 Critical thinking, 37.
The ability to think clearly, rationally, and independently. in popular
press reports, 38--39 in science, 40 steps to, 43

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-5

Cross-sectional study, 54. An experimental design for assessing
age-related changes in which data are obtained simultaneously from
people of differing ages. Crystallized intelligence, 393. The ability to
think logically using specific learned knowledge, 394f Cues, 337. A
stimulus that aids retrieval, 336--337 encoding, 337 encoding
specificity and, 337 role in memory retrieval, 336 Cultural diversity,
24, 25. Variations in the practices, values, and goals shared by groups
of people Cultural neuroscience, 107, 107f Culture adaptations in
therapy, 607 alleles and, 459--460, 460f brain and, 107, 107f
collectivist, 459--460, 493--494, 494f, 508, 509f emotional expressivity
and, 249f emotional knowledge and, 408f entheogens and, 219 eye contact
in, 251 genetics and evolution, 99--100 health and, 670--671 holistic
reasoning and, 169 individualistic, 459--460, 493--494, 494f, 508--509
intelligence and, 392f interdependence vs. independence in, 493--494
life expectancy, 670f optimism and, 674, 674f parenting and, 434
pessimism and, 674f physical punishment and, 300 Cyberball game, 501f

D

Dancing, 227 Dark Triad personality traits, 588 Darwin, Charles, 12, 14,
95, 97 Data, 56--63 central tendency and, 58 descriptive statistics and,
57--60 inferential statistics and, 62--63 reliability in, 57 validity
of, 57 Daydreaming, 203, 208 Daylight savings time, 201, 202f DBT. See
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) Death, causes of, 661f Decay, 343. A
reduction in ability to retrieve rarely used information over time.
Decibels (dB), 172, 172f Decision-making. See also Problem solving
adolescents and, 379f biological psychology of, 377--379 computer models
and, 377

s-6

framing in, 376 groupthink and, 529--530 probability and, 376 signal
detection and, 154 styles of, 380t--381t utility theory and, 375--376
Declarative memory, 328. A consciously retrieved memory that is easy to
verbalize, including semantic, episodic, and autobiographical
information; also known as explicit memory, 328--329 autobiographical,
330 cerebral cortex and, 347--348 episodic, 329 hippocampus and, 347
vs. nondeclarative, 348f semantic, 329 Deep brain stimulation, 616.
Electrical stimulation applied through surgically implanted electrodes
that is used to treat some anxiety and mood disorders.
Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) paradigm, 359 Default mode network (DMN),
198, 198f, 199, 225, 226f Defense mechanism, 463. In Sigmund Freud's
personality theory, a protective behavior that reduces anxiety.
Defensive aggression, 539 Defensive attributions, 506, 508
Deindividuation, 528. Immersion of an individual within a group, leading
to anonymity Déjà vu, 214 Delta waves, 204. A waveform of 1 to 4 cycles
per second recorded by electroencephalogram that usually indicates deep
nonrapid eye movement sleep. Delusions, 562. A false, illogical belief.
Dendrite, 134. A branch from the neural cell body that usually receives
input from other neurons. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 341 environment
and, 71--72 epigenome and, 409 fingerprint, reading, 82t identical twins
and, 71, 72t variations in, 82 Dependent variable, 51. A measure that
demonstrates the effects of an independent variable; the "result" part
of a hypothesis, 51f, 52, 53, 54, 63 Depersonalization disorder, 584
Depression. See also Major depressive disorder (MDD) facial expressions
and, 572, 573f

gender and, 568, 569f rates of, 453f rTMS and, 617f self-esteem and, 486
suicide and, 574, 574f Depth perception, 165. The ability to use the
two-dimensional image projected on the retina to perceive three
dimensions, 164--165 Ames room and, 165f Muller-Lyer illusion, 165, 166f
Ponzo illusion, 165, 166f Depth, recognizing binocular cues, 164, 166
depth perception, 164 monocular cues, 164--165 retinal disparity and,
166 Derealization disorder, 584 Descent of Man, The (Darwin), 12
Descriptive methods, 44. Research methods designed for making careful,
systematic observations. case study in, 44--45 naturalistic observation,
46 survey, 46--47, 48f Descriptive statistics, 57. Statistical methods
that organize data into meaningful patterns and summaries, such as
finding the average value. central tendency and, 58 data and, 57--62
frequency distributions and, 58, 58f mean and, 58 median and, 58, 59f
mode and, 58 normal distribution in, 59--60, 59f scatterplots, 60, 62f
standard deviation and, 59, 59f, 60 two variables and, 60 variance and,
59, 59f Development, 408--450. See also individual stages adolescent,
438--445 childhood, 420--438 continuity and discontinuity, 409--410,
410f ecological approaches to, 410 infant, 420--423 midlife, 448--450
nature and nurture in, 409 newborn, 412, 417--418 prenatal, 411--412,
411f psychosexual stages of, 463 universal approaches to, 410 young
adulthood, 446--448 Developmental psychology, 25. A psychological
perspective that examines the normal changes in behavior that occur
across the life span, 23f, 24 Dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine/ Dextrostat),
560

Diabetes insulin and, 255f Type 2, 255f Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), 553. A system for classification of
psychological disorders published by the American Psychiatric
Association, 553--554 Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 632
Diathesis-stress model, 573. A model that suggests that the experience
of stress interacts with an individual's biological predisposition to
produce a psychological disorder. Difference threshold, 153. The
smallest detectable difference between two stimuli. measuring perception
and, 153 Discontinuity, vs. continuity in development, 409--410, 410f
Discrimination, 285, 516. (a) A learned ability to distinguish between
stimuli. (b) Unfair behavior based on stereotyping and prejudice, 286f
Disorganized attachment, 434 Display rule, 247. A cultural norm that
specifies when, where, and how a person should express an emotion.
Dispositional attribution, 505. A judgment assigning the cause of a
person's behavior to personal qualities or characteristics. Dissociative
amnesia, 584 Dissociative disorder, 584. A disorder characterized by
disruptions in a person's identity, memory, or consciousness, 584--585
treatment for, 631 Dissociative fugue, 584 Dissociative identity
disorder, 584 Distributed practice, 350, 352 Diversity, personality
assessments and, 482 Divided attention, 152 Divorce, 544f DNA. See
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) DNA methylation, 85, 85f, 86, 87 Doctor of
philosophy (PhD) degree, 602 Doctor of psychology (PSyD) degree, 602
Domain-Specific Risk-Taking (DOSPERT) Scale, 440 Dominant, 74. A feature
of an allele that determines a phenotype in either the homozygous or the
heterozygous condition

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Door-in-the-face, 524. A persuasive technique in which compliance with a
target request is preceded by a large, unreasonable request. Dopamine,
143, 221--222, 223, 560, 564 Down syndrome, 389, 395, 413, 413f
Dreaming, 208. A mental state that usually occurs during sleep that
features visual imagery. activation-synthesis theory of, 208 default
mode network in, 208 EEG recordings and, 208 lucid, 208 themes of, 7f
Drive, 253. A state of tension and arousal triggered by cues important
for survival. Drive reduction, 253. The state of relief and reward
produced by removing the tension and arousal of the drive state. DRM
paradigm. See DeeseRoediger-McDermott (DRM) paradigm Drumming, 227
Drunkorexia, 671 DSM. See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM) Dyslexia, 389--390

E

Eating. See Hunger; Obesity Eating disorders, 260--261 anorexia nervosa,
260, 261 binge-eating disorder, 261 bulimia nervosa, 260, 261 culture
and, 260--261 environmental factors and, 261 genetic influences on, 261
male/female rates of, 260--261 Echoic memories, 320 Ecological
development, 410 Ecstasy, 222 Education giftedness and, 402 intelligence
and, 396 positive schools and, 682 self-esteem and, 490 Ego, 462. The
component of Sigmund Freud's personality theory that is the self that
others see, 462--463, 463f Egocentrism, 428. Limitations on the ability
to understand the point of view of other people. Elaboration likelihood
model (ELM), 512. A model that predicts responses to persuasive messages
by distinguishing between the central and the peripheral route to
persuasion.

Electrical signaling, 137--139 Electrical stimulation, 110t
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 615. A biological treatment in which
seizures are induced in an anesthetized patient; it is used primarily in
the treatment of mood disorders that have not responded to medication or
other treatments, 343 Electroencephalogram (EEG), 110t, 202--203, 204f,
208, 212f, 617 Electromagnetic energy, 151f Element of surprise, in
learning, 287 Embryo, 410. The term used to describe a developing
organism between the zygote and the fetus stages, or between 3 and 8
weeks following conception in humans, 411 Emotion, 232. A combination of
arousal, physical sensations, and subjective feelings that occurs
spontaneously in response to environmental stimuli. approaches to,
238--239 arousal and, 240, 240f arts and, 240--241 biology of, 241--245
adolescent, 442 amygdala and, 242--243 autonomic nervous system and,
241--242 basal ganglia and, 244, 244f cerebral cortex and, 244--245
cingulate cortex and, 243--244, 244f hypothalamus and, 242 insula and,
243 body language and, 240--241, 241f continuous vs. discrete view of,
232f evolution of, 239--241 expressing, 245--248 culture and, 249, 249f
development of, 245--246 display rules and, 247--248 evolution and,
245--246 eye contact, 251 facial expressions and, 245 lying, 250--251
regulation of, 246--247, 247f, 248 smiling and, 249 words for, 246
interpersonal relationships and, 273 interpreting, 248--251, 441
accuracy in, 250 culture and, 249 individual differences in, 248 smiling
and, 249--250 memory and, 340--341 mood and, 233 vs. motivation, 233

negative, 513 sexual satisfaction and, 264 theories of, 233--239, 252
appraisals in, 239 Cannon-Bard theory, 233f, 235--236 contemporary
approaches in, 238--239 James-Lange theory, 233--235, 233f
Schachter-Singer two-factor theory, 233f, 236--237 somatovisceral
afference model of emotion (SAME), 238 Yerkes-Dodson law and, 240--241
Emotion-focused coping, 658. A response to stress that targets the
negative emotions arising from the situation. Emotional intelligence,
248, 395 Emotional knowledge, 408, 408f Emotional regulation, 248
Empathy, 117 Empiricism, 7 Empty nest, 450f Encoding, 318. The
transformation of information from one form to another. Encoding cues,
337 Encoding specificity, 337. A process in which memories incorporate
unique combinations of information when encoded. Endocrine system,
132--133. A system responsible for the release of hormones into the
bloodstream. glands of, 132--133, 132f adrenal glands, 132--133 islets
of Langerhans, 132, 132f, 133 ovaries, 132 pineal gland, 132f, 133
pituitary gland, 132, 132f, 133 testes, 132, 132f, 133 thyroid gland,
131, 132f, 133 peripheral nervous system and, 133 Endorphin receptors,
223 Endorphins, 144, 146 Engaged followership, 526--527 Enteric nervous
system, 130. A division of the autonomic nervous system consisting of
nerve cells embedded in the lining of the gastrointestinal system, 131f
function of, 130 Entheogens, 219 Entitlement, participation trophies
and, 270 Epigenetics, 83. The study of geneenvironment interactions in
the production of phenotypes. gene expression and, 83

lifespan, 409 mechanisms of change in, 85f nutrition and, 83
psychological disorders and, 86 stress and, 648 transgenerational change
and, 87, 87f Epilepsy, 213 Episodic buffer, 324 Episodic memory, 329. A
memory for personal experience, 329--330 cerebral cortex and, 347--348
Epworth sleepiness scale, 204 Ethical research. See Research ethics
Ethics, of personality testing, 482 Ethnic identity, 444, 445f
Eudaimonic approach, 674 Event-related potential (ERP), 110t
Evidence-based practice, 601, 601f Evolution, 89. Descent with
modification from a common ancestor. behavior, influence on, 95--102 of
emotions, 239--241 of the human brain, 92--93, 92f mechanisms of, 89--90
adaptation, 91--02 genetic drift, 89--90 migration, 89--90 mutation,
89--90 natural selection, 89 of personality, 477 principles of, 94
Evolutionary psychology, 22. A psychological perspective that
investigates how physical structure and behavior have been shaped by
their contributions to survival and reproduction, 23, 23f, 24, 32
Excitatory messages, 141, 141f Exemplar, 365. A specific member of a
category used to represent the category, 365--367 Exercise cardiac
patients and, 657f depression and, 626, 627f health and, 668--669 memory
and, 354 play and, 668 sitting and, 668--669 stress and, 657--658, 657f
well-being and, 669 Exhaustion, 643. The third and last stage of the
general adaptation syndrome (GAS), characterized by depletion of
physical and psychological resources, 642--643 Experiment, 51. A
research method that tests hypotheses and allows researchers to make
conclusions about causality. artificiality in, 53 confounding variables
in, 51

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-7

Experiment (continued) control group in, 51, 51f, 52f dependent variable
in, 51, 51f, 52f design of, 51f experimental group in, 51, 51f
hypothesis in, 51 independent variable in, 51, 51f, 52f limitations of,
53 meta-analyses and, 53--54 multiple perspectives, benefits of, 54
operationalization and, 53 random assignment in, 51, 51f unethical, 50,
50f, 65, 65--66, 66 video game use, 53 Experimental group, 51. A group
of participants who are exposed to the independent variable. Exposure
therapy, 289--290 Extinction, 284. The reduction of a learned response.
In classical conditioning, extinction occurs when the unconditioned
stimulus (UCS) no longer follows the conditioned stimulus (CS). In
operant conditioning, extinction occurs when the consequence no longer
follows the learned behavior, 285f, 300, 303 Extrasensory perception
(ESP), 58--59 Extraversion, 475f, 481f Extrinsic reward, 253 A reward
from an outside source. Extroversion, 469. One of the Big Five traits
characterized by warmth, gregariousness, assertiveness, activity,
excitement seeking, and positive emotion; opposite of introversion, 465,
468, 476 Eye, 157f Eye contact, 250, 251 Eye movement desensitization
and reprocessing (EMDR), 119 Eye movements, emotions and, 119f
Eyewitnesses, reliability of, 341

F

Face recognition brain and, 492f brain damage and, 211 own-race bias in,
336 Facial expressions Botox and, 236f, 237f depression and, 572, 573f
emotions and, 239--240, 245 evolution of, 239--240 interpreting, 250
Factor analysis, 64, 467f Faith, 36 Fake news, 514

s-8

False memories, 334, 339, 340, 345 Family therapy, 606. A type of
therapy in which family members participate individually and in
combination with other family members. Family-centered positive
psychology (FCPP), 682 Family, defining, 447, 447f Fear amygdala and,
646f overcoming, 289--290 Fechner, Gustav, 9 Fetal alcohol syndrome
(FAS), 414. A condition resulting from alcohol consumption by the mother
during pregnancy that produces physical abnormalities and cognitive and
behavioral problems in her child, 416f Fetus, 410. The term used to
describe a developing organism between the embryo stage and birth, or
between 8 and approximately 40 weeks following conception in humans,
91f, 411, 412f Fight-flight freeze system (FFFS), 477 First impressions,
501, 504, 504f Fitness, 90. The ability of one genotype to reproduce
more successfully relative to other genotypes. Fixed action patterns,
279 Fixed interval (FI) schedule, 302. A schedule of reinforcement in
which the first response following a specified interval is reinforced,
303f Fixed ratio (FR) schedule, 301. A schedule of reinforcement in
which reinforcement occurs following a set number of behaviors, 301--302
Flashbulb memory, 340. An especially vivid and detailed memory of an
emotional event, 340--341 Flooding, 289 Flow, 679. A state characterized
by complete absorption in a current activity, such as work, problem
solving, or creativity Fluid intelligence, 393. The ability to think
logically without the need to use learned knowledge, 394f Flynn effect,
398--399, 399f Food additives, attention deficit hyperactivity and, 561
Foot-in-the-door, 524. A persuasive technique in which compliance with a
small request is followed

by compliance with a larger request that might otherwise have been
rejected. Forensic psychologists, 28f Forgetting, 342. A decrease in the
ability to remember a previously formed memory, 342--343 decay and, 343
interference and, 343--344 motivated, 344--345 types of, 358 Formal
operational stage, 428. Jean Piaget's stage of development beginning at
age 12 and extending through adulthood and characterized by mature
reasoning capabilities Fovea, 158. An area of the retina that is
specialized for highly detailed vision. 157f FOXP-2 gene, 383, 388
Framing effects, 376, 376f Free association, 609. The psychoanalytic
technique of encouraging a patient to say whatever comes to mind,
without attempting to censor the content. Frequency distributions, 58,
58f Freud, Sigmund, 13--14, 13f Frontal lobe, 118. The most forward of
the four lobes of the cerebral cortex; location of the primary motor
cortex and areas responsible for some of the most complex cognitive
processes. Broca's area, 121, 121f, 123 cognitive functions of, 121
damage to, 244 Frontal lobotomy, 122, 616 orbitofrontal cortex and, 122
Phineas Gage accident and, 122 prefrontal cortex and, 121, 121f Fryer,
Roland, 254f Functional fixedness, 370. A possible barrier to successful
problem solving in which a concept is considered only in its most
typical form. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 110t
behavior and, 477 brain and, 109 finger-tapping, 109 honesty and, 250,
251f hunger and, 4 love and, 67 meditation and, 225 memory suppression
and, 345 mirror systems, 123 neurofeedback and, 617 tennis serves and,
123 vegetative state and, 213f Functionalism, 11

An approach that saw behavior as purposeful and contributing to survival
James and, 12 Fundamental attribution error, 505--506 Fusiform face area
(FFA), 212

G

Gamma waves, 202. A waveform of more than 30 cycles per second recorded
by electroencephalogram that indicates attention to sensory input,
202--203 GAS. See General adaptation syndrome (GAS) Gate theory, 182.
The theory that suggests that input from touch fibers competes with
input from pain receptors, possibly preventing pain messages from
reaching the brain. Gen Y, 446f Gender concept of, 425 depression and,
568, 569f, 570 development of, 417--418, 423--425 intersex, 417, 425
response to infidelity, 534f self-esteem and, 487--488 stress responses,
649 transgender, 425 Gender assignment, 425 Gender dysphoria, 425 Gender
identity, 423, 425 Gene, 72. A small segment of DNA located in a
particular place on a chromosome that produces a protein, 73 alleles
for, 74, 76f bullying and, 75, 76f chromosomes, 73, 75, 76--77, 83, 84
environment and, 71--72, 73, 81, 83, 91, 91f eye color and, 82
hemophilia and, 77, 78f interpersonal relationships and, 101 serotonin
transporter (SERT), 75, 76f shared with other species, 79f variation in,
76 Gene expression, 74. The process in which genetic instructions are
converted into a feature of a living well, 83, 85 General adaptation
syndrome (GAS), 642. Hans Selye's three-stage model for an organism's
response to stressors, 642f, 643, 660 General intelligence (g), 392. A
measure of an individual's overall intelligence as opposed to specific
abilities.

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Generalization, 285. The tendency to respond to stimuli that are similar
to an original conditioned stimulus (CS), 286f Generalize, 62. To extend
conclusions to larger populations outside your research sample.
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), 580. A disorder characterized by
excessive anxiety and worry that is not correlated with particular
objects or situations. biological explanations for, 580 brain circuits
and, 580, 580f cognitive explanations for, 580 integrating perspectives
on, 580 social explanations for, 580 symptoms of, 594 Generalized
seizures, 214, 214f Genetic drift, 89. Change in a population's genes
from one generation to the next because of chance or accident, 89--90
Genetic research, social prejudice in, 80--83 Genetic variation, 76
Genetics behavioral, 78--80 of cats, 75 development risks and, 412--413
intelligence and, 397--398 major concepts in, 73--77, 88 allele, 73--74
dominant, 74 gene, 73--74 gene expression, 74 genetic variation, 76
genotype, 73--74 heterozygous, 74 homozygous, 74 recessive, 74
relatedness, 76, 77f sex chromosomes, 76--77 personality and, 475--476
psychology and field of, 77--88 to select a mate, 101 subfields of, 79t
Genius, 401 Genomewide association study (GWAS), 83. A scan of complete
sets of DNA from many participants, which is performed to look for
variations associated with a particular phenotype, condition, or
disease. Genotype, 72. An individual's profile of alleles, 73, 74f, 475f
Gestalt psychologists Koffka, 12 Köhler, 12 Wertheimer, 12 Gestalt
psychology, 11 An approach that saw experience as being

different from the sum of its elements. closure in, 164, 165f continuity
and, 163--164, 165f organization and, 163 proximity and, 164, 164f
recognizing objects and, 163--164 similarity and, 164, 164f simplicity
and, 164 Giftedness, 401. An extreme of intelligence defined as having
an IQ score of 130 or above. Gist, 339 Glia, 134 axons and, 135
blood-brain barrier and, 136f function of, 135 Global happiness, 678f
myelin and, 135--136, 136f Glucose, 255. A type of sugar that plays an
important role in hunger levels. Glutamate, 349 Golden rectangles, 153f
Goose bumps, 278--279 Grafton, Scott, 23f Gratings, 163, 163f Gratitude,
683 Gray matter, 134, 625f Group polarization, 528. The intensifying of
an attitude following discussion, 528--529, 529f Group therapy, 605.
Psychotherapy conducted with a group of people rather than individually,
605--606 Grouping, 176 Groupthink, 529. A type of flawed decision making
in which a group does not question its decisions critically, 529--530
Growth hormone, 132 Growth mindsets, 269 Gustation, 183. See also
Chemical senses The sense of taste. biology of papillae, 185 taste buds,
185, 186 taste receptors, 185, 185f supertasters, 186 thalamus and, 185

H

Habituation, 280. A simple form of learning in which reactions to
repeated stimuli that are unchanging and harmless decrease Haka, 234
Hall, G. Stanley, 20f Hallucinations, 562. A false perception.
Hallucinogen, 216. A drug that stimulates the experience of false
perceptions, 218--219, 222

Halo effects, 504 Handedness, 127 Happiness defining, 674 eudaimonic
approach to, 674 flow and, 679 genetics and, 674 global, 678f hedonic
approach to, 674 increasing, 678--679 interpersonal relationships and,
675 , 675f marriage and, 448, 448f, 675 parenting and, 448, 676 types
of, 684 wealth and, 675--677, 676f Haptic codes, 320 Hardiness, 659,
659f Hassles, 644--645 Health biopsychosocial model of, 660--661, 661f
exercise and, 657f heart disease and, 651 immune system and, 650--651
mood and, 652--653 obesity and, 652--653 sleep and, 652--653
socioeconomic status and, 649 stress and, 640--654, 654f Health
psychology, 660. A branch of psychology that investigates the
relationships between psychological variables and health. alcohol
consumption, 666--668, 667f behavior and, 662--672 biopsychosocial model
of, 660--661, 661f causes of death, 661f, 662 culture and, 670--671
exercise and, 668--669 habits for, 663f interpersonal relationships and,
683 life expectancy, 670f loneliness and, 669--670 nutrition and,
665--666 safety practices, 662t sitting and, 668--669, 668f tobacco use,
663--665, 663f, 664f Hearing loss, 177 Heart disease, 651 Hedonic
approach, 674 Hemispatial neglect, 124f Hemophilia, 75, 77, 77f, 78f
Heritability, 78. The statistical likelihood that variations observed in
a population are because of genetics. behavioral genetics and, 78--79
environment and, 79, 80f of human conditions, 81f misunderstanding of,
82 perceived loneliness and, 102f Heroin, 223, 223f Heroism, 537--538
Heterozygous, 74. Having two different alleles for a gene.

Heuristic, 371. A shortcut to problem solving; also known as a rule of
thumb. affect, 374 availability, 372--373, 373f recognition, 371--372,
372f representativeness, 373--374 types of, 382 Hierarchy of needs,
Maslow's, 271--272, 271f, 676 Higher-order conditioning, 286. Learning
in which stimuli associated with a conditioned stimulus (CS) also elicit
conditioned responses (CRs). Highly superior autobiographical memory
(HSAM), 330 Hippocampus, 117. A subcortical structure that participates
in memory. declarative memories and, 347 long-term memory and, 117
memory and, 316--317 Histology, 110t Histone modification, 85, 85f, 86
Hoarding behavior, 378 Holistic reasoning, 169 Holmes and Rahe scales,
644 Homeostasis, 253. A steady internal balance, or equilibrium.
Hominins, 92--93 Homo erectus, 92 Homo sapiens, 93 Homozygous, 74.
Having two of the same alleles for a gene. Honesty, 485f Hormones,
prenatal development and, 424f Hot nose sign, 213f Human behavior, myths
about, 7t Human eye, 157f Human growth hormone, 206f Human participants,
65--66, 69 Humanistic psychologists, 13--15 Maslow, 15 Rogers, 15
Humanistic psychology, 14. An approach that saw people as inherently
good and motivated to learn and improve. motivation and, 14, 466
personality and, 466--467 self-actualization and, 466, 467f therapy and,
14 Humanistic therapy, 601. A therapy approach patterned after the
theories proposed by humanistic psychologists, 610--611 Hunger autonomic
nervous system, 257, 257f fat stores and, 256, 257f glucose and,
255--256 insulin and, 255, 255f leptin and, 256, 257f metabolism and,
256, 257f motivation and, 253

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-9

Hunger (continued) satiety and, 256--257 sensation of, 254 stomach
contractions and, 255, 255f Hunter-gatherer societies, 96 Huntington's
disease, 94, 349 Hydrocephalus, 112 Hyperpolarization, 138, 141
Hypnosis, 224. An altered state of consciousness characterized by
relaxation and increased suggestibility in psychotherapy, 600, 604
Stroop Test and, 225, 225f Hypnotherapists, 604
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, 647. A circuit that responds
to perceived stressors by initiating the release of cortisol into the
bloodstream. Hypothalamus, 117. "4F" A subcortical structure that
participates in the regulation of thirst, temperature, hunger, sexual
behavior, and aggression. behaviors, 117 emotions and, 242 homeostasis
and, 117 lateral, 256 motivation and, 117 satiety and, 257f stress and,
646 ventromedial, 256--257, 257f Hypothesis, 41. A proposed explanation
for a situation, usually taking the form "If A happens, then B will be
the result," 41--42 developing and testing, 51f evaluating, 42 in
experiments, 51--53 generating, 41--42 null, 62 Hysteria. See Somatic
symptom disorder

I

Iconic memories, 320--321 Id, 462. The component of Sigmund Freud's
personality theory containing primitive drives present at birth, 463f
Identity, 443. A consistent, unified sense of self. If-then
relationships, 473 Imitation, 311. Copying behavior that is unlikely to
occur naturally and spontaneously, 316 Immigration, emotional
expressivity and, 249, 249f Immune system, 650. The body system that
defends against infection and cancer, 650--651, 650f Implicit
Association Test (IAT), 519 Imprinting, 279

s-10

In-groups, 521f Incentive, 253. A reward that pulls an organism's
behavior in a particular direction, 254f Independence
vs. interdependence, 493--494 Independent variable, 51. An experimental
variable controlled and manipulated by the experimenter; the "if A
happens" part of a hypothesis, 51f, 52, 54, 63 Individualistic culture,
459--460, 493--494, 494f, 508 Indulgent parenting, 436t, 437 Infants.
See also Childhood development audition and, 177 computational language
learning, 387, 387f, 388 emotional expressivity and, 418f emotions and,
245 ethical research with, 65 faces and, 418, 418f facial expressions
and, 240 gender development, 423, 425 language acquisition stages, 388
motor development, 421--423, 423f nervous system development, 421
physical development, 420, 420f REM sleep and, 207 separation protests,
246f sudden infant death syndrome, 210 touch and, 180 vision and,
166--167 Inferential statistics, 62. Statistical methods that allow
experimenters to extend conclusions from samples to larger populations,
63f data and, 62--63 generalizations and, 62 null hypothesis in, 62
statistical significance in, 62 Infidelity, 534, 534f Information
processing, 318. A continuum including attention, sensation, perception,
learning, memory, and cognition, 319f, 429--431 Informed consent, 65.
Permission obtained from a research participant after the risks and
benefits of an experimental procedure have been thoroughly explained, 63
Inhibition, 285. A feature of classical conditioning in which a
conditioned stimulus (CS) predicts the nonoccurrence of an unconditioned
stimulus (UCS) Inhibitory messages, 141, 142f

Insecure attachment, 435. A pattern of infant-caregiver bonding that can
take several forms but is generally characterized as less desirable for
the child's outcomes than secure attachment, 434--435 Insight therapy,
609. A therapy that improves symptoms of psychological disorder by
building people's understanding of their situation. Insomnia, 209. A
sleep disorder characterized by an inability to either initiate or
maintain normal sleep, 228 Instinct, 278. An inborn pattern of behavior
elicited by environmental stimuli; also known as a fixed action pattern,
279 Instinctive drift, 307 Institutional animal care and use committees
(IACUCs), 64 Institutional review boards (IRBs), 64 Instrumental
aggression, 539 Instrumental conditioning, 295 Insula, 243f. Regions of
cortex located at the junction of the frontal and temporal lobes.
anterior insula, 144 emotions and, 243 Insulin, 255, 255f Intellectual
disability, 400. A condition diagnosed in individuals with IQ scores
below 70 and poor adaptive behaviors; also known as mental retardation,
400--401, 401f categories of, 400 diagnosis of, 551 Down syndrome, 389,
395, 413, 413f IQ and, 552f language and, 389, 401 poverty and, 400f
skills and abilities, 393, 395 Williams syndrome, 389, 393, 395
Intelligence, 392. The ability to understand complex ideas, adapt
effectively to the environment, learn from experience, engage in
reasoning, and overcome obstacles. abilities, general and specific,
392--394 assessing, 392 biological influences on, 395--399 brain
development and, 397 brain structures and, 395, 397f genetics and,
397--398 collective, 196, 398--399 crystallized, 393, 394f cultural
differences and, 396

education and, 396 emotional, 394--395 emotional and social, 394--395
extremes of, 399--402 fluid, 393--394, 394f general, 392--394 genius
and, 401 giftedness and, 401 intellectual disabilities and, 400--401
multiple, 394, 395 self-concept and, 395 types of, 404 Intelligence
quotient (IQ), 392. A measure of individual intelligence relative to a
statistically normal curve. brain structures and, 397f culture-free
testing of, 393f, 398 distribution of, 400f giftedness and, 401 human
brain and, 93 increase in, 398 increasing, 402 intellectual disabilities
and, 400 socioeconomic status and, 398--399 Interactome, 549--550
Interdependence vs. independence, 493--494 Interference, 343--344.
Competition between newer and older information in memory, 344f
Interleaving, 352 International Statistical Classification of Diseases
and Related Health Problems (ICD), 553 Internet memes, 313 Interneurons,
114 Interpersonal relationships, sexual and emotional biological
perspective, 144 consciousness and, 227 emotions and, 273 genetics and,
101 gratitude and, 683 happiness and, 675, 675f health psychology and,
683 marital satisfaction and, 454 maximizers and satisficers, 403
methodological perspective, 67 methodological perspective, like
vs. love, 67 online relationships and, 544 operant conditioning and,
313--314 opposites and attraction, 495f pain and, 188 personality and,
494--495 psychological perspectives and, 30 PTSD and, 592 satisfaction
and, 264, 264f sexual orientation and, 264--267 transactive memory and,
356 treatment and, 634 using relationships to illustrate psychological
perspectives, 30

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Interpersonal self, 493. The self we are in the presence of other people
Intersex, 417, 425 Intersexual selection, 99, 101 Intimacy, 533
Intrasexual selection, 99 Intrinsic reward, 253. A reward that arises
internally. Introspection, 5. A personal observation of your own
thoughts, feelings, and behavior, 4 Introversion, 469. One of the Big
Five traits characterized by coolness, reserve, passivity, inactivity,
caution, and negative emotion; opposite of extroversion, 465, 468 IQ.
See Intelligence quotient (IQ) Iris, 157. The brightly colored circular
muscle surrounding the pupil of the eye. Ishihara Color Test, 161f
Islets of Langerhans, 131, 131f

J

Jamais vu, 214 James-Lange theory, 233. A theory of emotion that
proposes that physical sensations lead to subjective feelings. catharsis
and, 234 physical responses and subjective feelings of, 233--235, 233f
James, William, 20f functionalism and, 12, 12f Jet lag, 200--201, 201f
Just-world belief, 508. The assumption that good things happen to good
people and bad things happen to bad people.

L

L SERT allele, 459--460, 460f Language handedness and, 127t
lateralization of, 125, 126f Language, 382. A system for communicating
thoughts and feelings using arbitrary signals. biological psychology of,
384--387 building blocks of, 384 disorders, 385--387 Broca's aphasia,
385 Wernicke's aphasia, 385--386 FOXP-2 gene and, 383, 388 gap in
acquisition of, 388 gender-neutral, 382--383 intellectual disabilities
and, 389, 401, 402 learning, 387--389 morphemes and, 384 nonhuman
animals and ability, 386--387

origins of, 383 phonemes and, 384, 384f processing variations, 389--391
American Sign Language (ASL), 391 bilingualism, 390 dyslexia, 389--390
multilingualism, 390--391, 390f vocabulary and, 382--383, 385f Late
adulthood, 450--453 cognition in, 450--451 physical changes in, 450
social and emotional aspects of, 451--454 depression and, 452 marriage
and, 453--454 relationships and, 453--454 well-being and, 452 Latent
inhibition, 286. The slower learning that occurs when a conditioned
stimulus (CS) is already familiar compared to when the CS is unfamiliar,
287, 291 Latent learning, 305. Learning that occurs in the absence of
reinforcement, 305--306 Lateral hypothalamus (LH), 256 Lateral
preference inventory, 127t Lateralization defined, 124--125 emotional
behavior and, 125 function of, 125 handedness and, 127, 127t of
language, 125, 125f right/left brain myths, 126 split-brain operation,
124, 124f Law of effect (Thorndike), 17, 18f, 295 Law, lie detection
and, 250 Leadership, 588 Learned helplessness, 569. A state in which
experiencing random or uncontrolled consequences leads to feelings of
helplessness and possibly depression. Learning, 278. A relatively
permanent change in behavior or the capacity for behavior due to
experience, 279 aggression and, 541 associative, 280 classical
conditioning, 280, 282--283, 284--294 operant conditioning, 280,
295--309 cultural transmission of, 312--313 imprinting and, 279
instincts and, 279 latent, 305--306 modeling and, 280 nonassociative,
280 observational, 280, 310--314 reflexes and, 278--279 social, 280
synapses and, 345--347 types of, 280, 281

Learning disabilities, 389 Left cerebral hemisphere, localization of
functions in, 124--125 Lens, 157. The clear structure behind the pupil
that bends light toward the retina. Leptin, 256. A hormone secreted by
fat cells that helps the body maintain an appropriate level of stored
fat. Lesions, 110t Levels of processing theory, 325. The depths (shallow
to deep) of processing applied to information that predict its ease of
retrieval, 325--326, 326f Lickert scales, 479 Lie detection, 250--251
Life coaches, 604 Light spectrum, 156f Linear perspective, 164 Lithium
chloride (LiCl), 288, 293 Lithium treatment, 599--600, 624, 625f Lobes,
118, 119--123 frontal, 121--122 occipital, 122 parietal, 123, 124f
temporal, 121f, 122--123 Localization, language, hardedness and, 127t
Loci, Method of, 355 Locke, John, 8 Locus of control, 472. A cognitive
expectancy featured in social-cognitive learning theories of personality
about the source of individual outcomes; an external locus of control
sees outcomes as resulting from luck or chance, while an internal locus
of control sees outcomes as the result of individual effort.
Logotherapy, 659 Loneliness exercise and, 668 health and, 669--670
instruments for, 502 learning to become less lonely, 314 mortality and,
669f motivation and, 268 Loneliness, pandemic during, 145 Long-term
memory, 325. The final stage of the AtkinsonShiffrin model that is the
location of permanent memories, 325--326 declarative, 329--330
hippocampus and, 117 levels of processing theory, 325--326 moving
information into, 325--326 nondeclarative, 330--331 organization of,
333--335

connectionist theories, 333--334 inferences using schemas, 334--335
spreading activation model, 333--334, 333f retrieval, 336--341, 344
emotional events, 340--341 flashbulb memories, 340--341 reconstruction
and, 338--340 tip of the tongue, 337--338 role of cues, 336--337 serial
position effect and, 326--327 types of, 328--332, 328f vs. working
memory, 326--328 Long-term potentiation (LTP), 346. The enhancement of
communication between two neurons resulting from their synchronous
activation, 346f Longhand notes vs. typing notes, 351f Longitudinal
study, 54. An experimental design for assessing age-related changes in
which data are obtained from the same individuals at intervals over a
long period of time. Loudness, 175--176, 175f Love brain imaging of,
67f, 144f companionate, 533, 533f consummate, 533, 533f oxytocin and,
144 romantic, 533--534 triangle model of, 533, 533f types of, 534
Low-balling, 524. Making further requests of a person who has already
committed to a course of action. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), 218
Lucid dreaming, 208. A conscious awareness of dreaming accompanied by
the ability to control the content of the dream, 209 Lying, 250--251
Lymphocyte, 651. White blood cells that are products of the immune
system.

M

Machiavellianism, 588 Magnetoencephalography, 110t Maintenance insomnia,
209 Major depressive disorder (MDD), 568. A disorder characterized by
lengthy periods of depressed mood, loss of pleasure in normal
activities, disturbances in sleep and appetite, difficulty
concentrating, feelings of hopelessness, and possible thoughts of
suicide.

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-11

Major depressive disorder (MDD) (continued) antidepressant medicines,
625--626 attributions and, 571 biological explanations for, 571--572
causes of, 568--571, 572--573 circadian rhythms and, 571 cognitive
behavioral therapy and, 626 cognitive explanations for, 570--571 gender
and, 568, 569f, 570 learning explanations for, 569 mindfulness and, 627
prevalence of, 568--569 rumination and, 570--571, 570f sleep and, 575f
social explanations for, 571 stress and, 573 symptoms of, 575 treatment
for, 625--626, 636 Major depressive disorder with seasonal pattern, 201.
A mood disorder in which depression occurs regularly at the same time
each year, usually during the winter months; formerly known as seasonal
affective disorder (SAD). Major histocompatibility complex (MHC), 101
Mania, 567. A period of unrealistically elevated mood. Marijuana
(Cannabis) dependency and, 218 as a hallucinogen, 216--217 health
outcomes of, 217 psychosis and, 217 recreational use of, 217
schizophrenia and, 566, 566f Marriage divorce and, 544f happiness and,
448, 448f, 675 in late adulthood, 454 online relationships and, 544
perfect time for, 454 personality and, 454 therapy and, 634f Maslow,
Abraham, 14--15, 22f, 271--272 Master of divinity (MDiv) degree,
603--604 Maternal aggression, 539 Maximizers, 403 McGurk effect, 177f
MDMA (Ecstasy), 222 Mean, 58. The numerical average of a set of scores.
Measure, 48. A method for describing a variable's quantity. Median, 58.
The halfway mark in a set of data, with half of the scores above it and
half below, 58f Meditation, 225. A voluntary alteration of consciousness

s-12

characterized by positive emotion and absence of thought, 226 Medulla,
115. The brainstem structure that lies just above the spinal cord.
Melatonin, 131 Meme, 313 Memory, 318. The ability to retain knowledge.
adaptive advantage of, 319 Atkinson-Shiffrin Model, 321f
autobiographical, 330 biochemistry and, 349--350, 350f biology of,
345--350 context-dependent, 337, 337f declarative, 329--330 encoding
and, 318, 321 episodic, 329 false, 334 gist in, 339, 339f improving,
350--357, 354--355 distribute practice over time, 350, 352 exercise, 354
mnemonics, 355 reciting, 354 sleep and, 354 test taking, 352 information
processing and, 318 long-term, 325--328, 342 nondeclarative, 328,
330--331 own-race bias in, 336 priming and, 330, 331 procedural,
330--331 process of, 318--319 processing, 319 retrieval, 319, 335--341,
342 schemas and, 334 semantic, 329 sensory, 320--321 short-term,
321--325, 323f, 324 sleep and, 206--207 storage of, 318--319 stress and,
353, 353f transactive, 356 types of, 332 working, 323--324, 324f
Meningitis, 112 Menopause, 448. The complete cessation of a woman's
menstrual cycles. Menstruation, 449 Mental and physical health, 23f
Mental maps, 364f Mental processes, study of, 5--6 Mere exposure effect,
531. A situation in which repeated exposure increases liking, 531f
Meta-analysis, 53--54. A statistical analysis of many previous
experiments on a single topic. Metabolism, 256, 259, 261
Methamphetamine, 222 Method of successive approximations, 304. A method
for increasing the frequency of behaviors that

never or rarely occur; also known as shaping, 304--305 Methylphenidate
(Ritalin), 222, 560 Microscopes, 9f Midbrain, 115. The part of the
brainstem that lies between the pons and the cerebral hemispheres,
115--116, 174 Midlife, 448--450 empty nest and, 450f physical
development in, 449 social changes in, 449 Migration, 89. Movement to a
new location, 89--90 Miller, George, 21f Mimicry, 227 Mind, 5. The brain
and its activities, including thought, emotion, and behavior.... Mind
wandering, 198f, 203 Mindfulness meditation, 225, 627, 657 Minnesota
Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), 479, 480f Minnesota Study of
Twins Reared Apart, 475 Mirror neurons, 124, 125 Mirror systems, tennis
serves and, 125 Mixed longitudinal design, 55. A method for assessing
age-related changes that combines the crosssectional and longitudinal
approaches by observing a cross-section of participants over a shorter
period than is used typically in longitudinal studies. Mnemonics, 355.
Memory aids that link new information to well-known information. Mode,
58. The most frequently occurring score in a set of data, 58--59, 59f
Modeling, 280, 311--312 Monoamine oxidase A gene (MAOA), 84, 432f
Monocular cues, 165. A depth cue that requires the use of only one eye,
164--166 Mood emotions and, 233 REM sleep and, 207--208 stress and,
652--653 Moral reasoning conventional morality, 443 culture and, 443
Kohlberg stages of, 442, 442t, 443 postconventional morality, 443
preconventional morality, 442--443 Morita Therapy, 578 Morpheme, 384.
The smallest component of speech that carries meaning. Morphine, 223

Motivated forgetting, 344. Failure to retrieve negative memories,
344--345 Motivation, 233. A process that arouses, maintains, and guides
behavior toward a goal. achievement, 268--269 affiliation and, 267--268
approach and avoidance, 271 arousal and, 252 cognitive and social,
267--271 concepts in, 274--275 drive and, 253 drive reduction and, 253
vs. emotion, 233 emotion and, 232--233 extrinsic reward and, 253
homeostasis and, 253 hunger and eating and, 253--261 incentive and, 253,
254f intrinsic reward and, 253 Maslow's hierarchy of needs and,
271--272, 271f priorities of, 271--273 self-actualization and, 272--273
set points and, 253 sexual, 262--267 theories of, 271--273 Motives,
prioritizing during pandemic, 274 Motor cortex, 119--120, 121, 121f, 124
Motor development, 421--423, 423f Multilingualism, 390--391, 390f
Multiple intelligences, 394 Multiple perspectives, 26f, 54, 107
Mutation, 89. An error that occurs when DNA is replicated, 89--90
Myelin, 135. The insulating material covering some axons. adolescent
development and, 440 axons and, 135--136, 139--140 child development
and, 421, 421f formation of, 135--136, 136f function of, 135--136
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), 465, 480

N

Naive theories, 430, 431f Narcissism, 446f Narcissistic personality
disorder (NPD), 587. A disorder characterized by grandiosity, need for
admiration, and low empathy, 587--589 assessing, 590--591 treatment for,
632--633 Narcolepsy, 209. A sleep disorder characterized by the
intrusion of rapid eye movement phenomena into waking, 209 National
Institute on Alcohol & Alcoholism, 2018, 37 Native Americans
psychotherapy and, 607

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

self and, 493--494 self-esteem and, 487--488, 488f, 493 social behavior
and, 95--97 stereotypes and, 518--519 trophy, 272 Natural sciences, 7.
Sciences that study the physical and biological events that occur in
nature. Natural selection, 89. The process by which survival and
reproduction pressures act to change the frequency of alleles in
subsequent generations. adaptation and, 91--92, 95 allele and, 89 Darwin
and, 89 fitness and, 90 Naturalistic observation, 46. An in-depth study
of a phenomenon in its natural setting. Nature, 72 vs. nurture, 72--73,
84 The contributions of heredity to our physical structure and
behaviors.in development, 409 Near-death experiences, 214. An altered
state of consciousness reported by people who were close to death
because of cardiac or other medical problems that features out-of-body
experiences, light-atthe-end-of-a-tunnel perceptions, and a state of
calmness, 213 Negative emotions, 513 Negative punishment, 299. A method
for reducing behavior by removing something desirable whenever the
target behavior occurs. Negative reinforcement, 298. A method for
increasing behaviors that allow an organism to escape or avoid an
unpleasant consequence. Neglect, 124f Neisser, Ulric, 19f, 22f
Neo-Freudian, 465. A theorist who attempted to update and modify Sigmund
Freud's original theory of personality, 464--465 Nervous system
development of, 421 evolution of, 95--96 organization of, 110--124, 111f
Neural communication axons and, 134 dendrites and, 134 glia and,
135--137 myelin and, 135--137 process of, 134

structures of, 146 synapses and, 141, 143 Neural signaling, 137--142
chemical, 141, 142f, 143 electrical, 137--139 hyperpolarization, 138,
141, 142 neurotransmitters and, 143 resting potential, 138
Neurodevelopmental disorders, 618--622 Neurofeedback, 617. A type of
biofeedback used to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) and seizures by teaching the client to keep measures of brain
activity within a certain range. Neuron, 134. A cell of the nervous
system that is specialized to send and receive neural messages, 135f
axons and, 134 cell body and, 134 dendrites and, 134 glia and, 134--137
learning and, 346 myelinated, 139 nucleus of, 134 parts of, 135f resting
potential, 138 synapses and, 143 Neuron Doctrine, 109 Neuroticism, 469.
A Big Five personality trait characterized by anxiety, angry hostility,
depression, selfconsciousness, impulsivity, and vulnerability, 468f
Neurotransmitter, 140. A chemical messenger that communicates across a
synapse. acetylcholine (ACh), 143 dopamine, 143 endorphins, 144, 146
excitatory messages, 141, 143 hyperpolarization, 138, 139f important,
141t inhibitory messages, 141, 142f, 143 norepinephrine activity, 143
receptors and, 142 reuptake and, 141, 143 serotonin, 143 types of, 143
Newborn development activity and, 416--417 milestones in, 420 mother's
voice and, 412 reflexes and, 416, 417t senses, 418--419, 419f sex and
gender development, 417--418 Newell, Alan, 19 Nicotine, 220--221
Nightmares, 208--209 Node of Ranvier, 140 Non-rapid eye movement (N-REM)
sleep, 203. The components of sleep characterized by

theta and delta wave activity, as recorded by electroencephalogram, and
deep physical relaxation. benefits of, 206 delta waves in, 204 EEG
recordings and, 204f pattern of, 205f, 206 sleep talking in, 205
sleepwalking in, 205 stages of, 203--206 theta waves and, 203 Non-visual
senses important structures in, 190 McGurk effect, 177f perception and
cognition, 175--177 auditory groupings and, 176 localization of sound
and, 176, 176f of loudness, 175, 175f, 176 of pitch, 174f, 175
sociocultural influences on, 177--178 sound waves and, 172, 172f
ultrasound range and, 172, 173f vestibular system, 179 Nonassociative
learning, 280. Learning that involves changes in the magnitude of
responses to stimuli. habituation and, 280 sensitization and, 280
Nondeclarative memory, 328. An unconsciously and effortlessly retrieved
memory that is difficult to verbalize, such as a memory for classical
conditioning, procedural learning, and priming; also known as implicit
memory, 330--331 vs. declarative, 348f priming and, 330, 331, 331f
procedural, 330--331 Norepinephrine activity, 116, 141t, 143 Normal
curve, 59--60, 60f Normal distribution, 62 A symmetrical probability
function, 60f Note typing vs. longhand notes, 351f Nucleus accumbens,
118. A subcortical structure that participates in reward and addiction.
Null hypothesis, 62. A hypothesis stating the default position that
there is no real difference between two measures Nurture, 72. The
contributions of environmental factors and experience to our physical
structure and behaviors, 409 vs. nature, 72--73, 84

Nutrigenomics, 86 Nutrition epigenetics and, 86 health and, 665--666
obesity and, 666f social factors in, 665

O

Obedience, 524. Compliance with a request from an authority figure,
524--527, 526f Obesity body mass index and, 257--258, 258f cultural
influences on, 259 genetic influences on, 259 increase in, 258f, 259
medications for, 260 sedentary lifestyle and, 259 social influences on,
259 stress and, 652--653 surgical intervention for, 260 weight loss and,
259--260 Object permanence, 427. The ability to form mental
representations of objects that are no longer present. Objectivity, 36.
The practice of basing conclusions on facts, without the influence of
personal emotion and bias. vs. subjectivity, 36--37 Objects,
recognizing, 162--166 brain and, 162 contrast and frequency in, 163
Gestalt psychology and, 163--164 gratings and, 163, 163f Observational
learning, 280. Learning that occurs when one organism watches the
actions of another organism; also known as social learning or modeling.
aggression and Bandura's work, 311--312 behaviors influenced by,
310--311 cultural transmission of, 312--313 imitation and, 311 memes
and, 313 Obsession, 578. An intrusive, distressing thought.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 581. A disorder associated with
intrusive obsessions and compulsions, 116 biological explanations for,
581 COVID-19 and, 583 culture and, 582 learning explanations for,
581--582 social explanations for, 582 symptoms of, 594 treatment for,
629, 636 Occipital lobe, 119. The lobe of the cerebral cortex located at
the back of the brain; location of the primary visual cortex. nerves
and, 122 visual cortex and, 118, 119, 121f

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-13

Occlusion, 167 Olfaction, 183--184. See also Chemical senses The sense
of smell. biology of, 183--184 olfactory pathways and, 183--184
olfactory receptors and, 184f sociocultural influences on, 187--188
thalamus and, 184 Olfactory bulb, 183. One of two structures below the
frontal lobes of the brain that receive input from the olfactory
receptors in the nose. Olfactory nerve, 183. A nerve carrying olfactory
information from the olfactory receptors to the olfactory bulbs.
Olfactory receptors, 184f Omega-3 fatty acids, 567 Online therapy,
606--607 Onset insomnia, 209 Openness, 468. A Big Five personality trait
characterized by an appreciation for fantasy, feelings, actions, ideas,
values, and aesthetics. Operant conditioning, 280. A type of learning in
which associations are formed between behaviors and their outcomes.
applying, 307--308 behavior therapies, 308--309 token economies, 308
biological influences on, 306--307 cognitive influences on, 305--306
consequences, 296, 296t interpersonal relationships and, 313--314 method
of successive approximations/shaping and, 305--306 negative
reinforcement, 298 personality and, 465--466 positive reinforcement,
296--298 punishment and, 299 schedules of reinforcement, 300--304 social
influences on, 307 Operationalization, 53. Defining variables in ways
that allow them to be measured. Opiates, 223 Opioid overdose, 292, 292f
Opioids, 144, 223 Opponent process theory, 160. A theory of color vision
that suggests we have a redgreen color channel and a blue-yellow color
channel in which activation of one color in each pair inhibits the other
color, 160--161 Optic disk, 157f, 158

s-14

Optic nerve, 159. The nerve exiting the retina of the eye. Optic tracts,
159. Nerve pathways traveling from the optic chiasm to the thalamus,
hypothalamus, and midbrain. Optimism, 673. Thinking positively about the
future, 674, 674f Optogenetics, 110t Orbitofrontal cortex, 122. A part
of the prefrontal cortex located right behind the eyes that participates
in impulse control. antisocial personality disorder and, 586 damage to,
122, 122f obsessive-compulsive disorder and, 581 Orexins, 256 Organ of
Corti, 174. A structure located on the basilar membrane that contains
auditory receptors. Organization, in Gestalt psychology, 163--164 Origin
of Species (Darwin), 12, 89 Out-groups, 518f, 521f Ovaries, 132--133
Ovotesticular syndrome, 425 Own-race bias (ORB), 336 Oxytocin, 133, 144,
222, 263, 263f

P

Pain, 181--182. See also Somatosensation expectation and, 182 gate
theory of, 182, 182f pain messages and, 181--182 pain receptors and, 181
perception of, 182 placebo effects on, 182 relationships and, 188
thalamus and, 181--182 tolerance of, 183 Pandemic. See COVID-19 Pandemic
Panic attack, 578. The experience of intense fear and autonomic arousal
in the absence of real threat, 578--579 Panic disorder, 578. A disorder
characterized by repeated panic attacks and fear of future attacks.
biological explanations for, 578 cognitive explanations for, 578 culture
and, 579 integrating perspectives on, 579 panic attacks and, 578 social
explanations for, 579 symptoms of, 594 Papillae, 185. Small bumps on the
tongue that contain taste buds. Paradoxical sleep, 205 Parallelogram
illusion, 170

Parasympathetic nervous system, 130. The part of the autonomic nervous
system associated with rest, repair, and energy storage. function of,
130 Parental investment, 98 Parenting styles attachment and, 434--436
authoritarian, 436f, 436t authoritative, 436, 436f, 436t, 437 autonomy
in, 526 behavioral regulation, 436, 436t child outcomes and, 437f
cultural influences on, 435 indulgent, 436f, 436t obedience and, 526
parental support, 436--437, 436t responsive, 434 temperament and, 432f
uninvolved, 436--437, 436f, 436t Parents happiness and, 448, 676 marital
satisfaction, 448f Parietal lobe, 118. The lobe of the cerebral cortex
that lies at the top of the head between the frontal and the occipital
lobes; location of the primary somatosensory cortex. damage to, 124f
somatosensory cortex, 121f, 123 Parkinson's disease, 116 caffeine and,
220 dopamine and, 143 facial expressions and, 245 medications for, 623
procedural memory and, 349 Partial reinforcement, 301. The reinforcement
of a desired behavior on some occasions, but not others. Partial
reinforcement effect in extinction, 303. The more rapid extinction
observed following continuous reinforcement compared to that following
partial reinforcement Partial seizures, 214, 214f Participation
trophies, entitlement, competitiveness, and, 270 Passive aggression, 539
Pavlov, Ivan Petrovich, 16, 20f, 22f, 281 Peer groups, 444--445 Peer
review, 42. The process of having other experts examine research prior
to its publication Perception, 150. The process of interpreting sensory
information. assessing, 156 auditory, 175--178 autistic children and,
168 bottom-up processing and, 152--153, 162 color vision and, 160f
measurement of

absolute threshold and, 153 difference threshold and, 153 psychophysics
and, 153 sensation and, 150 sensory adaptation and, 151--152 signal
detection and, 153--154 top-down processing and, 152--153 visual
illusions and, 165f--166f, 170, 170f Performance, arousal and, 240f
Peripheral nervous system (PNS), 111. The nerves exiting the central
nervous system that carry sensory and motor information to and from the
rest of the body, 133 autonomic nervous system, 129--130, 131f endocrine
system and, 132--133 somatic nervous system, 129 Person-centered
therapy, 610. A humanistic therapy approach developed by Carl Rogers to
help clients achieve congruence, or an alignment of the real and ideal
selves. Personality, 25. An individual's characteristic way of thinking,
feeling, and behaving, 23f, 26f assessing (see Personality assessment)
biological bases of, 473--477 brain function and, 475--476 brain
structures and, 475--476 evolution of, 477 genetics and, 475--476
temperament, 473--475, 474f classic behaviorist approaches, 465--466
Dark Triad traits, 99 humanistic approach to, 466--467, 467f
interpersonal relationships and, 494--495 marital satisfaction and, 454
neo-Freudians, 464--465 psychodynamic theories of, 462--465 responses to
pandemic and, 496, 496f situations affecting, 470--473 social media and,
25f social-cognitive learning theories, 472 test, 481f theories of,
461--462 trait theories of, 467--470 big five theory, 468--470, 468f
early, 468 factor analysis, 467f twin studies in, 475, 476f unconscious
mind and, 465 Personality assessment computers and, 479f diversity and,
482 ethics of, 482

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

personality inventories, 478--479, 480f projective tests, 481--482
reasons for, 478 self-reports, 478 social media and, 478 standardized
tests for, 478 validity of, 481f Personality disorders, 586. A disorder
characterized by impairments in identity in personality traits, and in
establishment of empathy or intimacy. antisocial personality disorder
(ASPD), 58 borderline personality disorder (BPD), 587, 589f narcissistic
personality disorder (NPD), 587, 589--590 treatment for, 636 Personality
inventory, 478. An objective test, often using numbered scales or
multiple choice, used to assess personality, 478--479 Persuasion, 512. A
change in attitude in response to information provided by another
person, 512--513, 515 audience age and intelligence, 514, 515f
elaboration likelihood model and, 512 fake news and, 514 medium used
and, 513 negative emotions and, 513 neuroscience of, 515 routes to,
512--515 central, 512--515 peripheral, 512--515 similarity and, 513
social media and, 514, 515f Pessimism, 674f Phantom limbs, 180
Phenothiazines, 623 Phenotype, 72. An observable characteristic, 73, 74f
Philosophy, 7 The discipline that systematically examines basic
concepts, including the source of knowledge. Phobia, symptoms of, 594
Phonemes, 384. A speech sound, 384f Phrenology, 109 Physical punishment,
300 Piaget, Jean, 21f Piloerection, 278--279 Pineal gland, 132f Pitch,
174f, 175 Pituitary gland, 132--133 Plan in problem solving carrying
out, 376--377 computer models and, 377 evaluating, 377 making, 370--376
solutions in affect heuristic, 375

algorithms, 371 availability heuristic, 372 deciding on, 374--376
framing effects, 375--376, 376f heuristics, 371--374 recognition
heuristic, 372--373 representativeness heuristic, 373--374 Pons, 115. A
part of the brainstem located between the medulla and the midbrain.
Population, 46. The entire group from which a sample is taken., 46--47
Positive emotions, 673--679. See also Happiness Positive institutions,
681--682 Positive psychology, 672. An approach to psychology that
emphasizes normal behavior and human strengths, 672--673 future and, 682
happiness and, 674--679 healthy mindedness and, 672--673 optimism and,
673 positive emotions and, 673--679 positive institutions, 681--682
positive traits, 680--681 Positive punishment, 299. A consequence that
eliminates or reduces the frequency of a behavior by applying an
aversive stimulus, 299 Positive reinforcement, 296--298 Positive traits,
680--681 Positron emission tomography (PET), 109, 110t, 597--598
Postconventional morality, 443. Lawrence Kohlberg's stage at which moral
choices are made according to personal standards and reason Posterior
cingulate cortex (PCC), 117 Postformal thought, 446--447 Posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), 582. A disorder caused by the experience of
trauma, which leads to flashbacks, dreams, hypervigilance, and avoidance
of stimuli associated with the traumatic event. biological explanations
for, 583--584 children and, 583, 644 flashbulb memories, 340--341
interpersonal relationships and, 592 learning explanations for, 584 MDMA
(Ecstasy) and, 222 norepinephrine activity and, 143 prevalence of, 583
social and cultural explanations for, 584 symptoms, 583, 594

trauma and, 643f treatment for, 630--631, 636 virtual reality (VR) and,
630 Poverty health and, 671 intellectual disabilities and, 400f
psychopathology and, 671 Power of one, 527 Preconventional morality,
442. Lawrence Kohlberg's stage at which moral choices are made according
to expectations of reward or punishment. Prediction, 41 Prefrontal
cortex, 121. The most forward part of the frontal lobe of the cerebral
cortex. antisocial behavior and, 122 damage to, 122 decision-making and,
378 dyslexia and, 389--390 myelin and, 135--137 orbitofrontal cortex
and, 121--122 Pregnancy alcohol consumption, 414, 415t duration of, 412
premature birth and, 412 recreational drugs, 413--414 teratogens and,
413--416, 415t viruses and, 414--415, 415t Prejudice, 516. A
prejudgment, usually negative, of another person on the basis of
membership in a group. categorization and, 517, 522 conditioning and,
290--291 latent inhibition and, 291 out-groups and, 517f outcomes of,
518--519 reducing, 519, 521--522 sources of, 516--518 Premack principle,
296 Premature birth, 412 Prenatal development Down syndrome and maternal
age, 413f duration of pregnancy, 412 embryonic stage, 411 environmental
risks and, 413--416 alcohol consumption, 414, 416f recreational drugs,
413--414 teratogens and, 413--414, 414f, 415t viruses and, 414--415,
415t fetus and, 411--412, 412f genetic risks to, 412--413, 413f hormones
and, 424f milestones in, 420 premature birth and, 412 testosterone and
aggression in, 540, 540f zygote, 411 Preoperational stage, 427. Jean
Piaget's stage of development beginning at the age of 2 years and ending
at the age of 6 years

and characterized by use of symbols, egocentrism, and limits on the
ability to reason logically. Primary auditory cortex, 174--175 Primary
reinforcers, 297 Primary sensory cortex, 180 Primary visual cortex, 159,
159f Priming, 330. A change in a response to a stimulus as a result of
exposure to a previous stimulus, 331, 331f Principles of Psychology
(James), 12 Prisoner's dilemma, 536--537, 537f Privacy, 65 Proactive
interference, 344, 344f Problem, 368. A situation in which a current
state is separated from an ideal state by obstacles. Problem solving,
369. See also Decision-making The use of information to meet a specific
goal. flow chart, 369f functional fixedness and, 370 personal biases
and, 369 plan in (see Plan in problem solving) process of, 369
rumination and, 570, 570f systems engineering process of, 369f
understanding the problem, 370 Problem-focused coping, 658. A response
to stress designed to address specific problems by finding solutions.
Procedural memory, 330. A nondeclarative or implicit memory for how to
carry out skilled movement, 330--331 basal ganglia and, 348--349 Product
placement, 291 Progressive relaxation, 629 Project Pigeon, 307, 308
Projective tests, 481. A test of personality based on Freudian theory
that provides an ambiguous stimulus onto which test takers "project"
their personality, 481--482 Prosopagnosia, 211--212 Prototype, 365. A
representation of a category formed by averaging all members of the
category. Proximity, in Gestalt psychology, 164, 164f Psychiatrist, 602.
A medical doctor who specializes in psychiatry and can use medical
procedures, such as the prescribing of medication, to treat
psychological disorders, 602--603

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-15

Psychoactive drugs, 215. Any drug with the capability of altering a
person's state of consciousness. addiction to, 215, 216f blood supply
and concentrations, 220f commonly used, 216--218, 219f, 220--223,
228--229 culture and, 219 tolerance of, 215 withdrawal from, 215
Psychoanalysis, 609. Sigmund Freud's treatment approach based on his
psychodynamic theory, 462, 601, 605, 609--610 Psychodynamic, 462. A
theory put forward by Sigmund Freud in which psychic energy moves among
the compartments of the personality: Id, ego, and superego. Freud's
theories, 462--463 conscious awareness, 464f contemporary assessment of,
464 defense mechanisms, 463 id, ego, and superego, 462--463, 463f
psychosexual stages, 463 somatic symptom disorder, 462 Psychological
altruism, 538 Psychological disorders anxiety disorders, 580, 594
biological treatments for, 614--617 brain stimulation, 616
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 615 medication and, 615 neurofeedback,
617 psychosurgery, 615--616 bipolar disorder, 567--568 body dysmorphic
disorder, 582, 594 continuum of, 550--551f defining, 550--551 diagnosis
of, 553--554 dissociative disorders, 584--585 emerging in childhood,
555--561 epigenetics and, 83 genotypes and, 475f interpersonal
relationships and, 634 major depressive disorder (MDD), 568--575
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 581--582, 594 personality and, 475f
personality disorders, 586--590 posttraumatic stress disorder, 582--584,
594 psychological perspectives on, 554--555 rates of, 553, 553f
schizophrenia, 561--565 somatic symptom disorder, 585 stress and, 640

s-16

treatment for, 608, 618--636 treatment integrations, 633 Psychological
perspectives, 22--26, 26f biological psychology, 22, 23, 23f clinical
psychology, 26 cognitive psychology, 23f, 24, 24f cultural diversity,
24, 25 developmental psychology, 23f, 24, 24f, 25 evolutionary
psychology, 22, 23, 24f, 95 five main perspectives, 23f, 32f
integrating, 26, 26f interpersonal relationships and, 30 multiple
perspectives, benefits of, 26f, 54 personality, 23f, 24, 25
psychological disorders and, 554--555 social psychology, 23f, 24, 24f,
25 Psychologists, 28--30 bachelor degrees, 28, 29f clinical, 29
counseling, 29 doctoral degrees, 29, 29f employment for, 28, 29f
forensic, 28 master's degrees, 28--29, 29f medical doctor, 30 school, 29
specialties of, 29 sports, 29 Psychology, 5. The scientific study of
behavior, mental processes, and brain functions, 4 culture and
diversity, 27 experiencing, 14--22 milestones in the history of, 20f
origin of, 7--9 pioneering approaches to, 10--22, 20--22f behaviorism,
18--19, 19f cognitive revolution, 15--22 first experiments in, 11
functionalism, 11 Gestalt psychology, 11, 12 humanism, 13--14 milestones
in, 19f structuralism and Wihelm Wundt, 10, 10f, 12 real-world problems
and, 228 reason for studying, 6 roots of, 8--10 ancient Greek
philosophers, 8, 10 ancient physicians, 8, 10 British empiricists, 7, 10
clinical, 13--15 Fechner, 9 philosophical, 7, 8 scientific, 8--9 von
Helmholtz, 8--9, 10 studying science of, 3--5 tracking the problem of
pandemic, 31 Psychopaths antisocial personality disorder and, 586

corporate, 588 emotions and, 586 prevalence of, 588 Psychophysics, 153.
The study of relationships between the physical qualities of stimuli and
the subjective responses they produce. measuring perception and, 153
Psychosexual stage, 463. A stage in Sigmund Freud's theory of the
developing personality. Psychosis amphetamines and, 221--222 cannabis
and, 217 Psychosocial stages, 444t Psychosurgery, 615. The attempt to
improve symptoms of psychological disorders through operating on the
brain, 615--616 Psychotherapists, 602. A licensed professional who
provides psychotherapy. clinical psychologists, 602--603, 608
counselors, 603--604 credentialing practices, 605 degree, 602, 603f
doctor of philosophy (PhD), 602 doctor of psychology (PsyD), 602
hypnotherapists, 604 job opportunities for, 603, 603f life coaches, 604
master of divinity (MDiv) degree, 603--604 psychiatrists, 602--603, 608
psychologists, 602, 608 Psychotherapy, 599. A treatment designed to
improve symptoms of psychological disorder through conversation between
the therapist and the patient or client. approaches to, 599--602
biological, 599--600 clinical assessment, 602 evidence-based practice,
601 psychological, 600--601 brief therapy and, 605 contemporary
approaches to, 612--613 behavioral therapies, 612--613 biopsychosocial
approaches, 614 cognitive therapies, 613--614 couples therapy and, 606
delivering, 605--607 family therapy and, 606 group therapy and, 605--606
historical approaches to, 609--611 humanistic therapies, 610--611
psychoanalysis, 609--610 hypnosis and, 600, 604 innovative systems for,
606--607 with Native Americans, 607 online, 606--607

self-help groups and, 606 treatment challenges, 608 PTSD. See
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) Puberty, 439. A period of physical
changes leading to sexual maturity, 439f Publication bias, 54
Punishment, 299. A consequence that eliminates or reduces the frequency
of a behavior Pupil, 157. An opening formed by the iris.

R

Race anxiety disorders and, 574, 574f genetic research and, 80 optimism
and, 674 prejudice and, 517--518 self-esteem and, 487--488 shooter bias
and, 520 stereotypes and, 517--518 Random assignment, 51. The procedure
in which each participant has an equal chance of being placed in any
group in an experiment, 52f Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, 203. The
component of sleep characterized by waveforms resembling waking, as
measured by electroencephalogram, accompanied by rapid motion of the
eyes, muscular paralysis, and sympathetic nervous system activation.
benefits of, 206--208 body paralysis in, 205 EEG recordings and, 204f,
205 infants and, 207 lifespan, 207f lucid dreaming and, 208 mood and,
207--208 paradoxical sleep and, 205 pattern of, 205f, 206 REM rebound
and, 207 stages of, 205--206 Raves, 227 Reaction time, testing, 14--15
Reactivity, 475 Recency effect, 327, 327f Receptor, 141. A special
channel in the membrane of a neuron that interacts with
neurotransmitters released by other neurons. Recessive, 74. A feature of
an allele that produces only a phenotype in the homozygous condition,
74f Reciprocal altruism, 97. Help that you provide for another person
when you expect the person to return the favor in the future, 538
Reciprocal determinism, 472. A social-cognitive learning

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

theory of personality that features the mutual influence of the person
and that of the situation on each other. Reciprocation, 524 Recite, 354
Recognition heuristic, 371. A rule of thumb in which a higher value is
placed on the more easily recognized alternative, 372f Reconstruction,
338. Rebuilding a memory out of stored elements, 338--340 Recreational
drugs, 413--414 Reflection techniques, 611 Reflex, 278. An inevitable,
involuntary response to stimuli, 279 of newborns, 416, 417t Rehearsal,
322. Repetition of information. Reinforcement sensitivity theory (RST),
477 Relatedness, 76. The probability that two people share the same
allele from a common ancestor, 77f Relational aggression, 539
Relationship-focused coping, 658. A response to stress designed to
maintain and protect social relationships. Reliability, 54. The
consistency of a measure, including test-retest, interrater,
intermethod, and internal consistency. REM rebound, 207 Repeated
transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), 616, 617f Replication, 42.
Repeating an experiment and producing the same results.in science,
42--43, 61 Representativeness heuristic, 373. A rule of thumb in which
stimuli similar to a prototype are believed to be more likely than
stimuli that are dissimilar to a prototype. Repression of memories, 345
Rescorla-Wagner Model, 287, 288f Research ethics, 64--68 animal
subjects, 66 confidentiality and, 66 correlational methods, 48--49, 49f
experimental methods, 51--54 genetic research and, 80 human
participants, 65--66 informed consent and, 65--66 principles of, 69
privacy and, 66 Research methods in biological psychology, 110t
correlational methods, 48--49 dependent variable in, 51, 51f

descriptive method, 44--47 diversity in, 47 experimental methods, 51--54
independent variable in, 51, 51f interpersonal relationships and, 67
principles of, 55 time, assessing effects of, 54--55 unethical
experiments and, 49, 49f, 52 Research participants, recruiting diverse,
47--48 Resilience in the face of COVID-19 Pandemic, 683 Resilience, 659.
The ability to adapt to life's challenges in positive ways. challenge
and, 659 control and, 659 hardiness and, 659 stress and, 659--660
Resistance, 610. (a) A psychoanalytic technique in which the patient's
reluctance to accept the interpretations of the therapist indicate that
the interpretations are correct. (b) The second stage of the general
adaptation syndrome (GAS), characterized by coping with ongoing stress,
608, 642, 643 Resting potential, 138. The measure of the electrical
charge across a neural membrane when the neuron is not processing
information. Restless legs syndrome (RLS), 210. A disorder characterized
by the involuntary movement of an extremity, usually one leg Reticular
formation, 116. A collection of structures located along the midline of
the brainstem that participate in mood, arousal, and sleep. Retina, 157.
Layers of visual processing cells in the back of the eye, 158f Retinal
disparity, 166. The difference between the images projected onto each
eye, 167f Retrieval, 319. The recovery of stored information. from
long-term memory, 336--341 emotional events, 340--341 reconstruction
and, 338--340 role of cues, 336--337 tip of the tongue, 337--338 from
short-term memory, 335 Retroactive interference, 344, 344f

Reuptake, 141. A process in which molecules of neurotransmitter in the
synaptic gap are returned to the axon terminal from which they were
released Ribonucleic acid (RNA), 85 Right cerebral hemisphere,
localization of functions in, 124--125 Risk perception, 440--441, 441f
Risk-taking, 440--441 Ritalin, 222 Rods, 158. A photoreceptor
specialized to detect dim light, 158f, 159 Rogers, Carl, 15, 16f, 21f
Romantic love, 533--534 Rorschach Inkblot Test, 480, 481 Rouge test, 195
rTMS. See Repeated transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) Rumination,
570--571, 570f Runner's high, 144

S

S SERT allele, 459--460, 460f SAME. See Somatovisceral afference model
of emotion (SAME) Sample, 46. A subset of a population being studied.
Sandbagging, 488 SAT data, 56, 57, 60, 61f, 63, 63f Satiety, 256. A
sense of feeling full and not requiring further food, 257 Satisficers,
403 Scatterplot, 60, 62f Schachter-Singer two-factor theory, 236. A
theory of emotion in which general arousal leads to assessment, which in
turn leads to subjective feelings. physical responses and subjective
feelings of, 233f, 236--238 Schedules of reinforcement, 301f, 310
comparing, 303--304 fixed interval schedules, 302, 303f fixed ratio
schedules, 301--302 partial reinforcement, 301--302 partial
reinforcement effect in extinction, 303 variable interval schedules, 302
variable ratio schedules, 302 Schema, 334. A set of expectations about
objects and situations. concepts and, 367 false memories and, 334 memory
and, 334--335 Schizophrenia, 561. A disorder characterized by
hallucinations, delusions, disorganized thought and speech, disorders of

movement, restricted affect, and avolition or asociality, 561--566
biological factors in, 561--565 cannabis and, 566, 566f causes of,
562--565 dopamine and, 564 environmental factors and, 565, 565f genetics
and, 563, 563f latent inhibition and, 291 medications for, 623--624,
623f nicotine and, 221 psychosocial rehabilitation of, 624 recovery in,
599f self and, 492--493 stress and, 565, 565f symptoms of, 562, 575
treatment for, 623--624, 636 School psychologists, 29 Science, 36. A
method for learning about reality through systematic observation and
experimentation, 35--44 communicating, 42 critical thinking in, 38, 38f,
51 hypothesis in, 41--42 objectivity in, 36 peer review in, 42, 54
replication in, 42 systematic observations in, 38f, 51 theories in,
40--41, 41f Scientific enterprise, 40--43 Scientific mindset,
developing, 36--37 Secondary reinforcers, 297 Secondary sex
characteristics, 439. Physical changes occurring at puberty associated
with sexual maturity. Secure attachment, 434. A pattern of
infant-caregiver bonding in which children explore confidently and
return to the parent or caregiver for reassurance, 435 Seizures, 214. An
abnormal level of brain activation with a sudden onset, 213--214
absence, 214 coma and, 214 GABA and, 213 generalized, 214, 214f partial,
214, 214f tonic-clonic, 214 Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
(SSRI), 143, 261, 625--626, 626f Self, 483. Patterns of thought,
feelings, and actions that we perceive in our own minds, 483--484 brain
and, 491--493 culture and, 493--494 self-awareness and, 485--486, 497
self-concept and, 484--485, 497 self-esteem and, 486--490, 497
self-regulation and, 491 self-schemas and, 484, 484f, 497 social,
493--495

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-17

Self-actualization, 271. A state of having fulfilled your potential, 273
Self-awareness, 194--197. The special understanding of the self as
distinct from other stimuli, 497 consciousness as, 195--197 honesty and,
485f rouge test and, 195 self-consciousness and, 485 self-knowledge and,
486 Self-concept, 484. People's description of their own
characteristics, 484--485, 497 Self-consciousness, 485 Self-control, 491
Self-efficacy, 472 Self-enhancement, 488--489 Self-esteem, 486. A
judgment of the value of the self, 497 academic performance and, 490
advantages of, 489 culture and, 487--488, 488f gender and, 487--488
high/low, 486 intelligence and, 396 race and, 487--488 self-enhancement
to protect, 488--489 social comparisons and, 486--487 sources of,
486--487 terror management theory and, 489 Self-handicapping, 488
Self-help groups, 606 Self-injury, 296 Self-knowledge, 486
Self-reference effect (SRE), 484, 665 Self-regulation, 475, 491, 497
Self-schema, 484. A cognitive organization that helps us think about the
self and process self-relevant information, 484--485, 497 Self-serving
bias, 506. Attributing success to dispositional factors while
attributing failure to situational factors, 508 Selfishness, 538
Semantic memory, 329. A general knowledge memory, 329--330 brain and,
349f, 368f Sensation, 150. The process of detecting environmental
stimuli or stimuli arising from the body. autistic children and, 168
perception and, 150 transduction and, 151 Senses of newborns, 418--419
Sensitization, 280. An increased reaction to many stimuli following
exposure to one strong stimulus. Sensorimotor stage, 427. Jean Piaget's
stage of development beginning

s-18

at birth and ending at the age of 2 years and characterized by active
exploration of the environment. Sensory adaptation, 152. The tendency to
pay less attention to a nonchanging source of stimulation. Sensory
homunculus, 180 Sensory memory, 320. The first stage of the
AtkinsonShiffrin model that holds large amounts of incoming data for
brief amounts of time, 320--321 acoustic codes and, 320 haptic codes
and, 320 iconic memories and, 320--321 short-term memory and, 321
Sperling's demonstration of, 322f visual codes and, 320 Serial position
effect, 326--327, 327f Serotonin aggression and, 540 depression and,
143, 572 enteric nervous system and, 130 hallucinogens and, 219 LSD and,
218 MDMA (Ecstasy) and, 222 midbrain and, 116 REM sleep and, 208
Serotonin activity, 143 Serotonin transporter gene (SERT), 75, 76f, 88,
459, 460f Set point, 253. A value that is defended to maintain
homeostasis. Sex chromosomes, 78--79, 417 Sex hormones, 133 Sex-linked
characteristics, 77 Sexual maturation, 439 Sexual motivation, 262--267
biology of, 262--264 hormones and, 262, 263 ovulation and menstrual
cycles, 262--263 oxytocin and, 263, 263f testosterone and, 262--263,
263f vasopressin and, 263, 263f cross-cultural comparison of, 264f
culture and, 264 desire and, 262--263 emotional satisfaction and,
264--267, 264f romantic love and, 264 satisfaction and, 264 sexual
orientation and, 264--267 Sexual orientation, 264. A stable pattern of
attraction to members of a particular sex. birth order and, 266 brain
structures and, 266, 266f culture and, 265--266 genetic influences on,
266 identification and, 265 prenatal hormones and, 266

sexual satisfaction and, 264 Sexual preference, 267 Sexual selection,
98. The development of traits that help an individual compete for mates.
behavior and, 98 genes and, 98 parental investment and, 98 traits
influenced by, 99 Shaping, 304--305 Shell shock. See Posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) Shepard, Roger, 170 Shooter bias, 520 Short-term
memory (STM), 320. The second stage of the Atkinson-Shiffrin model that
holds a small amount of information for a limited time, 321--325
chunking in, 323 duration of, 321--322, 323f rehearsal in, 322
retrieval, 335 working memory, 323--324 Signal detection, 154. The
analysis of sensory and decision-making processes in the detection of
faint, uncertain stimuli. decision-making and, 154 perception and, 153
possible outcomes in, 155t Similarity, in Gestalt psychology, 164, 164f
Simon, Herbert, 19 Simplicity, in Gestalt psychology, 164 Sine waves,
177, 178, 178f Single cell recording, 110t Situational attribution, 505.
A judgment assigning the cause of a person's behavior to the
environment. Skin conductance response, 110t Skinner boxes, 18, 295f,
299, 301, 302, 303, 304 Skinner, B. F., 18, 21f Sleep, 199. See also
Non-rapid eye movement (N-REM) sleep; Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep A
normal state of consciousness characterized by reduced awareness of
external stimuli. American worker and, 200f benefits of, 206--208
circadian rhythms and, 199--202 consciousness and, 199 depression and,
575f diet and, 653f dreaming and, 208--209 Epworth sleepiness scale and,
204 features of, 211 human growth hormone and, 206f memory and,
206--207, 354 mood and, 207--208

nightly patterns of, 205f during pandemic, 228 stages of, 203--206
stress and, 652--653 Sleep apnea, 209. A sleep disorder in which the
person stops breathing while asleep, 210 Sleep deprivation, 200f, 202f,
206 Sleep disorders cataplexy, 209 insomnia, 209 narcolepsy, 208--209
nightmares, 208--209 restless legs syndrome (RLS), 210 sleep apnea, 209
sleep talking, 205 sleep terrors, 208--209 sleepwalking, 205 sudden
infant death syndrome, 210 Sleep talking, 205 Sleep terror, 209. A sleep
disorder occurring in non-rapid eye movement sleep in which the sleeper
wakes suddenly in great distress but without experiencing the imagery of
a nightmare, 208--209 Sleepwalking, 205 Smiling, 249--250 Smoking,
663--665, 663f, 664f Smoking cessation programs, 665 Sobriety tests, 115
Social anxiety disorder, 577. A disorder characterized by an unrealistic
fear of being scrutinized and criticized by others, 577--578, 628f
Social behavior altruism and, 97 cooperation and, 96--97 culture and,
99--100 origins of, 95--97 self-awareness and, 195--196 sexual selection
and, 98--99 social interactions and, 96t Social belonging, 655, 655f
Social distancing pandemic during, 145 working memory and compliance
with, 357 Social diversity, 23f Social exclusion, 268f, 501f Social
facilitation, 527. A situation in which the presence of other people
changes performance, 307, 527--528 Social intelligence, 394--395 Social
interactions, 96t, 99 as a human need, 500 memory and, 318 Social
isolation, 268, 500--501, 645 learning to become less lonely, 314 Social
learning, 280. See also: Observational learning Social loafing, 528.
Reduced motivation and effort shown by individuals working in a group.

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Social media fake news and, 514 narcissistic personality disorder and,
587 personality and, 25f, 478 persuasion and, 514 Social norms, 522.
Usually unwritten or unspoken rules for behavior in social settings.
compliance, 524 conformity, 523--524, 523f door-in-the-face, 524, 525f
foot-in-the-door, 524 obedience, 524--527, 526f power of one, 527 Social
prejudice, 80--82 Social psychology, 24 A psychological perspective that
examines the effects of the social environment on the behavior of
individuals, 23f, 25 aggression and, 539--543 attitudes and, 509--512
attributions and, 505--506, 508--509 cooperation and competition,
535--539, 546 first impressions and, 501, 504, 504f group processes, 530
deindividuation, 528 group polarization, 528--529, 529f groupthink and,
529--530 social facilitation and, 527--528 social loafing, 528
persuasion and, 512--515 prejudice and, 516--522 social interactions
and, 500--501 social norms and, 522--527 social relationships and,
531--534 Social relationships, 531--534 attitude alignment, 532
attraction and liking, 531--533 building, 533 ending, 534 infidelity in,
534f maintaining, 533--534 matching hypothesis, 533 mere exposure
effect, 531--533 stress and, 651 Social self, 493--496 cultural
influences on, 493--494 interpersonal relationships and, 494--495
interpersonal self and, 493 Social-cognitive learning theory, 472. A
theory of personality that features cognition and learning, especially
from the social environment, as important sources of individual
differences in personality. if-then relationships, 473 locus of control
and, 472 reciprocal determinism and, 472 self-efficacy and, 472

Socialization, 433 Socioeconomic status (SES) health and, 649 IQ and,
398--399 stress and, 649 Somatic nervous system, 129. The part of the
peripheral nervous system that brings sensory information to the central
nervous system and transmits commands to the muscles. cranial nerves
and, 129, 129f spinal nerves and, 129 Somatic symptom disorder, 585. A
disorder that is diagnosed when people are unusually concerned and
preoccupied with chronic somatic symptoms, 462, 600 treatment for, 632
Somatosensation, 178. The body senses, including body position, touch,
skin temperature, and pain. biology of body position, 179 pain, 181--182
touch, 179--180 vestibular system, 179 somatosensory stimuli, 178--179
Somatosensory cortex, 119, 121f, 123, 124, 180--181 Somatovisceral
afference model of emotion (SAME), 238. A model of emotion in which a
range of physical sensations from precise to general requires varying
degrees of cognitive processing prior to subjective feelings, 238f Sound
localization of, 176, 177, 177f Sound waves, 172, 172f Specific phobia,
576. Fears of objects other than those associated with agoraphobia or
social anxiety disorder, 575--576, 577f Sperling's demonstration of
sensory memory, 322f Spinal cord, 111. A long cylinder of neural tissue
extending from the medulla of the brain down to the middle of the back;
part of the central nervous system, 113f--114f Spinal nerves, 113, 113f,
129 Spinal reflexes, 113f, 114 Spinning, 225--226 Split-brain operation,
124f Spontaneous recovery, 284. During extinction training, the
reappearance of conditioned responses (CRs) after periods of rest, 285f
Sports psychologists, 29

Spreading activation model, 333. A connectionist theory proposing that
people organize general knowledge based on their individual experiences,
333--334, 333f Squid axons, 138 Standard deviation, 59. A measure of how
tightly clustered around the mean a group of scores is, 59f Standing
desks, 668f Stanford Prison Study, 523 Stanford-Binet Intelligence
Scales, 392 Statistical abnormality, 551--552 Statistical significance,
62. A standard for deciding whether an observed result is because of
chance. Stereotype, 516. A simplified set of traits associated with
membership in a group or category, 516--518, 519f Stereotype threat,
520--522, 520f Stimulants, 219. Any drug that increases the activity of
the nervous system. Storage, 318. The retention of information, 318--319
Stranger anxiety, 434 Stream of consciousness, 194--195 Stress, 640. An
unpleasant emotional state that results from the perception of danger.
affiliation and, 268 belongingness and, 655, 655f biological correlates
of, 645--649 amygdala and, 645--646 epigenetics of, 648 gender
differences in, 649 hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis, 647, 647f, 648
hypothalamus and, 646 socioeconomic status and, 649 sympathetic adrenal
medullary system, 647, 647f, 648 coping with, 658--659 emotion-focused,
658 problem-focused, 658 relationship-focused, 658 resilience and,
659--660 cortisol and, 639--640, 647, 653 depression and, 571 general
adaptation syndrome and, 642--643 hassles and, 644--645 health effects
of, 650--654, 654f identifying, 639 immune system and, 650--651, 650f
managing, 656--658 exercise and, 657--658, 657f mindfulness and, 657
pets and, 657 religious beliefs and, 658 sense of control and, 656

social support and, 657 tragic optimism and, 656 memory and, 353, 353f
mindset for, 641t during pandemic, 228 posttraumatic stress disorder
and, 643f, 644 psychological disorders and, 640 resistance and, 642
response to, 640--642, 642--643, 649 schizophrenia and, 565 , 565f
social isolation and, 645 social relationships and, 651 sources of,
643--645 Stressor, 640. A stimulus that serves as a source of stress.
Stroop Test, 224, 225, 225f Structuralism, 10. An approach in which the
mind is broken into the smallest elements of mental experience, 11
Gestalt psychologists challenged, 12--13 Structuralists Titchener, 12
Wundt, 10, 12 Stuttering, 35 Subcortical structures amygdala, 117--118,
118f basal ganglia, 116 cerebral cortex, 117f cingulate cortex, 117
hippocampus, 117 hypothalamus, 117 nucleus accumbens, 118 thalamus, 116
Subjectivity, 36 Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), 210. A sleep
disorder in which an otherwise healthy infant dies while asleep Sufis,
226 Suicide alcohol consumption and, 540 antidepressant medicines and,
625--626 depression and, 574, 574f law and, 552 social isolation and,
500 Summer, Francis Cecil, 14f, 21f Superego, 463. The component of
Sigmund Freud's personality theory that internalizes society's rules for
right and wrong, or the conscience, 463f Supertasters, 186 Suppression
of emotion, 246--247, 247f Suppression of memories, 344 Surprise,
element of, in learning, 287 Survey, 46. A descriptive method in which
participants are asked the same questions, 47, 48f samples used in, 44
video game use, 44, 48f

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-19

Sympathetic adrenal-medullary (SAM) system, 647. A circuit that responds
to perceived stressors by initiating the release of epinephrine and
norepinephrine into the bloodstream. Sympathetic nervous system, 129.
The division of the autonomic nervous system that coordinates arousal.
function of, 129 Synapse, 140. A point of communication between two
neurons, 141, 143, 345--347, 421f Synaptic pruning, 421f Synaptic
vesicles, 134 Systematic desensitization, 290. A type of
counterconditioning in which people relax while being exposed to stimuli
that elicit fear. Systematic observation, 36, 38f, 51 Systems
engineering process, 369f

T

Tardive dyskinesia, 623. A movement syndrome that results from the use
of medications used to treat symptoms of schizophrenia, 624 Taste. See
also Gustation categories of, 184--185 sensitivity to, 3--4, 24 Taste
aversion, 288--289, 293 Taste buds, 185. A structure found in papillae
that contains taste receptor cells. Taste receptors, 185, 185f
Temperament, 473. A child's pattern of mood, activity, or emotional
responsiveness linked to later personality, 473--475 child development
and, 431--432, 432f, 474f personality and, 474f, 477--475 Temporal lobe,
119. The lobe of the cerebral cortex that curves around the side of each
hemisphere; location of the primary auditory cortex. auditory cortex,
122--123 visual cortex and, 123 Wernicke's area, 123 Tennis serves, 125
Teratogen, 413. A chemical agent that can harm the zygote, embryo, or
fetus, 413, 414f, 415t Terror management theory, 489 Testes, 132--133
Testosterone, 262. A male hormone. aggression and, 540 disease and, 91

s-20

facial features and, 98 levels of, 262 prenatal exposure to, 540, 540f
reproductive advantage of, 91 sexual motivation and, 262 Tetanus, 141,
142f Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 216 Thalamus, 159f Thalamus, 116. A
subcortical structure involved with the processing of sensory
information, states of arousal, and learning and memory, 116f audition
and, 174 consciousness and, 197 gustation and, 185 olfactory pathways
and, 185 somatosensory pathways and, 182 vision and, 159, 159f Theodore,
Simon, 20f Theory, 38. A set of facts and relationships between facts
that can explain and predict related phenomena. concepts as, 366--367
developing and testing, 39f scientific, 13--14, 51 Theory of mind (TOM),
430. The understanding that others have thoughts that are different from
one's own, 430--433, 430f Therapy behavior, 612--613 brief, 605 couples,
606 cultural adaptations in, 607 family, 606 group, 605 insight, 609
online, 606--607 person-centered, 610--611 psychologists providing,
600--601 psychotherapies, 598--602 virtual reality (VR) and, 630 Theta
wave, 203. A waveform of four to seven cycles per second recorded by
electroencephalogram (EEG) that is characteristic of lighter stages of
nonrapid eye movement (N-REM) sleep. Third variable, 46. A variable that
is responsible for a correlation observed between two other variables of
interest. correlation and, 50, 50f Thorndike, Edward, 17f, 20f Thoughts
as concepts, 363--365 as images, 363 Thyroid gland, 132 Time, assessing
effects of cross-sectional studies, 54 longitudinal studies, 54--55
mixed longitudinal design, 55

Tip-of-the-tongue (TOT) phenomenon, 337--338 Tit-for-tat (TFT) strategy,
537 Tobacco use, 663--665, 663f Token economy, 308. An application of
operant conditioning in which tokens that can be exchanged for other
reinforcers are used to increase the frequency of desirable behaviors.
Tolerance, 215. The need to administer greater quantities of a drug to
achieve the same subjective effect Tolman's maze, 306f Tonic-clonic
seizures, 214 Top-down processing, 152. A perceptual process in which
memory and other cognitive processes are required for interpreting
incoming sensory information, 153 Touch, 179--181. See also
Somatosensation infants and, 179 primary sensory cortex and, 180 sensory
homunculus and, 180 social communication and, 179 somatosensory cortex
and, 180--181 touch receptors and, 180f Touch receptors, 180f Tragic
optimism, 656 Trait, 467. A stable personality characteristic. sexual
selection and, 99 Trait theories of personality Big Five, 468--470
factor analysis, 467f Trance states, 226 Transactive memory, 356
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 110t, 193 Transduction, 151.
The translation of incoming sensory information into neural signals.
Transference, 610. A psychoanalytic technique in which the therapist
uses the responses of the patient to the therapist to understand the
patient's approach to authority figures in general. Transgender
identity, 425 Trauma, 643f Trepanation, 615 Triangle model of love, 533,
533f Trichromatic theory, 160. A theory of color vision based on the
existence of different types of cones for the detection of short,
medium, and long wavelengths, 161 Tritanopes, 150

Turing test, 197 Turning the Tables illusion, 170 Tuskegee syphilis
experiment, 65 Twins chromosomes, 83 concordance rates, 81 correlational
methods, 81f differences in, 72, 81 DNA and, 71--72 epigenetics and, 83
fraternal, 80f, 81 intelligence and, 397 personality and, 475, 476f
phenotypes of, 80 schizophrenia and, 564 Type 2 diabetes, 255f Type A
personality, 651 A competitive, workaholic, and in some cases hostile
personality type. Type B personality, 651 A mellow, laid-back
personality type.

U

UCLA loneliness scale, 502t--503t Ultrasound, 172, 173f Unconditioned
response (UCR), 283. A response to an unconditioned stimulus that
requires no previous experience, 283, 283f Unconditioned stimulus (UCS),
283. A stimulus that elicits a response without prior experience, 283,
283f Unconscious behaviors, 227 Unconscious mind, 465. The part of
mental activity that cannot be voluntarily retrieved. Uninvolved
parenting, 436--437, 436t Universal development, 410 Utility theory, 375

V

Vaccinations, 558, 559f Validity, 57. A quality of a measure that leads
to correct conclusions (i.e., the measure evaluates the concept that it
was designed to do). Values, 680--681 Variable, 48. A factor that has a
range of values. confounding, 51 dependent, 51 descriptive statistics
and, 57--60 independent, 51 measurement of, 48--50 third variable, 50
Variable interval (VI) schedule, 302. A schedule of reinforcement in
which the first response following a varying period is reinforced.

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Variable ratio (VR) schedule, 302. A schedule of reinforcement in which
reinforcement occurs following some variable number of behaviors.
Variance, 59 Vasopressin, 133, 263, 263f Vegetative state (VS), 212. An
abnormal state following brain injury featuring wakefulness without
consciousness. characteristics of, 212 coma and, 212 Ventricles, 112,
112f, 113 Ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), 256--257, 257f Vestibular
receptors, 179 Vestibular system, 179. The system in the inner ear that
provides information about body position and movement. Video game use
aggression and, 46--48, 49, 51--54 cooperative, 54 experiments on,
51--53 naturalistic observation, 46--47 survey on, 46--47, 48f Virtual
reality (VR), 630 Vision, 156. The sense that allows us to process
reflected light. biology of, 157--159, 171 blind spots, 158 cornea, 157
fovea, 158

human eye, 157f iris, 157 lens, 157 pupil, 157 retina, 157--158, 158f
rods and cones, 158, 158f, 159 thalamus, 159 color vision and, 151f, 160
developmental and individual differences in, 166--168 recognizing depth
and, 164--166 recognizing objects and, 162--166 visual pathways, 159,
159f visual stimulus and, 156 Vision quests, 225 Visual codes, 320
Visual cortex, 121f, 122, 124, 159 Visual imagery, 363 Visual pathways
optic nerve, 159f optic tracts, 159 primary visual cortex and, 159
Visual stimulus, 156 von Helmholtz, Hermann, 8, 9, 10

W

Waking, 199. A normal state of consciousness characterized by alertness
and awareness of external stimuli. beta, alpha, gamma waves and,
202--203 circadian rhythms and, 199--202

consciousness and, 199 daydreaming and, 203 EEG recordings and, 202--203
features of, 212 Waorani, 99--100, 107 Warrior gene" concept of, 84--85
Watson, John B., 16--17, 17f, 21f Wealth, happiness and, 675--678, 676f
Web design accessibility of, 162f color vision and, 161--162 Wechsler
Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), 392, 400f, 552f Weight loss, 259--260,
653f Wernicke's aphasia, 385--386, 391 Wernicke's area, 123, 385--386
Wertheimer, Max, 12f, 20f White matter, 134 Whole-genome sequencing
(WGS), 83 Wildlife conservation, 293 Williams syndrome, 389, 393, 395
Willpower, 491 Withdrawal, 215. Physical responses to the removal of
some habitually administered drugs, 216, 220 Working memory, 323. An
extension of the concept of short-term memory that includes the active
manipulation of multiple types of information

simultaneously, 323--324, 324f, 326--328 brain and, 347 Wundt, Wilhelm,
10, 11f, 20f

X

X chromosome, 75

Y

Y chromosome, 77 Yagua, 143 Yanomamö, 99, 107 Yawning, contagious, 279
Yerkes-Dodson law, 240. A description of the relationships among task
complexity, arousal, and performance, 240f Young adulthood, 446--448
cognitive development, 446--447 physical status in, 446 relationships
and, 448 Younger generations narcissism and, 447f

Z

Zeitgebers, 200 Zone of proximal development, 430f Zygote, 410. The term
used to describe a developing organism immediately following conception
until the embryo stage, or the first 2 weeks following conception in
humans, 411

SUBJECT INDEX/GloSSary

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

s-21

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2022 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied,
scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights,
some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or
eChapter(s). Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content
does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage
Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if
subsequent rights restrictions require it.


