PSYCHOLOGY IN PERSPECTIVE

Also by Nicky Hayes

FOUNDATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGY A FIRST COURSE IN PSYCHOLOGY PSYCHOLOGY: An
Introduction (with Sue Orrell) PSYCHOLOGY: Theory and Application (with
Philip Banyard) A STUDENTS DICTIONARY OF PSYCHOLOGY (with Peter
Stratton) PRINCIPLES OF SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY THE GCSE SURVIVAL GUIDE
INVESTIGATING PSYCHOLOGY (with \[rene Taylor) TEACH YOURSELF PSYCHOLOGY

Psychology in Perspective Nicky Hayes Honorary Research Fellow School of
Human and Health Sciences The University of Huddersfield

\~

MACMILIAN

© Nicky Hayes 1995 All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or
transmission of this publication may be made without written permission.
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or
transmitted save with written permission or in accordance with the
provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the
terms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright
Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London WIP 9HE. Any person
who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be
liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages. First
published 1995 by MACMILLAN PRESS LTD Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire
RG21 2XS and London Companies and representatives throughout the world
ISBN 978-0-333-60686-5 ISBN 978-1-349-23862-0 (eBook) DOI
10.1007/978-1-349-23862-0 A catalogue record for this book is available
from the British Library. 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 I 04 03 02 01 00 99 98 97
96 95

Copy-edited and typeset by Povey-Edmondson Okehampton and Rochdale,
England

To Chris Lenton

Contents List of Figures

IX

Acknowledgements

Xl

Preface

Xlll

1 Reductionism in Psychological Theory Behaviourism Neurological
reductionism Genetic determinism Social reductionism Reductionism as a
general approach 2 The Influence of Behaviourism Behaviourism in its
times The influence of behaviourism Challenges to behaviourism Levels of
explanation Alternatives to behaviourism

3 Ethical Issues in Psychological Research Ethical questions raised by
past psychological research Re-evaluating research practices Animal
studies Ethical questions about practical work Ethical issues raised by
general perspectives and themes 4

Changing Values in Psychological Knowledge The nature of introductory
psychology courses Adapting research techniques A new methodology Social
responsibility of science Vll

1

3 8 12 15 16 19

19 23 27 30

31

35

37 41 45 48 50 53

55 56 58 60

Contents

Vlll

5 Perspectives in Social Psyehology

Traditional social psychology Levels of explanation European social
psychology Theories in European social psychology

6 European Social Psyehology

The growth of European Social Psychology Social representation theory
Social identity theory Attribution theory

63 63 70 73 75 77

80 81 85 89

7 Eeopsyehology

93

8 Perspeetives in Cognitive Psyehology Two traditions within cognitive
psychology Cognitive psychology and the computer metaphor Cognitive
psychology and 'objective' science Cognitive psychology and other areas
of psychological understanding

105 107

9 The Politics of Nature and Nurture

123 123 126 137

10 The 'Magie' of Sociobiology

141 142 144 148 151 158

Glossary

163

Bibliography

169 179

The philosophical background Nature and nurture in psychological theory
Problems of nativist arguments Sociobiological theory Sociobiological
explanation Sociobiology as magic Evolution and behaviour: an
alternative view So why is sociobiology so popular?

Index

109 114 116

List of Figures 1.1 1.2 6.1 6.2 7.1 10.1

The Necker cube The 'rat-man' figure American social psychology European
social psychology Neisser's cognitive cyc1e Evolutionary development of
the brain

IX

6 7

82 82

95 152

Acknowledgements This book is the product of a number of lectures
delivered to psychology students, and others, between 1986 and 1993. I
am grateful to all of those, both teachers and students, whose interest
and enthusiasm showed me that this activity was worth pursuing. Special
thanks must go to the many psychology lecturers who gave up their free
time and energy to organise revision workshops for psychology students
all over the country, and to the Association for the Teaching of
Psychology for encouraging these events. I would also like to express my
appreciation of the personal encouragement and support which I have
received in this undertaking, from so many people. The views expressed
in this book are entirely my own, but I would like to acknowledge my
considerable debt to Steven Rose, both for inspiration, and for
providing a role-model for a much-needed critique of scientific
activity, located within a scientific context. The papers which
constitute the chapters of this book have been delivered at various
conferences and workshops. An earlier version of the chapter 'The
"Magic" of Sociobiology' was published in the ATP journal Psychology
Teaching in 1986. Sources

Ultimately, the origin of this book lies in the many student revision
workshops organised by the Association for the Teaching of Psychology,
Nottingham Psychology Conferences, and others, during the period
1986-93. I am grateful to their organisers for giving me the opportunity
to develop these ideas, and to the students who attended them for
showing me that the ideas were appreciated. The main point of origin for
each chapter is given below: Xl

xii

Acknowledgements

Chapter 1 developed from a lecture first given at the Association for
the Teaching of Psychology Student Revision Conferences in Spring 1987.
Chapter 2 developed from a lecture first given at the Association for
the Teaching of Psychology Student Revision Conferences in Spring 1989.
Chapter 3 developed from a lecture first given at the Association for
the Teaching of Psychology Student Revision Conferences in Spring 1990.
Chapter 4 is the text of a paper given at the British Psychological
Society's London Conference in December 1992. Chapter 5 developed from a
lecture first given at the Association for the Teaching of Psychology
Student Revision Conferences in Spring 1993. Chapter 6 developed from a
lecture first given at the Association of Psychology Annual Conference
in July 1991. Chapter 7 is an extension of an article which originally
appeared in Psychology News, vol. 2, no. 5, in 1989. Chapter 8 developed
from a lecture first given at the Association for the Teaching of
Psychology Student Revision Conferences in Spring 1990. Chapter 9
developed from a lecture first given at the Association for the Teaching
of Psychology Student Revision Conferences in Spring 1988. Chapter 10
developed from a article first published in the Association for the
Teaching of Psychology journal, Psychology Teaching, 1986 (2), 2-16.

Preface Science is not value-free. It exists in society, and it reflects
society's assumptions. Research funding, scientific publication and the
scientific community's decisions about what counts as valid knowledge
all reflect the social contexts in which they take place. Psychology is
not exempt from these processes. Like the other sciences, psychology
exists in a social context, and its concerns are also those of its wider
society. Psychology's internal development - its theories, its evidence
and its subject matter - all mirror those concerns, as weIl as
contributing to them, both directly and indirectly. Psychology is a
living discipline. It has its own history, its own current concerns, and
its own future trends. But looking only at the present is not enough to
explain why modern psychology is like it iso If we are going to
understand its concerns and conflicts, we also need to understand its
history and the social movements which have shaped that history.
Psychology in Perspective surveys a number of different aspects of
psychology's history, looking at both the internal and the external
developments which have shaped it. Psychology in Perspective has a broad
scope. Its ten essays encompass philosophical theories, schools of
thought, social movements and human potential. In this book I have
challenged several of the psychological manifestations of reductionist
and repressive ideologies, both on ideological and scientific grounds.
At the same time, I have tried to present some of the alternatives: to
criticise without presenting alternatives is a sterile exercise, in my
view. I have tried to show how patterns of thinking emerged within the
psychological discipline, and how they exerted their influences on
subsequent generations. I have also tried to show how they were shaped
by wider social developments, and in turn contributed to accepted social
knowledge - and not always in positive ways. As scientists, we cannot
evade our social responsibilities by turning away from some of the less
xiii

XIV

Preface

palatable truths about our history. Rather, we need to be fully aware of
the social implications of what we are doing, and wh at our predecessors
have done. NICKY HAYES

1 Reductionism in Psychological Theory

One of the biggest problems in psychology's quest to understand the
human being has been the tendency to fall back on reductionism as a
means of explaining why human beings are like they are. Reductionism is
a way of going about explanation. When we talk of reductionist theories,
we are referring to a set of ideas which have one distinguishing
characteristic: the belief that things can be explained simply by
reducing them down to their constituent parts. In other words,
reductionist arguments state that things can be understood as being
nothing but the sum of their components. The philosophical background of
reductionism can be found in the theory put forward by Descartes
(1596-1650), in the seventeenth century. Descartes's approach is often
known as Cartesian dualism, because he was making distinctions between
two phenomena: the human mind, with its capacity to reason; and animal
nature, which he saw as mechanistic and instinctive, and in which he
inc1uded the human body. He regarded these as two separate things, which
is why his theory is referred to as dualist. In describing the mind-body
distinction, Descartes argued that the mind was a completely different,
separate entity from the body. The body was purely a machine, operating
like a machine and not influencing the mind at all. The mind, on the
other hand, was the seat of reason and the essence of being human -
hence Descartes' famous definition of what it was to be human: 'I think,
therefore I am.' Descartes went on to argue that the distinction between
mind and body made 1

2 Psychology in Perspective

human beings fundamentally different from animals, in that animal
behaviour was mechanistic (machine-like) and unthinking, operating from
instincts rather than from reasoning; whereas humans were able to think
and to use language, which made them distinctively human. Although this
may not seem to be particularly relevant, it is important for
understanding reductionism in psychology, for several reasons. For one
thing, Descartes had produced what became the first explanation of the
mind without reference to religious argument in Europe of that time.
This happened just when European thinking was just breaking free from
the domination of medieval theology, so as a philosophical principle it
formed the basis for investigations into the nature of the mind, which
eventually developed into 'experimental philosophy' and later
'psychology'. And Descartes' emphasis on instincts and his view of the
body as a machine established a tradition in European psychological
thinking which has continued up to the present day. Secondly, his idea
of the body as a machine not only legitimised its use in the growing
factories of the Industrial Revolution (one reason why his ideas became
so popular); but also formed the basis of modem medicine. The disputes
between supporters of holistic medicine (which treats the body and the
mind as inseparable) and those of traditional medicine, (which sees the
body as a machine, working independently from the mind), are a direct
legacy from Descartes. Modem medicine's allegiance to the idea of the
body as a machine is perhaps expressed most clearly in its emphasis on
spare-part surgery; while practitioners of holistic medicine emphasise
treatments which will encourage the body's own restorative powers to
come into effect. Thirdly, perceiving both the human body and animal
behaviour as mechanistic meant that each of them could be studied in
terms of their component parts, in the same way as we might study a car
engine by looking at the parts which it contains. So, for instance, you
read in Richard Gregory's popular book Eye and Brain about Descartes
dissecting an ox eye and, seeing the upside-down image on the retina,
concluding that the eye acts like a camera, producing an image which is
later processed and analysed. Many theories in

Reductionism in Psychological Theory

3

physiological psychology have started from this kind of approach, using
machine-like models to try to understand what is happening. And most of
these also had to be seriously revised, as researchers gained better
understanding of the human processes underlying them. Descartes, then,
could justifiably be called one of the first reductionists, in that his
reduction of the human body to a machine, and of animal behaviour to
mechanical, instinctive operations, adopts that form of argument. In so
doing, he established a style of reasoning about the human mind which is
still very much alive and kicking in psychology. There are three
particularly striking examples of reductionist theories which most
people encounter when they first leam about psychology. These are:
behaviourism; neurological reductionism; and genetic reductionism. There
are other forms of reductionism too, most notably social reductionism.
Each of these has its problems, which we will look at briefly, before
going on to look at some more general issues raised by reductionist
argument. Behaviourism The behaviourist revolution at the beginning of
this century centred around J. B. Watson's attempt to make psychology
'scientific'. Where, previously, psychology had concentrated on the
study of the mind, Watson (1913) argued that the 'mind' was not suitable
for valid scientific research, because it could only be examined
subjectively. He argued that the only truly scientific approach for
psychology was to keep to the study of things which could be objectively
observed. In the ca se of living 'organisms', as he put it, that meant
studying behaviour, because that is the only evidence that we can
examine directly. It isn't possible to know for certain what someone is
thinking, but we can use their behaviour as a guide: if they smile and
nod we can judge that they agree with what we are saying, even though we
can't see directly into the mind. Watson's attempt to make psychology
scientific involved modelling it on the other sciences: physics,
chemistry and

4

Psychology in Perspective

biology. Those sciences, interestingly enough, had all had developments
which had occurred at least in the previous century, which had
transformed them completely, and greatly increased their explanatory
powers. Watson considered that a scientific psychology would also
undergo such a transformation; and it was on this that he modelled his
view of scientific psychology. The particular development which had
occurred in physics was the development of atomic theory. Not the
Einstein version, leading to atom bombs and power; but the original idea
that matter consisted of atoms, which combined together to form
molecules. Once this idea had been established, physical phenomena such
as heat and structure could be explained in very much more meaningful
terms. A similar development in chemistry dealt with the relationship
between different forms of matter. The concept of valency and the
development of the periodic table of the elements meant that chemistry
became unified as a science, and could make much more sense out of its
established observations. In biology, two significant developments
served to unify the discipline. One was cell theory: the discovery that
all living things were constructed of small units - living cells. For
the first time, this provided a biological link between plants and
animals, which meant that all sorts of things which didn't previously
make sense started to show connections, and biology was finally
established as a 'true' science. The other major development in biology
was Mendelian genetics - still very much a talking point in Watson's
day, but demonstrating how it was possible to perceive inheritance in
terms of small units of heredity with definite principles of
combination, and making sense out of evolutionary theory. All of these
developments have two things in common. Firstly, the discovery of sm all
constituent units had developed and unified each of the disciplines
concerned. Secondly, they had all occurred or become widely known in the
previous century; and so the impact that they had had on their
respective disciplines was well-known. When Watson was see king to build
a scientific psychology, it was to the sciences that he looked; and when
he looked to the sciences he saw the

Reductionism in Psychological Theory

5

identification of small 'building blocks' as being of crucial importance
in scientific development. It is important to remember that this
definition of the nature of science by Watson is different from the
definition of science that was held by the 'introspectionist'
psychologists. Watson was defining a science largely in terms of its
subject matter, and in particular whether it had managed to identify the
basic units in its area of study. The introspectionists, however,
defined science in terms of the methods of investigation which it used.
Psychologists such as Wilhelm Wundt, William James and Herman Ebbinghaus
had been extremely concerned to go about their studies in a scientific
manner, using rigorous methodology. But their subject matter - the human
mind - was in Watson's eyes inherently unscientific. Watson identified
stimulus-response (S-R) connections as the basic units of psychology. A
complete understanding of behaviour, he considered, could be built up
from the systematic study of S-R connections and how they combined. He
emphasised the study of learning as the basis of psychology, because
that was the way that stimulus-response links were established, and he
studied animal learning because, he believed, it represented a
relatively 'pure' form of stimulus-response link, uncontaminated by as
much previous learning and memory as it would be in human beings. His
reasoning was that if S-R links were the basic foundation of behaviour,
then all S-R links would be similar in essence, in much the same way as
different atoms or cells are similar in essence, even though specific
details may vary. Behaviourism, of course, wasn't the only approach in
psychology at that time. A strong challenge to the reductionism of the
behaviourist school was put forward by the Gestalt psychologists, in
Europe. They argued that many aspects of human behaviour could not
realistically be seen as combinations of stimulus-response connections,
but were much more than just the sum of their parts. They devoted
considerable research efforts to studying those aspects of human
experience which could not be broken down in this way, notably
perceptual organisation and problem-solving.

6

Psychology in Perspective

For example, the tendency of individuals to organise their perception
into figures against backgrounds, rather than seeing a disconnected
pattern of light and dark patches, seems to be one of the earliest
perceptual skills. Even very young infants respond selectively to
patterned stimuli, and they respond very strongly indeed to patterns
bearing resemblances to human faces. Without some inherent organisation
of what is being seen into figures and backgrounds, this would seem
impossible. And a purely empirical approach entirely based on S-R
associations, such as was presented by the early behaviourists, is
inadequate to explain such phenomena. An even more convincing example is
given in the case of the Necker Cube (Figure 1.1) where exact1y the same
stimulus presented to the retina produces two different experiences. Any
attempt to explain this in terms of learned associations comes to grief
on the fact that the stimulus is identical, even when it is being
perceived in different ways. Further work with ambiguous stimuli, such
as those performed by Leeper in 1935, highlighted such factors as the
importance of 'set' in

Figure 1.1

The Necker cube

Reductionism in Psychological Theory

7

perception (Figure 1.2), and behaviourist attempts to explain perceptual
organisation receded more and more into the background. Similarly,
research into insight learning by Köhler in 1925 demonstrated what
seemed to be much more holistic forms of learning than those which could
be produced by S-R training. Insight learning seemed to take place by a
sudden cognitive (mental) restructuring of the whole problem, leading to
rapid problem-solving instead of trial-and-error attempts. Although
Harlow (1949) did show that previous experience with similar problems
could produce what looked like insight, but through trial-and-error
learning, by then the work had been taken up in studies of human
problem-solving, and again simple behaviourist explanations became
inadequate and receded into the background. Perhaps the most important
discovery of the Gestalt psychologists, though, in terms of their
arguments against reductionism, was the principle of closure. This
demonstrated the human tendency to go far beyond the data, to combine
incomplete images or sounds into whole pictures or meaningful units. The
various examples of the principles of closure showed that in many
instances S-R explanations just didn't make any sense at all. Often,
what was given to a human being as the stimulus was completely
inadequate for piecing together by learned association, yet the person
had no difficulty seeing

Figure 1.2

The 'rat-man' figure

8

Psychology in Perspective

a complete person. In modern times the difficulty of programming
computers to do tasks like face recognition has shown just what a
complex cognitive event it iso People do it easily, but not, apparently,
by trial and error. We can see, then, that although some aspects of
behaviour may be explicable in S-R terms, others are very much harder to
explain. The modern-day 'neo-behaviourists' have largely dropped the
reductionist approach adopted by Watson, and some of them argue instead
for an 'interactionist' perspective, in which cognition and
environmental learning are seen to be working together to produce
particular behaviours. Their emphasis is still on behaviour and S-R
links, but they no longer consider that to be the only possible level of
explanation in psychology.

Neurological reductionism

Descartes' view of the human body as a machine led to an emphasis in
medical practice on illness as occurring when some mechanism or part had
gone 'wrong' with it. This idea has been applied not only to physical
illness, but also in the cases of people who show peculiar or disturbing
social behaviour patterns. The medical model of mental illness, which is
largely, though not completely, accepted in Western society, sees
abnormal behaviour as being 'caused' by something going wrong with the
machinery of the mind. One version of this is known as neurological
reductionism. Neurological reductionism can be seen most clearly in the
medical approach to schizophrenia - a disturbance in which people often
speak irrationally, and seem to hold peculiar beliefs which are not in
tune with their objective reality. Schizophrenics often show other forms
of peculiar behaviour too, such as catatonia, in which the person seems
to 'lock' into a trance, and the body remains rigid for a long period of
time - sometimes several hours. The existence of specific brain
chemicals in schizophrenic patients is taken by some members of the
medical profession as 'proof that the disorder is 'caused' by those
chemicals.

Reductionism in Psychological Theory

9

Kallman's (1938) twin studies, published in 1946, appeared to show that
schizophrenia or a 'schizoid' tendency could run in families, which was
taken as implying that it was inherited; but Kallman used a very loose
definition of 'schizoid', such that just about any kind of unusual
behaviour could count. Moreover, the dinicaljudgements were also made by
Kallman hirnself (sometimes without even seeing the people concerned),
who knew all the details and intentions of the study, and believed
firmly in the idea of genetic influence. It is obvious how vulnerable
this way of doing things is to unconscious bias, even in a researcher
with the best of motives. Nowadays, we would insist on far better
controls in such a study. Laing (1965) argued that the disorder of
schizophrenia could be produced by intolerable social demands. As early
as the 1950s, Bateson et al. put forward the 'double bind' theory of
schizophrenia, which showed how the families of schizophrenics often
trapped those people in situations where just about anything they did
would produce censure and hostility from other family members. The
situation where a teenager is told 'you're never at horne nowadays', but
on staying in receives the complaint of 'Can't we ever get any peace and
quiet without you hanging about all the time' is an everyday example of
the sort of thing that Bateson et al. meant although they were really
talking about much more extreme examples. Following on from this, the
psychiatrist R. D. Laing (1965) showed how the apparently irrational
symptoms shown by schizophrenics often mirrored the conflicts which they
were encountering. A case study given in Sanity, Madness and the Family
by Laing and Esterson (1968) is of a girl whose delusion was that she
imagined herself trapped in a perpetual game of tennis, as the tennis
ball in play. On investigating her family situation, Laing found that
the family had a deep rift, with the mother and her mother's father on
one side, and the father and his mother forming the other side. The girl
was obliged to act as go-between between the two sides of the family,
induding carrying ho stile and emotional messages which distressed her
deeply. Eventually she was unable to cope with this any further, and
became catatonic - rigid and unable to move.

10

Psychology in Perspective

Laing and Esterson were pointing out how the apparently irrational
symptoms of schizophrenia could be seen to make sense, if they were
taken in the context of the person's actual existence in the world. In
this case, although the girl herself, on a conscious level, did not
understand what was happening to her, on a subconscious level her
symptoms were reflecting the double bind that she found herself in.
Everything she did was judged as wrong, and so by becoming catatonic,
she 'froze', and didn't do anything at all. And the schizophrenic fugue
of the tennis game reflected her role within the family. Laing showed
how schizophrenics often came from deeply disturbed families, which he
called 'schizophrenogenic' (likely to bring ab out schizophrenia in
their members). These generally had considerable amounts of suppressed
conflict and double binds in their everyday interaction, and the
schizophrenic person was too sensitive to be able to cope with these. He
also showed how the presence of someone who could be seen by the family
as 'ill' was used and perpetuated by the family. It allowed them to
focus the family disturbance around that person and so to distract
attention from their other disturbed relationships. The 'sick'
individual, in other words, became the scapegoat for the whole family.
The point is this: a complex phenomenon like schizophrenia is not
'explained' simply by talking about chemicals in the brain. That the
chemicals exist is indisputable. That altering the level of chemicals
through drugs can suppress symptoms is also not disputed - although it
is questionable how far suppressing symptoms is the same as curing them.
But to argue from there that the chemicals 'cause' schizophrenia is to
neglect all the other levels of explanation which may be needed, in
order to understand fully what is goiIig on. Laing may have taken his
case to extremes, but we cannot ignore the existence of family
disturbance as an additional factor in schizophrenia. Indeed, thanks to
Laing's work, many professionals now use what has become known as the
'vulnerability' model of schizophrenia - the idea that some people may
be vulnerable to schizophrenia, perhaps for neurological reasons, but
that they will only develop the problem if they are placed under
intolerable stresses.

Reductionism in Psychological Theory

11

Otherwise, they will be fine, and live their lives as normally as anyone
else. There are other examples of the way in which simple neurological
reductionism is inadequate to explain what is going on. One would be the
role of motivation in recovery from cerebral strokes. If we adopt a
mechanistic approach to brain functions, then when parts of the brain·
become damaged as a result of an interruption to the blood supply, we
would expect that damage to remain. But that isn't how it works: the
reality is that patients who are highly mo ti va ted and try very hard
to overcome the problems will often recover almost complete functioning,
while those who accept their condition passively remain crippled or
paralysed. Their own beliefs affect how much effort they make to
recover, and this in turn affects how much they do recover. Similarly,
Parkinson's disease is considered to result from a deficiency in the
amount of the chemical dopamine in the brain. Patients with Parkinson's
disease find coordinated physical action extremely difficult, if not
impossible. Yet faced with an emergency, like nearly being run over when
crossing a road, they can react very quickly. The comedian Terry Thomas,
who suffered from Parkinsonism later in his life, described how at one
time he found hirnself unable to walk through the door of his bedroom.
Yet, when he tried, he found that he could dance through it. The extra
effort and determination needed to do something as difficult as dancing
enabled hirn to overcome the effects of the brain disease, at least
temporarily. These findings are very hard to explain if Parkinsonism is
simply seen as a collection of symptoms which are 'caused' by dopamine
deficiency in the brain. The fact is that there is a continuous
interaction between people's beliefs and cognitions, the brain, the
environment that they are in, and their behaviour. To take just one
example, the brain will react to certain environmental situations -
like, say, particularly threatening ones - by the production of specific
chemicals; these chemicals in turn can influence our physical reaction
to the environment, by providing us with more energy, and both of them
influence how we comprehend wh at is actually happening. They all

12

Psychology in Perspective

interact continuously. To argue that the chemieals 'cause' the behaviour
is to take a very simplistic and narrow view of what is happening, which
ignores the rest of the picture. We need explanations which can take
more than one aspect of a problem into account - which can deal with
different levels of explanation.

Genetic determinism

Genetic determinism in psychology has manifested itself in many
different ways. I do not intend to deal with one of the most contentious
issues here - that of innate intelligence because that is dealt with
elsewhere in this book (see Chapter 9). Rather, I shall concentrate on a
different aspect of genetic determinism: the global acounts of inherited
behaviour which have emerged from ethological studies of animals.
Research into animal behaviour has always invited theories ab out human
beings, ever since Darwin first published the theory of evolution.
Although the history of these ideas makes fascinating reading, here we
will just concentrate on ideas in the second half of the twentieth
century. In the 1950s and 1960s, writers such as Konrad Lorenz and
Desmond Morris argued that because certain forms of behaviour occurred
in certain animals, and because human beings were also animals, in
evolutionary terms, therefore human beings also showed those behaviours.
Interestingly enough, these writers tended to ignore the vast range of
diversity in behaviour shown by different species of animals, as weIl as
the flexibility of behaviour shown by primates - those species closest
to human beings. Instead, they focussed particularly on just one or two
species, usually birds or fish. Interestingly too, their focus was
always on the 'darker' side of animal behaviour, so we had endearing
qualities such as aggression, territoriality and xenophobia 'explained'
as part of our inescapable biological heritage, and something which we
could do nothing ab out. They were caused by genetic influences and that
was that. In more recent days these theories have taken on a new turn,
through a new version of evolutionary theory which

Reductionism in Psychological Theory

13

proved able to explain even such things as people being nice to one
another, as if it were basically 'selfish', or unpleasant. This new
version, known as sociobiology, was put forward by E. O. Wilson in
Sociobiology and made accessible to the general public by Richard
Dawkins, in The Selfish Gene. Altruistic or helping behaviour had
largely been ignored by Lorenz and Morris, mainly because it was
difficult to see how this showed the darker side of human nature. But
the new concept of kin selection meant that this could actually be
explained as a selfish act, and so that made it an right. Wilson argued
that it is an about saving relatives: if an individual were to lay down
its life for an individual who shared its genes, then its line would be
perpetuated even though its own life wasn't. He, and Dawkins, went on
from there to argue that an animals, induding human beings, were simply
products of their 'selfish genes', and that to think otherwise was
purely an illusion. Society - and particularly the darker side of it -
was as it was because this was an inevitable result of the selfish gene.
What is important about this theory isn't so much the merits or demerits
of its application in understanding the behaviour of white ants or
bumble bees (in whose study the ideas were first formulated) as in its
application to human behaviour. Reducing human behaviour down to the
action of individual 'genes' means that sociobiologists ignore a whole
range of other influences on human behaviour, which in many cases are
crucially important to understanding people. There is a more detailed
discussion of sociobiology and its weaknesses later in this book (see
Chapter 10), but the most important point here is the way that this
approach to understanding human beings, by focussing on just one level
of explanation, ignores all of the other levels of explanation which we
need to use to understand why people are like they are. In order to
understand this point, we need to look at how sociobiologists argue
their cases. Broadly speaking, this consists of three stages: (1)
identifying some kind of 'universal' in behaviour; (2) postulating some
kind of 'gene' which could account for the behaviour's existence; and
(3) seeking a plausible, evolutionary argument about how that

14

Psychology in Perspective

behaviour 'must' have evolved. From then on, any alternative explanation
is completely ignored. There are many other weaknesses in this
procedure, which we will look at in more detail in Chapter 10. But, in
essence, as Gould (1981) pointed out, by looking for separate
explanations for each particular behaviour, sociobiologists act in the
same way as if Galileo had looked for separate explanations for each of
the weights, feathers and cannonballs that he supposedly (but apparently
mythically) dropped off the Leaning Tower of Pisa. Rather than trying to
explain the feather's behaviour by postulating some property of
'featherness', and the cannonball's behaviour by postulating
'cannonballness', Galileo identified two physical rules friction and
gravity - which between them can explain a whole range of behaviours.
Similarly, if we look for the underlying rules within the biological
potential of the human being, we find a whole range of possible human
behaviours, not just a few limited options. It makes no sense to talk of
human beings as innately aggressive on the grounds that even currently
peaceful societies have had aggressive events in their past; because
that doesn't allow us to explain their currently peaceful behaviour.
Rather, we need to talk ofhuman beings as having the potential for
either aggression or peacefulness, and a whole range of behaviours in
between (Rose, 1984). Which brings me on to the main problem of genetic
reductionism: its way of focussing on all the most negative attributes
of human behaviour; and arguing that these are inevitable because they
are biologically determined. That other attributes - such as the
peaceable behaviour in the previous example - could be equally well
defended but are never selected indicates very clearly the political and
social nature of these theories. By presenting a static view of the
individual, and stating that it is futile to try to change it, these
ideas serve to defend and to legitimise all sorts of repressive social
practices. After all, they are simply keeping our nasty biological
natures in check, aren't they?

Reductionism in Psychological Theory

15

Social reductionism

There is another common form of reductionism in psychology, too, which
may be rather less obviously political than the previous example, but
still serves to distract attention away from questions ab out power and
control in society. That is the idea of social reductionism. Although we
will be looking at perspectives in social psychology in more detail in
Chapters 6 and 7, it is worth outlining the main issues here.
Essentially, social reductionism is the attempt to explain what happens
in society simply in terms of the individual qualities of individuals.
The clearest examples of this come with research into social prejudice.
Much of this research arose as a result of what happened in Germany
before and during the Second World War, when Jews, Gypsies and other
groups of people were first segregated from the rest of German society,
and then systematically murdered, in huge numbers, in the death camps.
Although the camps themselves were kept relatively quiet, there were
over 200 of them in Germany alone, and the whole process of what was
referred to as the 'Final Solution' was widely known and discussed. The
whole thing happened against a background of widespread and accepted
racial prejudice and discrimination - not just in Germany, but
throughout Europe. Attempts by psychologists to understand racism and
social prejudice during the decades which followed mostly took a
reductionist approach. For example, Adorno et al. (1950) attempted to
explain social prejudice in terms of the 'authoritarian personality',
looking for aspects of personality which would lead to rigidity and
intolerance in the person's thinking, and so produce social prejudice.
Adorno successfully showed that such a personality syndrome existed, and
could explain why some people are more likely to be prejudiced than
others. But this couldn't account for why a whole society had connived
in the Final Solution, and completely ignored the wider sociological and
economic issues which were also involved. It may have been one part of
the answer, but it certainly wasn't the wh oIe story.

16

Psychology in Perspective

At the Nuremberg trials, after the war, the most common defence of those
Nazis involved in the atrocities was that they were only obeying orders.
Milgram conducted an impressive series of experiments showing that even
ordinary people could obey orders to the point of actually killing
someone. But when he tried to explain why this happened, Milgram too
avoided issues of social power and influence, and explained it in terms
of individual states of being (Milgram, 1973). Again, his work provided
part of an answer, but not all of it. There are other examples of social
reductionism too, such as Philip Zimbardo's attempt to explain crowd
behaviour in terms of deindividuation, which ignores the very real
social inequalities which underlie riots - and also fails to explain the
behaviour of peaceful crowds. Similarly, Bibb Latall(!'s social impact
theory explains bystander intervention or apathy purely in terms of the
numbers of individuals concemed, entirely ignoring questions of social
beliefand social structure. The point is this: that accounting for
social events in terms of the actions and ideas of individuals is not
enough. There are other factors involved as weH. As Tajfel (1981) showed
in his studies of group behaviour, there are real differences in power
and control between different groups in society, and these influence how
individual people act and think. We can't ignore these other levels,
even though we may choose to focus on just one aspect of human behaviour
for research purposes. The explanations and theories that we develop
need to link with these other levels and work with them, not simply
ignore their existence.

Reductionism as a general approach The real problem with reductionism,
though, is that as a way of looking at human beings it is both negative
and misleading, in the way that it ignores all the other levels of
explanation. To argue that a certain kind of behaviour is 'caused' by
brain chemicals is to deal with only one part of the problem. Questions
such as 'Why is the person showing that behaviour rather than any
other?', 'How does the person understand what is happening?' and 'What
are the objective circumstances

Reductionism in Psychological Theory

17

in that person's life?' are equally relevant questions, which can
contribute equally to our understanding of what is going on. We need to
look at explanations on a sociallevel, as weIl as on an individual one.
The interactions of a disturbed family may throw more light on a
particular case and - more importantly - let us know what kinds of help
may be more effective (like, say, family therapy) than a simple
reductionist model which talks only about brain chemistry. The study of
depression in London housewives conducted by Brown and Harris in 1978
showed that factors such as being at horne with the children rather than
working, or living as a one-parent family in a society geared for
two-parent families, were a major contribution to depression. To
understand why this is, we need to look at much wider social, economic
and political issues. But, of course, the fact that reductionist
arguments comfortably avoid questions like this is one reason for their
popularity among the very right-wing sectors of society. The other
question that we have to ask when faced with reductionist explanations
is: in what sense does this really form an explanation? And in what
sense does it simply tell us to accept things as given and do nothing
about them? If we look, for instance, at the finaloutcomes of
reductionist thought, we find totally static models of the human being
underpinning them. Skinner's Beyond Freedom and Dignity argues that,
since we are all pawns of our environments anyway, we mightjust as weIl
make the best ofit and go in for social manipulation on a massive scale;
Dawkins's The Selfish Gene argues that lies, deceit and so on, are
inevitable simply because communication makes them possible and some
genes may beneft-t from them - therefore we just have to accept it as
unchangeable. And the only conclusion that neurological explanations of
abnormal behaviour seem to come to is to drug or to incarcerate, or
both, the 'abnormal' individual. These ideas have the flavour, not of
explanations, but of static defences of existing practices. It is for
this reason that people get het up about reductionist thought. If it
were just a matter of academic debate, nobody would care particularly
much. Academics will always argue, after all. It's part of their job.
But it is always the reductionist arguments which hit the headlines in
the tabloids: 'Inner city

18

Psychology in Perspective

riots caused by lead poisoning from exhaust fumes' and so on. By
presenting issues in this way, they distract attention from wider social
questions, and end up justifying existing practices at times when these
are in serious need of change. And as a mode of scientific thought, too,
it simply isn't valid. To attempt to understand a cake in terms of its
contituent parts is to miss out on the event of the cake. It is true
that originally the cake was constructed from the elements of flour,
fats, water, sugar and the application of heat. But once the cake has
been made, it can neither be returned to those elements, nor do those
elements 'explain' the cake, if by explanation we mean allow us to
understand the cake any better than we do. The cake is more than just
the sum of its parts. In the same way, society is far more than just the
sum of individual human abilities. Flying, for instance, is weIl outside
an individual's capacity unaided, yet through the coordination of
science and technology it is a day-to-day reality. None of us can store
the sum total of human knowledge, yet access to vast amounts of it is
available in libraries. To argue that we can only understand society in
terms of the ability of the individual human being is to argue that a
very large amount of our everyday experience could not exist. Similarly,
to argue that basic units, whether they are genes, S-R links, or brain
chemicals, entirely determine human behaviour is to ignore the vast
wealth of alternative experience and capacity for adaptation which we
encounter every day. We have not yet begun to explore human potential:
why limit our understanding before we start?

2 The Influence of Behaviourism Philosophically speaking, behaviourism
has its origins in the associationism of the philosopher John Locke
(1632-1704). Locke believed that the human being was born as a tabula
rasa - that, mentally, a human infant was a blank slate, with no prior
knowledge or ideas. It is experience, received through the senses,
according to Locke, which provides the material which forms the human
mind. By associating different experiences, complex chains of ideas can
be developed, and new combinations can be found. Locke believed that all
human thought and mental life was formed by such associations. J. B.
Watson, the founder of the psychological school of thought known as
behaviourism, also saw the human being as a tabula rasa at birth; and
like Locke he saw complexity as arising from the association of small
items of experience. But for Locke, experience consisted of sensation
and reflection: he was in accord with Descartes in seeing thinking as
the essence of being human, reflected in Descartes's famous saying
Cogito ergo sum -'I think, therefore I am'. For Watson, however,
experience consisted of sensation only. It was derived from the
stimulus, which was external to the organism, and registered through the
five external senses of sight, hearing, touch, taste or vision.
Behaviourism in its time

In its time, behaviourism was a radical theory which was embraced with
evangelical zeal by its followers. In order to 19

20

Psychology in Perspective

understand this, we have to look at the backdrop against which
behaviourist ideas were ta king place. In terms of the dominant
assumptions of the psychology of the time, behaviourism was perceived as
a dynamic new approach, with the potential for leading to a better world
by freeing its followers from the constraints of the old one. Broadly
speaking, we can trace three separate strands in this backdrop, although
not all of them were equally influential everywhere. The first strand is
the work of the 'introspectionist' school of psychology, against whom
Watson made his particular stand. In America, the most significant
figure of the introspectionist school was William James, whose
Principles of Psychology had been published in 1890 and represented one
of the first texts to present psychology as a coherent discipline,
capable of explaining human behaviour. James's method consisted largely
of introspection, and although some of his insights continue to have
relevance for psychological research even today, his 'unscientific'
methods were anathema to Watson. James' underlying assumptions about the
human mi nd were essentially nativist: his interest was in the
structuring of experience, which he saw as being similar for everyone.
Watson, by contrast, was an empiricist: all human behaviour was learned,
not innate. James also tended to concern hirnself with the more holistic
aspects of human experience; and as we shall see shortly, Watson was a
reductionist to the core, believing that scientific knowledge could only
be built up from a set of elemental building blocks. The second strand
in psychology of that time consisted of the psychoanalytic paradigm,
which was beginning to dominate the mental health field. Originating
with the ideas of Freud, psychoanalytic theories adopted radically
different assumptions about evidence and scientific investigation from
those accepted by ordinary 'science'; inc1uding notions of
'psychological truth' and dream symbolism. The idea that human problem·s
and behaviour could be addressed as manifestations of a deep underlying
pathology whose origins could be traced back to infantile frustrations
was one which, although popular with the medical profession, appeared to

The Influence of Behaviourism

21

many psychologists even at the time to be woolly and speculative. In
Europe, and particularly Britain, a third strand of experimental
psychology had emerged. Tracing its origins to the work of Wundt and
Ebbinghaus, and developing further in Britain with the work of McDougall
at Oxford, experimental psychology concerned itself with systematic
laboratory investigations of human actions. Since it modelled itself on
the physical sciences whenever possible, it tended to focus on
observation and measurement; and was therefore quite receptive to the
behaviourist paradigm when it emerged. There were differences, though,
between experimental psychology and behaviourism. The underlying
assumptions of experimental psychology were strongly influenced by the
nativist legacy left by the earlier faculty psychology, which had
dominated European thinking in the nineteenth century. Consequently, the
experimental school continued to study such 'mentalistic' events as
memory and perception, which were largely eschewed by the hard-line
behaviourists of the time. The new school of behaviourism, then,
presented a very different picture of the human being to those already
in existence. It challenged the rigid assumptions of the nativists,
presenting a picture of the human being as open to new learning and
capable of being moulded. It also challenged the negative images of the
psychoanalysts, with their picture of the human mind as a repressed
seething mass of impulses and emotions. To many, it appeared as a
radical, liberating approach. Behaviourism stressed the malleability of
human behaviour: ifyou had maladaptive habits, then the answer was to be
found in your reinforcement contingencies; by altering your
reinforcement contingencies you could develop better habits. If
everything you were was the result of learning, then it became possible
to learn new things and become a new person. The optimism of the
behaviourist promise was particularly relevant at a time when social
orders all over the world were changing. The social upheavals of the
growth of industrial capitalism through the nineteenth century had
produced much utopian-style debate about progress and the nature of the

22

Psychology in Perspective

social order, as weIl as massive social unrest. The revolution in Russia
in the early part of the twentieth century challenged feudal assumptions
about power and society, and provided a dramatic impetus to social
reform movements all over the world. All over the Western world, people
were looking for ways to build a new society. Behaviourism's promise
that people could change carried a firm implication that a new order
ofhuman society could be forged out ofthe old one, and it so on became
firmly embedded in the new ideals of social engineering. A famous quote
from Watson's paper, which you've probably heard of, expresses the
essence of the new optimism. In 1924, he argued that if he were given:
'a dozen healthy infants ... and my own specified world to bring them up
in, and 1'11 guarantee to take any one at random and train him up to
become any type of specialist I might select doctor, lawyer ... and yes,
even beggarman and thief, regardless of his talents, penchants,
tendencies, abilities, vocations, and race of his ancestors'. The
idealism of this message speaks for itself: we are not limited by our
heredity;

we can be anything at all, if we grow up in a world which permits us the
appropriate learning. In America, behaviourism was embraced with
enthusiasm not by every American psychologist, but certainly by a
majority. In England, it coexisted reasonably easily with the
experimental psychology tradition, but uneasily with the
deeply-established nativist school of thought originating with Francis
Galton and continuing through the work of Cyril Burt and his pupils
(notably induding Hans Eysenck). In Europe, behaviourism had its
influence, but never took such a hold. The reductionism of behaviourist
thinking was also, of course, directly challenged by the Gestalt
psychologists, with their emphasis on the holistic nature of experience.
As a way of seeing psychology, behaviourism was generally superseded by
other theoretical frameworks, such as those offered on one side by
Piaget's genetic epistemology, and on the other by the theoretical work
of members of the existentialist school, like Simone de Beauvoir. When
B. F. Skinner took over where Watson had left off, as the main advocate
of behaviourism, his influence was

The Influence 0/ Behaviourism

23

dramatic and wide-ranging. His acceptance of the 'black box' model
(stimulus in, behaviour out) was complete. It was unnecessary to
postulate thinking at all, Skinner argued: even language was simply
verbal behaviour - noises shaped by reinforcement, in the same way that
an pigeon's actions can be shaped until it plays ping-pong. Skinner, in
fact, managed to dismiss ideas of intentionality and freedom of action
completely, seeing them simply as 'explanatory fictions' which formed
convenient units of verbal behaviour. Similarly, he saw the personality
as nothing but a manifestation of the individual's behaviour patterns,
acquired through stimulus-response learning. And in Beyond Freedom and
Dignity, he applied this model to the whole of human action in society
an idea to which we will return. The influence of behaviourism At its
peak, behaviourism permeated almost every aspect of psychological
enquiry. Its domination probably achieved its height in the 1950s,
although its influence had begun very much earlier. Behaviourist models
challenged existing psychological theories across the board.
Behaviourism is essentially a reductionist theory, and Watson's
reductionism stemmed from his views on what distinguished a science. As
we saw in Chapter 1, he considered that a scientific psychology should
model itself on the established sciences of physics, chemistry and
biology. During the previous century, each of these had been transformed
by theories which had identified basic 'building blocks', and mIes for
how these blocks should be combined: in physics, the building blocks
were atoms; in chemistry, elements; and biology had been transformed
into a science by the development of cell theory and Mendelian genetics.
Watson saw a scientific psychology as being obliged to identify its own
set of 'building blocks', and their mIes of combination. The
stimulus-response (S-R) unit was the building block that Watson
identified as the 'atom' of psychology which would eventually lead to a
complete understanding of human behaviour. Since S-R connections had
been shown to deve10p

24

Psychology in Perspective

through learning - through Watson's own work on the Law of Exercise, and
Pavlov's work on conditioned reflexes - Watson believed that learning
theory would ultimately lay bare the rules of combination, showing how
simple S-R units could combine into the complex actions and interactions
of human life. Following the physicists' model of the atom, or the
biological model of the simple cell, Watson argued that psychology
should begin by studying the simplest form of stimulus-response link.
Animallearning, he argued, would be relatively uncontaminated by other
kinds of factors; and so would be a suitable area of study to form the
foundation of the new science. If S-R links were the basic foundation of
behaviour, then all S-R links would be similar in essence, the same way
as different atoms or cells are similar in essence. It is important to
remember here that Watson's definition of the nature of science was
different from the definition of science that was held by the
'introspectionist' psychologists, in that he was defining a science alm
ost in a Popperian manner, as that which had absolute laws, basic units
and rules of combination - in other words, in terms of its subject
matter. The introspectionists, however, defined science in terms of the
methods of investigation which were used. Psychologists such as Wilhe1m
Wundt, William James and Herman Ebbinghaus had established rigorous
methodology, and a tradition of systematic experimentation. But their
subject matter - the human mi nd - was in Watson's eyes inherently
unscientific. At the heart of behaviourism, then, was learning theory.
Skinner's work on the Law of Effect added to and augmented Watson's work
on the Law of Exercise. With the introduction of Skinner's operant
conditioning, everything seemed to open up for the behaviourists. When
the Gestalt psychologists argued ab out insight learning (Köhler, 1925),
behaviourists countered by talking about learning sets and
generalisation (Harlow, 1949). As long as one ignored tricky issues like
Tolman's work on cognitive maps or complex aspects of learning like
imitation or intentionality, it seemed that the paradigm could explain
every type of human learning. I have already mentioned Skinner's view of
language as 'verbal behaviour' - noises were selectively reinforced from
the days

The Injluence 0/ Behaviourism

25

of the child's earliest babbling. This, Skinner argued, applied to
vocabulary too, inc1uding the social use of words like 'thought' or
'intention'. Skinner argued that, despite their popularity, these words
did not reflect any underlying mental reality. Instead, they were simply
manifestations ofthe kind of language use which society approved of and
reinforced. In the field of child development, Watson's original
assertion that the child could be moulded into anything at all, given
the right conditions and environment, sharply challenged both the
nativist school of Arnold Gesell and the psychoanalytic orientation of
Freud. The child, as we have seen, was simply a product of its
stimulus-response history. Even what we would now regard as cognitive
skills such as reading and concept formation began their psychological
history with theoretical explanations in terms of stimulusresponse
connections. In the mental health field, behaviourists again challenged
the assumptions of psychoanalytic theory, and insisted on seeing
neurotic symptoms as evidence of faulty learning. Dollard and Miller
conducted an extensive reappraisal of psychoanalytic theory, arguing
that each of its tenets could be explained in terms of conditioning. As
early as 1920, in one of the most ethically dubious studies in the
history of psychology, Watson and Rayner had conducted their famous
'little Albert' study, and in so doing had shown how phobias could be
induced. In the 1950s, Wolpe showed how conditioning principles could be
applied to specific forms of disturbed behaviour, and initiated the new
approach of behaviour therapy. Although the psychoanalysts made dire
predictions about the recurrence or displacement of symptoms (since the
underlying disturbance hadn't been dealt with at all), their patients
showed quite dramatic, and apparently lasting, improvements.
Behaviourism spread its influence across the whole of psychology. Even
social psychology concentrated on social behaviour, and didn't really
come to grips with social cognition until the cognitive revolution made
it respectable in the 1970s. Studies in social psychology during the
1950s and 1960s emphasised observable aspects of social interactions,
such as non-verbal communication, conformity in group

26

Psychology in Perspective

behaviour, obedience to authority, and the behaviour of bystanders. It
is only relatively recently that social psychologists have become so
much more concerned with our understanding of social situations, such as
the attributions that we make about ourselves and others, the
relationships that we develop with other people, and the shared social
representations which permeate social life. Even the study ofperception
and memory, which almost by definition have to deal with the mind,
adopted semibehaviourist methodologies. Much of the research into
perception during this period, for instance, concentrated on measuring
aspects of sensation - looking at stimulus thresholds and reaction times
and ignoring the content of what was being perceived. Similarly, despite
the influence of Frederick Bartlett, memory researchers in general
avoided the tricky issues posed by meaningful everyday memory, and
instead looked at word-pairs and very specific - some would say
trivial - recognition tasks. The theory-building which occurred in these
areas restricted itself to narrow, specific areas; and it wasn't really
until Ulrich Neisser published Cognition and Reality in 1976 that any
overall attempt was made to make sense out of everyday cognitive
experience. Behaviourism's influence even extended to those who didn't
share the paradigm. Many psychologists disagreed with the empiricism
which was such a central feature of the behaviourist school: the
nativist school was a strong one, especially in Britain, and the idea
that people could change or be changed is one which goes against British
traditional social assumptions (unlike in America, where it does not).
So uneasy marriages developed, in which certain aspects of behaviourism
were adopted while others were rejected. In essence, behaviourism as the
dominant paradigm determined what could appear on the psychological
agenda. Almost all psychologists, for instance, accepted the idea that
behaviour had to be objectively quantified in order to be studied
scientificaIly; and the resulting techniques of data collection often
led to sterile measures which managed to disregard personal meaning and
social experience pretty weIl entirely. Whether or not they accepted the
behaviourist paradigm, psychologists everywhere began to speak of people

The Influence 0/ Behaviourism

27

as 'organisms', which was an implicit acceptance of the behaviourist
idea that all behaviour could be reduced to identical essential
components. Behaviour was described as being 'elicited' by situations,
and human beings were seen as fundamentally passive, at the mercy of
environmental (or nativist) causes. Behaviourism carried with it the
idea that all human (and animal) behaviour was essentially the same; and
could be treated as such. This meant that the normative group experiment
came to dominate the psychological scene, discrediting the insights
which could be obtained from the individual case study, or from accounts
of personal experience. Ideas of replicability and reliability meant
that only the more limited or predictable aspects of psychological
phenomena could be discussed. This resulted in an image of the human
being which entirely denied uniqueness and idiosyncrasy: something with
which we are only just now beginning to come to terms. The concepts of
autonomy and intentionality were rarely mentioned, except by 'heretics':
the vocabulary needed to discuss them was dismissed as 'woolly' and
'unscientific' . Rather than opening psychology up to a new range of
human potential, then, behaviourism, at least in Britain, ended up
restricting its scope severely. It limited the methodologies of both its
own researchers and those of other psychologists by defining other
vocabuhuies as 'unscientific'. And it carried an implicit assumption
about generalisability which maintained that all research had to be
applied across large groups: single-case studies, individuality and
individual change were dropped from the psychological agenda, and are
only just returning.

ChaUenges to behaviourism While the supporters of behaviourism
emphasised its promise for a brave new world, its opponents challenged
it on many other grounds. One major objection made by psychologists in
Britain, at least, was that it defied what appeared to be common sense.
Watson's insistence that anybody could be

28

Psychology in Perspective

anything seemed to deny the importance of heredity, which people could
see just by looking about them, in physical family resemblances. It also
chaHenged the idea of genius, and distinctive talent, which was an
important social belief in a society as stratified as that of Britain.
The chaHenge to common sense, of course, was not one which worried the
behaviourists much - perhaps rightly. After aH, psychology is fuH of
things which run counter to common sense - common sense, for instance,
teHs us that people will not give each other fatal electric shocks just
because they've been told to by someone they don't even know! But there
were more serious objections to behaviourism too. Although behaviourism
was the dominant paradigm, psychology was never unified in its support
for behaviourist ideas. There were always chaHenges to its assumptions -
many of them originating with the experimentalist school. In the 1930s,
Frederick Bartlett had shown how the ability to remember meaningful
information was c10sely linked to expectations and cultural assumptions;
and this formed a starting point for a whole tradition of research which
eventuaHy led to present-day investigations of eyewitness accuracy and
everyday memory. In perception, Jerome Bruner's work on expectation and
the effects of personal experience showed how perception was intimately
tied to the mental attributes of the individual. But these studies had
to wait for the cognitive revolution to come fuHy into their own and
even then, they were devalued by the computer metaphor (see Chapter 8).
Opposition to behaviourism frequently took an extreme stance: Chomsky
countered Skinner's assertion that infants acquired language entirely
through operant conditioning with the equally extreme assertion that, on
the contrary, acquiring language was almost entirely inherited and had
very little to do with learning or human contact. H. J. Eysenck,
although rather oddly calling himself a behaviourist, maintained that
personality and even political attitudes were inherited. And even the
humanistic school, while rightly emphasising a holistic view of self,
ended up more or less denying the importance of environmental stimulus
control in matters relating to personal growth.

The Injluence 0/ Behaviourism

29

Perhaps the most far-reaching effect of behaviourism in Britain was the
way that it polarised the nature/nurture debate. Because it stated the
environmentalist position in such an extreme manner, those who opposed
it were given an opportunity to discredit ideas of environmental
influence which they didn't fail to seize. Early psychological theory
had always maintained a strongly nativist approach, and the extreme
challenge of the empiricists produced an extreme reaction. To give one
example: the extreme arguments of behaviourism were - and still are -
used to discredit ideas about social or environmental influence in
scholastic achievement. The concept of innate 'ability' still dominates
the majority of our teacher training establishments and school
staffrooms in Britain, and this is partly because those who opposed the
idea stated their challenge in such an extreme mann er. Rather than
suggesting that social/environmental influences were equally important,
they denied the existence of any form of individual difference in
ability or talent. As a consequence, they left little room for the
middle ground: a model in which talents are seen as amplified and
developed by the environment. The debate became so polarised that people
feit obliged to opt for one side or the other. And the dominant
ideology, in Britain, was on the nativist side. Psychology itself in
Britain is still feeling the discrediting influence of extreme
behaviourist ideas. Many sociologists, for example, still appear to
believe that behaviourism is the dominant paradigm in the psychological
discipline, and attack it accordingly. Many ofthose who undertook minor
courses in psychology in the 1960s perceive it as a mechanistic,
inappropriate discipline. The growth of pre-degree psychology has done,
and is doing, much to inform the public about the nature of psychology;
but it will be a long time before we manage to shrug off the 'either
Freud or Skinner' perceptions held by so many older people. The extreme
reductionist of the early behaviourists has largely disappeared. Even
modern-day 'neo-behaviourists' have, for the most part, dropped the
reductionist approach adopted by Watson, and argue instead for an
'interactionist' perspective, in which cognition and environmental
learning

30

Psychology in Perspective

are seen to be working together to produce particular behaviours. Their
emphasis is still on behaviour and S-R links, but they no longer
consider that to be the only possible level of explanation in
psychology. Levels of explanation

There is a level at which many of the insights put forward by the
behaviourist approach can be very useful. It is, for instance, often a
good idea in changing behaviour to begin by looking at the reinforcement
contingencies under which the individual is operating. The error comes
in treating those reinforcement contingencies as if they were all there
iso Applying the principles is one thing: accepting the inherent
reductionism of behaviourism is quite another. Behaviourism - or at
least the stimulus-response level of explanation - is one out of many
possible levels of explanation for human experience. Human beings are
complex and multifaceted: to look for a single answer to anything is to
invite trouble. We live in a culture which encourages us to look for
single, 'correct' answers to things; but this is inherently misleading
when we're looking at human behaviour. People don't do anything for just
one single reason, even though we may often rationalise our actions that
way after the event. Instead, several different levels of explanation
can be operating at once. If I want to explain ahandshake, I could
explain it as a conditioned behavioural response on my part to the
stimulus of the other person holding out their hand, when we are being
introduced. But that's not the only way of explaining it. On a
historical level, I could explain it as a convention with symbolic
meaning: the right hand is traditionally shaken because in medieval
times that allowed the two to retain their shields against possible
treachery. The handshake has a sociocultural explanation too: as a
greeting and an acknowledgement of equals. If I were a
neurophysiologist, I would explain the handshake as the outcome of my
brain sending a series of signals instructing bundles of muscle fibres
to contract in a specific sequence. All of these are equally valid

The Influence 0/ Behaviourism

31

levels of explanation of the single gesture, and there are many more. To
focus on one at the expense of all of the others has to be inherently
misleading. Within psychology, we use many different levels of
explanation, ranging from the level of neural sensation, through
habitual stimulus-response associations and cognitive levels, up to
socioculturallevels. They are all germane: an individual psychologist
may choose to focus on just one level of explanation to tackle any one
problem, but to insist that that particular level is the only possible,
or 'correct' one, is arrogant and misleading. It is also dangerous,
since reductionism as a style of thinking often leads to simplistic and
politically questionable ideas - like, for example, the implicit
totalitarianism in Skinner's Beyond Freedom and Dignity. Alternatives to
behaviourism

Humanistic psychologists and sociologists early recognised the
questionable social assumptions underlying the behaviourist ideas; which
eventually emerged most clearly in B. F. Skinner's Beyond Freedom and
Dignity. While aiming to present a realistic attempt at discussing
society, the book actually presented a picture of a world dominated by
'Brave New World' -style totalitarianism. Its basic message was that
there was no room for outmoded concepts like 'freedom' or 'dignity',
since none of us were really free or dignified at all. As our actions
were simply the product of our reinforcement history, 'freedom' was just
an illusion; so society might just as weIl begin to manipulate our
reinforcement contingencies to produce the kind of behaviour that it
wanted. Besides raising the obvious question of 'who censors the
censors?' - or in this case, 'who manipulates the behaviour
manipulators?' - the image of the human being as a ping-pong ball, being
batted around by circumstances (Bannister and Fransella, 1971), was feit
by many to be simply inadequate. Psychologists began to construct
alternative models: the image of the human being as an active,
enquiring, theory-building scientist portrayed by personal construct
theory was one; the

32

Psychology in Perspective

personal growth-oriented, positively stnvmg human being portrayed by the
humanistic psychologist Carl Rogers was another. Much empirical research
illustrated the need to re-evaluate the behaviourist approach. I've
already mentioned the gradual emergence of the cognitive school, which
eventually led to the cognitive revolution of the 1970s and 1980s (see
Chapter 8). In other fields, too, it was becoming apparent that
behaviourism was not the only answer: research into behaviour therapy,
for instance, showed how the relationship between the patient and the
therapist was a far more significant factor in determining the outcome
of treatment than the stimulus-response connections involved.
Behaviourists had always treated so ci al influences as simply complex
examples of environmental stimuli; but it gradually became apparent that
social influence was in many ways qualitatively different from other
types of influence. Studies of language acquisition showed how human
interaction was far more important than simple exposure to language;
Carl Rogers posited a need for positive regard as basic to the human
being; cognitive studies showed how social factors could affect almost
everything, including vigilance and attention. As evidence accumulated,
it became clear that a paradigm shift was on the way. As those who have
studied the work of Thomas Kuhn will know, paradigm shifts don't happen
until there is something else to put in its place. As evidence
accumulated for cognitive processing, the foundations of behaviourism
became more shaky. Bandura and others showed how important social
cognition and modelling were; and work on cognitive dissonance and
attribution, as weH as personal construct theory, showed how the
interpretations that people put on their experience were every bit as
important as the experience itself, if not more so. Much of this
research had taken place during the behaviourist heyday, until the
evidence for the new paradigm gradually built up to critical mass. With
the advent of the cognitive revolution of the 1970s and 1980s, cognition
came to replace behaviour as the focus of psychological attention.
Building on the groundwork of the Gestalt school and the experimental
psychologists of earlier

The Injluence 0/ Behaviourism

33

decades, such as Tolman, Bruner, Bartlett and the like, the concept of
'mind' was firmly re-established, signalling a gradual demise of
behaviourism, at least in its pure form. But we are only now beginning
to re-ex amine our methodology and language: the implicit legacy of
behaviourism, both in vocabulary and methodology, is still very much
with uso

3

Ethical Issues in Psychological Research

Ethical issues in psychology are becoming increasingly important. Not
only do they feature as an area of study in their own right, but all
psychological research is coming increasingly under scrutiny with regard
to its ethical implications. Studies which were once regarded as
acceptable are now no longer considered to be so; and concepts like
social responsibility and equity have entered the psychological
vocabulary - not before time, many would say. This state of affairs has
developed for several reasons. In many ways, concern with morals and
ethics has arisen throughout modern society: it has become part of the
current Zeitgeist. Perhaps the political exposure to monetarism and
free-market economics in England and America stimulated such concern, by
its very obvious lack of consideration of alternative values; perhaps it
was areaction to the dogmatic materialism of the middle part of the
century; or perhaps it was the youth-culture 'peace and love'
value-system of the 1960s taking a more mature form. Perhaps, even, it
arose in response to the increasing threat to civil liberties through
tougher legislation. Most likely, it was a combination of all of these;
but the fact remains that the late 1980s showed a dramatic increase in
media discussion and debate about ethical issues. And psychology, as we
have seen before, is as susceptible as any other discipline to changes
in the mood of the times. Another, related, factor was the increasing
support gained over the 1970s and 1980s for the social responsibility of
35

36

Psychology in Perspective

science movement. This movement calls into question the whole notion of
'value-free' science, arguing that science is always located within a
social context, and has social implications. Perhaps oddly, it was the
governmental opposition to the inclusion of social responsibility of
science in the school curriculum at the beginning of the 1980s that
clarified much of its support among science teachers: while seeking to
defend something that had vaguely, but unclearly, been seen as an
important issue, people became very much clearer about exactly what the
important underlying principles and concepts were. Given such general
concerns, it was inevitable that psychology, with its explicit claims to
be a science, should come under the ethical microscope as weil. The
impact of the humanistic school in psychology brought additional
emphasis on the human being who collaborated with the researcher by
serving as 'subject' in psychological research. Humanistic psychologists
took issue with the objectification of human beings, in which their
identity as thinking, reasoning and autonomous individuals was denied.
They objected to reductionist research paradigms which focussed purelyon
some fragment of behaviour, denying entirely the social and human
context of what was going on. And they emphasised that these were
people, not inanimate lumps ofmatter. This increasing recognition that
the source of psychological information was people rather than
'subjects' went hand in hand with an increased acknowledgement that
these people had rights of their own, which should be respected. Another
source of ethical concern arose from psychological research itself.
During the 1960s, a number of studies were undertaken which brought
ethical dilemmas clearly into focus by virtue of the way in which those
ethical issues had been ignored. Other psychological studies were
conducted which investigated ethical questions explicitly, and made
known the implications of their findings. And a third set of
psychological research investigated the social and other effects that
wellknown pieces of psychological research had produced; and brought out
ethical implications arising from those. The outcome of all of these
factors was a very significant shift in emphasis in psychology, away
from the notion of 'value-free'

Ethical Issues in Psychological Research

37

science, and towards the principle of ethical responsibility for
psychologists. So wh at implications does this have for the study of
psychology? The paradigm shift wh ich is emerging impinges on the
typical psychology student in three ways: firstly, in the form of the
accounts of existing psychological research which are studied as part of
a typical psychology course; secondly, in the form of questions about
how ethical considerations arise in practical work; and thirdly, in the
form of the wider ethical issues, in society as a whole, which are
raised by so me of the general perspectives and themes within
psychology. Ethical questions raised by past psychological research

Introductory psychology, like introductory courses in other disciplines,
traces how thinking has developed in the subject: how gene rally
accepted ideas and concepts have emerged, and their basis on previous
psychological research. Typically, therefore, covering a topic at an
introductory level involves looking at some of the early ideas and some
of the key studies wh ich are considered to provide the evidence on wh
ich a psychological theory was built. What this means, of necessity, is
that as students study introductory psychology, they leam about
psychological research which was conducted many years ago, in a very
different social context. Psychology as a discipline, however, has
changed over the years. And, as psychology has changed, so has our
awareness of methodology. Most students leam, for instance, about the
power of the self-fulfilling prophecy and the need to avoid experimenter
expectations from affecting the outcome of an experiment. But the
studies wh ich demonstrated self-fulfilling prophecies so convincingly
were conducted in the 1960s, which means, by definition, that studies
conducted before that date did not take the possibility of experimenter
effects into account. (That's why students are expected to know the
dates of studies - it isn't just a novel form of torture inflicted on
those taking exams!) Ethical concems, in their current form, are a
relatively recent development in psychology. So a number of the studies

38

Psychology in Perspective

which a student learns about as part of an introductory psychology
course raise ethical questions. While we can still learn from such
studies - and indeed, we ought to learn from them - we have to bear in
mind that it would no longer be acceptable for a psychologist to conduct
such research today. While we need to see these studies as a significant
part of psychological knowledge, we also need to bear in mind that
modern psychology is rather different. In essence, the difference
between modern psychology and older forms of knowledge hinges around
respect for the person who participates in the research - those who were
traditionally called 'subjects'. The traditional forms of investigation
within psychology involved a highly maq,ipulative mind-set, in which the
experimenter pulled the strings and the 'subjects' (ideally) danced.
Inputs were changed and outputs measured, as if the person were little
more than a lump of metal or a plant. This way of regarding research
participants, as essentially passive and manipulated by the
experimenter, also incorporated the idea that, as long as one didn't
actually damage the people concerned, it didn't really matter what the
researcher did with them. This lack of respect for research participants
shows in a number of studies. One which illustrates it quite elearly was
the well-known library study of Felipe and Sommer (1966). This study
involved researchers going into libraries and deliberately invading the
personal space of library users, by sitting extremely elose to them, and
timing how long it took before they packed up their books and moved
away. This is, of course, not a harmful thing to do - nobody was
damaged, although understandably many of the subjects were irritated.
But it illustrates very elearly the lack of respect for subjects in the
old experimental paradigrn. The library users were people carrying on
with their own lives, who had a right to get on with their work in
peace. But this was not considered. It was taken for granted that the
experimenter had the right to disrupt other people without any
consideration for their rights as individuals. If we look through the
psychological literature, we find that this was a recurrent attitude,
although not one which was inevitably shared by all psychologists.

Ethical Issues in Psychological Research

39

Another research practice which is common in the psychological
literature but which has become much less acceptable now is that of
deception. Even as children, we are taught that lying to people is mo
rally wrong, and compromises one's personal integrity. But psychologists
of the old school appeared to forget that, or to consider themselves
'above' it somehow. Deception was a routine aspect of psychological
research, so there are many examples which I could give. But it became
so much an accepted part of psychological research that it was often
employed in situations where it was entirely unnecessary. For example,
take the 'bogus pipeline' technique, described in a number oftextbooks
(but not mine) asjust another, fairly routine, way of measuring
attitudes. Developed by Jones and Sigall in 1971, this technique
involved first giving participants some kind of general attitude
questionnaire, and then following it up several weeks later in an
apparently different context. On the second occasion, participants were
connected to an impressive-looking machine by means of electrodes, and
told that the machine could measure tiny electrical changes associated
with their 'true' attitudes. Then they were given a number of statements
(actually rephrased versions of their previouslyexpressed attitudes), as
'evidence'. This was aimed to convince them that the machine worked, so
that they wouldn't bother lying. Again, this is not a technique which is
likely to cause participants deep psychological damage. But it does
involve gratuitous deception, and for no particularly good reason, since
there are other, more effective ways of measuring attitudes. It reveals
again the underlying attitude of disrespect, almost contempt, which the
old-style psychology had for its 'subjects' . I have chosen reasonably
innocuous examples of these two prillciples, because it is too easy to
cloud the issue by using dramatic examples. But there are many examples
of research in psychology which dealt with more potentially serious
outcomes. Take, for instance, the study on self-esteem and attraction
conducted by Walster, in 1965. In this, female students were given
personality tests, and later asked to wait outside an office for their
result. While they were waiting, they

40

Psychology in Perspective

were approached by a good-Iooking young man - a confederate of the
experimenters - who chatted with them and eventually asked them for a
date. They were then given false feedback from their personality tests,
designed to lower or raise their self-esteem, and asked to assess the
attractiveness of a set of people, inc1uding the young man they had just
met. This study incorporates both the lack of respect for participants,
and the gratuitous use of deception. But more importantly, it does it in
such a way as to produce a certain amount of personal distress -
experiencing a lowering of selfesteem is not pIe asant - and some risk
of harm, since low levels of self-esteem have been shown to have a
number of psychologically damaging effects. When one examines the
ethical implications of what appears on the surface to be a relatively
innocuous study, and is certainly a fairly typical one for the time, the
contempt which is being demonstrated for the participants is quite
striking. At the time, the study passed without comment. It wouldn't be
considered acceptable research at all nowadays. There are a number of
other issues which could be discussed here. For example, the anxiety
caused to participants during Asch's conformity studies is often
unrecognised; yet both the original papers and the Perrin and Spencer
follow-ups of the 1980s record how distressed participants became during
the procedure. Indeed, the question of distress was one of the first
issues raised in the correspondence between Perrin and Spencer and
Solomon Asch when discussing their research findings. The fact that
participants had become just as distressed as those in Asch's original
study at failing to conform, yet had nonetheless stuck to their
individual judgements, was a significant contribution to the conc1usion
that Perrin and Spencer had encountered a cultural effect. There are, of
course, several even more dramatic examples of unethical practice in
psychological research - Watson and Rayner's study of little Albert, for
example. Admittedly, ninemonth-old little Albert was deliberately
selected because he was a phlegmatic kid, who had never been known to
get upset over anything. But that's no excuse for deliberately
subjecting the child to all sorts of unpleasant experiences designed to
induce terror! Acording to their original paper, Watson and

EthicalIssues in Psychological Research 41 Rayner never actually did get
the chance to recondition little Albert, as he was removed from the
hospital by his mother before they had a chance. Not, however, before
little Albert had become nervous, jumpy and easily upset. One wonders if
his mother's trust in the integrity of the researcher had finally become
eroded, after 18 days of Albert being exposed to increasingly
distressing stimuli. But this aspect of the study went largely
uncommented on for many decades. In fact, some of the studies which did
generate comment sometimes seem to have been conducted much more
carefully. Baumrind's criticisms of Milgram's obedience experiments, for
instance, were based on possible outcomes - what might have happened,
rather than what really did happen. Milgram kept in touch with all his
participants, and in a survey conducted a year later, 99 per cent of
them reported that they were glad to have taken part, even though it had
been stressful at the time. But, of course, the essence of Baumrind's
criticism was that such an outcome could not have been predicted. Even
if it all worked out for the best, taking risks with people's well-being
is not acceptable professional practice. It was studies like Milgram's
which brought this to psychology's attention - and which, ultimately,
stimulated our current concerns with ethics. Re-evaluating research
practices But there are costs to be calculated, and Milgram's work is a
good example of these. Milgram found things out about the power of
obedience which were entirely unpredictable. Indeed, when professional
psychologists and psychiatrists were asked to predict the likely outcome
of the study before it took place, they were wildly inaccurate, as were
members of the general public. Milgram's studies transformed our
understanding of the social side of human nature and of the nature of
power. We need, therefore, to learn from those studies, even while
recognising that a modern study of obedience would require a different
approach. Similarly, not all deception is unacceptable. What about
participant research, in which the researcher becomes involved

42

Psychology in Perspective

in a social group as a participant, rather than as an observer? This
inevitably involves some degree of deception, and sometimes this is the
only way that information about social practices can really be obtained.
For instance, look at the famous 'natural experiment' by Festinger,
Riecken and Schachter, in which they investigated what happened to the
beliefs of a 'Judgement Day' cult when their prophecy was disconfirmed.
The cult firmly believed that the world would be destroyed by flood and
fire on a specific date. In readiness for this, members of the group
sold their hornes and possessions and gathered on a hill to await the
event. Festinger and his team posed as members of the cult, and joined
them on the hill. When the date came and no such cataclysm occurred,
they were admirably placed to see how the group's overall faith remained
consistent, but was preserved by changing the minor details, much in the
manner predicted by dissonance theory. Maintaining that it was their
actions which had cause the world to be saved meant that members of the
cult could continue to exist without loss of face. Participant research
simply couldn't work if the participants were to declare their
intentions beforehand. But the question is, is this automatically wrong?
Nowadays, if a research problem requires deception, the precise details
of it will need to be approved by an ethics committee, and if there is
any other way, it will be sought. As a general rule, only participants
who have consented to the deception can be used (an issue which I shall
come back to later), and it is always required that they should be fully
debriefed after the event. As participating human beings, that is, after
all, their right. In other words, making ethical decisions isn't simply
a matter of applying a rigid rule. The reason why we need ethics
committees is because we need to apply judgement - and for that, more
than one person's point of view is needed. Even though we can't simply
assurne that the end justifies the means, as those early psychologists
did, equally, we can't entirely ignore the ends either. Reynolds (1982)
argued that we should examine ethical issues in social research in the
light of three criteria:

Ethical Issues in Psychological Research

43

Utilitarian, cost-benefit criteria - do we leam more from the research
than we could do from research carried out differently, and if we do, is
it worth it? 2. The effects on the participants - what will the outcome
of our research be for the participants involved? Clearly, if covert
observation has no effect whatsoever, this is different from research in
which the covert intervention produces change. 3. Issues of individual
integrity - have we had to engage in personal dishonesty and
manipulation, and if so to what extent may this be offset by
humanitarian considerations? 1.

None of these three can be taken in isolation a\~ the only criterion for
making ethical judgements. Applying strictly utilitarian perspectives
isn't acceptable - you can justify anything that way, and the
utilitarian perspective was the basis for much of the undesirable
research in the past. At the same time, utilitarian arguments can't be
entirely ignored, either. And looking purely at the effect on the
participants isn't enough either: there might be forms of research which
we would consider to be ethically unacceptable even if the people
concemed were not actually affected by it. In this context, for
instance, we might still consider the Milgram studies to be unethical
despite their apparent lack of damaging effects on the participants.
Reynolds discussed how these three criteria might be applied to a real
piece of research by looking at Rosenhan's 1973 study 'On being sane in
insane places'. In this study, a number of researchers attended various
psychiatric hospitals, complaining of hearing voices. Once inside the
hospitals, they dropped all such pretence, and acted as normally as
their environments permitted. They were almost all diagnosed as
schizophrenic, and their normal behaviour, which was not the norm for
the hospital setting, was frequently taken as 'evidence' of the illness.
Taking Rosenhan's study and applying Reynold's analysis, it is possible
to argue that the information which was gathered could not be obtained
in any other way, and that functionally it was valuable in alerting the
professional world to important

44

Psychology in Perspective

areas of doubt in psychiatric diagnosis. The whole issue of
medicallabelling presents a number of ethical problems in its own right,
and this study highlighted some of them. It is also possible to argue
that any ill-effects of the study would have accrued to the researchers
alone: it was they who were diagnosed as mentally ill, and entered into
a powerless relationship with the medical establishment. On the third
criterion, inevitably there was untruthfulness - professions were
concealed as weIl as the false symptom reports; but the use that was
made of the knowledge was careful, individuals were not identified, and
information which could be embarrassing to specific individuals was not
revealed. The work on the self-fulfilling prophecy undertaken by
Rosenthai presents a similar case. For those of you not familiar with
it, Rosenthal's work began with a study in which psychology students
were allocated rats to train at a mazerunning task. Although the rats
were matched for mazerunning abilities, the students were told either
that their particular rat was from a 'maze-bright' strain, or that it
was from a 'maze-dull' one. And the rats lived up to the prophecies
which had been made. Now in this case, there was clear deception -
outright lying, in fact - and yet without that, we would not have become
so sensitised to the wider research implications involved. Rosenthai and
Jacobsen's foIlow-up work with schoolchildren also involved so me degree
of deception, but there were no direct lies told to the schoolteachers.
Instead, they were just allowed to overhear a conversation between the
experimenters in which certain children were picked out as being 'late
developers'. Although there is still a manipulative element here, most
people would consider that it remains within the limits of acceptablity.
Moreover, what we learned from that study in terms of the impact that
teachers' beliefs could have on students was extremely important. There
are other studies which show dearly that covert research is sometimes
the only option. Perhaps the most extreme example of this was Bruno
Bettelheim's 1943 paper on social identity within a concentration camp -
the one that was turned down by several journals on the grounds that it
was 'implausible' . Bettelheim had spent two years in Dachau

Ethical Issues in Psychological Research

45

before managing to escape; and had thus had firsthand experience of what
went on, and how people managed to maintain, or how they lost, their
individual identities in the face of such monumental hardships. He
hirnself found that he needed to ding on to his identity as a social
psychologist very tightly, and during his time in the camp, he adopted
rigorous mental strategies - induding formal memorising techniques,
obviously, as there was no opportunity for hirn to take notesin studying
the social processes that were taking place. His research provides us
with valuable insights as to the social processes that were going on,
between the guards and inmates as well as between the inmates
themselves. In his view it was his duty to inform the psychological
world of what was happening - so in this case, the conduct of covert
research became ethically positive, not negative. Personally, I find it
a pity that this paper isn't better-known. AnimaI studies

There is a whole different set of ethical issues raised by the question
of animal experimentation. Animal experimentation in psychology has had
a long history, much of it originating with the behaviourists, who were
mainly concerned with identifying the basic S-R 'building blocks' of
behaviour. Being, as they thought, uncomplicated by memory or
experience, animal learning represented the simple, 'pure' form of the
stimulus-response connection. As a result, the behaviourists believed
they could learn ab out human learning from animal learning, much as a
bio10gist might learn about the components of animal cells by studying a
simple, onecelled animal like an amoeba. This would provide the key to
human psychology, they believed, because they adopted the reductionist
stance that all human experience could ultimately be reduced to
stimulus-response associations (see Chapters 1 and 2). The behaviourists
concentrated on learning and conditioning; but there are other forms of
animal experimentation which have been used in psychology. Many students
beginning psychology are deeply shocked when they learn about, for

46

Psychology in Perspective

instance, those perception experiments performed in the 1960s, which
involved rearing kittens or apes in restricted environmental conditions
in order, supposedly, to investigate aspects of the nature/nurture
debate. But so much of psychology rested on animal experimentation at
the time that issues of animal rights and cruelty received little
consideration. It was assumed without question by many psychologists, as
well as by other biological scientists, that, since certain experiments
could not be done without harming the victim, the only option was to use
animals instead of people. The idea that one might take the option of
not doing the study at all was one which received scant attention from
the scientific establishment in general. At that time, it was considered
to be self-evident that the acquisition of scientific knowledge was a
goal in itself, regardless of the cost. The anti-animal research
arguments gathered in momentum through the 1970s and 1980s, partly as a
manifestation of the growing debates about the social responsibility of
science, and partly as more and more psychologists became unhappy with
what was going on. As animal rights campaigns gained momentum, the value
of vivisection was increasingly called into question. Singer (1977)
pointed out that animal experiments, particularly in psychology, were
often trivial, needlessly cruel, and didn't really contribute to
psychological knowledge. I do not propose to enter into the rights and
wrongs of the medical research argument here. Everyone has their own
opinion as to whether medical research on animals is justified. But
there are certainly arguments - and champions - for both sides. For
example, Gray (1985) showed how animal experimentation had led
physiologists directly to a better understanding of how anxiety
mechanisms in the brain operated, which meant that effective
anti-anxiety drugs could be developed and used far more safely. And
Blakemore's work on restricted visual environments with kittens
increased understanding of astigmatism in human beings. Their argument
is that, while animal experiments should be restricted and controlled to
avoid needless suffering, to prevent all of them would be to throw the
baby out with the bathwater.

Ethical Issues in Psychological Research

47

Animal rights supporters counter that animal physiology is different to
that ofhumans anyway, andjust because we find a mechanism which looks
similar doesn't mean that it is the same thing at all. So studies of,
for instance, brain structure or functioning in experimental rats won't
necessarily tell us anything at all about human beings. lronically,
perhaps, the strongest evidence for this comes from precisely one of the
types of animal experiment. Fisher (1964) found that injections of the
same neurotransmitter into the same part of the brain of cats and rats
produced entirely different responses. However, given the interests of
society as well as the champions of both sides, this argument looks set
to run and run. Whatever the rights and wrongs of the case, it did
produce some very positive results for psychology. The trivial, often
gratuitous, animal learning experiments which were such a feature of the
1960s and 1970s - and often, indeed, a course requirement for the
psychology student - have now largely disappeared. Ethical guidelines on
animal research are now strongly enforced, and backed up by the law.
Researchers are strictly adjured not to cause animals pain or distress,
and there must be a serious point to the research. The problem is,
though, that defining pain and distress is not necessarily easy. Looking
at some of the earlier studies, some of them are beyond doubt needlessly
cruel. But what about Harlow's monkeys, suffering lifelong induced
neurosis through being brought up in isolation? Similarly, teaching
animals to use sign language is all very well, and no doubt a
terrifically fun game; but what happens to the animals at the end of the
experiment? Jane Goodall once gave an account of a chimpanzee, Lucy, who
was brought up with human beings and taught sign language. When she grew
too large, she was put in with a colony of wild chimpanzees. When a
visitor whom she recognised came to visit the chimpanzeee colony, Lucy
signed desperately 'Please help. Out'. Again, it is a matter for
personal judgement. I personally am in favour of attempts to teach
animals language, because I believe that it is only when we acknowledge
that animals can and do communicate with us that we will begin to
respect them. But I am not in favour of bringing a chimpanzee up in

48

Psychology in Perspective

an enriched, affectionate environment and then suddenly pitching it into
something entirely different. As with human beings, it is a question of
responsibility and respect, rather than manipulation, even though that
respect may take a rather different form. If a researcher needs to
justify both the purposes of their research and the long-term
consequences for the animals to an ethics committee, then these issues
come on to the agenda. Without such requirements, they are too easily
overlooked.

Ethical questions about practical work So what does this change in
emphasis imply about the conduct of a student's own practical work? The
typical introductory psychology course requires students to undertake a
number of practical exercises, which take the form of research projects.
Introductory syllabuses advise that ethical considerations must be
addressed in the conduct of these studies, and generally recommend that
the ethical guidelines of either the British Psychological Society or
the Association for the Teaching of Psychology should be followed. So
let's look at some of the practical implications which are involved in
taking ethical issues seriously. Firstly, and above all else, there is
the question of respect for one's research participants. That
encompasses several things. For one, it involves respecting
confidentiality - it shouldn't be possible to identify any of the
participants from the report. In group studies, of course, participants
would be unlikely to be identifiable; but more in-depth case studies can
often end up dealing with quite personal issues, and it is essential
that confidentiality is respected in these instances. But respecting
research participants also means making sure that the study doesn't
involve anything which the research participants might find intrusive,
offensive or insulting, if they knew the whole of what was going on. I
have already shown how the Felipe and Sommer study was offensive in its
lack of respect for research participants. The question a student needs
to ask when designing a study is: are the research participants being
manipulated into doing what the researcher wants, or

Ethical Issues in Psychological Research 49

are they and the researcher cooperating in a joint venture? And since
one's own view is, by definition, biased, it is essential that other
people's views are consulted in the planning stage, through an ethics
committee, or the submission of an outline for approval. Then there's
the question of deception. Deceiving subjects is unethical, but what do
researchers do if they don't deceive? Effectively, there are three
alternatives to using deception in psychological research: 1. Tell the
truth (and do studies which will allow you to do so without any
likelihood of contamination. People are often much less motivated to lie
than one might imagine from the psychologicalliterature) 2. Reorganise
the research technique so that there is no need for deception, by using
different methods, like interviews, questionnaires and case studies. 3.
Get the participants to grant permission to deceive them. On the whole
the first two are easier, although Gamson, Fireman and Rytina (1982), in
their study of obedience and rebellion, produced an inventive technique
for getting permission from their research participants. In their study,
people who had volunteered to participate in the research were contacted
by telephone and asked if they would be prepared to participate in the
following types of research: (a) Research on brand recognition of
commercial products (b) Research on product safety (c) Research in which
you will be misled ab out the purpose until afterward (d) Research
involving group standards. Only those who agreed to option (c) were
selected for the research, although in practice that was virtually
everyone. Such approaches, though, are more difficult for an
introductory psychology student, and on the whole the first two
strategies are more appropriate. Which brings us to the question of
research techniques. Taking ethical issues seriously means moving away
from the

50

Psychology in Perspective

old manipulative mind-set, and into something which recognises the
participants as human beings. But the traditional psychological research
methods with which most people are familiar are based on different
assumptions: that you can't trust your subjects, and that they need to
be tricked into revealing things. We will be looking at this more
closely in the next chapter. Nowadays, though, we see this level of
manipulation as largely unnecessary. More direct ways of finding things
out are becoming increasingly common in psychological research. They, in
turn, carry their own implications about research skills. It is
remarkably difficult, for instance, to design a good questionnaire, but
it's a skill which is worth learning. Introductory methods courses often
include case studies, observations, interviews and questionnaires as weB
as experimental methods, so there is plenty of scope for adopting
different techniques. The new paradigm has also led to the emergence of
alternative methodologies, like the ethogenic approach outlined by Rom
Harre. Such methodologies include a greatly increased emphasis on
qualitative analysis. Looking at wh at people say, and how they perceive
and construe events, is increasingly recognised as a valid part of
psychology. To look at them, we need qualitative rather than
quantitative techniques. As yet, though, relatively few textbooks
instruct students in how to undertake qualitative analysis, although
they often go into considerable detail about how to trick andj or
manipulate subjects. But this is changing. Ethical issues raised by
general perspectives and themes

Then there are the wider ethical issues that are raised as psychological
theory impinges on society as a whole. There isn't the scope here to go
into these in detail, and we will be looking at so me of them again in
the next chapter, so here I shall just make a couple of points. The
first concerns the social responsibility of science. A number of
psychological theories have had very powerful

EthicalIssues in Psychological Research

51

social effects - wh ich haven't always been to the good of humankind.
Stephen Jay Gould's book The Mismeasure 0/ Man shows how IQ theory was
used from the outset as an instrument of racial discrimination; and in
Britain, belief in inherited intelligence propagated by Galton and Burt
is still a powerful factor in the education system, acting as much
through self-fulfilling prophecies as anything else. Kallman's twin
studies of schizophrenia provided a direct rationale for the
extermination of vast numbers of people in the Nazi gas ovens. We will
be looking at all of these issues again in Chapter 9. Similar arguments
can be made about the sociopolitical implications of physiological and
sociobiological reductionism, and these will become apparent elsewhere
in this book. The principle of social responsibility in science applies
as much to psychology as to any other discipline, and the general
sociopolitical implications of our theorising is something which all
psychologists need to consider much more closely than they have done in
the past. The other side of the coin is what is left out of psychology.
As a discipline, psychology has tended to be remarkably ethnocentric,
focussing mainly on the psychological processses of the white North
American undergraduate. But the pluralism of modern society means that
this, too, is no longer acceptable. In a modern world, respect for other
cultures is an essential ethical principle. The demands of cultural
awareness and multiculturalism mean that psychology needs to reflect a
wider variety of cultural values, and to incorporate such values into
its everyday practices: sampling, selection of research topics, the
identification of problems, and so on. While this, of course, gene rally
goes under the heading of equal opportunities, it is an ethical issue in
its own right, involving as it does the implicit devaluing or ignoring
the validity of people's lives. So it too is one of the broader
implications raised by psychology's increased ethical awareness. Of
necessity, this has been only an overview of some of the issues raised
by ethical considerations in psychology. There are many other topics,
and many other questions which can be

52

Psychology in Perspective

raised. It can be argued, too, that a full acceptance of the ethical
implications of psychological research actually involves a revolution in
psychology, and this is the issue that we will look at in the next
chapter.

4

Changing Values in Psychological Knowledge

As we have seen in earlier chapters, the nature of knowledge in the
psychological discipline has changed considerably over the past 100
years, and always in li ne with its social context. Schools of thought,
methodologies and research techniques reflect their social origins. For
example, the 'armchair science' of the first, introspectionist
psychologists (e.g. James, 1890) reflects the tradition of the Victorian
gendeman-researcher, for whom science was an intellectual pursuit and
hobby rather than a profession. Later, as the social order changed and
the concept of meritocracy came to replace ascriptive values in social
organisation (at least in theory) the materialist sociopolitical
philosophies of the early part of the twentieth century were reflected
in the mechanistic, 'objective' methodology of the behaviourist era, as
exemplified by Watson (1913). The prevailing social belief in the
ability of society to produce a brand-new and better social structure
without reference to the past resulted in an empirical methodology which
decontextualised human action, treating each separate behavioural
incident as a self-contained unit in itself, linked to other units
purely by associative chains. In the second half of the twentieth
century, the growth of the expert culture through technology, computers
and professional specialism was reflected in the development of
technological methodologies based on computational metaphors, with
increasing complexity of experimental design and statistics, and ever
more sophisticated attention to the finer

53

54

Psychology in Perspective

details of information processing (see Baddeley, 1983, as an example,
although there are many other possibilities). Nowadays, however, society
ischanging yet again. Just as the transition from the mechanistic
concepts of progress of the first half of the century gave way to the
expert culture of the second half, so the expert culture is itself
giving way to a new emphasis on social responsibility. Expertise in
itself is no longer enough: it is how we use that expertise which
matters. Accountability is all-important. The consumer society has
brought with it a new emphasis on individual choice and personal
autonomy, while at the same time our growing social acceptance of
cultural pluralism has brought with it the demand that those from
differing cultures or persuasions should be respected. As society comes
to terms with the increasing demands of cultural pluralism and consumer
capitalism, a new awareness of ethical responsibilities has come to
psychology. As part of this awareness, all psychologists who are members
of the British Psychological Society receive a copy of the Code of
Conduct for psychologists, which outlines procedures for conducting
research and professional practice. A look at the BPS guidelines for
conducting research with human beings illustrates the type of explicit
ethical requirements to which psychologists are currently adapting:

The BPS Ethical Guidelines for research with human subjects 1.
Investigators must always consider ethical implications and
psychological consequences for research participants. 2. Investigators
should inform participants of the objectives of the research and gain
their informed consent. 3. Withholding information or misleading
participants is unacceptable. Intentional deception should be avoided.
4. Participants must be fully debriefed, so they can complete their
understanding of the nature of the research 5. Investigators must
emphasise the subject's right to withdraw from the experiment at any
time.

Changing Values in Psychological Knowledge

55

6.  All data obtained must be treated as confidential unless otherwise
    agreed in advance.
7.  Investigators must protect participants from physical and mental
    harm during or arising from investigations.
8.  Studies based on observation must respect the privacy and
    psychological well-being of the people studied.
9.  Investigators must exercise care in giving advice on psychological
    problems.
10. Investigators share responsibility for ethical treatment, and should
    encourage others to rethink their ideas if necessary. (A dap ted
    from British Psychological Society, 1990.)

On the surface, it would seem that these guidelines simply reflect an
adjustment to existing investigative techniques. Psychologists must now
go about their research in different ways. But if we look at the
fundamental assumptions which underlie these guidelines, we can see that
the new approach is much more than that. In essence, the new approach
argues that people are not merely the 'raw material' of psychological
research, to be manipulated at the whim of the scientistpsychologist.
Instead, it sees people as autonomous beings, able and entitled to make
infonned choices about their mode of action and to receive full
information ab out their experiences (British Psychological Society,
1990). This view of the human beings who form the subject-matter of
psychological research represents a radical change for psychology.
Conventional psychological methodology is thrown into disorder when
faced with the active, enquiring individual as its subject-matter. The
result is that the modern psychology student must reconcile what seem to
be (and are) several inherently contradictory demands. The nature of
introductory psychology courses

The source of the confusion lies far deeper than just problems with data
collection. Introductory courses in psychology,

56

Psychology in Perspective

whether they be A-Ievel psychology courses or first-year 'Introduction
to Psychology' university courses, are the primary agents of
socialisation into the discipline. It is in these courses that students
leam what psychology is all about, what issues are of concem to
psychologists, and how psychologists go about their work. As the
student's first contact with the discipline, their primary purpose is to
familiarise the student with its key ideas and assumptions. In doing so,
of necessity, these courses present a conceptual history of the
subject - as do introductory courses in all scientific disciplines. They
describe how key ideas and concepts have developed, the empirical basis
on which they rest, those areas of knowledge which have become
established within the discipline, and how enquiry into different fields
has changed over time. As part of this process, they inevitably
encapsulate the attitudes and methodologies of previous eras. This is
true of all the sciences, not just psychology, but it is with psychology
that we are concerned here. And in psychology, many of the attitudes and
assumptions manifest in the history of the discipline are direct1y
contradictory to the ideas and assumptions inherent in a full acceptance
of ethical issues. The challenge for the discipline, therefore, is how
to introduce students to psychology, inc1uding its history, while
simultaneously socialising them into a new ethical attitude. Meeting
this challenge, I contend, involves three separate and distinct tasks.
The first of these is one with which most psychologists and psychology
students are familiar, and is reflected in the BPS guidelines mentioned
previously: the adaptation of research techniques so that students can
leam how to conduct research in an ethical manner.

Adapting research techniques Current research psychology, at least as
taught to undergraduates, operates within an empirical paradigm which is
modelled on the physical sciences. The scientist manipulates her
subject-matter, while the subject-matter remains inert, responding only
to the physical changes by which it is

Changing Values in Psychological Knowledge

57

manipulated. A look at the basic principles of experimental research
into which psychology students are inducted shows the power of this
model. One of the first things students leam, for example, is that there
is a need for the researcher to maintain rigorous control over the
physical situation, in order to ensure that there is 'no difference'
between two experimental situations except the one being manipulated.
Practical manuals and methods courses emphasise the susceptibility of
the human being to unconscious social influence, and te ach students ab
out the desirability of 'double-blind' controls to prevent such
influences. Tasks are decontextualised in order to ensure that the
individual's previous experience or prior knowledge doesn't
'contaminate' the study. What all this adds up to is the idea that the
research participant must be kept as inert as possible, responding only
to the manipulations of the researcher. The adaptation of research
techniques in order to conform to more ethical standards is a process
which is al ready taking place, and is reflected in such documents as
the BPS ethical guidelines. As we can see, these guidelines challenge
such wellestablished practices as the use of deception, the assumption
that the psychologist is entirely free to determine the experience of
the research participant once they have committed themselves to the
research, and the idea that the expert should have exclusive access to
relevant information. However, while they are of course necessary, such
adjustments to technique are not enough to ensure ethically responsible
practices, since existing research techniques are predicated on the
assumption that people's behaviour is inherently unreliable (in the
statistical sense) and must therefore be rigidly controlled. Teaching
students that the double-blind control is necessary to prevent
'contamination' of the experimental outcome directly contradicts
teaching students that people are entitled to full information about
what is being done to them. Moreover, the language of traditional
methodology contains powerful emotive loadings: we speak of
'contaminating' variables, of a 'well-controlled' experiment, and of
'pure' stimulus input. These phrases transmit, quite explicitly,

58

Psychology in Perspective

an attitude that controlled data is inherently 'good', and that
uncontrolled information is inherently 'bad'. As psychologists, we are
aware of the effectiveness of vocabulary in influencing attitude, and
students are introduced to these terms, and their underlying
value-Ioadings, at a very early stage in their psychological
development. The result is a deep-rooted mistrust of 'uncontrolled'
information. I would argue, however, that such control is incompatible
with a true respect for the research participant. Human beings are
active and enquiring, and make their own sense of what is going on.
Moreover, they adapt their behaviour to the situations that they are in,
including the tightly controlled situation of the psychological
experiment. Irwin Silverman's book The Human Subject in the
Psychological Laboratory shows how unrealistic it is to see people as
passive, inert experimental material. But it is more than just
unrealistic: it shows a deep-rooted contempt for the individual as a
human being. Information which is obtained using methods which truly
respect the individual as an autonomous, personal agent is by its very
nature uncontrollable. A new methodology

The implication of this is that a fuH acceptance of ethical issues in
psychology requires a new approach to methodology. In the real world,
human beings are inherently unreliable: mood and health fluctuate,
experience leaves its mark, none of us remain exactly the same from day
to day. Unreliability, in the statistical sense, is a distinctive
feature of the psychologist's subject-matter. It is not, as it is
assumed to be in the physical sciences, a function of some external or
artificial 'contamination'. Real people grow, develop, and change. In
our teaching, we inform students that reliability and validity are
equally important criteria for psychological measurement. In practice,
however, we emphasise reliability above all else. This comes ab out as a
direct result of our idealised view of the physical sciences. A
psychological measure which is unreliable is alm ost automatically
regarded as invalid. Yet if our subject matter is inherently unreliable,

Changing Values in Psychological Knowledge

59

the converse is the case: to elevate reliability to the paramount
research goal is to distort the realism of our picture of human
behaviour. These distortions have been repeatedly demonstrated, for
example by researchers such as Orne (1962) and Silverman (1978). Taking
ethical issues fully on board involves respecting the human being as a
person in their own right, not denying their active involvement in wh at
is happening to them by treating them as passive material objects. I am
not advocating, though, that we should abandon the quest for scientific
rigour in psychological research. Rigour is essential to any scientific
endeavour, and the careful collection of data is the paramount
responsibility of the scientist. But there is more than one type of
scientific rigour, and more than one way of collecting scientifically
valid information. We need to broaden our concept of science, and
recognise that there is more to scientific rigour than just controlled
experimentation. The ethical demand of respect for the human being
requires a paradigm shift. That such a shift is beginning to take place
can be detected from a number of indices. Harr6's ethogenic approach
suggests taking the episode as the basic unit of social analysis, as
more valid for the understanding of human experience than the single act
or action. The growing acceptance of action research is another sign, as
is the increased use of qualitative data to augment research of all
kinds, even technologically-based psychophysiological research. As
psychologists are becoming increasingly aware of the limitations of the
single-cause approach to experimental design, action research,
ethogenics, discourse analysis and qualitative approaches are all
gaining currency within the discipline. Increasingly, psychological
research projects combine traditional methods with qualitative
techniques. Each of these has its strengths and weaknesses. Where
traditional psychological methodology sacrificed validity in the quest
for reliability, the new methodology, in asense, does the opposite,
emphasising validity at the expense of reliability. Both have something
to contribute to our understanding of the human being, and we need a
balance between the two. The problem, however, is that introductory
research methods courses in psychology rarely reflect that balance.

60

Psychology in Perspective

There are reasons for this. One of them is our deep-set anxiety lest we
be thought not to be 'properly' scientific. Another is a lack of
knowledge of how to go about systematic research in this new way. There
are several different methods for conducting qualitative research, for
example, yet few of them appear in introductory methods textbooks, and
if they do, they tend to be tacked on as an afterthought. Students are
taught first about traditional methods (emotive terminology and all) and
only later introduced to qualitative techniques or 'real-world' data
collection. If nothing else, primacy effects would ensure an unbalanced
perception of the two. If we are to take our ethical principles
seriously, then, methods of collecting data which show respect for the
experiences, ideas and background of the research participant need to be
taught with at least equal emphasis with more traditional approaches.
But this on its own would not resolve the problems of the psychology
student struggling to reconcile ethical responsibility with
pyschological knowledge. There is yet another problem, and this has to
do with the relationship between the discipline and its history.

Sodal responsibility of science

I contend that a full realisation of ethical issues also requires a
higher-order appraisal of psychological knowledge and research, to
locate it within its social and epistemological context. This is all to
do with the social responsibility of science. As students are introduced
to psychology, they are also gaining impressions of what psychology is
all about. If we judge from its history, psychology is at least partly
about manipulation and ethically questionable research practices. But
more than that, psychology's theories, too, have often had dramatic
social consequences. For example, early theories of infant attachment,
long since modified by research psychologists, sparked off debates about
working mothers which still continue today. In their time, they have
influenced court judgments, family life and social policy regarding
singleparent families (Rutter, 1981). Early theories about intelli-

Changing Values in Psychological Knowledge

61

gence legitimated eugenic policies both in Europe and America, were
indirectly responsible for the deaths of many deemed to belong to
'inferior' races in the Nazi concentration camps, and are still
perpetuated in some societies today (Gould, 1981). Psychological
theories of aggression and crowd psychology underlie not only the
political assumptions underpinning the horrifying violence of events
like Tiananmen Square, but also the policing policies which led to
tragedies such as Hillsborough (Banyard, 1989). Psychology has
traditionally blinkered itself to the social implications of its
theories. Many of these outcomes originate with theories which are no
longer current in the discipline, so we like to think that they no
longer have any relevance for psychology. Yet they are part of our
history, and as much a manifestation of the social responsibility of
science as is the utilisation of the atomic bomb to physics.
Psychologists developed these theories, and as psychologists we have no
right to walk away from their consequences. Particularly not in
introductory courses. Treating psychological knowledge as if it were
context-free and consequence-free is another manifestation of
psychology's lack of respect for the people who form its subject-matter.
A full acceptance of the respect for the human being encapsulated in the
idea of ethical responsibility also involves accepting the social
responsibilities of psychology, not trying to pretend that psychological
knowledge is in some sense independent of the society in which it
occurs. In this sense, then, if we are to realise our ethical
responsibilities fully we need to recognise and leam from our history,
rather than leaving it as a conceptual trap for our students. That
means, primarily, that we have to identify it both methodologically and
in terms of its social implications and context. We need to stop
pretending that psychological knowledge is somehow context-free and
timeless. We cannot articulate the new approach without drawing
contrasts with the old, and those contrasts need to be drawn explicitly.
I am not arguing that psychology is in any sense a prisoner of its
history, but I am arguing that we can best move forward ifwe
acknowledge, fully, what it is that we are trying to change that to
change the present, we must first acknowledge the past.

62

Psychology in Perspective

A full realisation of ethical issues, then, involves much more than
simply tinkering about with our existing research techniques. It means
that the new generation of psychologists need to be socialised into a
psychology which respects the human being. That doesn't mean that we
reject everything which we al ready know; simply that we acknowledge the
nature, history and pluralism of our discipline. Respect for the human
being as an active, autonomous individual involves a major rethinking of
our approach to methodology, and a far fuller appraisal ofpsychology's
past and present role in society than is often appreciated. Teaching
students about ethical criteria for conducting research is important,
but it is far from being enough.

5 Perspectives in Social Psychology Social psychology, during the past
twenty years, has been going through a revolution. It is a quiet
revolution, but a revolution nonetheless. There is a paradigm shift
going on. That paradigm shift concerns the nature of social psychology,
and it deals with major issues such as the question of reductionism, the
value of laboratory experimentation, and how far social psychology can
be considered to be truly social enough to explain human behaviour in
areal society. Traditional social psychology

A great deal of the psychology which people study on typical social
psychology courses is of the older kind - it has come from the
pre-revolutionary paradigm. Someone who has done a conventional social
psychology course is likely to have come across topics such as
impression-formation, attraction, nonverbal communication, attribution,
bystander intervention, and obedience. All interesting areas, and all
topics which help us to understand sociallife. Or at least, that's how
they seem on the surface. Impression-formation

But do they really? Let's look at them more c1osely. The topic of
impression-formation inc1udes aspects of social thinking such as
stereotyping and primacy effects. And nobody would dispute that these
happen: we do sometimes stereotype people, 63

64

Psychology in Perspective

and we do react to people on the basis of the first impression that we
have of them. But once we've acknowledged that, what else is there to
say? Not a lot. To get any further in understanding social living, we
need to look into these issues more deeply. Yes, sometimes we
stereotype. But equally, sometimes we don't. And sometimes, as we become
aware that we are stereotyping, we make an effort to change our
thinking - to stop ourselves from letting accepted stereotypes affect
our judgement. We realise that people are not all the same, even if they
do fit into the same general category. So wh at we really need to look
at in this area isn't whether people are aware of large-scale social
stereotypes or not which is largely what the research described on
introductory courses is all about - but when people stereotype and when
they don't, how stereotypes change, why some people stereotype more than
others, what purposes stereotypes serve, and how individual people
change the nature of their stereotypes during the course of their lives.
Not much of the social psychology on conventional courses has been
concerned with this. The same goes for primacy effects. Yes, of course
we can be affected by our first impressions; and in a situation like a
job interview, that can be absolutely crucial. But life doesn't really
consist of nothing but job interviews, even though it may feeI Iike that
sometimes. What about the rest of the time? Some of my dosest
friendships have been with people whom I didn't particularly like when I
first met them. I didn't dislike them, or at least not enough to avoid
them, but I didn't particularly like them either. But over time, as we
moved in the same cirdes, I got to know them better, and we eventually
became friends. First impressions, in other words, are not the whole
story. We often rethink our first impressions: sometimes we admit we are
wrong, but more often, we completely forget that we didn't Iike the
person at first - human beings have an impressive capacity for rewriting
history! So my point is this: that what is really interesting about
primacy effects isn't just the immediate phenomenon, as studied by those
sociaI psychologists. It's wh at happens over time: when first
impressions stay with us and when they don't; how they influence us, and
how we change them.

Perspectives in Social Psychology

65

Attraction

The same argument can be applied to the psychology of attraction. If you
look at the research which goes under that heading in most psychology
courses, what it is really all about is the dating behaviour of the
lesser-spotted North American undergraduate. But think, for aminute, of
the people that you personally like to be with - the people that you
yourself find attractive. Do these studies really explain how you came
to like them? Most types of attraction in everyday living are much
longer-term processes, based on a deeper social knowledge and much more
social interaction. It is highly questionable whether asking people to
rate photographs for attractiveness can get anywhere near the reality of
social attraction. Both of these topics, then, have suffered from being
treated as if they were immediate phenomena, whereas really they are
longer-term developments. The research which you leam about consists of
superficial snapshots of social processes which in real life occur over
time, and in a social context. Moreover, the time-span and social
context is so important in those processes that the snapshot actually be
ars very litde resemblance to the real thing. Another set of topics in
'traditional' social psychology concems the processes which underlie
social behaviour. Both attribution and non-verbal communication are
social processes which we can see in action all around uso They are to
do with how we interact with other people, and how we make sense out of
what is around uso But both of these suffer from being taken out of
their social context. They are treated as if they were phenomena which
occur in isolation, regardless of what they actually mean in the li fe
of the person who is engaging in them. Attribution

Take attribution, for example. One of the approaches to attribution
which a social psychology student leams about is Kelley's covariance
theory - the idea that the type of cause which we identify for a
particular event derives from the three

66

Psychology in Perspective

features of consistency, consensus and distinctiveness. In other words,
according to this model, the human being acts as a computer: we process
the different bits of information, do the calculation, and come out with
the result. But in reallife, attribution doesn't work anything like
that. As Lalljee (1981) pointed out, explanations are always given for a
reason - and that reason is directIy tied to the social context.
Consistency doesn't always mean the same thing. You wouldn't accept 'he
always does it' as an adequate explanation for why someone had just
stolen a car, would you? That just invites the question 'whyT - why does
he always do it? Simply looking at distinctiveness, consensus and
consistency is not enough for us to explain that event. The same holds
true for less dramatic social events too: you might accept 'she always
does it' as a sufficient reason for why someone was out walking their
dog at six o'clock in the evening, but that wouldn't be an adequate
explanation for why she was doing it at three o'clock in the moming. The
point is that we don't come to each attribution completely fresh, and
simply process that information out of context. We set what is happening
in a framework drawn from what we know about social life: we draw on our
pre-existing social knowledge to explain what is going on. Consistency,
distinctiveness and consensus may be all right for explaining why lohn
laughs at the comedian, but they are distinctly limited when it comes to
explaining why someone steals a car. Non-verbal communication

Non-verbal communication doesn't take place in a social vacuum, either.
It isn't just a matter of knowing the rules of how to interact
'appropriately', even though leaming something about some basic rules
can be a distinct help to those who are socially unskilled. For most
people, non-verbal communication is all about meaning. It is a way of
demonstrating unspoken social relationships: it signals power, control,
friendship, attachment, social distancing, and a host of other messages.
Taken out of that social context, the study of non-verbal communication
becomes just a bewildering collection of descriptions of different
signals. On

Perspectives in Sodal Psychology

67

their own, they have little or no intrinsic meaning. It is only when
they are looked at in their social context that they mean anything. What
these two topics show us, then, is that social processes cannot be
studied in isolation if they are really to tell us something meaningful
about how we go ab out living our sociallives. Instead, we need to look
at what they are telling us ab out living, and how that knowledge fits
in the wider social context of the world that we live in. The type of
traditional social psychology which takes these phenomena out of their
social contexts doesn't really tell us very much at all. Then there are
the theories. We need to look, very carefully, at the kinds of theories
which emerge from social psychological research. And that highlights
another major problem, which is that traditional social psychology is
pretty short on general theories. It is, as Kuhn might have said,
preparadigmatic - what theories it does have are limited to a very
narrow range of phenomena. There are not many general theories which can
link together several different aspects of social behaviour. This makes
it very difficult to look to tradition al social psychology and gain any
general sense of the person as a coherent social being. Instead, we get
disparate items of information: a collection of 'ooh look ain't it
interesting' bits. Deindividuation

Take Zimbardo's theory of deindividuation, for instance. This has a
relatively narrow range, being a theory which was formulated entirely in
order to explain how people act in crowds. Like attraction, some of the
phenomena which it is trying to explain mayaIso be peculiarly American.
For the most part, suicides in European countries tend to undertake the
act in private, rather than by standing publicly on high buildings.
Equally, the behaviour of crowds in shouting 'jump, jump!' at the
would-be suicide mayaIso be distinctively American. I have only heard of
one instance of it happening in Britain, and that was in a very popular
tourist town during the main season.

68

Psychology in Perspective

But Zimbardo proposed deindividuation as an attempt to explain other
kinds of crowd behaviour too: most notably riots and the behaviour of
football crowds. It is when we look at these applications that the most
significant weakness of this theory becomes apparent. Like social impact
theory, deindividuation is inherently reductionist: it attempts to
explain crowd behaviour purely in terms of what happens to individuals.
As such, it entirely ignores other levels of explanation. The violence
of political riots is seen as occurring simply because the individuals
have become anonymous - and the underlying perceptions of social
injustice wh ich are an inevitable factor in such riots are entirely
disregarded. In political terms, of course, Zimbardo's deindividuation
theory can be seen as a straight-li ne modern equivalent of Le Bon's
'mob psychology', and it can be seen as serving the same sociopolitical
purpose. It distracts people away from asking embarrassing social
questions about power, injustice and poverty, and encourages them to
blame individual psychology for why the disturbance happened. So there
is a sociopolitical dimension to this question, as weIl as a scientific
one. Sodal impact theory

One of the few attempts to develop a more general theory of social
interaction is Latane's social impact theory. Latane (1981) explained
audience effects, bystander intervention and the like by creating a
metaphor of other people as a set of light bulbs, shining on the actor.
The more light bulbs, the greater the strength of the social impact; the
more influential the person, the stronger the bulb wattage; and the
eIoser or more immediate the person, the more powerful their effect.
What this theory does, in effect, is to see social influences as the sum
of the influence of individuals: we can explain how people are
influenced essentially by adding up who is influencing them. But
although this theory does try to link together different bits of social
psychology, it does so by ignoring completely other social processes
which may be influencing what is going on. While it may be true that
part of the explanation for why people do or don't act to help others
may simply be a result of

Perspectives in Sodal Psychology

69

the presence of other people, it is equally true that other levels of
explanation are important factors as well. We need to look at wider
social realities if we are to make sense out of social behaviour. One
type of wider social reality concerns shared social beliefs. To take
just one example: the Hollywood 'but what if ... ?' myth of the human
being as someone who 'might' do almost anything is a powerful shared
belief which influences human behaviour. People are frightened to step
into emotionally intense situations because they are worried that they
may get into something that they can't handle, and which they might not
be able to escape from. Hollywood has built up a wh oie industry around
telling people that the most ordinary situations may land you in
terrifying situations that you can't get out of. Western society is
flooded with films and TV dramas based on this idea. So it isn't
altogether surprising that many people hesitate before stepping in to
help astranger. The 'what if ... ?' scenario has become an important
factor in people's understanding of social action, unrealistic though it
may be. The fact that psychological research shows how most people will
actually help in a real-life situation indicates that this is not the
only factor, of course, and tells us something important about the basic
helpfulness of people; but the study of social beliefs can also help us
to understand the people who don't help. Neither of those, though, are
the sort of issue which you could deal with using social impact theory.
Levels of explanation

The big problem, then, with these traditional social theories is that
they fail to link with other levels of explanation. In this, of course,
they are following a long-established psychological tradition.
Psychology has frequently been criticised by sociologists as
reductionist, and if we look at it historically, that is true. For
example, in 1920, Freud reformulated his theory of personality to
include the new idea that the human psyche also contained a negative and
destructive source of energies, known as thanatos, in addition to the
positive life-

70

Psychology in Perspective

enhancing energies of the libido, which he had described many years
earlier. Freud thought it necessary to introduce this concept in order
to explain the massive carnage of the First World War, in which
virtually a whole generation of young men was wiped out. Social and
political theorists, however, saw no need to invoke explanations for the
slaughter in terms of destructive psychological energies. They could
find adequate explanation in terms of the social, political and economic
conditions which were the antecedents of the war. These created a
situation in which several years under the restrictions of a war economy
came to be seen as the only solution to overwhelming economic problems.
That doesn't mean, of course, that psychological factors were totally
unimportant. The enormous scale of the war casualties, for example, had
everything to do with the retention of old-fashioned beliefs by the
military command, which did not keep pace with advances in technology.
Sending whole battalions of troops 'over the top' in direct frontal open
assaults was a tactic left over from the days of cavalry and
sabre-fighting, but it did not take account of the development of the
machine gun. It was this tactic which accounted for the millions of
deaths in the First World War, in Flanders and elsewhere. Those of you
who contribute to the Poppy Day appeal might reflect on the irony of its
being named after the very General Haig whose outdated ideas were
directly responsible for the massive slaughter and mutilation which made
the fund necessary in the first place. So I am not saying that
psychology is irrelevant in these matters. What I am saying is that the
type of psychological explanation which we develop must be one which can
link with other levels of explanation too. It was a combination of
psychological, social and economic factors which produced the carnage of
the First World War, in the same way that it was the combination of
psychological beliefs and social conformity with economic and
sociological factors which produced the atrocities of the Second World
War. The reductionist explanation leaves no room for social and economic
dimensions, but they are important too.

Perspectives in Socia! Psycho!ogy

71

Mi!gram 's agency theory

To explore this idea, let's take another theory which you may have come
across: Milgram's agency theory, which he developed in order to explain
his experimental findings, that people would be prepared to 'kill'
another human being simply by doing what they were told. If you read
Milgram's book Obedience to Authority, you will find that Milgram
proposed that this ability has an evolutionary origin, deriving from a
need for social animals to act as members of a hierarchy. This means,
according to Milgram, that each individual has two entirely different
modes, or states, of operation: an autonomous state in which they act
independently and in line with their own conscience; and an agentic
state, in which they suppress the actions of conscience and act simply
as the agents of someone higher in the hierarchy. There are many things
wrong with this theory, not least of which is its assumption that animal
social behaviour is inherently hierarchical. Although this was a popular
assumption at the time that he developed the theory, subsequent animal
research has shown that, in fact, dominance hierarchies are very much
rarer than was assumed in the 1960s and 1970s (Appleby, 1985), and are
an unusual form of social organisation rather than an inevitable one.
But Milgram was working from the knowledge available at the time, and
cannot really be blamed for that. What is more problematic is the way
that his theory largely ignored the way that those individuals like
Gretchen Brandt and Jan Rensaleer, who refused to act against their own
consciences, were perfectly capable of engaging in cooperative action.
He describes their behaviour, but doesn't develop a theory which can
account for it, except by saying that they were in the 'autonomous
mode'. But that is to oversimplify badly. These two people had no
objection to going along with anything else in the experiment - indeed,
they co operated willingly in the experiment until the point where it
became apparent that harm could result. And even after that, they
remained willing to cooperate in other respects: they simply refuse to
administer any more electric shocks. So to present

72

Psychology in Perspective

the agentie or autonomous states as a simple eitherjor condition in the
human being is to oversimplify badly. This theory, too, is an attempt to
explain social action purely in individual terms. It sees what people do
as arising purely from the characteristics of that individual, and again
that ignores the reality of social life. To see obedience as an
internal, inherited state is to ignore the way that children are
systematically socialised into obedience - for a child, the consequences
of not being obedient are very serious indeed. Y ou try being a
seven-year-old and openly defying your teacher! Whether you are in a
strict-discipline school or not, the behaviour will set off a chain
reaction of consequences likely to ensure that you will only do it in
very extreme circumstances, and probably never again. What I am trying
to say is that there are very real power relationships in society. Out
there, as the saying goes, the bastards are using live ammunition. If
the soldiers at Mi Lai had refused to obey orders, they would have been
up on a charge of mutiny, or whatever the army equivalent iso It
wouldn't matter in the slightest whether society as a whole judged them
as being right, they would still be subjected to army discipline.
Indeed, it is highly unlikely that society as a whole would ever have
heard ofit. And army discipline, ifyou think of it, is by necessity
designed to make soldiers more frightened of disobeying orders than they
are of being killed. Otherwise, soldiers would simply obey basic
survival impulses and run away. To attempt to explain obedience in
individual terms, without lookihg at the very real power relationships
in society, is to ignore wh at is really going on. A theory of obedience
which ignores that kind of issue can't possibly present an adequate
explanation for the phenomenon. Traditional approaches to social
psychology, then, suffer from several problems. One is that they ignore
questions of how social experience changes over time, as we saw when
looking at research into impression-formation and attraction. Another is
that they ignore questions of social purpose - what the behaviour or
processes are actually used for - as we saw when looking at research
into non-verbal communication and attribution. And the third is that
they are reductionist - they try to explain social behaviour purely in
terms of individuals,

Perspectives in Sodal Psychology

73

and ignore the wider social and political context of social experience -
as we saw in the theories of social impact and social agency. To attempt
to explain bystander intervention, crowd behaviour or obedience without
looking at the wider social beliefs and power relationships of society
is simply naIve. European social psychology The revolution in social
psychology is all about responding to these problems. It began with the
development of a new school of thought in social psychology, which
became known as European social psychology. This distinguished it from
the more traditional form of social psychology, which was very much
American in its orientation. And the reason why it was particularly
associated with Europe is that it grew up among European psychologists.
Some of them were working in America, having fled Nazi Germany, but
their ways of thinking were quite different from those of the more
traditional American psychologists. The main reason for these
differences lay partly in everyday European experiences of
multiculturalism, produced by a constant history of neighbours with
different languages, cultural practices and beliefs; and partly in the
lessons of Nazi Germany and the Second World War. Other psychologists
had also tried to explain what had happened in Europe, but they had
tended to adopt individual explanations, such as Adorno et al.'s
authoritarian personality theory. Although these provided some useful
insights, they simply couldn't explain what had happened to whole
communities during the Nazi era. For example, Milgram's work gave
insight into the widespread nature of obedience, but despite the fact
that 'I was only obeying orders' was the most popular defence at
Nuremberg, this still wasn't a sufficient explanation. In Milgram's
experiments, people stopped obeying the minute they thought they could
get away with it: if the experimenter went out of the room, obedience
dropped to ne ar zero. But in Europe, people continued to act in
accordance with the Nazi

74

Psychology in Perspective

system whether supervised or not. Many identified with its basic
beliefs, while at the same time convincing themse1ves that when the
Nazis talked of Vernichtung - annihilation - of the Jews, they didn't
really mean it. The reality of what was going on was too horrifying for
many to acknowledge, even to themse1ves. This was true outside Germany
as well as within it. Bruno Bettelheim had been in Dachau, and was only
freed as a result of powerful representations from the international
scientific community. Once out, he wrote a paper analysing the
psychological processes underlying how guards and inmates defined
themselves and each other, and how this process became self-fulfilling
and se1f-perpetuating. The paper was turned down by several scientific
journals on the grounds that it was 'implausible' . It was eventually
published in 1943 in the Journal 0/ Abnormal and Sodal Psychology. As
both Hannah Arendt and Bettelheim pointed out, most of the Nazis,
inc1uding well-known ones like Eichmann, were not demons, or even
particularly evil people. Arendt's book on Eichmann's trial in Jerusalem
was subtitled AReport on the Banality 0/ Evil, and that is exactly what
it iso It shows how one of the most monstrous crimes against humanity
was actually committed by ordinary people, and how everyday mechanisms
of ordinary socialliving allowed it to happen. In addition to the Nazis,
for example, understanding what went on also involved explaining the
actions of other members of the European population, such as the e1ders
in the Jewish ghettos, who drew up the lists and without whose co
operation the pogroms would have been impossible; and the actions of
other people, German or not, who acquiesced in what was going on. And
also understanding those who did not, such as the Danish people, whose
open refusal to cooperate with the Nazis was their first encounter with
direct, open opposition. All of this meant that the psychologists of the
new school of European social psychology knew better than to attempt
simplistic, reductionist explanations for social behaviour. Instead,
they drew on both sociological and psychological thinking, and studied
social behaviour in the contexts of real societies, with real
inequalities in power and status, and all the social implications
deriving from those. The European Journal

Perspectives in Social Psychology 75 of Social Psychology was founded in
1972, and became steadily more influential. In terms of British social
psychology, it would be fair to say that it has now become the dominant
paradigm, although you might not think so from many introductory
syllabuses.

Theories in European sodal psychology Theoretical developments in
European social psychology were particularly stimulated by the work of
Serge Moscovici in France, and Henri Tajfel in Britain. The three key
theories in this respect are social identity theory, social
representation theory, and some of the more recent versions of
attribution theory. We will be looking at these more closely in Chapter
6. Together, though, these three theories represent the core of modern
European social psychology. Doise (1984) argued that social behavour can
be understood using four levels of explanation, encompassed within the
European framework. These are:

1.  General ideas about social relations, such as social
    representations: shared beliefs about how the world works.
2.  Intergroup levels of explanation, as in social identity theory.
3.  Interactive levels of explanation, such as the study of nonverbal
    communication, relationships, attraction, and so on.
4.  Intra-individual levels of explanation, such as personal constructs
    or attributions. Unlike the old-style individualistic social
    psychology, European social psychology doesn't discount
    socio-political levels of analysis. But, on the other hand, it
    doesn't claim that those are all that matters, either. Instead, its
    theories are formulated so that they can link the different levels
    of explanation. Although any one researcher may be concerned with
    only one level of investigation, understanding social life depends
    on seeing it in its social context. It is for this reason

76

Psychology in Perspective

that European social psychology has emerged as an alternative to the
social reductionism of traditional social psychology. In Chapter 6, we
will look at European social psychology more dosely.

6 European Social Psychology

As we saw in the last chapter, one of the major problems with social
psychology, until very recently, has been that it lacked theoretical
coherence. Traditional social psychology consisted largely of numerous
small bits of information, each covering just one or two small facets of
social living, and having no connection at all with each other. Although
one or two 'themes' can be seen recurring from time to time, such as
reinforcement explanations for social events, or social exchange
processes, these have been limited in their scope, and have failed to
provide general links or overarching theories. But why do general
theories matter? Essentially, because of the diversity of human
behaviour. People do all sorts of things, in all sorts of ways, and it
would be an impossible task to chart them all separately. Nor could
anybody hope to make sense out of all those bits of separate research,
even if they were all c1assified and documented. A specific theory which
only explains one or two bits of human behaviour isn't much help to us
in understanding the human being. We need theoretical coherence so that
we can cope with the unpredictable: so that, faced with a new problem in
a new area, we can at least begin to see how we might go about tackling
it. At the same time, any modern theory purporting to explain human
behaviour needs to be able to come to terms with pluralism. Society is
no longer mono-cultural (if, indeed, it ever was), and the old type of
social psychology, which assumed that the values, attitudes and
behaviour of white 77

78

Psychology in Perspective

transatlantic undergraduates would be typical of the whole human race,
is no longer tenable. Increasing pressure from both within and outside
psychology is gradually forcing the discipline to include alternative
perspectives and the recognition of valid alternatives. So how are we to
reconcile these two needs? On the one hand, we need overarching,
integrating theories, and on the other hand, we need to recognise and
acknowledge pluralism and diversity. One possible way of coping with
this is to fall back on relativism: we might choose to adopt a general
multiapplication theory like personal construct theory, seeing all
alternatives as equally valid and looking at how an individual person
constructs her reality from the information which she has available. By
doing so, we use a theoretical model which can account for why everyone
thinks differently. But constructive alternativism has its problems
too - not least of which is the need to come to terms with real life.
Explaining sociallife entirely in terms of the theories which we deduce
from our experience can't handle the fact that there are undeniable and
serious inequalities of power, wealth and access to resources in
society. These inequalities have their influences both on human
behaviour and on the way that we understand our worlds. Some versions of
reality are backed up with more power then others. It is for that reason
that totally relativist explanations are only part of the answer: in an
ideal world, they might be the whole answer, but this is not an ideal
world, and there are things going on at the sociological, political and
economic levels which exert powerful influences on all aspects of
experience. This leads us to the second major problem of traditional
social psychology: its reductionism. Essentially, traditional social
psychology attempts to explain the social world by looking at the
actions of individuals, and assuming that these, together, make up
social reality. But this ignores other levels of explanation, and
because it does so, it cannot come to terms with what else going on. So,
for example, Zimbardo put forward his theory of deinidividuation as an
explanation for why crowds watching potential suicides on high in the
United States chant 'Jump, jump!'. Deindividuation, an individual
mechanism, is supposed to explain why this happens. But, like

European Sodal Psychology 79

so many other reductionist explanations, it actually does nothing of the
sort. For one thing, it doesn't begin to explain why some people don't
join in with these crowds while others do, and that is an important
question. Until we can understand that, we have little hope of
understanding the real psychological processes which are going on. And
it also carries no acknowledgement of the cultural specificity of the
behaviour. Crowds in other countries don't generally act in this way.
Suicides in Europe, for instance, generally undertake the act in
private; and in Japan, even if it is done publicly, it is done quickly.
Jumping off high buildings in public view appears to be a distinctively
American practice. So what is it that is distinctive about the United
States of America that provokes this very public form of suicidal
behaviour. Deindividuation, or any other reductionist model, cannot
begin to explain any of this. As with all questions of reductionism,
what we come down to is the question of single-level explanations as
opposed to interactionism. The reductionist position maintains that just
this one level of explanation is all that we need, while the
interactionist approach says that human behaviour needs to be understood
by looking at it from several levels of explanation. And it is the
interactionist view which is better fitted to deal with the complexities
of human behaviour. Deindividuation may be a factor in the suicide crowd
event indeed, it probably is - but it isn't the whole explanation. There
is a lot more to crowd behaviour that needs explaining. In other more
positive types of crowds, for instance, there is the question of the
shared peak experience. My esteemed colleague, Banyard, P., described
the transcendent experience of being a member of a football crowd which
rose as one and chanted 'You Fat Bastard' as a certain lachrymose player
entered the field. I recall a similar experience at Silverstone in 1973,
when the leader spun off, and six grandstands full of motor racing fans
spontaneously stood up and cheered. The positive experience of being
part of such spontaneous and concerted crowd behaviour is one for which
traditional social psychology can offer little explanation. Yet for
those who take part in it, it offers an experience of commonality and
shared perception which is uniquely vivid.

80

Psychology in Perspective

In fact, most of the more social aspects of experience - the feeling of
identifying with one's group, of being a member of a team, of
representing one's professional field - are not readily explained by
traditional social psychology. And it is unlikely that they ever will
be, as long as traditional social psychology continues to treat social
experience as an individual event, and fails to look at the interaction
between society, culture, and the individual. These criticisms of social
psychology are not new. Both Durkheim and Wundt talked about the
importance of collective beliefs in the understanding of social life,
and this theme was continued by McDougall (1920), and later by Sherif.
Farr (1984) described how the original study of attitudes included the
important dimension of attitudes as shared, social beliefs, resulting in
shared ideas and behaviour that were not the same as those produced by
the same individuals acting independently. But Floyd Allport (1924), in
an approach which typified the mainstream of American social psychology
from then on, argued firmly that social psychology was 'a part of the
psychology of the individual', and nothing more, and that was the view
that stuck. Although individual researchers adopted different approaches
from time to time, social psychology as a discipline stayed with the
individualistic approach. The growth of European social psychology But
events in Europe before, during and after the Second World War showed
very clearly that individualistic explanations of social behaviour were
simply inadequate. Many European psychologists fled to America or
Britain. Bruno Bettelheim, for example, escaped from a concentration
camp and went to America, but the paper he wrote about his experiences
in the camp was largely ignored. Social psychology had neither the
theoretical orientation to deal with it, not the willingness to confront
such unpleasant realities. Gradually, however, this began to change, as
psychologists returned to Europe or reestablished links with other
psychologists there. Gradually, psychology began to develop theories
which were

European Sodal Psychology 81

robust enough to explain the realities of social life. At the beginning
of the 1970s, the European Journal 0/ Sodal Psychology was founded, and
in 1972, Henri Tajfel published a paper entitled 'Some developments in
European social psychology', which began to construct adefinite identity
for a new approach to social psychology: European social psychology.
European social psychology developed rapidly through the 1970s and
1980s, focussed largely on the theoretical work of Serge Moscovici in
France, and Henri Tajfel in Britain. The new approach took an
interactive stance to social psychology, dealing explicitly with
phenomena such as shared social beliefs or intergroup conflict, and
working on several levels. Being European, with a corresponding
awareness of the richness of cultures and languages, European social
psychologists have always been keen to ensure that their theories can
come to terms with pluralism and diversity. The main way that they set
out to do this was to emphasise not the study of individual phenomena,
as traditional social psychology did (Figure 6.1) (choose a social event
and then study it), but social processes embedded in their social
context (Figure 6.2). European social psychologists aim to identify the
underlying mechanisms which influence how human beings go about social
living: As a result of this, the theoretical framework within which
research takes place is of paramount importance. Unlike American social
psychology, in which theory is seen as an optimal extra to be tacked on
later, the theoretical basis of social psychology is its core. The three
key theories of European social psychology are social representation
theory, social identity theory, and some of the more recent formulations
of attribution theory.

Social representation theory Social representation theory was developed
by Serge Moscovici in France, through the 1960s and 1970s. It is
concerned with the shared social beliefs which influence what counts as
valid explanation in everyday lire. As we know, certain explanations
appear to have rar more popular acceptance than others: look at how Iong
matemal deprivation theory has

82

Psychology in Perspective

Individual past experience

PROCESSING

!..-!

CulturaVgroup influences

MORE PROCESSING

OUTCOME

Figure 6.1

'American' sodal psychology

Group/cultural framework

Past experience

The immediate situation

\~/ PROCESSING

!

OUTCOME

Figure 6.2

'European' sodal psychology

European Sodal Psychology

83

survived, or at how psychoanalytic forms of explanation have come to
permeate everyday life. Any study of psychology will show how the
evidence for these ideas is shaky, to say the least. But that doesn't
make them any less popular. Moscovici argued that it is the shared
social representations held by a group or society which allow them to
communicate effectively. Social representations make ideas conventional
and familiar, and by so doing, they come to guide social action. They
can also limit social action if such action involves different groups of
people who have different social representations. Di Giacomo (1980)
studied the social representations in a student protest movement at a
university in Belgium. It turned out that the student leaders -held very
different social representations from the majority of the students, and
these differences meant that in the end, their attempts to rouse the
students to action failed. For example, the student leaders spoke of
'student-worker solidarity', but the ordinary students saw 'students'
and 'workers' as having very little in common. Effectively, the two
groups saw the world very differently, and this meant that they couldn't
really communicate with one another. Shared beliefs are powerful social
forces, and they influence, directly, what can be done in a given
society. In Britain, for instance, any discussion of criminal
rehabilitation is likely to come up against the shared social belief
that you can't change people. It's a very powerful part of the British
social belief system, with a very long political and social history. But
it isn't shared by other societies. I remember being at a conference on
child sexual abuse, and watching an argument between an American friend,
who was the director of a rehabilitation unit for teenage sex offenders,
and an English professional in the field. The two of them were
completely unable to communicate, because the Englishwoman believed
firmly that such people would automatically revert to their previous
behaviour once the rehabilitation programme was over, whereas the
American woman knew, from experience, that it was possible to develop a
programme which made a lasting and permanent change. What we are talking
about here is the sociological concept of ideology. One of the
fundamental ideological beliefs of

84

Psychology in Perspective

American society is that people can change. But one of the fundamental
ideological beliefs in British society is that people can't, or at least
don't, These beliefs link dosely with social structures, the dass
system, political approaches to crime, and a host of other social
phenomena - induding theories of intelligence, of which more later.
These are not beliefs which just hang around in the air. They are
beliefs which are held by real people, and which are actively used to
make sense out of social experience. Moscovici discussed how people
negotiate their own versions of social representations, through
conversations, and by drawing ideas from the media and fitting them into
their own personal construct system, or schemas, or whatever you want to
call an individual's own belief system. Social representations, then,
are the interface between the sociological concept of ideology, and an
individual's own thinking style. One of the first studies of social
representations was conducted by Moscovici (1961), and was concerned
with how psychoanalytic concepts had come to be so commonly accepted in
French society, and how in becoming so they had become a form of social
dogma, providing arbitrary explanations which served to justify social
practices something that was very different from the scientific theory
which Freud had originally developed. Moscovici identified three phases
to how the theory had become transformed into a social representation.
The first was the scientific phase, in which psychoanalysis was
elaborated as a scientific theory, and knowledge of its tenets and
practices was largely restricted to professional scientists. This was
followed by a second phase, in which the image and concepts of
psychoanalysis began to diffuse through society, and were modified or
recast in the process. The third phase was described by Moscovici as the
ideological phase, in which the transformed version of psychoanalysis
came to signify a school ofthought, adopted by power bases in society
and thus becoming not only accepted, but enforced as a product of
thinking. Social representations, then, are not static: they change with
time, and in ways that are directly influenced by other forces in
society. Fischler (1980) showed how changes in social representations of
what consitutes an acceptable diet reflect

European Sodal Psychology

85

social and economic changes, some concerned with the production,
distribution and consumption of food, and others concerned with the
adoption of new, consumer-based lifestyles which involve different modes
of eating, in the sense of the increased emphasis on fast food and
snacks rather than meals. Jodelet (1984) described a study of changes in
social representations of the body, in terms of the influence of youth
movements, women's liberation, and other social factors. The theoretical
basis for understanding these changes is to see social representations
as having a consistent central nudeus, which doesn't change, surrounded
by peripheral elements, which do. Y ou can see this if you look at ideas
ab out education in Britain. The consistent central nudeus here would be
the idea that some people just can't be taught. That belief can be seen
as inherently ideological, linking directly with the British dass
system. However, the theories which have been used to justify that
central nudeus - the peripheral elements - have changed over time. At
first, it was the genetic theory of intelligence, then it was the
Piagetian idea of biological 'readiness', and then it was social
deprivation. But the end result was the same - the overriding idea that
some kids would never achieve anything in education.The central core
stayed the same while the peripheral elements changed and the wealth of
scientific and social evidence which directly challenged it was simply
dismissed or ignored. Social representation theory, then, provides us
with a framework within which ideology, shared beliefs, and individual
social cognition can be linked. It lets us begin to study social
cognition in the real context of when and where it happens, and wh at
social purposes it serves. The study of social representations is
well-developed in many European countries, although the theory has been
little known in Britain. But that is rapidly changing, as interest in
shared social beliefs begins to grow. Social identity theory

Social identity theory is perhaps the most influential of all of the
European social psychology theories. It has been applied

86

Psychology in Perspective

in a number of different contexts, such as explanations of prejudice, or
aspects of the self-concept. And it is the way that it can be applied to
so many different phenomena in social psychology which indicates how
very different it is from most of the traditional theories. Hogg and
Abrams (1988) showed how the theory doesn't invalidate the earlier
findings of social psychologists. Instead, it sets them into context,
showing how the results of classic studies can be reinterpreted as
manifestations of social identity, and helps us to make sense in
explaining why people act as they do in those particular contexts. In
many ways, it takes up Sherifs work on social norms and conformity, and
provides a framework within which the observations and findings link
into a coherent social pattern, which takes account of real-world
pressures as weB as individual cognitions. Social identity theory, as
expressed by Tajfel and Turner (1979), argues that personal identity can
be located on a continuum, ranging from purely individual identity at
one end, to purely social identity at the other. We all belong to a
number of social groups, and these are part of how we think ab out
ourselves. When I speak as a psychologist, I am not just pIaying a roIe:
my being a psychologist is part of me, and I can become very defensive
when my social group is disparaged by an 'outsider' - even though I
might spend much of my own time criticising psychology! I don't identify
as a psychologist all of the time, of course - there are individual
parts of my selfconcept as well- but when the occasion demands, it will
come to the fore. Social identity, as opposed to personal identity,
becomes strongest when the circumstances make it relevant to the
immediate situation. So we may shift from personal to social identity,
even during a single conversation, if social identity becomes salient:
an argument about who does the washing up may shift from being an
interpersonal one to an intergroup conflict if gender become a salient
issue. It depends on what appears relevant at the time. More
importantly, though, social identity theory allows us to see social
groups in their wider context. The theory emphasises how real social
groups differ from one another in

European Sodal Psychology

87

terms of power and status, and how those differences, in turn, affect
how people belonging to those groups behave. People need to feel that
belonging to their own group is a positive thing, so, if they belong to
a group which is inferior in social status, they will try to change the
status of that group, or compare themselves with other, inferior,
groups; or engage in a number of other mechanisms to make it bearable.
Failing that, they will try to leave, or dissociate themselves from the
group. The controversy over Michael Jackson's supposed 'skin disorder'
was direct1y about whether he was attempting to dissociate hirnself from
a group which he personally perceived as low-status, at a time when
others were challenging the whole idea of the group as inferior. He said
not, but the evidence of his other cosmetic changes went against hirn.
There are three fundamental processes of social identification. The
first of these is categorisation: the basic human tendency to c1assify
experience into groups. We do this with inanimate objects and animals as
weIl as with people. The second of these processes is social comparison:
our tendency to compare one group of people with another. And the third
of these is the human drive to seek sources of positive selfesteern.
Putting these three underlying mechanisms together results in social
identification. There are a great many implications which spring from
this apparently straightforward model. One of them is the way that even
the basic process of categorising people and things seems to make people
perceive them as being more different from one another. It even applies
to judgements about lengths of lines (Tajfel and Wilkes, 1963), and is
even stronger when we are talking about social groups. For instance, in
a study in which white Canadians or Indians were asked to speak to an
audience, Doise, Deschamps and Meyer (1978) found that people
accentuated those aspects of the speakers' behaviour which fitted with
their stereotypes but not those which were non-stereotypical. It has
been known for a long time that highly prejudiced individuals are more
likely to perceive extreme racial differences than other people: because
they see the world as sharply categorised, that exaggerates their
perceptions. So the process

88

Psychology in Perspective

of social categorisation, in itself, can exaggerate group
discrimination. The process of social comparison involves applying a
broader social knowledge to the categorisations that we make. It
involves our own world-knowledge, our social representations, and, most
importantly, the views of other people whom we regard as similar to
ourselves. Essentially, it is about evaluating other groups: weighing
them up in terms of their place in the world. But in doing so, we gather
social knowledge and ideas from members of our own group, because we see
them as being like ourselves. So in the end, there is a tendency for
their views to be seen as being more 'true' than other views. For the
most part, we favour the beliefs of the social groups that we identify
with - a process which links inextricably with the development of social
representations. We also weigh up social groups in terms of their
relative social status. So, for example, in a study comparing student
perceptions of universities, Spears and Manstead (1989) found that
students from Manchester and Exeter Universities were more inclined to
compare themselves with Oxford University students than with students
from what was then Manchester Polytechnic. This comparison led them to
exaggerate the differences between themselves and polytechnic students,
and to ignore the similarities. This links with the third process, which
is the question of self-esteem. Identification with a social group means
that membership of that group becomes incorporated into the selfconcept.
The students in the Spears and Manstead study had an incentive for
comparing themselves with Oxford University students, since the latter
were seen as having higher social prestige. The distancing from the
polytechnic students was also self-serving, since they saw polytechnic
students as having lower social status. Social identity theory, then,
allows us to see social interaction in terms of how the behaviour of the
individual human being links with the wider social realities. It
tackles, directly, the question of in-groups and out-groups in society,
and shows how the 'them-and-us' issues which are so much a part of human
psychology in the real world come about.

European Social Psychology

89

Attribution theory

Within the European context, attribution theory underwent a dramatic
change of emphasis, becoming much more concerned with analysing the
nature of everyday explanations. The traditionally detached views of how
people make attributions, such as Kelley's covariance theory, have been
criticised (e.g. by Lalljee, 1981) because they assurne that we make an
entirely new attribution each time. They make the computer analogy,
assuming that the human being processes information in a way similar to
that of a computer. But, as we will see in Chapter 8, human cognition is
very different from computer information-processing, and draws on much
wider social awareness. In the same way, the everyday attributions which
we make incorporate our social knowledge, our social representations and
our social identifications: they don't just happen in a context-free
manner. As a result of this, there has been a growing interest in how
attribution and explanation is used in intergroup situations. For
example, Taylor and Jaggi (1974) compared the attributions made by Hindu
and Muslim groups in southern India about themselves and each other.
They found that people tended to make internal attributions for socially
desirable behaviour by members of their own groups, but used extern al
attributions to explain socially desirable behaviour from the others. In
other words, their own group acted positively because they were nice
people, while the other group acted positively because they couldn't
help it: the situation made them. It was, of course, the other way round
when the behaviour being explained was socially undesirable. This way of
exploring how conflicting groups in social identity terms perceive each
other can tell us a great deal about how conflicts become
self-perpetuating, and can last over many generations. Attribution
theory has also been used to throw light on how social representations
develop. For example, Moscovici and Hewstone (1983) used attributional
analysis to show how split-brain research became transformed from a
scientific theory into a social representation. Most introductory
psychology students are familiar with the scientific evidence on
splitbrain studies, and aware that this simply shows that language,

90

Psychology in Perspective

mathematical and spatial abilities seem to be partially localised in
different cerebral hemispheres. But Moscovici and Hewstone showed how
that research had become transformed into a social belief that: (a) the
two halves of the brain are two different, independent minds; (b) that
each deals exclusively with opposing skills; (c) that these include
major aspects of personality, e.g. intuition, masculinity and so on; and
(d) that this explains social differences, because society favours those
with left-hemisphere dominance. In other words, the scientific evidence
that the two hemispheres tend to mediate different cognitive skills had
become distorted, shifting from the description of a few experimental
phenomena to an ideological explanation for why society is like it iso
This was even extended by some people to include technology, wars, and
repressive authoritarian social practices. Since social representations
are all about how we make sense of the world, looking at the groupbased
attributions which people make can help us to make connections between
individual explanations and the wider social representations of society.
This principle can be applied to smaller groups too - some of my own
research uses attributional analysis to identify social representations.
This is useful in looking at managerial beliefs, and how they lead to
organisational practices which can foster or damage positive social
identifications at work (Hayes, 1991). But this type of attribution
theory is very different from the information-processing model implicit
in covariance or correspondent inference theory. Together, then, three
theories represent the core of modem European social psychology. They
provide us with overarching theories which allow us to re-evaluate a
great deal of existing research in social psychology, and to offer
theoretical frameworks and explanations which deal with a much richer
portion of the social fabric. One of the reasons why this is possible is
because they link together several different levels of explanation. As
we saw in Chapter 5, Doise (1984) identified four levels of explanation
within which these theoretical developments could be understood, ranging
from general ideas about social relations to individual cognitive
mechanisms. The increasing use of these

European Sodal Psychology

91

different levels of explanation, and the development of complementary
theories at each of these levels, has resulted in European social
psychology forming a kind of 'metatheory' within which social psychology
is being re-evaluated and reconceptualised. The aim of European
psychology is not to seek to explain everything in individualistic
psychological terms; but nor is it to say that our entire experience is
socially determined. There is also personal identity and individual
belief. But what it does try to do is to develop theories which will
link the different levels of explanation, by focussing on underlying
social psychological mechanisms. It also seeks theories which can co me
to terms with pluralism, new situations and new problems. By doing so,
it is revolutionising our view of social psychology.

7 Ecopsychology As a new awareness of ecology and of ecological balance
begins to penetrate our consumer consciousness, where is psychology? Is
there a case for a new approach to psychology - an ecopsychology,
dedicated to exploring the relationship between the human being and its
ecological environment? This chapter aims to raise that question, and to
explore some of the ways that psychology has been moving towards such an
approach. It is my private belief that psychology has, or could have, a
great deal to offer in the context of this new awareness of the
importance of our environment. But much of what it has to offer is
scattered across the discipline. Whether these disparate threads can be
woven into a viable garment remains to be seen. Certainly, the word
ecology has permeated the psychological vocabulary in recent years.
Ecological validity has been a central issue in much cognitive and
social research recently, and the trend shows no sign of abating. Not
very long ago, laboratory-bound methodologies seriously limited how far
psychology could penetrate into everyday living; but times have been
a-changing. Psychology has developed a range of new conceptual and
methodological tools, and now shows every sign of really becoming able
to handle everyday experience. Cognitive psychology, for example, has
become increasingly sophisticated in its awareness of, and its ability
to deal with, cognition in everyday living (e.g. Neisser, 1982; Smyth et
al., 1987) - or at least, some cognitive psychology has (more ab out
that in Chapter 8). Indeed, apart from the issue of ecological validity,
the other major use of the word 'ecological' which emerges in
psychological vocabulary occurs in the context of 93

94

Psychology in Perspective

J. J. Gibson's radical theory of perception, in which he approached
perception not as dispassionate computer-style information-processing,
but in terms of its evolutionary function: what a living organism needs
to know in order to be able to act effectively in the real world.
Although much of the research into Gibson's theory has operated within
conventional laboratory paradigms, the conceptual shift is still there.
Both people and animals have evolved to operate in the real world, and
their cognitive mechanisms reflect that. Neisser's theory of cognition,
which was perhaps most dearly expressed in 1976, is very firmly located
in the real world, rather than in an idealised computer metaphor.
Neisser argued that it is our continual interaction with the world, and
the continual modification of our expectations and search procedures as
a result, which form the basis of all cognition, not just perception.
The model argues, strongly, that to separate cognition from the world in
which it takes place is unrealistic: that simply isn't how it works. We
are continually interacting, cognitively as weIl as physicaIly, with our
environment (Figure 7.1). Both of these theoretical approaches are quite
different from the idea that as human beings we stand somehow distant
from what is around us, appraising and processing the information we
receive in a detached, impartial way. In the social arena, ever since
Rom Harre showed how an ethogenic methodology could capture the everyday
meanings of social interaction (e.g. Harre, 1979; Marsh, Rosser and
Harre, 1978), the discipline has been opening up to new areas. Even our
dose relationships are becoming more susceptible to psychological
investigation (Duck, 1988; Sternberg, 1988). We are developing social
psychological theories which can deal with the way that people interact
as members of social groups which differ in power and status, and how we
adopt social representations to explain what is going on (see Chapter
6). In short, psychology is well on the way to dealing with those
complex areas of human experience that used to be avoided because they
couldn't be studied very easily in the laboratory. So what about human
relationships with the natural world? Ecological activists argue that
our whole relationship with, and attitude towards, our environment needs
to be rethought.

Ecopsychology

95

The Anticipatory Schema

Perceptual Exploration

Figure 6.1

Neisser's cognitive cycle

We need to see ourselves are part of the world - as participating in
it - rather than as independent of it. The traditional Western stance
towards the world has been of the world as separate, and distant, from
the individual. It is not a perception which was shared by the great
ecologicallysensitive non-technological cultures, such as those of the
Native Americans, whose careful management of their environment produced
aland which was virtually overflowing with wildlife. It is the Western
attitude of separation, many ecologists believe, which has led to the
exploitation of nature and the disregard for natural balance, of which
we see the results so clearly today. We can trace the development of
this attitude in Western philosophical thought. In the early chapters of
this book, we explored some of the implications of Cartesian dualism,
and this too has been a factor. But other empiricist philosophers were
involved as weIl. For instance, Locke, Berkeley and Hume all took as
their starting point the idea that human

96

Psychology in Perspective

beings have five senses: sight, hearing, touch, smell and taste. Their
ideas ab out the nature of knowing and the individual's relationship
with the world were entirely predicated on that basis. Yet we now know,
from both physiological and psychological evidence, as well as our own
experience, that we have more senses than that. We have at least four
internal senses as well, which tell us about the internal state of the
body, movements of the musdes and joints, and so on. And if we take
these senses into account as well, when we are looking at how people
receive information about the world, we end up with a very different
model. What essentially happens is that we lose the idea that our senses
somehow present us with a distant, detached, image of the world.
Instead, they give us an image of the world and ourselves as we are
located in it. External experience becomes linked with internal
experience. We connect how we, personally, feel with what we are
perceiving through our 'external' senses. At its most extreme, this
recognition challenges the idea that we can somehow operate on the
extern al world and remain unchanged ourselves - the basis of much
ecological activism; at the very least, it opens up ways that we can
link our internal feelings with external situations. The concept has
interesting implications, not least in terms of our relationship with,
and perceptions of, the world. For example, how much have we studied the
relations hip between minor illness and perception of the world? As an
extreme hayfever sufferer, I (and, regrettably, those dose to me) have
become aware of how strongly the condition affects my emotions: when I'm
fighting a hayfever attack I become very irritable and extremely
intolerant, which as a general rule is not all that characteristic. From
tal king to other sufferers and their families I have found that others,
too, experience similar moodjattitude changes. Colds and flu seem to
affect some people in similar ways. Have we more than just anecdotal
data about the relations hip between health and emotion? The Ifaluk of
Micronesia recognise these issues. In their language, they have five
different words for anger (Lutz, 1990). One word, tipmochmoch, is used
to describe the feeling of irritability which is often experienced by
people who are ill. This is seen as being quite different from the
irritability which

Ecopsychology

97

occurs when relatives have not fulfilled their obligations (nguch) , the
kind of anger which arises from frustration or helplessness in the face
of personal misfortunes or some other unfairness (tang), the anger which
builds up gradually when a whole series of little unpleasant events
occur (lingeringer), or the sense of 'justifiable anger', or righteous
indignation which occurs in the face of moral unfairness or injustice
(song). If it comes to that, exploring how human beings really do relate
to their worlds also raises questions ab out the psychological effects
of degrees of physical fitness? Why does the world seem so much more
pleasant when we are fit and weH? Why is it easier to be optimistic when
we have had a good meal, or a good night's sleep? Cartesian,
machine-like metaphors of the human body simply can't begin to get close
to explaining these psychological phenomena, but they are too widely
known in lay experience for us to ignore or dismiss them totally. If we
can explain 'jogger's euphoria' in terms of endorphins and encephalins,
can we go any further than that? We've known about psychosomatic illness
for over a hundred years now, so what about the psychology of normal
health? What do we know ab out influences of the body on the mind, or
feedback loops between bodily state and psychological well-being? Does
this connect with the phenomenon of statedependent learning? An
ecopsychology might be concerned with gathering up the disparate bits of
knowledge in this area, and attempting to integrate them into a whole
body of knowledge. And then there's the question ofthe interaction
between our physical states and the physical environment that we are in.
For example, one phenomenon which has always struck me as meriting far
more attention than psychologists have given it is our reactions to
being in 'natural' places. Going for walks in the country, sitting by
the sea, gazing at a waterfall: these are all powerfully evocative
images. Why? What is it that they evoke? Whatever it is, it is powerful
enough for us to recognise it instantly. Argyle and Crossland (1987)
used phrases like this to evoke positive emotions in their research
participants, and found that people had no difficulty relating to the
emotion itself. When they analysed descriptions of these, and many

98

Psychology in Perspective

other emotions, they found that they were particularly strong on
'potency' and 'spiritual' dimensions. That's something which could
usefully be explored by an ecopsychologist. But the simple fact that
their research participants could immediately relate to this type of
description on a personal level, and recall their own associated
emotional experiences with such clarity and consistency, is a message in
itself. Anecdotally, many people are aware ofhow much a walk in the
country, or by the seashore, can affect their emotions. Feelings of
relaxation and tranquillity from a visit to so me remote beauty spot, or
the sense of 'refreshment of the spirit' so often described in novels
and other literature, seems to be common in many people's experience.
earl Jung was brave enough to attempt to tackle this on a
theoreticallevel, but not many psychologists have looked at it since. On
the other hand, psychoanalytical methodology was more suited for
expressing such interests, certainly by comparison with the more rigid,
behaviouristically-influenced methodologies which domina ted traditional
psychology for so long. But psychological methodology has come a long
way during the past twenty years, and we are far more able to encompass
broad perspectives now. Hay and Morisey (1978) showed that, according to
surveys, about a third of the population report having experienced
religious-style mystical experiences. I don't know whether this is
related to the above issue or not; but I would think it worth
investigating. My guess would be that if people were similarly asked
about the sometimes quite overwhelming semi-mystical emotions often
associated with being in outstandingly beautiful natural environments,
the figure would be far higher. There may be a qualitative difference
between the two types of experience, or the difference may only be a
matter of intensity. But anything that occurs so frequently should be a
matter for psychological investigation. There have been so me attempts
to chart semi-mystical experiences. For example, Benewick and Holton
(1987) interviewed members of the crowd during a large open-air Mass
held during the Pope's visit to Britain, and afterwards. People
described it as one of the most deeply moving, spiritual experiences of
their lives. Not least in this experience was the

Ecopsychology

99

sense of sharing brought ab out by being a member of such a large,
peaceful crowd, and knowing that for others, too, it was a deeply
meaningful experience. On a more mundane level, there are also supposed
psychologically positive effects from simply spending a lot of time in
the open air. On a personal level- i.e. anecdotally I know that a day
spent outdoors always seems to leave me feeling relaxed and contented
(unless it's the hayfever season). Gardening, fishing and walking are
the three most popular recreational activities in this country (with the
exception of watching TV); I don't think this is accidental.
Afficionados of each talk of the psychological benefits of the time that
they spend outdoors as self-evident. Do psychologists know ab out these
psychological benefits? Are we, at least, looking into them? I hope so.
The trouble is, though, that all of this is really only anecdotal
evidence. And anecdotal evidence isn't good enough. So an eco-psycology
would need to engage in some systematic research to find out just
whether there is any real psychological validity underlying these common
everyday ideas, or whether they are all simply a widespread delusion
like the illusion of veridical memory, or the social delusion that
people will stand up and confront authority rather than obeying in an
act which goes against conscience. In both these cases, psychological
research has shown that, just because something is a commonplace belief,
it doesn't mean that it is true. But in other cases, psychological
research has found that everyday beliefs are well-grounded. Without
research, we can't tell which is which. Vicky Rippere (1988) and others
(e.g. Rippere and Adams, 1982) have been at pains to point out the
importance of clinical ecology for clinical psychology. Food allergies
may seem a far cry from the effects of global warming or the destruction
of the ozone layer, and if we stick to a rigidly dualistic
interpretation of behavioural change and food allergy, then clinical
ecology may be seen as having little to offer a wider perspective.
However, as Edwards and Owens (1984) point out, clinical ecology has its
holistic implications too, and could beconstrued as carrying some direct
implications about the interaction between the human psyche

100

Psychology in Perspective

and its environment. There is potential hefe for much further
exploration, and not just into the effects of foodstuffs. And then
there's our relationship with animals. Keeping pets, as far as I can
tell, seems to be an activity in which human beings all over the globe
engage. Sociobiologists emphasise the importance of looking at
'universals' of human behaviour: does this tell us anything? It also
seems to be fairly well-established that ownership of the right type of
pets can significantly reduce the risk of he art disease: the main
theoretical explanation that I have heard argues in terms of the
importance of tactile contact and stroking in reducing tension and
stress, but there may be other explanations. This too strikes me as
being the type of question that an ecopsychology could explore. There
are questions, too, ab out the location of the human being in their
community. Disparate items of information suggest how important the
mechanisms of cooperation, reconciliation and social awareness are to
people. Studies of the self-concept show how the idea of the self as an
independent entity, away from its social network, appears to be a
peculiarly Western phenomenon - and isn't even all that valid in the
West, since self-concept has been repeatedly shown to be so dependent on
social factors. And again, there are social phenomena which need to be
explained. For example, why is it that with such overwhelming social
propaganda warning us away from being friendly with strangers, people
are still willing to help one another out? De Waal (1989) showed how
reconciliation is an almost completely under researched area. We know a
great deal about the propagation and maintenance of aggression, but
almost nothing about the mechanisms of reconciliation. Yet, when you
think about it, reconciliation is the social glue which holds everything
together: without the ability to resolve aggressive interactions, no
social community - animal or human - could remain whole. It would simply
fly apart. If we are truly to look at the human being in an ecological
context, that inc1udes the social context as well. Rom Harre proposed
that one of the most useful ways that we could do this was to begin to
look at social life, not in terms of discrete acts or single
interactions, but in terms of

Ecopsychology

101

meaningful episodes. By taking the episode as the unit of analysis, we
would be able to apply some of the analytical tools which allow us to
look at what is happening in a social situation - our knowledge of
social scripts, roles, non-verbal communication and so on - and piece
them all together in terms of their human meaning. Such an approach to
understanding social living would be much more able to incorporate the
ecological influences of context and setting than the traditional
approach of studying social acts in isolation. Those, then, are some of
the additional aspects of human psychology which could meaningfully
become the province of an ecopsychology. And there are other, more
obvious topics too. One is the whole question of ecological activism.
There are questions about which individuals are more or less likely to
become ecologically concerned, and also about which people are more or
less susceptible to changing their lifestyles. Is it age-related? Does
it make a noticeable difference if we teach children about it in school?
Did the 1960s have anything to do with it - did its simplistic
philosophies lay the groundwork for an appreciation of ecological
concerns in later life? Or is it primarily a response from a younger
generation, intolerant of the material values andjor naive romanticism
of their elders. As more and more people turn to lead-free petrol, and
consumer demand for eco-friendly detergents and cleaners grows, we also
need to understand the attitude and attributional changes which underlie
the whole process. Are people who aim for lifestyle change seeing
themselves differently in relation to the world? Does that relate to
their self-efficacy beliefs, or to locus of control? And what about the
behavioural patterns of lifestyle change? How do those who are
intellectually committed go about changing their lifestyles? Are there
sud den discontinuities, 'stages' in ecological awareness, or a
continuous, gradual adaptation? Do people sustain their efforts once
they begin, and what causes them to 'give up', if they do? This leads
us, also, into the area of social representations the
ideologically-based shared beliefs about the nature of the world and the
human being that we all hold. We need to

102

Psychology in Perspective

explore how people understand ecological issues. My own research into
this area shows that public awareness is very diverse, and that there is
a tremendous amount of straightforward factual confusion - despite the
vast amount of public education in the area. There is much more to
integrating awareness of ecological issues in the public mind than
simply expressing the facts clearly. There's the motivational side of
things, too. We know from clinical psychology how devastating the
effects of learned helpless can be, and how important it is to the human
being to have manageable goals and a sense of agency. But global
ecological issues, as a general rule, carry their own pessimistic
message of gloom and futility. So what does our existing psychological
knowledge about human motivation have to tell us about getting
ecological messages across? These are some of the more apparent avenues
which an ecopsychology might explore. It's not a definitive list: there
are many other possibilities. Some of the questions which could be
raised might be too far 'on the fringe' for many ofus, but might still
provide useful insights. For instance, what about animi sm? If we take a
cross-cultural perspective, and include our own everyday experience
(rather than the 'official' view of what Westerners believe), we find
that animi sm is endemie in human thought patterns - whether it be in
tal king to one's computer, ascribing malevolent intent to a car that
breaks down on a particularly crucial morning, apologising to a tree
before one cuts it down, or locating the sprits of one's ancestors in a
sacred rock face. Why is it so widespread? Could animi sm perhaps be
seen as a manifestation of abasie tendency to see oneself as part of and
taking part in the world, rather than as a entity separate and distinct
from the rest of the natural world - an 'individual'? It has long been a
truism that non-technological cultures may have a great deal to teach us
about living with our planet. But if it is going to tell us anything,
then we have to be ready to listen: we need to look, seriously, at the
concepts in nontechnological cultures, and ask what they can tell uso I
am reminded of a paper by Horton (1967) on traditional African
approaches to medicine. Typically, if someone falls siek from an
infectious disease, a traditional medicine practitioner will

Ecopsychology

103

look for social stress as a source: has the patient had any recent
disagreements wi\~h friends or neighbours? That could be the source of
the speil which produced the sickness. To Western ears, this makes no
sense: we believe that we know how infectious diseases are transmitted.
But Horton pointed out that in a country with a high infant mortality
rate, those who survive to adulthood are, almost by definition, those
with a high natural immunity to such diseases. In such cases, the
question is why they became susceptible - why their natural resistance
was lowered - and in that context, given how stress suppresses immune
functioning, looking for social stressors with a view to resolving them
makes a great deal of sense. The question is whether one sees the human
being within the context of its ecosystem, or separate from it. Failing
to appreciate the relationship can produce an inadequate, or even
distorted, understanding of what is going on, and why. The ecological
movement argues that we all have to change our consciousness if we are
going to come to terms with living on this planet. Psychology should be
at the forefront of that change. Our discipline has a tradition of
considering how human beings are affected by their environment, but has
usually only considered smalI, discrete bits of that influence, so out
of context as to have only limited value. But recent developments in
environmental psychology have broadened our perspectives in that
direction, and the recent opening-up of psychological methodology gives
us the conceptual and analytical tools to look at less tangible aspects
of human experience. So isn't it time that Fe took a further step and
began to explore, systematically, just what an ecopsychology might have
to offer us, in our attempt to understand the human being?

8 Perspectives in Cognitive Psychology

When the 'cognitive revolution' of the 1960s and 1970s took place,
psychology breathed a metaphorical sigh of relief. For many years, it
had been domina ted by the rigid demands of behaviourism, with an
insistence on an 'objective' approach that many feIt had become
increasingly trivialised, not least in view of its emphasis on animal
learning as the essence of psychological mechanisms. Like any paradigm
change, the cognitive revolution took time to gather momentum.
Behaviourism was unquestionably the dominant paradigm in the 1950s, hut
gradually through the 1960s more and more research in the cognitive
field began to trickle through. The 1970s saw the trickle become a
flood, and the 1980s saw academic psychology inundated with cognitive
psychology - even leading to the development of a whole new discipline,
of cognitive science. But the 1980s saw something else too. It saw a
gradual emergence of a new interest in cognitive processes developing
within other areas of psychology. This took several forms: an increasing
amount of research into social beliefs and ideas in social psychology;
an increasing interest in how social cognition develops in children; the
development of cognitive therapy in clinical psychology; and even the
publication of textbooks on animal cognition within the comparative
field. These new approaches did not call themselves cognitive
psychology, partly because they were disclaimed as not being 'real'
cognitive psychology by the cognitive psychologists, but partly also
because they had little in common with what had 105

106

Psychology in Perspective

by now become 'traditional' cognitive psychology - the formal,
laboratory-based search for models of how information is processed. The
paradigm shift from behaviourism to cognitive psychology had hardly been
achieved before a new paradigm shift had begun. So why did cognitive
psychology prove so inadequate? In many ways, cognitive psychology could
claim to have originated with psychology itself. Cognitive topics such
as attention, mind and memory were certainly the focus of interest of
the early experimental philosophers, and of the introspectionists such
as William James or Wilhelm Wundt. But the advent of the behaviourists
discredited the study of the 'mind' , and their insistence on a rigid
methodology and adherence to behaviourist principles meant that during
the first half of the century, psychology's focus moved away from
cognition and on to strictly observable forms ofbehaviour (or,
alternatively, the psychometrie industry). At its peak, in the 1950s,
the dominance of behaviourism was producing a number of reactions. At
this time, the foundations of the humanistic school of psychology
emerged, through the work of Maslow and Rogers, to gain in influence
through the subsequent decades. In the clinical field, George Kelly
produced his theory of personal constructs in an attempt to come to
terms with the differences in how patients saw their worlds. Kelly's
constructive alternativism suggested that cognitions, rather than
arising as a rather unimportant byproduct of behaviour, were the major
factors in determining action. Since people would construe different
events according to different personal theories, their responses to
those events would vary according to the personal constructs that they
used. In other words, cognitions would determine behaviour. At the same
time, other developments were taking place in the academic world. It had
become apparent during the Second World War that the military needed to
have a better understanding of how such cognitive processes as attention
worked, given the increase in technological complexity which had
occurred. There was a military necessity to know, for instance, just how
long someone could sit in front of aradar screen without making
mistakes; or just how the many dials in an aircraft cockpit should be
arranged so that the pilot would

Perspectives in Cognitive Psychology

107

be less likely to make fatal errors. Since these were military
questions, they received large amounts of funding, and soon research
into this was proceeding apace. It was helped, too, by the discovery
that it was possible to study cognitive processes without resorting to
introspection, which by now had been thoroughly discredited as a
research too1. By operationalising the topic to be studied, it was
possible to use more objective measures. So, for instance, by asking
subjects to press a key whenever they noticed a particular signal, it
was possible to establish whether they were paying attention to the
stimulus or not. Perhaps the most persuasive arguments promoting the new
development of cognitive psychology, and the chaHenges wh ich it offered
to behaviourism, however, arose from the work of J. S. Bruner and
others, who showed how human factors like expectation, language, values
and the like exerted their influence on what peQple perceived. Working
within a 'scientific' laboratory context, their findings could not be
dismissed academicaHy in the same way as those of the humanists (who had
largely worked as clinical psychologists), and they showed that an
understanding of the active basis of cognition was important in
understanding wh at was going on in people's minds. But Bruner was
working before the age of the computer. Two traditions within cognitive
psychology

There have always been two entirely different traditions of research
within cognitive psychology. One of these originates within the
experimental philosophy tradition, and remained alive and weH in the
universities throughout the behaviourist era. It dates back to Herman
Ebbinghaus (1885). Ebbinghaus established a tradition of rigorous
experimental research into memory, in which the goal was to ensure that
only 'pure' memory would be studied. This involved memorising nonsense
syHables in order to avoid 'contamination' from extraneous variables
such as interest, motivation, or, worse still, prior knowledge. He
systematised a laboratory research tradition which continues, albeit in
modified form,

108

Psychology in Perspective

even to the present day, in which the aim is to ensure that the topic
under study is as decontextualised and uncontaminated by extraneous
experience as possible. That this was - and remains - the dominant
paradigm in psychology can be seen in the language with which it is
described. Notice the hidden metaphor in the use of the word
'contaminated' - as in 'contaminating variable', or 'our results were
contaminated by some of our subjects having had relevant previous
experience'. In other words, research which deals with the real world is
'unhygienic' - and therefore to be avoided. The ideal situation is
'sterile', or 'pure'. This is the research paradigm into which students
of psychology are first inducted: it is held up as an ideal, and
encourages the student to discount real-world experience as somehow
invalid. More about this later. The second tradition in cognitive
research, however, while still at times operating within a laboratory
context, is much more at ease with real-life experience. In terms of a
'founding father', this can be said to have originated with the work of
Bartlett (1932), who investigated among other things the phenomenon of
serial learning, and the distortions which occur when the individual is
asked to recall or translate meaningful information. Most psychology
students are familiar with the way that Bartlett used an Indian 'ghost'
story to show how people's conceptions of what the world is like exert a
powerful influence on the material which they recall. Other eminent
reseachers, most notably Bruner and Neisser, kept this other tradition
alive within cognitive psychology - alive, but underemphasised. Left to
themselves, the two traditions might have coexisted and interacted with
one another fruitfully. But they were not left to themselves, because
science always occurs within a social context. That context included
both the rise of the 'expert culture' in society, and the vehement
insistence of the behaviourists that psychology must be 'scientific' and
that this meant modelling itself on the physical sciences (see Chapter
2). As a result, an ideal emerged, in which highly controlled research
investigating single-variable causes was seen as being somehow 'better'
than other forms of investigation. Since research in the Ebbinghaus
tradition fitted with this ideal far

Perspectives in Cognitive Psychology

109

more readily than the work of Bartlett and his followers, the Ebbinghaus
tradition received far more emphasis (and research funding) than the
Bartlett one. One of the reasons for this is that a human cognitive
psychology requires a rather different approach to the subjectmatter.
If, as Bartlett showed, it is the sense which people make out of their
material which is crucially important in determining how they will deal
with it, then we need to come to terms with how people make sense out of
things before we can fully understand what is going on. This moves us
into the realms of understanding meaning - the realm which the
sociologists call hermeneutics. And that is something which makes
psychologists who adhere to traditional forms of research methodology
feel very uncomfortable indeed. After all, it go es against all of our
early socialisation (see Chapter 4). So cognitive psychologists in
general - with some notable exceptions - have tended to avoid these
tricky questions and focus on research following the Ebbinghaus
tradition. That doesn't mean, of course, that cognitive research has
never been able to deal with personal values or other issues. On the
contrary: some of our 'classic' studies in cognitive psychology have
done just that. But for many modern cognitive psychologists, the
challenges thrown up by the work of, say, Bruner and Neisser, while
being respected, tend to be respected at a distance. And in the
meantime, research in the laboratory tradition continues, with ever more
complex information-processing models being developed, and usually at
the expense of models which can integrate the social and personal
contexts of wh at is actually happening. Cognitive psychology and the
computer metaphor

One of the reasons for this lies in the forms of explanation which are
adopted within the discipline of cognitive psychology. Much of what I
shall refer to as 'mainstream' cognitive psychology rests on the
computer metaphor, in which the human being is seen as 'like' a
computer - in other words, as being effectively a complex information
processor. In this type of model (e.g. Baddeley, 1983), information is

110

Psychology in Perspective

received through the senses, channelled through various filters and
processors where it is sorted, allocated to stores and boxes, and then
(sometimes) outputted in the form of behaviour being studied. One of the
consequences of this is that mainstream cognitive psychology is full of
flow charts and other kinds of mechanical models. The flow charts have a
distinct family resemblance to computer diagrams. Uncertainties or
'woolly' concepts like context or background are often relegated to a
single inputting box with an arrow feeding into the process somewhere
(e.g. 'cultural factors'). The emphasis is entirely on the inferred
information-processing which is happening within the brain. The problem
is that none ofthis actually gets to the meaning of what is going on. If
we look at the process of understanding speech, for instance, we can
develop models which involve 'dictionary units' or 'logogens' which
identify words; but that doesn't tell us what is going on when we listen
to people talking. If I were to say to a group of students to whom I was
giving this paper, as a 1ecture, 'OK, we've cancelled the rest of this
talk, you can have an early lunch now', there would be huge dimensions
of meaning which couldn't be addressed by an information-processing
metaphor. Just think for a moment about the complexities of what would
happen if I really did say that. How would the students feel? Pleased,
I've no doubt, at being let off so lightly. Relieved to be able to move
about, rather than sitting still. But maybe a bit cheated too, because I
wouldn't really have lived up to the informal 'social contract' which
was going on between uso Slightly anxious perhaps as to how what I had
covered so far could be converted into an exam answer; and probably
rather puzzled, because the behaviour certainly wouldn't live up to the
'script' which we all share about what type of behaviour is expected and
appropriate in this sort of situation. None of this can really be
expressed by a single box with an arrow (or even three boxes with
arrows). In other words, if we really want to understand what human
beings say to one another, we need much more than an
information-processing flow chart. In a situation like the one that I've
just described, although there would be processing of the information,
and the

Perspectives in Cognitive Psychology

111

students' brains would be identifying distinct words and so on, it
wouldn't tell us the whole story of what is going on. There is more
happening, which needs to be explored using other levels of explanation.
I am not saying, in any sense, that research into language-processing is
a total was te of time - it can give us some insight, of course. But I
amsaying that its value is severely limited, unless it can be integrated
with other levels of understanding. We cannot assurne that this
cognitive perspective gives us a full understanding of the human mind.
In part, this is only a problem because cognitive psychology has
committed the same error as that of the behaviourists. Both schools of
thought became so seduced by the metaphor which they used to describe
their approach that they eventually took the metaphor itself to be the
be-all and endall of understanding what people do. In the case of the
behaviourists, it was the idea of the atom and the molecule: the S-R
link as the 'atom', which could be combined, through increasingly
complex learning, until it could eventually account for all human
behaviour. In the case of the cognitive psychologists, it is the
computer metaphor - the idea that the human being is essentially 'just'
a highly complicated processor of information, and that when we have
understood fully how that information is processed, we will know all
that is necessary about human thought processes. But analogy is not
homology. Just because something can be compared with something else
doesn't me an that it is the same thing. In some respects, yes, the
human brain can be compared with a computer. But in other respects, it
operates quite differently. When we move from analogy, which is saying
it is 'like' something, to homology, which is saying that it is the same
as that thing, we seriously distort our understanding of what is going
on, because from then on we tend to ignore all the differences, and
focus only on the similarities. For many cognitive psychologists, of
course, it is overstating the case to say that they see their work as
the basis of all psychology. They see their work as part of a more
general story: fitting into the jigsaw, rather than as the wh oIe answer
in itself. But if a piece is to fit into a jigsaw, then it must have
parts which link in some way with the other pieces, and this is

112

Psychology in Perspective

where tradition al cognitive psychology falls down. By developing models
which are entirely self-contained, without reference to other aspects of
human functioning, and by refusing to acknowledge those other dimensions
of human li fe except as a form of 'contamination', traditional
cognitive psychology is implicitly arguing that people's thinking is
independent of their social, cultural and biological context. However
much lip-service is paid to the jigsaw concept by cognitive
psychologists, in the end it is the opportunities offered by the
theories which count. If those opportunities preclude integration with
other levels of explanation, as they do when other levels are simply
seen as optional influences, then the implicit message is that links are
unimportant. If the models which cognitive psychologists develop
relegate broader aspects of human functioning to one or two input boxes,
instead of attempting to integrate them within a coherent model, the
message is that those broader aspects are peripheral to human thought.
Yet, as we have seen elsewhere, they can be central. Perhaps the reason
why the computer metaphor became so popular with cognitive psychologists
is because of its philosophical basis. U sing the computer metaphor to
'explain' the brain and how it works is an implicit acceptance of the
Cartesian view of 'man as machine', wh ich in a machine-oriented society
is popular with both academics and lay people. I have discussed
elsewhere how the mechanistic view of the human being produced by
Descartes provided a rationale for treating human beings as 'just'
machines during the Industrial Revolution and subsequently, and how it
also provides the basis for conventional medical assumptions and for
other mechanistic ways of understanding human behaviour (see Chapter 1).
But the computer metaphor leads to other problems too. Perhaps the most
important of these is its intolerance of, not just uncertainty, but also
of the more complex forms of reality. Since computers run on principles
which derive stricdy from formal logic, it is assumed that formal logic
is the most important principle that there iso So, for example, human
beings who have shown, as they did in the Wason and 10hnson-Laird
experiments, that their thinking does not

Perspectives in Cognitive Psychology

113

accord with formal logic are assumed to be making 'errors'. The fact
that their thinking actually represents something considerably more
sophisticated, in that they are applying a complex knowledge of social
convention and probability, is considered to be irrelevant. If it isn't
strictly logical, it is an 'error'. Many cognitive psychologists have
attempted to challenge this idea; but the increased adherence to the
computer metaphor through the 1980s meant that the work of Gregory,
Neisser, Abelson, and others, who tried to identify the overarching
aspects of cognitive understanding, was often ignored. Most modern
'mainstream' cognitive research rests on a fundamental (but
unsubstantiated) assumption that cognitive processes are veridical and
adhere to the precepts of formal logic. But it isn't as simple as that:
as Neisser showed in his comparison of John Dean's memory with the
actual events as recorded in the Watergate tapes, someone might get
almost every single one of the details wrong, but still get the gist, or
the social meaning, of what took place accurate. A cognitive psychology
which adheres strictly to the computer metaphor is unable to cope with
this, because computers don't do that sort of thing. Of course, some of
those working in computer modelling are aware that simple logic is not
enough. But the thing which immediately strikes a elose observer is the
naivety of some of the attempts to rectify this narrowness. For example,
I recently attended a conference paper on computer modelling, in which
the researchers had cottoned on to the way that human beings don't just
deal with one item of information at a time. They were very excited
about their new 'neural network' system, which allowed the computer to
deal with several chains of reasoning at once. Much of the excitement
derived from the way that the cross-linkages meant that the logic
processes all got jumbled up together and became 'muddy' their word, not
mine - just like human thinking, they said! Personally, I don't call
applying a sophisticated social knowledge 'muddy'; but if you live in a
world in which things are either correct and logical or they are errors,
then I guess human thinking does look muddy. The dominance of the
metaphor makes it almost impossible to recognise

114

Psychology in Perspective

fundamental qualitative differences between human and computer
information-processing. Cognitive psychology and 'objective' science

Another thing that mainstream cognitive psychology and behaviourism have
in common is that both are based on the idea that it is possible to
refine down what human beings do into some 'pure' form, and isolate its
essence. For the behaviourists, this was the 'pure' version of learning,
the stimulus-response link. For the cognitive psychologists, it was the
processing of information. Both schools of thought believed that by
identifying the essential nature of these processes, it would be
possible to work upwards, and to analyse how this essence combined into
more complex forms. But studying human beings by taking some small unit
of human behaviour or cognition and studying it in an independent and
context-free manner is based on a fallacy, which is the idea that the
behaviour remains essentially the same when it occurs in context. There
is any amount of research into the behaviour and understanding of the
human subject in the psychological laboratory (e.g. Silverman, 1977)
which shows that people simply don't act in a context-free manner. They
are affected by the demand characteristics of the experiment, the
relationship with the experimenter and with other subjects, and their
views on the value and social relevance of the study. Any psychology
student encounters this when conducting psychological research of their
own - indeed, it's one reason why practical work is such a fundamental
part of a psychology degree. But, in accordance with their discipline's
socialisation, most psychology students manage to convince themselves
that it is their own shortcomings or the limitation of their situation
wh ich prevents the 'perfect' experiment. It isn't. The perfect
experiment doesn't exist; and nor does the passive research subject who
is prepared to do exact1y as she is told without even speculating about
what the study is for. What I am saying is that the whole edifice, from
Ebbinghaus upwards, is constructed on a myth. It is simply

Perspectives in Cognitive Psychology

115

not possible to study human beings in a context-free manner, because
however we are trying to study them, we establish some sort of context.
And people then behave in ways that they judge appropriate for the
context that we have established. Human beings are not like computers.
We are social animals, we have biological and affiliative needs, we
interact according to complex and sophisticated social rules, and we
project the image that we (by and large) wish to project. Even in a
psychology experiment. Moreover, even ifwe achieved this idea ofa
'pure', objective study of human behaviour, what good would it do us?
How can human behaviour produced in a 'clinical' setting like a
psychology laboratory relate to the real world, which just doesn't
operate that way? The very difficulty of establishing 'objective'
laboratory conditions should show us how unlike reality those conditions
are; and that in itself should tell us something about the value of the
evidence about human functioning obtained from such a study.
Psychologists who apply cognitive insights in the real world have had
considerable success, but that success has always been achieved by
compromising on the pure 'objectivity' and acknowledging reality, with
all its uncontrollable features. And when we do acknowledge reality, we
find that the outcome of our research is often qualitatively different.
What about the classic Morris et al. (1981) study, in which they found
that subjects' memory for word-digit pairs could far exceed anything
that was previously thought possible. Normally, if you're asked to
remember a set of word-digit pairs based on one auditory exposure only,
you wouldn't be likely to do too weIl. This has been demonstrated so
often in the laboratory that it is regarded as a truism: we only
remember 7 ± 2 bits of information at a time. But Morris et al. showed
that if you are a keen football supporter, and the word-digit pairs that
you are hearing are that day's football results, 10 and behold, you
recall an awful lot more! Hardly surprising, you say? WeIl, maybe; but
wh at happens then to the limited-capacity theories which have been
developed on the basis of 'pure' laboratory work? The simple fact is
that we deal with irrelevant information in a way which is qualitatively
different from the way we deal with 'real' information. So

116

Psychology in Perspective

models developed from how we deal with irrelevant information are, quite
simply, not likely to be much use. In recent years, cognitive psychology
has progressed from the nonsense syllable, and it likes to believe that
it currently deals much more with 'real' information. And being asked to
read areal sentence, or a whole paragraph, is certainly much more real
than learning a nonsense syllable. But even so, it is about as similar
to real reading as the abstract word--digit pair is to the football
result. The two are not even likely to utilise the same mechanisms. When
you are reading in everyday li fe your motivation is entirely different
(because you are likely to be reading either for your own pleasure, or
for some instrumental reason, like studying); the context is different,
because each paragraph you read is preceded by something relevant and is
going somewhere; the time of day and the setting is different, and so
on. A paragraph may be better than a nonsense syllable, but it is out of
context and still distinctly artificial. Cognitive psychology and other
areas of psychological understanding That these criticisms reflect a
serious deficit in modern cognitive psychology is evidenced by the way
in which the insights and theoretical models from cognitive psychology
have made very little impact on psychological knowledge in other
disciplines. Its rigid adherence to the computer metaphor renders it
inherently useless when it comes to understanding social or
developmental cognition, since human beings do not operate like
computers. But the developments that have taken place in other
disciplines show how strong was the need for cognitive insights. Sodal
psychology Increasingly, those cogmtlve psychologists not enamoured with
the computer-oriented aspects of 'cognitive science' have been turning
to social cognition as an area in which a socially relevant psychology
of cognitive processes is developing. This

Perspectives in Cognitive Psychology

117

field operates on entirely different assumptions and with different
theoretical models than 'mainstream' cognitive psychology, and as a
consequence, it can deal with 'real-life' in a way that
information-processing models cannot. The research area known as social
cognition began with the need to explain just how it is that people's
understanding of wh at is going on affects how they act with one
another. In part, this has always been an element in social psychology,
mainly manifest through research into attitudes. But there is much
research which shows that attitudes and behaviour are not always
congruent, and it is clear than simply looking at people's attitudes
leaves a lot more to be explained. Social cognition has a number of
different areas. One of these is attribution theory - how people explain
what is going on, to themselves or to others. Modern theory has the
capacity to link together a number of different insights wh ich have
arisen in different fields of psychology. For example, we know from the
work of Rotter and others that locus of control perceiving causes as
controllable as opposed to uncontrollable - is a crucial factor in
stress management. Walking to college on the day of an exam leaves you
very much less stressed than waiting to see if your lift, or the bus,
will turn up, because walking is under your control, whereas the other
two options are not. The study of attributions permeates many aspects of
social living. For example, Stratton and Swaffer studied mother's
attributions, obtained from hearing them talk about their children while
watching them play, and found that mothers who battered their kids saw
their children's behaviour as very much less controllable than did
mothers of matched control groups. This provided useful pointers for the
therapists who were working with these mothers, enabling them to develop
an approach which would build up the mothers' sense of agency, and
therefore reduce the frustrations which they felt. This is one specific
example of how social cognition has enabled us to investigate areas of
day-to-day living in a positive way, by taking the everyday explanations
which people make and looking at how these operate. More recently,
research into attribution has begun to investigate shared social
beliefs - social representations, held by groups of people and

118

Psychology in Perspective

taking the form of shared theories about the world and how it works. As
an approach, social cognition can handle many more of the levels on
which life is lived - coming to terms with the importance of social
identification with social and cultural groups rather than simply seeing
the individual as an independent information-processor. There are other
forms of social cognition, too. Schank and Abelson's c1assic work on the
unconscious 'scripts' of everyday action which we all follow has enabled
us to chart more complex forms of social understanding more c1osely; and
their work has fed back into some of the more socially aware areas of
cognitive psychology. In fact, it is a moot point whether Schank and
Abelson should be c1assified in social cognition or in cognitive
psychology itself; although if considered as cognitive psychologists,
they certainly can't be seen as 'mainstream'. Developmental psychology

Like social psychology, developmental psychology reached a point at
which an understanding of the social cognitive mechanisms developed by
the child became essential to further progress. Mainstream cognitive
psychology was of no help and therefore, like social psychology,
developmental psychology had to develop its own models, entirely
independently. If we look at early research into cognitive development,
we find that in orientation it paralleIs 'mainstream' cognitive
psychology, and indeed it achieved its height at a similar time. The
highly influential Piagetian model of cognitive development also adopts
an individualistic, largely context-free approach to understanding
cognition, in which the essential question is how the child comes to
terms with solving problems and discrepancy between its prior experience
and its immediate sensory input. Essentially, the child is regarded as a
context-free problem-solver. The idea that the social context might be
more than simply another factor which the child needs to take into
account has been demonstrated by a number of recent studies with
children, which have shown how the entire response of the child is
dependent on the child's understanding of the social

Perspectives in Cognitive Psychology

119

processes which are taking place. A changed answer may occur because the
same question was repeated, rather than because the child has no stable
concept, since repetition of a question from an adult is taken to concur
with a social convention meaning that the first answer was wrong. A
problem devised using irrelevant settings and objects becomes easy once
it is reformulated to a setting with which the child is familiar. And a
child exposed to any amount of language through radio and television
still fails to learn to speak, but makes rapid progress as soon as it
has contact with a speaking human being in the form of a speech
therapist. All of these examples show that the child's social
understanding of what is happening is more than simply an added factor,
superimposed on some underlying process. It is a fundamental part of the
processes which are going on. Consequendy, a very large part of modern
research into the psychology of child development is concerned with
exploring the child's developing social cognition. For example, Paul
Harris's book Children and Emotion documents a large chunk of research
devoted to exploring the child's theory of mind, and their understanding
of other people's mental states: research which has given us a lot of
insight into why children respond as they do, and which has also led to
a greater understanding of the phenomenon of autism. The models offered
by traditional cognitive psychology, or by information-processing models
of cognitive development, have been of litde value in exploring how
children think about other people - and yet, as the previous research
has shown, so much of the small child's thought is firmly located within
that social context that models based on context-free individualistic
problem-solving can account for only a very litde ofwhat is going on in
the child's mind. Other areas 0/ psychology

There are other areas of psychology which cogmtlve psychology has failed
to address, despite a clear need for its presence. For example, the
fields of advertising and marketing use a number of theoretical models,
which tap into some areas of human behaviour and cognition. They draw
from several

120

Psychology in Perspective

different areas of psycho10gy, inc1uding even Gestalt psychology, but
'mainstream' cognitive psychology is conspicuous by its absence. This is
not because the psychologists working in applied psychology are
unintelligent or ill-educated; it is because cognitive psychology has
very little to offer them. It fails to deal with essential human
processes. For example: one of the main motivating factors which
advertisers tap into when they are selling products in the modern
market-place is that of image-projection and impression-management.
Despite the vast amount of research which has been conducted into
imagery, mainstream psychology remains lamentably short of studies
investigating the social nuances of different kinds of image, and how
these may be manifest in different ways. Yet it is c1ear from its end
product that advertisers have developed highly complex, if largely
experiential, concepts about how people use image as part of their
understanding of everyday life. In comparative psychology, too, there
are opportunities for some fruitful links, which have been entirely
overlooked by cognitive psychologists. There has been an increasing
amount of research into anima I cognition, both within the ethological
and the experimental traditions. The ethological tradition, as
exemplified by the research of Peter Marler and his colleagues, has
thrown up some fascinating work on potential evolutionary precursors of
'words', of preparedness in learning, and, even more interestingly, of
natural categories, or concepts (Marler, 1982; Gould and Marler, 1987).
When the overall implications of this research are taken into account,
what we find is an increasing body of knowledge which could give some
very useful insights into the conceptual nature of human thinking. But
the involvement of cognitive psychologists in formulating these
connections is strikingly non-existent. The same can be said for the
research into neurological insights into memory mechanisms (e.g. Rose,
1992). In both cases, cognitive psychology has the potential for making
asolid contribution, but at the time of writing there is no indication
that it is doing so. I would contend, then, that cognitive psychology
has sold itself, and the rest ofpsychology, short.1t has failed to
provide the alternative which was so badly needed after the dominance

The Po/ities 0/ Nature and Nurture

121

of behaviourism. The cognitive obsession with the computer metaphor
meant that it fell into the same trap for which it criticised the
behaviourists. By defining the human being using a metaphor, and then
taking the metaphor as if that were the only possible reality, it
rendered itselfunable to respond to the real issues and challenges which
are being thrown up in other areas of psychology. Where it could have
been the linking force between the diversity of psychology's branches,
cognitive psychology has gone into a dead end and become irrelevant to
those areas. Despite the efforts of many great cognitive psychologists,
the promise of its early years has been lost, and the rest of psychology
has had to leam to manage without it.

9 The Politics of Nature and Nurture

One of the first questions in psychology that a new student 1earns about
is the nature/nurture debate. A nature/nurture debate is concerned with
what causes something to develop. On one side are the nativists, who see
development as arising from innate factors - from genetic inheritance.
On the other side are the empiricists, who see development as occurring
because of experience and learning. Nature/nurture debates are often
presented as being simply academic disputes; but they are actually much
more than that. They form the basis of the way that we organise our
society, and also of our attitudes towards one another. As such, they
are highly political issues. The philosophical background

Nature/nurture debates have a long philosophical history, stemming from
three seventeenth century European philosophers: Thomas Hobbes, Rene
Descartes and John Locke. Their ideas contain two interconnected issues,
each of which has been influential in psychological thinking. The first
is biological determinism: how far the human being is determined by its
animal nature. The other is whether human mental capacities are innate -
inherited through genetic transmission - or whether they arise through
experience. Hobbes was one of the first biological reductionists. He
argued that human beings were simply the product of their biological
natures; and that as a result of this, human 123

124 Psychology in Perspective

relationships in the 'natural' state were typified by competition,
threat and fear, and the wish to achieve recognition or glory. So,
Hobbes argued, organised society had to be constructed in such a way as
to minimise the damage done by 'human nature'. Left to themselves,
Hobbes believed, people would engage in all-out warfare, so society
needed to keep its members in check. This view of human nature is still
common today. The idea that people need to be controlled 'for their own
good' is one which is a fundamental principle of modern social
organisation. While we see it to some extent in any organised society,
it appears in its most extreme form in totalitarian countries.
Biological determinism forms an important belief for these societies: it
justifies repressive social practices by maintaining that people's own
natures are their own worst enemies, that aggression is innate and
unavoidable, and that rigid social controlleads to the greatest
happiness of the greatest number - a common argument in, for instance,
Stalinist Russia and Maoist China, as weIl as in other totalitarian
states. As a form of argument, biological determinism is still very
common. It receives widespread media coverage through popularisers such
as Desmond Morris and Richard Dawkins. If we look carefully at these
ideas, which we will be doing in the next chapter, we find that they
propound the view that people's tendencies to socially destructive
behaviours are biological and inevitable, and cannot be helped. This is
a form of argument which has descended directly from Hobbes. And it is
intimately linked with the nature/nurture question, because it rests
entirely on an assumption that people's natures are inherited. By
contrast, Descartes argued that the human mind is a completely separate
entity from the body. The body, in Descartes's view, is purely a
machine, operating like a machine and not influencing the mind at all.
The mind, on the other hand, is the seat of reason and the essence of
being human - hence Descartes's famous definition of what it is to be
human: 'I think, therefore 1 am.' This dualism of Descartes's did not
ignore 'animal nature' in human beings, hut held that it was the base
state, which could be overcome by reason and rationality. As such,
Cartesian philosophy

The Polities 0/ Nature and Nurture

125

presented a different picture to that of Hobbes, and one which was very
appealing to the emerging rationalisticJmaterialistic society of the
time: a society which was just breaking free from the theological
domination of the Middle Ages. However, with the later development of
evolutionary theory, the mind-body distinction which Descartes made was
chaBenged. Evolution argued that there was no qualitative difference
between human beings and other animals, and so opened the way for
Cartesian views to be linked with biological reductionism. This happened
through the connection with nativism. Descartes was strongly of the
belief that human mental faculties were innate, and not changeable. His
nativist perspective on mental ability dominated European philosophical
and psychological thinking to the present day. The other side of the
natureJnurture debate came from a line of thinking which was perhaps
most clearly expressed by the philosopher John Locke (1632-1704). He was
one of the early empiricists, who considered that aB human knowledge
comes ultimately from experience. As such, it was acquired through the
senses: vision, hearing, touch, taste and smell. Locke envisaged the mi
nd of the human infant at birth as a tabula rasa - a blank slate on
which the child's experiences would be written. Meaningful thought and
ideas emerged from the association of different sensory experiences,
allowing the child to identify regularities and patterns. Locke's
thinking was extremely influential in many areas of human society,
including the political sphere. It has always, for instance, been a
major underlying philosophical assumption on the part of social
reformers, because it carries the crucial implication that human nature
isn't fixed and determined, but can be moulded and developed through
experience. It formed a philosophical basis for the revolutionary
movements of the eighteenth century as weH as those of later times,
influencing revolutionaries such as Thomas Paine, whose ideas were so
fundamental to the newly formed United States of America. It also formed
a philosophical basis for the massive social engineering projects of
Soviet Russia, and their attempts to create the New Soviet Man through
social education and social restructuring.

126

Psychology in Perspective

For people who were trying to found a new society not dominated by the
feudal and religious oppression of the old Europe, Locke's ideas were a
breath offresh air. By suggesting that human nature was essentially
learned, Locke had implied that new forms of social interaction and
social structures were possible: that the old order was not inevitable.
In later times, as we have seen, Locke's associationism also provided
the basis for the emergence of the behaviourist school of thought in
psychology - which, in its day, was also radical, even though it may
seem rather repressive to modern eyes. So much for the philosophical
background. It's important, though, for us to recognise that the various
perspectives put forward in these debates represent forms of thinking
which are not recent and modern, but have permeated society for hundreds
of years. During their long history, they have appeared in many
different forms, and have fuelled massive political and social change.
So perhaps it's understandable that people get a bit heated about them.

Nature and nurture in psychological theory

There are many nature/nurture debates in psychological theory, and as I
shall show, some of them have at times carried social implications which
were literally a matter of life and death. Through this century, there
has been a steady nature/nurture debate raging in society, with views
ranging from extreme nativism to extreme empiricism. Nativist ideas
remain the dominant perspective in our society. Their popularity can be
seen in the amount of publicity given to those who propound it: the work
of Desmond Morris, for instance, receives massive media acdaim; as do
Richard Dawkins's ideas about the 'selfish gene'. Alternative,
nonnativist ideas receive little publicity. Incidentally, it is worth
noting here that modern psychologists see human. development rather
differently. Instead of seeing it as a straight either/or question,
modern psychologists perceive a continuous interaction between the two.
Biological predispositions may guide development in certain directions,

The Po/Wes 0/ Nature and Nurture

127

but how that development proceeds depends entirely on our experience
with the environment. We call this a dialeetieal relationship between
inheritance and the environment: they each contribute to the whole, and
are completely interconnected, not competing alternatives. We will come
back to this idea later. Some of the nature/nurture debates which a
psychology student encounters appear to be relatively innocuous. It is
difficult, really, to get excited about the political implications of
the nature/nurture debates on perception or language - if, indeed, there
are any. But when we look at the evidence for this too, it shows in the
end that there is an interaction between biological predispositions and
the environment; and that social experience is an important part of it.
But one feature of the nature/nurture debate on language highlights an
interesting issue. For the hereditarians, the idea that chimpanzees
might be able to learn human language is anathema: language above all
else must be seen as innate for humans and no other species. This belief
resulted in a complicated game of 'moving the goalposts', such that
whatever any chimpanzee achieved was described as not 'really' language,
because the criteria for wh at 'real' language was were changed, to make
sure of it. The chimpanzee Lana, for example, was deemed to be not using
language because she did not communicate spontaneously with her keepers.
But Washoe and the other Oklahoma chirnps did communicate spontaneously,
so all of a sudden the most important issue was whether requests used
the correct word-order. The fact that this wasn't even a criterion which
could be applied universally to human languages was totally ignored: by
the time the whole research programme was torpedoed by Terrace in the
early 1980s (again on very questionable grounds), the criteria for what
counted as 'real' language had got to the point where it was
questionable whether a typical toddler's speech, matched to those
criteria, would have been seen as language either. The point about this
was that throughout this whole research programme, the arguments of the
critics came not from informed scientific judgement, but from
predetermined views. Criteria were manipulated simply to make sure that
the

128

Psychology in Perspective

same criticism could be maintained. Whether one believes that what these
chimpanzees did was truly language or not, a 'scientific' approach
should surely involve applying consistent standards, rather than moving
the goalposts in mid-debate. Nativist arguments have consistently been
used to argue against social change, even on a relatively trivial level.
Take the case of dyslexia, for instance. It has been argued - see, for
instance, Whittaker, 1982 - that since its inception, the concept of
dyslexia has become so broad that it is now applied to almost any
difficulty in spelling which the child encounters. And this has served
to distract attention from poor teaching and low expectations on the
part of teachers. I, personally, would not dispute that a specific
disorder known as dyslexia exists. Nor would I dispute that for those
that have it, it can produce real difficulties. But I would seriously
question whether three-quarters of those who are deemed to be 'dyslexie'
really have the disorder, and I would also question the role which the
concept has come to play in society. Too often, it has been used to
avoid teachers (or parents) taking responsibility for failure when a
particular child doesn't enjoy the kind of leaming which school
provides, and so doesn't leam to read particularly quickly. The idea of
an inherited disorder distracts attention away from more serious social
questions, such as the quality of teaching or parental expectation, and
so avoids identifying a need for social change. In fact, nativist ideas
dominate education, at least in Britain. The firm belief in a child's
'ability' has resulted in millions of children being deprived of access
to higher levels of education - and, increasingly, condemned to a life
on the dole, as opportunities for unskilled workers die away.
Interestingly, this doesn't apply in other countries: both American and
Russian educational systems are based on the premise that children are
all educable, and some 60 per cent of the population of the United
States go on to so me form of higher education. The British proportion
is only a fraction of this. The difference can be seen perhaps most
clearly in the role which testing plays in the educational systems of
England and America. In the United States, children are tested
frequently, and all are expected to achieve the specified level of
attainment

The Politics of Nature and Nurture

129

for their year group. Should a child fail a test, this is taken as an
indication that it needs to go through that part of the curriculum
another time, perhaps with extra help, so that it won't fail it next
time. So tests are used diagnostically, to help the child to progress.
In England, on the other hand, testing has always been used to exclude
people from education. Major examinations like the 11 +, GCE and CSE or,
in modern times, GCSE exams, 'A' levels, and degree examinations have
all acted as a filter, weeding out the 'weaker' candidates. The test
result is taken as an indication that the child isn't capable of such
leaming, not that it simply needs to go over the material again. It's
also interesting to note which aspects of theory are accepted in the
British education system. Piaget, for instance, regarded the concept of
'biological readiness' and the developmental stages to be very minor
parts of his theory. What mattered, in his view, was the child's
interaction with its environment. But it was the concept of readiness
which was adopted wholesale by teachers and teacher trainers, with its
implicit message that there was no point trying to te ach children
things before they were biologically capable of it. Some
educationalists, such as Shayer and Adey, even argued that some children
would never become capable of formal operations - for genetic reasons.
Of course, the private sector in education in Britain didn't adopt
Piagetian theory in quite such a wholesale manner: they continued to
teach five-year-olds mea!mrement and calculations, and to push children
into achieving educational success. As a result, the gap between the
private and public sectors of education became even wider - and with it,
the gap in educational expectations for working- and middle-class
children. Recent theories of socio-cognitive development have shown how
important the human factor is in what children can leam: Donaidson, for
instance, showed how children had no problem with Piagetian tasks if
they were placed in a human context. It was only when the tasks were
decontextualised, or abstract, that the children had difficulties.
'Decentring' was no problem when the child had to hide a boy doll from a
policeman doll; but was a problem when the child was asked

130

Psychology in Perspective

to look at photographs of mountains that didn't have any social meaning.
In theories of cognitive development, too, we have a hidden
nature/nurture debate, with significant social implications. The
evidence Jor nativist ideas But when we look at the evidence for
nativist theories, time and again we find it to be highly questionable.
For example: one of the most famous psychological studies of inherited
character appeared in psychological textbooks in the first part of this
century, and purported to be a study of a family known as the Kallikaks.
These people were portrayed as hard-core moral degenerates, who enjoyed
living in the gutter and who could not be reformed, because their
propensities were inherited. The textbook accounts were accompanied by
photographs of members of the family, showing them as evil and ferocious
in facial appearance - although a photo graph of a female member of the
family kept in an institution showed her looking se rene and pleasant.
Gould (1981) pointed out that the photographs of the 'unpleasant'
members of the family were clearly altered, to make them appear more
ferocious: this was done so clumsily that any modern child could
perceive it. Although it may seem to be a trivial example, the doctoring
of the photographs raises some significant points. Mainly, it highlights
how evidence for the debate has been overstated, distorted, or even
entirely fabricated. Which in turn raises the question: why? Why is it
that purveyors of a supposedly scientific theory feel the need to
distort their evidence in this way? The answer, of course, lies in the
political nature of the theory. The case of the Kallikaks was being used
as a political tool to demonstrate the futility of trying to improve the
lot of the poorer people in society: their economic degeneration simply
reflected their innate characters, and as such there was nothing society
could do to improve them. Instead, the nativists argued, they should be
put into institutions, and sterilised to ensure that they did not pass
on their unsavoury genes to another generation.

The Po/ities 0/ Nature and Nurture

131

Dubious scientific practice is not uncommon in the hereditarian
position. Take, for instance, the idea that schizophrenia is inherited.
This is almost an article of faith with many members of the medical
profession, and even a few psychologists, although not all that many. It
is often asserted to have been thoroughly proven in the past, by twin
studies. It also goes hand in hand with the idea of schizophrenia being
caused by brain chemicals: the idea is that an inherited gene stimulates
the production, or overproduction, of whatever brain chemical is
fashionable at the time, and this causes the schizophrenia. Various
chemicals have been l'roposed to fit this role at different times: the
dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia, put forward in 1972, was one of
the first, but many others have also been proposed, such as
acetylcholine or gamma-amino-butyric acid. Hut when we actually
scrutinise the evidence, we find that it all goes back to a set of twin
studies performed by Kallman in 1938. This is regarded as a classic
study, and is quoted uncritically in psychiatric textbooks, and some
psychology ones. Hut Kallman's methodology was questionable to say the
least. For one thing, Kallman performed all of the diagnoses in the
study himself, while being well-aware ofwhat it was that he was trying
to prove. In many cases, he diagnosed members of the family as
schizophrenic or as schizoid personalities simply on the basis of
anecdotes or case notes - some of these family members had even been
dead for twenty years at the time of the study! And he made sure that
his diagnoses fitted perfectly the model which he was putting forward.
On the basis of his theory, Kallman argued vigorously for the compulsory
sterilisation of schizophrenics: a policy which was so on put into
practice in Nazi Germany. Not long afterwards, schizophrenics were sent
to the concentration camps. So a single, seriously biased piece of
'scientific' research, performed by someone with strong opinions and in
a way which guaranteed that those opinions would appear to be
substantiated, directly caused the deaths of thousands of mentally ill
people. The dodgy methodology of the hereditarian side usually remains
unchallenged. Hut dubious scientific practices pervade the history of
this theory, and even result in the rewriting of

132

Psychology in Perspective

apparently contradictory findings. The twin study conducted by Newman,
Freeman and Holzinger, for instance, showed little evidence of heredity.
But its statistical outcomes were systematically 'corrected' by
hereditarians, until a relatively low correlation in the region of 0.6
was reworked to become a high correlation of 0.8 - and the study was
then extensively cited as evidence for the hereditarian argument. Other
studies of separated identical twins relied heavily on twins which were
only nominally separated: the usual pattern was that one would be
brought up by its biological mother and the other by a relative; they
frequently went to the same schools and spent time together. Those
studies which were not amenable to being reworked to support the
hereditarian argument were simply never cited, and became forgotten.
Moreover, there are powerfullobbies at work in this area. When Cyril
Burt's work on inherited intelligence was shown to be fabricated, the
hereditarians simply closed ranks and insisted that there was still lots
of other evidence. But, as Leon Kamin showed, ifthat other evidence is
chased up, it isn't very convincing at all. Burt's work was so
influential, and other studies so ambivalent in their evidence, that
actually very little is left. Even today, we find people attempting to
restore Burt's credibility, despite the fact that only very few aspects
of the evidence for fraud have been exonerated, and the overwhelming
evidence still remains. My point is this: if the case for the
hereditarians is as clearcut as they maintain, why do they need to
engage in questionable scientific practices? Surely, if the theory is
valid, it will produce clear-cut evidence: these machinations should be
unnecessary. The reason, of course, is that these people are not
purveying scientific theory, but ideology. It is a political perspective
with very direct political implications: it legitimises the inequalities
of society by arguing that these arise from inherited differences; and
negates attempts to create a better society by implying that they are
doomed to failure from the start. Not all of the evidence, of course,
results from deliberate fraud or misrepresentation. But other studies
also have serious methodological weaknesses. In the case of adoption
studies, for instance, these mean that they imply a closer connection

The Po/Wes 0/ Nature and Nurture

133

with biological parents than is really the case. This is an argument
which centres around the use of correlation coefficients. A correlation
coefficient indicates how closely two variables vary together. But it
doesn't tell us anything ab out the actual value of each set of figures.
In almost all of the adoption studies which used formal IQ tests (some
ofthem simply took the mother's educationallevel instead), the actual
value of the adopted child's IQ was closer to that of the mother,
sometimes by as much as 20 IQ points. But the use of correlational
measures meant that it looked as though there was a closer relationship
with the biological parent. IQ testing

And all of these studies, of course, rest on the assumption that the IQ
test is aprecision instrument which can accurately reflect an
individual's intelligence. Differences of just a couple of points are
treated as if they were precise data, although the reliability
coefficients of the tests indicate that much larger differences would
occur by chance alone. IQ tests are not precise instruments, nor are
they accurate indicators of intelligence. As Stephen J. Gould showed in
The Mismeasure 0/ Man, ever since the first battery IQ tests were
developed, they have been culturally biased, in ways which ensure that
white middle-class individuals will score most highly. The first
systematic IQ tests were used by US immigration authorities to control
entrance to the United States at the beginning of this century. They
were unashamedly racist, asking such questions as: 'The number of a
Kaffir's legs is: 2, 4, 6, 81' They also asked would-be immigrants
questions about American baseball heroes, and in the non-verbal tests
which supposedly allowed for language difficulties they were expected to
be familiar with artefacts from American culture, like being able to
draw in the missing horn from a phonograph, or place a ball in the hand
of a man in a bowling alley. (No marks, incidentally, given for placing
it in the hand of a woman in the same picture!) The bias inherent in
these tests was extreme, but many researchers have demonstrated how
modern IQ tests, too,

134

Psychology in Perspective

discriminate strongly against certain populations, such as black
Americans or people from working-class backgrounds. In America they have
been successfully challenged in the courts: ludge Peckham, in 1979, mIed
that education authorities who used IQ tests to place black children in
special schools for the mentally retarded were discriminating against
ethnic minority students, because standardised intelligence tests are
racially and culturally biased, and because they were being misused in
this diagnostic role. There are other forms of social bias in these
tests too. In the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (generally
referred to as the WISC), for example, which is one of the most
widelyused individual IQ tests in Britain and in America, children are
asked: 'What is the correct thing to do if you find a stamped, addressed
letter in the street?'. It is marked as folIows: 2 marks for saying
'post it', or 'give it to a postman'; 1 mark for saying 'give it to a
policemen, teacher, or someone in authority'. But no marks at all for
saying 'open it'. It's a measure of social conformity, not a measure of
intelligence. All these, of course, are factors wh ich are completely
ignored by those putting forward the hereditarian theory of IQ. When
Arthur lengen revived the race and IQ controversy, in 1969, he argued
that because American blacks scored an average of 15 IQ points lower
than American whites, they were therefore lower in intelligence and
should receive special schooling accordingly. lensen's arguments relied
almost entirely on Burt's statistics; and we know how reliable they
were. But the reason why he achieved such acclaim was because he was
putting a pseudo-scientific gloss on a political issue: legitimising the
views of racists that black people were 'inferior', and providing a
rationalisation for those who were objecting to their children attending
mixed schools. His views are still quoted as 'proof of the supposed
inferiority of blacks in National Front propaganda. It is worth noting,
incidentally, that ever since the very first IQ tests were developed,
girls have scored more highly than boys, and women than men; but this
mean difference in IQ scoring was simply dealt with by adjusting the
population norms of the tests. A girl has to answer more questions

The Polities 0/ Nature and Nurture

135

correctly than a boy to get the same IQ score. If the IQ difference
between blacks and whites was so important, why didn't they simply
adjust the population norms? Three guesses ... Eugenies

But all of this hides the main issue. When we are looking at the
nature/nurture debate on intelligence, the key word is one which appears
only peripherally in the textbooks: eugenies. Eugenic theory was
developed by Francis Galton at the end of the last century, and it is
directly linked with the concept of inherited intelligence. In his book
Hereditary Genius, Galton described a number of families of eminent
Victorians (he hirnselfwas a cousin ofCharles Darwin). He then argued
that, since intelligence clearly ran in families, it must therefore' be
inherited, overlooking entirely the idea that families also provide
environments for their children to grow up in. Galton went on to observe
with alarm that the 'lower classes' in society were breeding
prolifically, and argued that this would result in a lowering of the
overall intelligence of the nation, or of the race. Therefore, he
argued, in the interests of the future progression of the human race,
inferior people, such as those of low intelligence, should be sterilised
to prevent them from having children. All this might simply seem like,
and is often presented as, a rather undesirable eccentricity in someone
who was otherwise a respected academic figure. But it actually goes much
further than that. Galton's ideas were far from eccentric. Indeed, they
became so widely accepted, and so deeply ingrained into society that
laws which enforced compulsory sterilisation of those with low IQs were
passed by several American states. Moreover, these laws continued to be
implemented - for example, in the state of Virginia - right up until
1972. Eugenic principles of weeding out undesirables to encourage
genetic 'progress' also underlay the massive extermination programme
conducted by the Third Reich, and the American sterilisation programmes
were taken by Hitler as a model of desirable social reform. The Nazis
linked eugenics with a spurious form of evolutionary theory, which held
that

136

Psychology in Perspective

human races had 'evolved' in a sequential order, with each stage being
more advanced than the last. In this model, for which no scientific
evidence was ever found, blacks were considered to be the most
'primitive', and the Aryan race the most 'advanced'. For the Nazis,
therefore, 'miscegenation', or racial mixing, was a serious crime.
Following GaIton's eugenic principles, they saw it as weakening the
genetic stock of the human being and hindering the ultimate evolution of
the 'superman'. They were particularly hostile to Jewish people, because
they saw them as being genetically inferior but elose enough to Aryan
stock to make 'miscegenation' a serious problem. As we have seen,
Kallman's argument for the sterilisation of schizophrenics was also
based on eugenic principles. So, far fropl eugenics being an academic
theory, or the eccentricities of a Victorian academic, it has been
directly responsible for the deaths of miIlions of people and the
compulsory sterilisation of tens of thousands more. Francis Galton's
eugenic ideas reverberated throughout this century, and are still
propagated by the National Front and similar neo-fascist organisations.
The groundwork for them lies in nativist arguments: the theory of
inherited intelligence. But, as we have seen, these are fraught with
problems. We see this question of ideology coming up again when we take
a look at one of the most influential social biologists of this century:
the ethologist Konrad Lorenz. Lorenz was an Austrian, a member of the
Nazi party, and a supporter of the Final Solution, which was the Nazis'
euphemism for the extermination of the Jewish people. Lorenz developed a
theory of innate aggression which became widely accepted in both
psychology and biology. In it, he portrayed aggression as an innate
quality in all animals, ineluding human beings, which had to have an
outlet because it was continually building up. It could be sublimated
into sports, he believed, or into other competitive activities, but its
existence was the reason why human beings had wars and territorial
disputes. Effectively, as you can see, Lorenz was restating the
Hobbesian belief in the anti-social nature of humanity, and this time
giving it apparent credibility by citing instances of animal behaviour
which appeared to support it. By presenting

The Po/Wes of Nature and Nurture

137

aggression as a biological inevitability, Lorenz legitimised the
aggressive expansionism of Nazi Germany, and by setting it in an
evolutionary context, he legitimised their victimisation of weaker
members of society as being for the social good - as a form of 'survival
of the fittest'. Lorenz's reductionist explanation for wars would not be
shared by many people nowadays, although it was in keeping with its
time. It is commonly accepted that wars have an economic basis rather
than a personal one: if human beings were so 'naturally' aggressive,
they would hardly need the massive propaganda machine wh ich is involved
in any war. In fact, just look around and you'll find that human beings,
by and large, tend to try very hard to avoid aggressive confrontations -
most people will run a mile rather than say 'no' to someone's face. When
people do become violent or aggressive, we know that there is always
some other factor involved: either they are under pressure from so me
other source or they are in a highly aroused physiological state for
some reason. Lorenz's theory of aggression, however, makes much more
sense once we know about his connections with the Nazi party. As those
who have studied the psychology of emotion will realise, what we do
inherit is a nervous system which can become aroused; but how we
interpret that arousal depends on our circumstances. The same situation
may prövoke very different reactions, depending on a number of factors.
And people who experience low levels of personal stress or frustration
become demonstrably less aggressive. But if we see aggression as an
inherited drive, then we don't need to ask any embarrassing questions
about why people are feeling frustrated, or what has brought them to
this point: we can simply ignore street rioters or terrorists, without
having to ask ourselves what it is really all about. Politically
speaking, the concept of inherited aggression is an extremely useful
one. Problems of nativist arguments

One major problem of making a rigid distinction between nature and
nurture is that it ignores how organisms actually

138

Psychology in Perspective

develop - which is why geneticists have never been as enamoured with the
idea as psychologists were. The fundamental distinction which
geneticists make is between genotype and phenotype. The genotype is the
inherited 'blueprint' which is represented in the individual's gene
pattern, and which has been passed on from both parents. The phenotype,
on the other hand, is the characteristics which the individual actually
develops as they mature. It is not possible for the genotype to
determine what a person is like. The person emerges as a result of the
interaction between genotype and experience: if we look at a child or at
a grown person, what we see is the phenotype, not the genotype. Someone
may inherit tall stature and blond hair, for instance, and this may
result in her being treated socially in a manner wh ich is different
from those with short stature and dark hair. In that sense, the genotype
has been influential in her experience, since it has helped to produce
the phenotype that people are responding to. But the nature of that
influence will vary depending upon the kind of society in wh ich she
lives; the sub-culture within that society, the family relationships
which she has. One person with that kind of genotype may grow up
confident, poised and socially reassured; another may become timid,
lacking confidence and unwilling to attract attention. D. o. Hebb tried
to bring this point horne as far back as 1949, with his 'egg' analogy.
He pointed out that ifwe take the genotype away, there is no egg; but if
we remove the warm supporting environment, the egg dies. Nature cannot
be regarded as distinct from nurture; there is a dialectical
interrelationship between the two such that each is totally dependent on
the other. Nor does it make any sense to claim that the egg is 80 per
cent inherited or 60 per cent, or any other percentage: each side is
equally essential. Nativist arguments are by definition reductionist. By
saying that some aspect of development is caused by the genes, any
further explanation is precluded: there isn't anything else to say. It
leads to researchers, and politicians, ignoring - or regarding as
non-significant - the other influences, agencies or developments which
affect human life. It focusses on one level of explanation and simply
ignores the rest. I have dealt with

The PolWes of Nature and Nurture

139

the problems of reductionism as a form of argument elsewhere (see
Chapter 1), and, as with other examples, it's the lack of consideration
of other levels of explanation which is the most important problem. By
ignoring all other levels, nativist arguments produce a completely
static model of the human being: one which presents human nature as
fixed and unchangeable. And what these arguments do, therefore, is act
to support the status quo. The view that intelligence is fixed means
that there's no need to do anything about better education for those who
are 'less capable'. The idea that mental illness is inherited means that
we don't have to look at the social pressures that people are under. And
the idea that people are innately aggressive means that we obviously
need to keep them under tight control with strict law and order. What is
particularly revealing in all of this, of course, is the way that
exposes make so little difference. When Burt was shown to be a fraud,
the hereditarians kept on arguing their points regardless; Marshall's
paper in the BPS Bulletin which showed the methodological problems of
Kallman's studies went almost completely ignored; Kamin's criticisms of
the adoption and family studies in intelligence have been similarly
ignored. It is a powerful paradigm, which commands a great deal of media
support, and its power lies precisely in its political overtones. As we
have seen, -these are not just academic theories. Nazi Germany showed us
the logical outcome of a society organised purely around nativist
principles. We should take warning from this. An interactionist
perspective, on the other hand, looks to improving sodal conditions to
facilitate social change. And this leads us to one of the most important
questions: are human beings fixed, or can they change? A wide body of
evidence shows that they can. The nativist view, though, is that change
is impossible, or at least only to a limited extent. I do not,
personally, find any adequate evidence for this view. But we don't need
to choose between nativism and empiricism: it is our phenotypes, not our
genotypes, which we use to interact with the world. All of us have an
inherited biology which channels us in certain directions: we are

140

Psychology in Perspective

partieularly sensitive to social signals from others, even from the
eradle; we leam quiekly, we use our hands rather than our feet to
manipulate objeets, and so on. These are aspeets of the biology of our
speeies. There are biologieal dimensions to individual differenees too:
some babies have a more labile autonomie nervous system than others, and
so are more easily aroused; others respond more quiekly to novel stimuli
than others; some babies like to be euddled and some don't. But these
are differenees in temperament. How they aetually beeome expressed
varies, depending on how we interaet with our social and phy\~ieal
environment. Someone with a highly labile autonomie nervous system might
grow up to be an energetie, eharismatie publie speaker; or an anxious,
nervous introvert. Someone who enjoys novelty may beeome a eurious
inventor, or an avid fashion-follower. The genotype doesn't determine
the phenotype, although it may point us in eertain direetions rather
than others. The potential for growth and development always remains.

10 The 'Magie' of Soeiobiology When E. o. Wilson's Sociobiology: The New
Synthesis was first launched in 1975, its arrival was greeted with
immense excitement on the part of the media as wen as within the
academic world. As a theory, it provided a comprehensive even global-
set of 'explanations' of the human condition and human societies, in a
respectably tentative, academic way. Moreover, it had the ultimate claim
to credibility: the theory was, we were told, scientific - drawing on
evidence from experts in the worlds of biology and ethology, and
presenting its conclusions in a suitably scientific manner, using
mathematical models derived from game theory to present a convincing
series of numbers, tables and diagrams. The large, coffee-table-style
book was an instant hit, resulting in articles in such publications as
Readers' Digest, House and Garden Magazine, and many others. At the same
time, it became widely read within the academic world, and while debated
hotly by many, was readily accepted by many more working academics. The
book's influence was immense. Sociobiological explanations of behaviour
became common in the popular media. While articles drawing on biological
origins for human behaviour have always been around, Richard Dawkins
replaced Desmond Morris as the mass media's guru of biological
determinism. In the academic field, some biologists even claimed that
sociobiology was the third phase of evolutionary theory: that an current
thinking must, inevitably, fit into this framework. (Others, needless to
say, disagreed.) Sociobiological arguments also crept into psychology:
social psychologists toyed with sociobiological explanations for
problems such as why people seem to lend money more 141

142

Psychology in Perspective

readily to relatives than to friends; right-wing psychologists put
forward sociobiologically-based theories to 'explain' racism and
xenophobia in society, on the basis of genetic similarity. In short, the
celebrations at the launch of E. O. Wilson's book were well-justified -
it was indeed a highly influential and best-selling theory, with even
Dawkins's small popular paperback The Selfish Gene to carry the message
further to the elamouring masses. Sociobiological theory

But what of the theory itself? Sociobiology attempts to explain both
human and animal behaviour by placing it firmly within an evolutionary
context. Wilson assumes (or rather, states explicitly) that all animal
behaviour is directly coded in the genes. He goes on to assert that both
animal and human behaviour are directly concerned, not with the survival
of the individual, but with the survival of that individual's genes.
Animals are considered to be simply biological mechanisms by which genes
perpetuate themselves - and so are human beings. Although the
extrapolation to human behaviour was limited to just one tentative final
chapter of the book Sociobiology, Wilson's later publication On Human
Nature showed that he saw human beings as following the same 'genetic
imperatives'. Wilson formulated sociobiological theory as a result of
his research into ant societies, in which he had observed that
individuals would often sacrifice their own lives to ensure the survival
of others. Since this could not be explained using conventional
evolutionary models, Wilson proposed that what was important was the
fact that elose relatives had a high proportion of their genes. This
mirrored some observations by the biologist J. B. S. Haldane, who
reputedly, during an conversation ab out altruism in a pub, made some
rapid calculations on the back of an envelope, and announced: 'I will
lay down my life for two brothers or eight cousins' (Gould, 1978). Since
brothers have half of their genes in common, and cousins have an eighth,
these figures theoretically expressed the minimal requirement for an
individual to ensure that their genes would survive.

The 'Magie' of Sociobiology

143

This version of evolutionary theory, therefore, was genetic determinism
in its most extreme form. Rather than being seen as acting to maximise
their own individual survival, individual animals (and humans) were now
seen as acting to maximise genetic survival. As a result, even
altruistic actions - prevously ignored by genetic determinists, who
construed individual survival pure1y in terms of conflict and
aggression - could be explained as manifestations of the 'selfish gene'
, through the concept of kin se1ection - and were. Despite its
popularity, however, sociobiology made a number of claims to academic
validity which do not really stand up to a good close scrutiny. Despite
its scientific veneer, sociobiology is not an academically sound theory
r\~sting firmlyon scientific evidence. Rather, sociobiology, as a system
of explanation, is fundamentally both magical and unscientific. These
terms need some explanation. First, what do I mean by 'magical'? When I
say that, in terms of its explanations, a framework is magical, I am
using a set of criteria concerning magical, as opposed to scientific,
explanations, which can be stated fairly explicitly as follows: 1.
Magical explanations do not re1y on material evidence ('facts'). 2.
Magical explanations re1y on the invocation ofaxioms mystical formulae -
which are used to account for events which occur. 3. By virtue of these
mystical formulae, magical explanations for events prec1ude further
investigation - they are considered to be totally self-sufficient
explanations which do not require further questioning. Sociobiology, as
an explanatory system, conforms to all three of these criteria. When I
say that sociobiology is unscientific, I am also drawing on a set of
criteria concerning the nature of scientific explanation, which can be
stated as follows: 1. Scientific explanation is fundamentally
materialist In nature, resting on empirical data.

144

Psychology in Perspective

2.  Scientific explanations take the form of theories, which are put
    forward as possible explanations for events, but which are refutable
    in the event of alternative empirical data becoming available.
3.  Scientific explanations give rise to predictions, which can be
    tested against reality as further investigation of the theory.
    Although these criteria may be perceived as slightly idealised, in
    terms of the actual practice of science by scientists (see, for
    example, Kuhn, 1962), they nonetheless summarise a set of
    assumptions held about science, by those within it, as weH as those
    .outside. Sociobiology, despite its claims to scientific
    respectability, does not conform to these criteria, and so must be
    regarded, in these terms, as unscientific.

Sociobiological explanation

The first argument against sociobiological explanation is that it does
not rest itself on empirical data, as currently available. Rather, it
selects its data from among a wealth of investigations, choosing only
that which confirms its own arguments, and ignoring or dismissing the
rest with little justification. The primary evidence of sociobiological
explanation is ethological observations of animal behaviour. In one form
or another these have been in vogue for the whole of the century, and a
considerable bank of studies has accumulated. In Sociobiology, Wilson
drew heavily on his own studies of slavery in ants, and, foHowing the
weH-established traditions of such writers as Robert Ardrey and Desmond
Morris, generalised his conclusions to the rest of the animal kingdom,
inc1uding, by implication, humans. Having shown that ants, bees and
wasps were prepared to commit individual suicide in defence of their
colonies, he explained this in terms of their 'genes' surviving in the
bodies of those relatives who were successfully defended. He then stated
that the same mechanisms operate - or 'appear' to operate, in higher
mammals, and

The 'Magie' 0/ Sociobiology

145

went on to argue that the genetic explanation must also be true of
humans on the grounds that human beings, too, must have evolved in
small, close1y-related communities. It can be seen that there are many
flaws in this line of argument, not the least of which being the
question of what the mammalian brain is for, which I shall discuss later
on in this chapter. But a very real question is, 'Why ants?'. Wilson
claimed to be arguing from an evolutionary perspective, and yet ignored,
for his most fundamental arguments, studies of animals which are
evolutionarily much closer to the human being. While it wouldn't
necessarily be true to say that insects are as phylogenetically as far
away from humans as you can get, it is certainly true to say that their
evolution has proceeded along very different lines from that of the
mammals. Behavioural mechanisms which appear to parallel those of
mammals are not necessarily the same at all. Analogy doesn't mean
homoiogy - looking similar doesn't me an being the same thing. Evidence
from the higher mammals in sociobiological reasoning tends to be rather
conspicuous by its absence, with sociobiologists much preferring to take
their examples from insects, birds and fish. When mammals are used, the
evidence is very highly se1ective indeed: an example quoted by Dawkins
on surrogate parenting, for instance, rests on precise1y two cases: that
male mice secrete a pheromone which causes females who are pregnant with
offspring not re1ated to that male to abort; and that new male lions
joining a pride will sometimes kill the young cubs. He then uses this to
support an elaborate argument about male control of female reproduction,
the advantages of a long courtship (making sure the fern ale isn't
already pregnant by somebody else), monogamy, and so on. On those
observations of mammals adopting, or caring for, non-re1ated
individuals, such as baboon 'aunts', or mongooses, his only comment is
that the rule must be 'misfiring'. In other words, if it doesn't fit the
explanation, it doesn't really count. However, the diversity of
behavioural patterns and social organisational strategies in the animal
kingdom is vast: to dismiss what is turning out to be a very large
number of ethological studies in such a summary fashion cannot be

146

Psychology in Perspective

acceptable in a theory which purports to have global application.
However, such a form of argument becomes justifiable in sociobiological
terms, I contend, because sociobiology does not form a scientific
theory. Rather, it forms a series of assertions about what 'ought to
be', rather than what 'is' . Its proponents, of course, hotly dispute
this. Both Wilson and Dawkins issue warnings that straightforward
descriptions of what 'is' should not be taken as justifying their
continuance. At the same time, though, they make it quite c1ear that
they regard any attempts to be different as a struggle against our
biological nature. The 'natural' tendency of the human being, according
to the sociobiologists, is towards such endearing qualities as
xenophobia, aggressive territoriality, rigid sexual distinctions, and
altruism only as long as it has some sort of pay-off for the altruist.
Other forms of human societies may be possible, they admit, but they
give the distinct impression that this would be at a biological cost
rather akin to walking around on all fours. When they are faced with
their arguments in this sort of form, it is not uncommon for
sociobiologists to retreat into the defence that they are not c1aiming
that genes determine human behaviour, only that they determine a
possible range of human behaviours. But any kind of behaviour which has
been shown by human beings must be biologically possible, otherwise we
wouldn't be able to do it. Flying without artificial aids, for instance,
is notably absent in the repertoire of recorded human achievements. But
stable forms of human society, or instances of human behaviour which do
not conform to the assumptions made within sociobiology, do exist and
have existed in the past. Once again we are back to the question of
selectivity of evidence, and it is notable that the evidence from human
societies selected by sociobiological theorists just 'happens' to
coincide with assumptions ab out human nature considered appropriate for
Western industrial society, even though they are totally inappropriate
for many other cultures in the world. As an 'explanation' for the ills
of Western society, it fits the bill admirably: of course new
step-parents find it difficult adjusting to their new children! Nothing
to do with different

The 'Magie' of Sociobiology

147

family practices or beliefs - it's simply that they are going against
their 'selfish gene,' which is pressurising them to do away with any
riyal offspring! Of course, the clear implication is that it would have
been much better if the original parents had never divorced in the first
place. These fundamentally prescriptive and subtly moralistic
assumptions of sociobiology permeate the arguments. Often, they reveal
themselves most clearly, not in the actual statements made, but in the
language selected to make them in. For example, starting from tentative
introductions, replete with caveats, Richard Dawkins goes on to argue a
chain of reasoning wh ich inevitably ends in the word 'must': 'We must
expect lies and deceit, and selfish exploitation of communication to
arise whenever the interests of the genes of different individuals
converge ... \[so\] ... we must expect that children will deceive their
parents, that husbands will cheat on wives, and that brother will lie to
brother' (Dawkins, 1976, p.70). As I previously remarked, these
statements are not made without caveats: at another stage in the book
Dawkins states: 'If there is a human moral to be drawn, it is that we
must teach our children altruism, for we cannot expect it to be part of
their biological nature' (Dawkins, 1976, p. 149). Nonetheless, they are
made, and moreover made in a way which presents them as the logical
outcomes of a process of scientific reasoning. And the negative
assertions far outweigh the caveats, in linguistic power as weH as in
frequency. This brings us on to the question of sociobiological
methodology. In most sciences, the accepted methods of scientific
enquiry are to do with deriving some kind of hypo thesis from a theory,
and then testing out that hypo thesis by some form of experimentation,
or observational study. This, however, is not the case with
sociobiology. Rather than being predictive in its approach, and
formulating hypotheses which can then be tested, sociobiological
argument is retrospective in nature. It starts with an assertion ab out
some form of behaviour - in the case of humans, one which is supposed to
be 'universal' (although that in many cases is open to question). From
there, it proceeds to 'explain' that behaviour, first by postulating a
gene which could account for

148

Psychology in Perspective

its occurrence, and then by seeking an evolutionary story which shows
how that gene could be shown to be adaptive. It can be seen from this
that, providing the theorist is inventive enough, any form of behaviour
can be 'explained', but the circularity of its reasoning is striking.
There is no way of ever refuting these arguments, since they are
entirely circular: the 'universal' behaviour is seen as both the effect
and the cause of the 'gene'. If an important characteristic of
scientific theories is that they should be open to refutation, then a
process which uses this form of methodology cannot be considered to be
scientific, as it cannot be refuted. One is reminded of some
psychoanalytic theories, also postulated as 'scientific' in an earlier
time, and just as circular.

Soeiobiology as magie

Rather than being a form of scientific investigation, sociobiological
reasoning is actually much more akin to the invocation of magical axioms
to 'explain' events. In sociobiology, the magical axiom is the 'gene',
rather than the spell, or the curse, but as a general-purpose concept it
is just as useful. When we examine how sociobiologists use the word
'gene', we can see that it bears Httle resemblance to the phenomenon
investigated by geneticists - and indeed, some of the most vociferous
criticisms of sociobiology have come from the field of genetics, rather
than sociology or psychology. Genes

In The Selfish Gene, having stated that 'We can define a word how we
like for our own purposes, provided we do so clearly and unambiguously'
(Dawkins, 1976, p. 30), Dawkins defines a gene as a unit of natural
selection. However, in genetic terms, a gene is a portion of chromosomal
material which brings about a particular protein synthesis in the
organism, and his comment about defining words is made precisely because
he is not using the word with this meaning. A unit of

The 'Magie' of Sociobiology

149

natural selection may be something else altogether, and at the very
least is likely to be a combination of genes rather than one specific
one. In other words, both Dawkins and Wilson take a word with a highly
specific biological meaning, and use it with a very much vaguer, and
ultimately indefinable (except circularly) meaning. What this strategy
does is to give an apparently scientific precision to the theory, and
therefore to increase its apparent plausibility. But there is little
scientific justification for doing so. If one attempts to get specific
about what a gene actuaHy does, then the magical nature of the concept
becomes even more apparent. No attempt is made to move from the level of
protein synthesis to behaviour: such connections are taken for granted.
If an organism carries the necessary genes for that particular
behaviour, then that behaviour happens. The 'gene' does it, it seems,
quite magicaHy. We are, however, as yet very far from an understanding
of how neurochemistry and cognition interrelate, and our assumptions ab
out these mechanisms are grossly immature. But one thing that we can say
is that modern brain research is showing more and more evidence for a
dialectical interrelationship between cognitions, environment and
neurochemistry, in which each affects the other reciprocally. As a
result, it is becoming clear that simplistic statements involving our
biology 'causing' our behaviour don't hold up very weH in real life.
Perhaps it is just as weH that sociobiology hasn't actuaHy attempted to
deal with this question, but it doesn't make their use of the word
'gene' any less magical. Kin seleetion

The concept of kin selection, while perhaps being rather more specific
in nature, also provides sociobiology with an opportunity to 'explain'
anything, or pretty weH anything, to do with human behaviour. Since
human beings 'must' have evolved in smaH, closely-related groups, any
behaviour which involves humans being nice to one another can be seen as
deriving from kin-orientated altruism, while any behaviour

150

Psychology in Perspective

which involves humans being nasty to one another can be seen as direct
evolutionary competition. Either way, it 'must' be controlled by the
'genes'. Heads I win, tails you lose. Of course, if modern humans end up
being nice to totally unrelated strangers, this is simply because they
are applying the principle inappropriately. Wilson states that we should
consider the possibility that 'altruistic behaviours will dec1ine
through the loss of group selection, a process that could spread over
perhaps two or three centuries'. (Incidentally, the time-scale here
makes one wonder how fast Wilson thinks human beings reproduce, and, at
least to me, reinforces my conviction that he sees evolution as a
magical - certainly not gradual- event.) There is much more that can be
said about sociobiological reasoning: its use of metaphor, for instance,
which confuses any attempt at scientific interpretation of animal
observation by using human analogies, often inappropriately. As Rose
(1984) asked: just how does a 'totally captive, force-fed eggbearing
machine have any resemblance to Elizabeth 1 or Catherine the Great'?
There is also the issue of reductionist explanation per se, but we
looked at that in some detail in Chapter 1, and elsewhere in this book.
I think that we have seen enough to be able to return to the original
assertion, that sociobiology is magical and unscientific. On the
question of magical explanations, then, we have seen that sociobiology
does not rest on material evidence, or at least only on highly selective
versions of it. Hs central concept, the gene, is not the one understood
by geneticists, but is more of an axiom which is evoked as if it were an
explanation. Because of the all-embracing nature of its explanatory
constructs, it prec1udes further investigation, both of other causes of
behaviour, and of processes within the individual which might give rise
to specific behaviours. So in terms of the criteria outlined at the
beginning of this chapter, it conforms weIl with magical belief-systems.
However, when we turn to the scientific criteria, we find that
sociobiological explanation rests on a process of reasoning by analogy
rather than material evidence, that its 'explanations' are not refutable
because it is aIl-embracing, and that it operates by retrospective
deduction rather than by

The 'Magie' of Sociobiology

151

prediction. This hardly accords well with its claim to be a scientific
theory.

Evolution and behaviour: an alternative view It seems to me, and has
done since my undergraduate days,

that one problem which ethologists consistently fail to come to terms
with is the question of what the brain is for. Lip-service is paid to
the idea that the more complicated brain has developed because it he1ps
the individual to adapt to its environment better, but the full
implications of that idea are rarely explored. In this argument, I am
concerned primarily with the development of that part of the brain which
shows its most striking development in the primates and cetaceans: the
cerebrum. To be more specific, it is the question of the cerebral cortex
which is the main focus of attention. If we draw up an approximate
phylogenetic scale, ranking groups of species in terms of their
relatedness to human beings, and excluding cetaceans, because we don't
really know very much about their behaviour, we find a dramatic increase
in the size of the cerebrum - and particularly in the cerebral cortex.
In fish and reptiles, the forebrain, the precursor of the cerebrum, is
relative1y sm all by comparison with other structures of the brain. In
birds, it is the largest of the structures, but still not very large.
With mammals, the cerebrum as we know it appears, and as we move through
marsupials and higher mammals, to monkeys, then apes, then humans, we
find a consistent and impressive development in its structure (Figure
1O.l), (Hubei, 1979). The surface of the cerebrum becomes larger and
larger, convolutions appear, and the cerebral cortex comes to overshadow
all the other brain structures. So an evolutionary theorist is faced
with the question of why should this be? What function does this
structure serve, that its development in phylogenetic terms should be so
striking? Many of the functions of the cerebral cortex are listed in the
standard textbooks. We know that it mediates language in

152

Psychology in Perspective

STAIPED !JASS

.------\~

\_

L.EDMRD FIIOG

CEREBRUM

\~\~ \~

1.:.:.''::

GRASS SHAKE

:R\~

-1-'~-~ \~:

CEREBRUM

CHlMPAHZEE

MACAQUE IIIOHKEY

CER.!:BRUM
:   . --

..

\_

\_.-

\~

L"" ,\~\~

J

(

.\~

I

## ):\~\~

-\~I

\~

:   \~ ,'!'":

. '.'. .. "'"-c\<oINf!

Figure 10.1

Evolutionary development 0/ the brain

PlGEON

The 'Magie' 0/ Sociobiology

153

OPOSSUM

,\

, -\~., '

Source: D.H. Hube) (1979) 'The brain', Scientific American, 214(3),
44-53.

154

Psychology in Perspective

human beings, that it is involved with interpreting sensory information,
although the primary decoding seems to take place elsewhere in the
brain, that it initiates voluntary movement, although this also is
coordinated elsewhere in the brain, that it is involved with our
experience of emotions, in conjunction with other systems, and that it
seems to be the main organ responsible for learning and memory, although
other structures are involved in this as well. In short, the cerebral
cortex seems to be a high-level informationprocessor, which can control,
coordinate and mediate the organism's interaction with the environment.
Most importantly, it allows the organism to 1earn from its experience.
With the development of learning, an individual organism can adapt its
behaviour to take account of new circumstances. All animals can learn to
some extent, but it is clear that some can modify their behaviour to a
greater extent than others and those are the ones which have the more
highly developed cerebral cortex. In evolutionary terms, of course, this
confers a definite advantage on an animal which may be living in widely
different environments. If you can adapt your behaviour to new
circumstances rapidly, then you are more likely to survlve. Of course,
if you happen to be a species living in a relatively stable environment,
or with a social structure which maintains a stable environment for the
key individuals, then this isn't likely to be very important. Ants may
live in many places on the earth, but the structure of their colonies
ensures that they maintain a very stable environment for their breeding
females. Species which live in consistent habitats, as do many birds,
also have little reason to evolve a high level of adaptability. (Note
that in this discussion I am thinking of animal behaviour only - plants
and bacteria are not featured in this argument!) Learning, however, is
only important as long as you do something about it. In other words,
learning must result in a change in behaviour, so that in some way you
are now acting differently than you did before. And if your behaviour
patterns have already been fixed by some other mechanism, you will find
a conflict - the same conflict that Lorenz and Tinbergen saw when they
subjected fish and birds to

The 'Magie' 0/ Sociobiology

155

inappropriate stimuli and elicited fixed, stereotyped responses from
them. Behaviour which is genetically determined is, by definition,
fixed, at least within any one individual, although it may evolve
gradually across many generations into a different pattern. We can argue
that the phylogenetic development of the cerebral cortex in mammals
represents a fundamental change in the acquisition of behavioural
patterns. As we move higher up the phylogenetic scale (treat this idea
with caution: it really doesn't imply that all evolution is aiming to
produce human beings!), we find an increasing dependence on learned
behaviour, and a decreasing reliance on inherited patterns of behaving.
The increased size of the cerebral cortex allows for a greater emphasis
on learning in the course of the individual's development. This goes
hand in hand with neoteny - the tendency for species higher up the
phylogenetic scale to be born at an increasingly early stage in their
life cyc1es, which means that the young have a far longer period of
dependency (during which they are learning all the time). I am not
implying here that genes have nothing to do with development. It is our
genes, after all, which tell us to grow these highly convoluted brains.
Rather I am suggesting that we see a progressive decrease in direct
genetic control of behaviour, as we move higher up the phylogenetic
scale. Moreover, this is a systematic evolutionary change with definite
survival advantages for the individual. In some ways this is similar to
Dawkins's idea that sometimes genes hold behaviour 'on a very long
leash'. But I am also arguing that by the time you get to apes and
humans, the leash has become so long that to talk of human behaviour as
if it were genetically determined is just nonsense. I think, also
(though this is rather more tentative), that we can trace the gradual
abdication of direct control of behaviour by the genes through aseries
of intermediate stages. We can see a gradual progression through fish,
birds, and mammals, from rigidly fixed behaviours (such as courtship
rituals in sticklebacks and grebes), to generally fixed but modifiable
behaviours (such as songbirds with regional 'accents' but the same basic
pattern), to general tendencies towards certain forms of behaviours but
which are increasingly modified by

156

Psychology in Perspective

the individuals' experience (such as emotional reactions in domestic
pets). Much work, recently, has shown how animals are prepared to engage
in certain forms of learning rather than others. This ranges from
Seligman's early observations of one-trial leaming with regard to food,
to Gould and Marler's seminal discussion of how leaming in bees, birds,
and other animals appears to be shaped according to the important
features of that animal's environment. Bees leam to identify food
sources by scent very easily indeed; they leam to identify them by
colour somewhat less easily, and will never leam them by shape. Birds
respond most readily to sounds which have the physical characteristics
of the adult song of their species. And humans respond most readily to
sounds with the physical characteristics of the human voice. We mayaiso
be seeing a progression, as the genes abdicate direct control of
behaviour, in the amount of influence they exert. As Lorenz so
convincingly demonstrated, young birds acquire their behaviours from
their caretakers, but only during a particular period of time - a
sensitive period (nee critical). Other precocial species seem to do this
too, but those with young which are dependent for longer periods of time
seem to have a longer period of readiness for this kind of leaming, and
to base it more on interactions and transactions with the parent.
Indeed, by the time we come to look at human infants, we find that their
most striking predispositions are towards sociability. The human infant
seems to be born preprogrammed to respond to other human beings, and the
attachment bond develops gradually through social interaction with
others, not appearing in its full form until the infant is about seven
months old. Through this prolonged period of dependency, the human
gradually leams appropriate behaviours for the things which it will
encounter in its environment, and the large cerebral cortex means that
it will continue to leam throughout its life. In the retreat of direct
genetic control of behaviour to a generalised disposition to leam from
one's caretakers, we see an increase in reliance on leamed behaviours
but without the evolutionary cost that leaming from scratch by trial and
error would produce.

The 'Magie' of Sociobiology

157

I do not think that we need to postulate explanations for human
behaviour in sociobiological terms. Why would we have such a large
capacity for learning, if how we should behave was already fixed? It
seems to me that ifwe are looking for an understanding of human beings
in evolutionary terms, then we should do so in terms ofthe infant's
tendency towards sociability, rather than looking at particular
behaviours (usually specific to Western culture anyway), and then seeing
if they are 'adaptive' and arguing that they must therefore be genetic.
The wide variability of human behaviour has barely been explored - even
within Western culture - and it is difficult to find 'universals' which
will truly hold up for all human societies, let alone all human beings
within those societies. One further point, which I think is another very
much undernoticed one. The human cerebral cortex has various areas which
appear to have specific functions, although much of it is 'silent' - in
other words, any functions specific to these areas are unknown. One of
the areas with a specific role is known as the angular gyrus. Its
function seems to be explicitly to do with reading. The angular gyrus is
involved in passing information from the visual cortex to Wernicke's
area, which is concerned with interpreting speech. In the process, it
converts the visual message into the equivalent of auditory input. So we
seem to have an area of the brain devoted specifically to reading. My
point is this: written language has not existed in human culture for
long enough - let alone been universal - to have meant that we needed to
evolve a special mechanism for it. The ability to read has never been
the basis for species survival, and it is only in the past hundred years
that mass literacy has even become a social goal. Literacy has, for the
most part of human history , been restricted to a small elite. So how
could we have evolved a physical part of the brain for reading? However,
this part of the brain exists. To me, this implies that what we inherit
when we inherit the human brain is an organ which can adapt -
physiologically - to entirely new types of situations. Colin Blakemore
(1984) showed how the visual cells in the cortex can adopt modified
functions in

158

Psychology in Perspective

response to alternative environmental stimuli, and other animal studies
have shown how brain weight may be increased by enriched environments
(for example, Rosenzweig and Bennett, 1976). We have nuclei in the brain
which give us the potential, and our experience either allows us to
develop that potential or it doesn't. If we think of the brain, not so
much in terms of structures which have evolved for a purpose, but in
terms of structures which give us the potential for learning and
adapting our behaviour, we may be able to understand the wide variety of
human behaviour a great deal better. Not only that, but we are also in a
better position to understand the wide variability in animal behaviour,
such as variable social organisations within the same species of mammal.
Rather than having to ignore or dismiss studies of non-hierarchical
organisation in baboon societies, or wide flexibility in the different
behaviours of chimpanzees, we are in a position to make sense of them
instead. So why is sociobiology so popular?

One reason, of course, is that sociobology provides a very
straightforward set of easy answers to questions, wh ich, in a society
based on instant gratification, is always appealing. By reducing human
behaviour down to one level - the action of the genes - things seem to
'make sense', at least at first. As we saw in Chapter 1, reductionist
explanations of human behaviour, by making things look very simple, have
an appeal all of their own. By ignoring all the other levels on which a
human can operate, they streamline the question enormously. The problem,
though, is just how valuable their 'explanation' is, if, for instance,
we wanted to do something daring like sort out the problem. For example,
if asked to explain wife-beating, a sociobiologist's answer is simple:
the man is simply expressing the aggression natural towards someone who
doesn't share the same genes. If, on the other hand, I was asked the
same question, I could only answer on a whole series of levels: in terms
of the patriarchal nature of power relationships in our

The 'Magie' 01 Sociobiology

159

society; socioeconomic pressures and frustrations coming to a head;
cognitive mismatches between the two of them in terms of their
understanding of issues; and so on, which would take much longer and
leave us with much more uncomfortable conc1usions. Another reason for
sociobiology being so popular (you see, I even have to answer this on
aseries of levels), is that it falls into the well-established Western
philosophical tradition of Cartesian dualism. Ever since Descartes put
forward his view of the mind and the body as entirely separate things,
and of the body as a machine, the Western world has adopted this line of
thought - one reason, of course, why medicine has so much of a problem
coming to terms with acupuncture and other holistic forms of medicine.
The idea of the body as a machine blindly programmed by its selfish
genes keeps our thinking weIl within this tradition. Add to this
Descartes's insistence that all animal behaviour is totally mechanistic,
stir in a bit of evolutionary theory - at least enough to say that
humans are really 'only' animals - and we have a tasty brew, going down
nicely with conventional ideas about human bodies and animal behaviour.
So perhaps another reason for the popularity of sociobiology is that it
doesn't really cause any uncomfortable rethinking or re-evaluation to go
on. We also have to look at just which sort of conclusions sociobiology
produces. Again, we find that these are weIl in line with conventional
Western assumptions about the nature of human beings (perhaps in this
context I should say 'Man'), drawing as they do conc1usions about
patriarchy, xenophobia and aggression being 'natural' and inevitable. If
sociobiological theory had ended with conclusions wh ich suggested that
all humans were 'naturally' co operative and gentle - so mething which
would be perfectly legitimate within the sociobiological method, and
could be achieved simply by selecting different examples of animal
behaviour, and different 'universals' of human societies - its
popularity would have been negligible. This is because ideas or theories
which emphasise the basic sociability of the individual, rather than
competitiveness or aggression, are rarely considered newsworthy. If one
looks at the history of popularised scientific ideas, in contrast with

160

Psychology in Perspective

actual scientific debate, one finds a distinct tendency for those which
support the status quo to be taken up by the media, while contradictory
theories, even if wide1y accepted in the academic world, are usually
ignored. This, too, tells us something about the sociopolitical nature
of these arguments. The final reason I shall put forward for the
popularity of sociobiology is to do with the Zeitgeist - the spirit of
the times. There are some topics - child-rearing is one, animal
behaviour is another - which are, or at least seem to be, particularly
susceptible to reflecting social and economic changes. Different
theories arise at different times, and always when the economic c1imate
seems ripe for them. So during the latter part of the Victorian period
we had Spencer's Social Darwinism - 'nature red in tooth and c1aw' -
which was used to justify the survival of the fittest in economic terms,
and the neglect and abuse of poorer members of society. During the
1960s, with an expanding economy and a growing social awareness, we had
ethological theories which emphasised group cooperation through
dominance hierarchies and the like. With the gradual rise of Thatcherism
in Britain, and Reaganism in America, the harsher economic c1imate
produced theories which concentrated on each looking after their own and
ignoring other members of the species, as reflected in the idea of kin
se1ection. Of course, this is not why Wilson wrote Sociobiology, but it
does he1p us to account for why sociobiological theory became so
popular, given its scientific weaknesses. A theory that accords with the
mood of the times is a theory that people are ready to accept, perhaps
far less critically than they might otherwise have done. As I said
earlier, I do not believe that we need to look to sociobiology for an
adequate understanding of human, or even higher mammal, behaviour.
Moreover, the nature of the conc1usions it draws are more than simply
invalid scientifically - in a social context they legitimise and make
acceptable ideas which are not only misleading about the potential and
nature of human beings, but also ultimately repressive. I do not believe
that we have yet begun to explore human potential. In that context,
adopting repressive theories which don't even have scientific validity
as a saving grace is entirely

The 'Magie' 0/ Sociobiology

161

counter-productive, if we really are trying to understand the human
being.

Glossary

The idea that people operate most effectively when they are active in
making their own decisions about their lives, and in carrying those
decisions through.

agency theory

Apart of the cerebral cortex of the brain which mediates reading,
receiving information from the visual cortex and converting it to the
equivalent of spoken language.

angular gyrus

The idea that all human knowledge derives from associating one small
item of information with another.

associationism

A theory which is concerned with the reasons that people give for why
things happen.

attribution theory

An emotional disorder in which the person is withdrawn and unable to
interact effectively with other people.

autism

A reductionist approach to psychology which assumed that overt behaviour
was the only possible or desirable subject of interest for
psychologists, and that all behaviour would eventually be reduced down
to links between stimulus and response.

behaviourism

The idea that human behaviour is entirely caused by our biology.

biological determinism

Descartes' idea that the mind and body are entirely distinct and
separate.

Cartesian dualism

The Gestalt principle of perception according to which we tend to
perceive complete, 'c1osed', objects rather than incomplete ones, even
if the stimulus itself is incomplete.

c10sure

The branch of psychology which is concerned with understanding how the
mi nd works, and how we process information.

cognitive psychology

The version of attribution theory which explains the reasons that we
give as the result of variations in consensus, consistency and
distinctiveness.

covariance theory

163

164 Glossary deindividuation An approach to explaining crowd behaviour
by arguing that the anonymity of belonging to a crowd results in people
behaving in a less inhibited and more impulsive fashion. dualism

See Cartesian dualism.

dyslexia In its strictest form, a brain disorder in which reading or the
perception of letters is abnormal. Also used more widely as a
sociallabel to justify bad spelling. empiricism An approach to
understanding the world which assumes that only information which can be
detected physically and measured should count as valid knowledge.
epistemology The study of what counts as knowledge, or as 'real'
information. ethogenics An approach to studying human social interaction
which emphasises the value of people's accounts of their experience, and
of the episode as the basic unit of study. ethological To do with
studying behaviour in its natural environment. eugenics An elitist
theory of human nature which proposes that those with 'inferior' genes
should be prevented from breeding so that those who are supposedly
'superior' will pass on their genes and improve the human race. Eugenics
was the basis for the Nazi concentration camps and the American
sterilisation laws. existentialist A philosophical approach which
emphasises the individual's responsibility for their own existence in
the world. genetic reductionism The idea that all human behaviour will
eventually be understood simply as a product of genetic influences.
genotype The genetic code contained in DNA sequences within the cell
nuc1eus of the body, which speIls out how the organism will grow and
develop, physically, in the appropriate environment. Gestalt psychology
A school of psychology which opposed the stimulus-response (S-R)
reductionism of the behaviourists and instead emphasised a human
tend\~ncy towards wholeness of experience and cognition. hereditarian A
type of theory which emphasises inherited mechanisms (e.g. in
intelligence) to the exc1usion, or minimisation, of other factors.

Glossary

165

hermeneutics The study of the nature of social meaning and
interpretation of human experience. humanism A school of thought which
emphasises the positive aspects of human nature, and sees human
potential as a reservoir of potentially positive energies.
interactionism The approach to understanding human and animal behaviour
which emphasises links between different levels of explanation, and is
therefore the opposite of reductionism. introspectionist An approach to
study which uses the method of looking 'inwards' to analyse or explore
the person's own mental state, beliefs or ideas. libido The sexual and
life-affirming energy which Freud initially saw as the energising factor
for all human behaviour. In later work, he added the idea of a
destructive energy: thanatos. Mendelian genetics The generally accepted
approach to genetics, in which genetic transmission is seen as occurring
at conception, by the combination of genes and chromosomes from the
parents, and with no further changes occurring to those genes during the
organism's lifetime. miscegenation The Nazi idea that the human race
would be weakened by breeding those with supposedly 'superior' with
those with supposedly 'inferior' genes. See eugenics. nativism An
approach which assumes that knowledge or abilities are innate, and do
not need to be learned. neurological reductionism The belief that all
human behaviour will eventually be understood as nothing but the action
of nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord. personal construct theory
An approach which emphasises the individual ways that people make sense
of, or construe, their personal worlds. phenotype The physical
characteristics which an individual develops, as evidence of the
interaction between their genetic structure and the environment in which
they have developed. pheromones Chemicals which are released into the
air by animals, which, when received by another animal, exert a direct
influence on its hormonal system and sometimes its behavioUf.

166 Glossary To do with the sequence of evolution through which a
particular species, or set of species, has passed.

phylogenetic

Deriving from the theories of the philosopher of science Karl Popper.

Popperian

To do with, or deriving from, the approach known as psychoanalysis, in
which the aim is to analyse the unconscious mind with a view to
identifying hidden meanings and motives.

psychoanalytic

An approach to understanding behaviour which focusses on one single
level of explanation and ignores others. The opposite of interactionism.

reductionism

An approach to understanding the world which avoids value-judgements,
and takes all frameworks or perspectives as having equal value.

relativism

The common abbreviation for stimulus-response, which was considered to
be the basic element in all learning by the behaviourists.

S-R

Amental disorder in which the person experiences a separation or split
from reality.

schizophrenia

The way that we think about and interpret social information and social
experience.

social cognition

A theory which emphasises how membership of social groups forms a
significant part of the self-concept, such that people sometimes respond
primarily as group members and not as individuals.

social identity theory

An approach to understanding social phenomena in terms of cumulative
factors, such as the number of people present, the immediacy or
otherwise of their presence, and the importance of those people to the
individual concerned.

social impact theory

An approach to understanding human behaviour which argues that human
social behaviour results purely from the sum of the actions of
individuals.

social reductionism

A theory which looks at how shared beliefs develop and are transmitted
among social groups, and how they serve an important function in
explaining reality, and in justifying social action.

social representation theory

A reductionist approach to explaining animal behaviour, sometimes
applied to humans, which argues that all

sociobiology

Glossary

167

behaviour is driven by units of survival referred to as 'genes' (not the
same as the biological concept), and that individuals and species are
nothing but mechanisms by which these 'genes' can perpetuate themselves.
thanatos The negative, destructive energy proposed by Freud as a
counterpart to the positive sexual energy known as libido, and invoked
in order to explain the destruction and camage of W orld War I in
psychoanalytic terms. Wernicke's area An area of the cerebral cortex
which, when damaged, produces problems in comprehending verbal
information. Zeitgeist The spirit, or mood, of the times.

Bibliography ABELSON, R. P. (1976) 'Script processing in attitude
formation and

decision making', in: J. S. Carroll and J. W. Payne (eds), Cognition and
Social Behavior (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum). ADORNO, T. W.,
FRENKEL-BRUNSWIK, G., LEVINSON, D. J. and SANFORD, R. N. (1950) The
Authoritarian Personality (New York: Harper). ALLPORT, F. H. (1924)
Social Psychology (Boston, Mass. : Houghton Miffiin). APPLEBY, M. (1985)
'Hawks, doves ... and chickens', New Scientist, 10 January 16-18.
ARDREY, R. (1966) The Territorial Imperative (New York: DelI). ARENDT,
H. (1963) Eichmann in Jerusalem: AReport on the Banality of Evil (New
York: Viking Press). ARGYLE, M. and CROSSLAND, J. (1987) 'The dimensions
of positive emotions' British Journal of Social Psychology, 26, 127-37.
ASCH, S. E. (1956) 'Studies of independence and conformity: a minority
of one against a unanimous majority', Psychological Monographs, 70(9)
BADDELEY, A. D. (1983) 'Working memory', Philosophical Translations
Royal Society of London B(302), 311-24. BANNISTER, D. and FRANSELLA, F.
(1976) Inquiring Man: The Psychology of Personal Constructs, 2nd edn
1980 (Harmondsworth: Penguin). BANYARD, P. (1989) 'Hillsborough',
Psychology News, 2(7), 4-9. BANYARD, P. (1991, 1992, 1993, etc.)
Personal communication. BARTLETT, F. C. (1932) Remembering (London:
Cambridge University Press). BATESON, G., JACKSON, D., HALEY, J. and
WEAKLAND, J. (1956) 'Towards a theory ofschizophrenia', Behavioural
Science, 4, 25164. BAUM RIND, D. (1964) 'Some thoughts on the ethics
ofresearch: after reading Milgram's study of obedience', American
Psychologist, 19,421-3. BENEWICK, R. and HOLTON, R. (1987) 'The peaceful
crowd: crowd solidarity and the Pope's visit to Britain', in G. Gaskell
and R. Benewick (eds), The Crowd in Contemporary Britain (London: Sage).

169

170

Bibliography

BETIELHEIM, B. (1943) 'Individual and mass behaviour in extreme

situations', Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 38, 417-52.

BLAKEMORE, C. (1984) 'The sensory worlds of animals and man',

Address delivered to the Annual Meeting of the Association for the
Teaching of Psychology, London 1984. BLAKEMORE, C. and COOPER, J. F.
(1970) 'Development of the brain depends on the visual environment',
Nature, 228, 477-8. BRITISH PSYCHOLOGICAL SOCIETY (1981) 'Principles
governing the employment of psychological tests', Bulletin of the
British Psychological Society, 34,317-18. BRITISH PSYCHOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(1985) 'Guidelines for the use of animals in research', Bulletin of the
British Psychological Society, 38,289-91. BRITISH PSYCHOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(1990) 'Revised ethical principles for research with human subjects',
The Psychologist, 3, 269-72. BROWN, G. W. and HARRIS, T. (1978) The
Social Origins of Depression: A Study of Psychiatrie Disorder in Women
(London: Tavistock). BRUNER, J. S. (1973) Beyond the Information Given:
Studies in the Psychology of Knowing (New York: W. W. Norton). BURT, C.
(1955) 'The evidence for the concept of intelligence', British Journal
of Educational Psychology, 25, 158-77. BURT, c. (1966) 'The genetic
determination of differences in intelligence: a study of monozygotic
twins reared together and apart', British Journal of Psychology, 57,
137-53. CHOMSKY, N. (1959) 'Review of Skinner's "Verbal Behaviour"',
Language, 35, 26-58. DAVIES, G., HAWORTH, G. and HIRSCHLER, S. (1992)
'Ethics in psychological research: guidelines for students at pre-degree
levels', Psychology Teaching: Journal of the Association for the
Teaching of Psychology, 1, 4-10. DAWKINS, R. (1976) The Selfish Gene
(Harmondsworth: Penguin). DE WAAL, F. B. M. (1989) Peacemaking Among
Primates (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press). DESCARTES, R.
(1637) Dioptrics (New York: Dover). DESCARTES, R. (1641) Meditations on
the First Philosophy (London: Everyman). DI GIACOMO, J. P. (1980)
'Intergroup alliances and rejections within a protest movement (analysis
of the social representations)', European Journal of Social Psychology,
10, 329--44. DOISE, W. (1984) 'Social representations, inter-group
experiments and levels of analysis', in R. M. Farr and S. Moscovici
(eds), Social Representations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).

Bibliography

171

DOISE, W., DESCHAMPS, J. -Co and MEYER, G. (1978) 'The accentuation

of intra-category similarities', in H. Tajfel (ed.), Differentiation
Between Social Groups (London: Academic Press). DOLLARD, J. and MILLER,
N. E. (1950) Personality and Psychotherapy: An Analysis in Terms of
Learning, Thinking and Culture (New York: McGraw-Hill). DONALDSON, M.
(1978) Children's Minds (London: Fontana/ Collins). DUCK, S. (1988)
Relating to Others (Milton Keynes: Open University Press). EBBINGHAUS,
H. (1885) Memory: A Contribution to Experimental Psychology (reprinted
1964)(New York: Dover). EDWARDS, G. and OWENS, G. (1984) 'The clinical
ecology debate: some issues arising', Bulletin of the British
Psychological Society, 37,325-28. EYSENCK, H. J. (1947) Dimensions of
Personality (London: Routledge). FARR, R. M. (1984) 'Social
representations: their role in the design and execution of laboratory
experiments', in R. M. Farr and S. Moscovici (eds), Social
Representations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). FELIPE, N. J.
and SOMMER, R. (1966) 'Invasion of personal space', Social Problems,
14,206-14. FESTINGER, L., RIECKEN, H. W. and SCHACHTER, S. (1956) When
Prophecy Fails (Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press). FlSCHLER,
C. (1980) 'Food habits, social change and the nature/ culture dilemma',
Social Science Information, 19,937-53. FISHER, A. E. (1964) 'Chemical
stimulation of the brain', Scientific American, 210(6), 60--8. FREUD, s.
(1901) 'The psychopathology of everyday life', republished 1953 in J.
Strachey (ed.), The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works
of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 6 (London: Hogarth). FREUD, S. (1920) Beyond the
Pleasure Principle (New York: Norton, 1975 edn). GALTON, F. (1869)
'Classification ofmen accprding to their natural gifts', in J. J.
Jenkins and D. G. Paterson (eds), Studies in Individual Differences (New
Y ork: Appleton-Century-Croft). GALTON, F, (1884) Hereditary Genius (New
York: Appleton). GAMSON, W. B., FIREMAN, B. and RYTINA, S. (1982)
Encounters with Unjust Authority (Homewood, Ill.: Dorsey Press).
GARDNER, R. A. and GARDNER, B. T. (1969) 'Teaching sign language to a
chimpanzee', Science, 165, 664-72.

172

Bibliography

(1929) 'Maturation and infant behaviour patterns', Psychological Review,
       36, 307-19. GIBSON, J. J. (1979) The Ecological Approach to
       Visual Perception (Boston, Mass.: Houghton Miffiin).
       GODDARD, H. H. (1912) The Kallikak Family: A Study in the
       Heredity of Feeble-mindedness (New York: Macmillan). GOULD, J.L.
       and MARLER, P.J. (1987) 'Learning by Instinct', Scientific
       American, 256(1), 62-74. GOULD, S. J. (1978) Ever Since Darwin:
       Reflections in Natural History (Harmondsworth: Penguin). GOULD,
       S.J. (1981) The Mismeasure of Man (Harmondsworth: Penguin).
       GRAY, J. A. (1985) 'A whole and its parts: behaviour, the brain,
       cognition and emotion', Bulletin of the British Psychological
       Society, 38, 99-112. GREGORY, R. L. (1966) Eye and Brain (New
       York: McGraw-Hill). GREGORY, R. L. (1973) 'The confounded eye',
       in R. L. Gregoryand E. H. Gombrich (eds), Illusion in Nature and
       Art (London: Duckworth). HARLOW, H. F. (1949) 'The formation of
       learning sets', Psychological Review, 56, 51-65.
       HARLOW, H. F. (1959) 'Love in infant monkeys', Scientific
       American, 200,64-74. HARLOW, H.F., and HARLOW, M.K. (1949)
       'Learning to think', Scientific American Offprints, no. 415 (New
       York: W. H. Freeman). HARLOW, H.F., and HARLOW, M.K. (1962)
       'Social deprivation In monkeys', Scientific American, 207(5),
       136-46. HARRE, R. (1979) Social Being (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
       HARRIS, P.L. (1988) Children and Emotion: The Development of
       Psychological Understanding (Oxford: Basil Blackwell). HAY, D.
       and MORISEY, A. (1978) 'Reports of ecstatic, paranormal or
       religious experience in Great Britain and the United States: a
       comparison oftrends', Journalfor the Scientific Study of
       Religion, 17,255-68. HAYES, N. J. (1991) .'Social identity,
       social representations and organisational culture', unpublished
       PhD thesis, CNAA/Huddersfield Polytechnic. HAYES, N. J. (in
       press) 'Theory-led thematic analysis: social identification in
       small companies', in N. Hayes (ed.) Introduction 10 Qualitative
       Analysis in Psychology (London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates).
       HEBB, D. o. (1949) The Organisation of Behaviour (New York:
       Wiley). GESELL, A.

Bibliography

173

HOBBES, T. (1651) Leviathan (London: Everyman). HOGG, M. A. and ABRAMS,
D. (1988) Socialldentifieations: A Social

Psyehology olIntergroup Relations and Group Proeesses (London:
Routledge). HORTON, R. (1967) 'African traditional thought and Western
science', in M. F. D. Young (ed. 1971), Knowledge and Control
(Cambridge, Mass.: Addison-Wesley). HUBEL, D. H. (1979) 'The brain',
Scientifie Ameriean, 214(3), 44-53. JAMES, w. (1890) Principles of
Psychology (New York: Holt). JENSEN, A. R. (1969) 'How much can we boost
IQ and scholastic achievement?', Harvard Edueational Review, 33, 1-123.
JODELET, D. (1984) 'The representation of the body and its
transformations', in R. M. Farr and S. Moscovici (eds) Social
Representations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). JONES, E. E.
and SIGALL, H. (1971) 'The bogus pipeline: a new paradigm for measuring
affect and attitude', Psyehologieal Bulletin, 76, 349-64. JUNG,
c. (1961) Memories, Dreams, Refleetions (London: Random House).
KALLMANN, F. J. (1938) The Geneties 01 Sehizophrenia (New York: J. J.
Augustin). KAMIN, L. J. (1974) The Scienee and PolWes olIQ (potomac, Md:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates). KELLEY, H. H. (1973) 'The process of
causal attribution', Ameriean Psyehologist, 28, 107-28. . KELLY, G. A.
(1955) The Psyehology 01 Personal Constructs (New York: W. W. Norton).
KöHLER, w. (1925) The Mentality 01 Apes (New York: Harcourt Brace).
KUHN, T. S. (1962) The {}trueture 01 Scientifie Revolutions (Chicago,
Ill.: Chicago University Press). LAING, R. D. (1965) The Divided
Self(Harmondsworth: Penguin). LAING, R. D. and ESTERSON G. S. (1968)
Sanity, Madness and the Family (Harmondsworth: Penguin). LALLJEE, M.
(1981) 'Attribution theory and the analysis of explanations', in C.
Antaki (ed.) The Psyehology olOrdinary Explanations 01 Social Behaviour
(London: Academic Press). LATANE, B. (1981) 'The psychology of social
impact', Ameriean Psyehologist, 36, 343-56. LE BON, G. (1895) The Crowd:
A Study 01 the Popular Mind (New York: Viking Press). LEEPER, R. (1935)
'A study of a neglected portion of the field of learning - the
development of sensory organisation', Journal 01 Genetie Psyehology, 46,
41-75.

174

Bibliography

LOCKE, J. (1700) An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 4th

edn (republished New York: Dover, 1959). (1950) 'The comparative method
in studying innate behaviour patterns', Symposium 0/ the Society 0/
Experimental Biology, 4, 221-68. LORENZ, K. (1966) On Aggression (New
York: Harcourt Brace and World). LUTZ, C. A. (1990) 'Morality,
domination and understandings of "justifiable anger" among the Ifaluk'
in G. R. Semin and K. J. Gergen (eds) Everyday Understanding: Social and
Scientiftc Implications (London: Sage). MARLER, P. R. (1982) 'Avian and
primate communication: the problem of natural categories', Neuroscience
and Biobehavioural Reviews, 6, 87-94. MARSH, P., ROSSER, E. and HARRE,
R. (1978) The Rules 0/ Disorder (London: Routledge). MARSHALL, J. R.
(1984) 'The genetics of schizophrenia revisited', Bulletin o/the British
Psychological Society, 37, 177-81. MASLOW, A. H. (1954) Motivation and
Personality (New York: Harper & Row). MCDOUGALL, w. (1920) The Group
Mind: A Sketch o/the Principles 0/ Collective Psychology with Some
Attempt to Apply Them to the Interpretation 0/ National Life and
Character (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). MILGRAM, S. (1963)
'Behavioural study of obedience', Journal 0/ Abnormal Psychology, 67,
371-78. MILGRAM, s. (1973) Obedience to Authority (London: Tavistock).
MORRIS, D. (1967) The Naked Ape (London: Cape). MORRIS, P. E.,
GRUNEBERG, M. M., SYKES, R. N. and MERRICK, A. (1981) 'Football
knowledge and the acquisition of new results', British Journal 0/
Psychology, 72, 479-83. MOSCOVICI, S. and HEWSTONE, M. (1983) 'Social
representations: from the "naive" to the "amateur" scientist', in M.
Hewstone (ed.) Attribution Theory: Social and Functional Extensions
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell). MOSCOVICI, s. (1961) La psychoanalyse: son
image et son public (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France).
MOSCOVICI, S. (1984) 'The phenomenon of social representations', in R.
M. Farr and S. Moscovici (eds), Social Representations (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press). NEISSER, U. (1976) Cognition and Reality:
Principles and Implications 0/ Cognitive Psychology (San Francisco: W.
H. Freeman). NEISSER, U. (1981) 'John Dean's memory: a case study',
Cognition, 9, 1-22. LORENZ, K.

Bibliography

175

Memory Observed: Remembering in Natural Contexts (San Francisco: W. H.
Freeman). NEWMAN, H. H., FREEMAN, F. N. and HOLZINGER, K. J. (1937)
Twins: A Study of Heredity and Environment (Chicago, 111.: University of
Chicago Press). ORNE, M. T. (1962) 'On the social psychology of the
psychological experiment: with particular reference to demand
characteristics and their implications', American Psychologist,
17,276-783. PAINE, T. (1791) The Rights of Man (London: Freethought
Publishing). PERRIN, S. and SPENCER, C. (1980) 'The Asch effect: a child
of its times?' , Bulletin of the British Psychological Society, 32,
405-6. PlAGET, J. (1952) The Origins of Intelligence in Children (New Y
ork: International Universities Press). REYNOLDS, P. D. (1982) 'Moral
judgements: strategies for analysis with application to covert
participant observation', in M. Bulmer (ed.) Social Research Ethics
(London: Macmillan). RIPPERE, V. (1988) 'Introducing clinical ecology',
Psychology News, 2(4),4-8. RIPPERE, V. and ADAMS, R. (1982) 'Clinical
ecology and why clinical psychology needs it', Bulletin of the British
Psychological Society, 35, 151-52. ROGERS, C. R. (1961) On Becoming
aPerson: A Therapist's View of Psychotherapy (London: Constable). ROSE,
S. (1984) 'Sociobiology: the total synthesis', in S. Rose, L. Kamin and
R. Lewontin (eds), Not in Dur Genes (Harmondsworth: Penguin). ROSE, S.
(1992) The Making of Memory: From Molecules to Mind (London: Bantam
Press). ROSE, S., KAMIN, L. and LEWONTIN, R. (1984) Not in Dur Genes
(Harmondsworth: Penguin). ROSENHAN, D. L. (1973) 'On being sane in
insane places', Science, 179, 250--58. ROSENTHAL, R. and FODE, K. L.
(1963) 'The effect of experimenter bias on the performance of the albino
rat', Behavioural Science, 8, 183-89. ROSENTHAL, R. and JACOBSEN, L.
(1968) Pygmalian in the Classroom: Teacher Expectations and Pupil
Intellectual Development (New Y ork: Holt, Rinehart & Winston).
ROSENZWEIG, M. R. and BENNETT, E. L. (1976) 'Enriched environments:
facts, factors and fantasies', in J. L. McGaugh and L. Petrinovitch
(eds), Knowing, Thinking and Believing (New York: Plenum). ROTTER, J. B.
(1966) 'Generalised expectancies for internal vs external control of
reinforcement', Psychological Monographs, 80(1). NEISSER, U. (1982)

176

Bibliography

RUMBAUGH, D. M. (1977) Language Learning by a Chimpanzee: The

Lana Project (New York: Academic Press). (1981) Maternal Deprivation
Reassessed, 2nd edn (Harmondsworth: Penguin). SCHANK, R. and ABELSON, R.
(1977) Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding: An Enquiry into Human
Knowledge (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum). SELIGMAN, M. E. P. (1970) 'On the
generality ofthe laws oflearning', Psychological Review, 77, 406-18.
SHAYER, M. AND ADEY, P. (1981) Towards a Sdence of Science Teaching
(London: Heinemann). SHERIF, M. (1936) The Psychology of Sodal Norms
(New York: Harper & Bros). SILVERMAN, I. (1977) The Human Subject in the
Psychological Laboratory (New Y ork: Pergamon). SINGER, P. (1976) Animal
Liberation (London: Cape). SKINNER, B. F. (1953) Science and Human
Behavior (New York: Macmillan). SKINNER, B. F. (1957) Verbal Behavior
(New York: AppletonCentury-Crofts). SKINNER, B. F. (1972) Beyond Freedom
and Dignity (Harmondsworth: Penguin). SMYTH, M. M., MORRIS, P. E., LEVY,
P. and ELLIS, A. w. (1987) Cognition in Action (London: Lawrence
Erlbaum). SPEARS, R. and MANSTEAD, A.S. (1989) 'The social context of
stereotyping and differentiation', European Journal of Sodal Psychology,
19, 101-21. SPENCER, H. (1884) The Man versus the State (Harmondsworth:
Pelican Classics). STERN BERG, R. J. (1988) The Triangle of Love (New Y
ork: Basic Books). STRATTON, P. M. and SWAFFER, R. (1988) 'Maternal
causal beliefs for abused and handicapped children', Journal of
Reproductive and Infant Psychology, 6, 201-16. TAJFEL, H. (1972) 'Some
developments in European social psychology', European Journal of Sodal
Psychology, 2, 307-22. TAJFEL, H. (1981) Human Groups and Sodal
Categories: Studies in Sodal Psychology (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press). TAJFEL, H. and TURNER, J. C. (1979) 'An integrative theory of
intergroup conflict', in: W. G. Austin and S. Worchel (eds), The Sodal
Psychology of Intergroup Relations (Monterey, Calif.: Brooks/Cole).
TAJFEL, H. and WILKES, A. L. (1963) 'Classification and quantitative
judgement', British Journal of Psychology, 54, 101-14. RUTTER, M.

Bibliography TAYLOR, D. M. and JAGGI, V. (1974)

177

'Ethnocentrism and causal attribution in a S. Indian context', Journal
of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 5, 162-7l. TERRACE, H. S. (1979) Nim (New
York: Knopf). TINBERGEN, N. (1951) The Study of Instinct (Oxford: Oxford
University Press). TOLMAN, E. C. (1932) Purposive Behavior in Animals
and Man (New York: Century). WALSTER, E. (1965) 'The effects of
self-esteem on romantic liking', Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 1, 184--97. WASON, P. C. and JOHNSON-LAIRD, P. N. (1972)
Psychology of Reasoning: Structure and Content (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press). WATSON, J. B. (1913) 'Psychology from the
standpoint of a behaviourist', Psychological Review, 20, 158-77. WATSON,
J. B. (1924) Behaviorism (New York: J. B. Lippincott). WATSON, J. B. and
RAYNER, R. (1920) 'Conditioned emotional reactions', Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 3, 1-14. WHITTAKER, E. M. (1982) 'Dyslexia and
the flat earth', Bulletin of the British Psychological Society, 35,
97-9. WILSON, E. o. (1975) Sociobiology: The New Synthesis (Cambridge,
Mass. : Harvard University Press). WILSON, E. O. (1978) On Human Nature
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press). WOLPE, J. (1958)
Psychotherapy by Reciprocal Inhibition (Stanford: Stanford University
Press). WUNDT, w. (1905) Grundriss der Psychologie (Leipzig: Engelmann).
ZIMBARDO, P. G. (1969) 'The human choice: individuation, reason and
order versus deindividuation, impulse and chaos', in W. J. Arnold and D.
Levine (eds), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 17 (Lincoln: University
of Nebraska Press).

Index

Abe1son, R. P. 113, 118 ability see intelligence Abrams, D. 86
accountability and research 54, 61 action research 59 Adams, R. 99 Adey,
P. 129 Adorno, T. W. 15, 73 advertising and marketing 119-20 African
medicine 102-3 agency theory 71-3, 117 aggression 14 avoidance of 137 as
inevitable 12, 124, 136-7 and social policy 61, 139 sociobiologists on
146, 158-9 Allport, F. H. 80 altruistic behaviour 13, 14, 69, 100, 142,
143, 146, 149-50 Americans, Native 95 anger, types of 96-7 animals 12,
13, 24, 45-8, 71, 100, eh. 10 passim cognition 120 ethical issues of
studies 45-8 animism 102 Appleby, M. 71 Ardrey, Robert 144 Arendt,
Hannah 74 Argyle, M. 97 army see military Asch, S. E. 40 attachment 156
attitudes 39, 80, 101 attraction 65 attribution theory 65-6, 75, 89-90
and managerial be1iefs 90 and maternal abuse 117 and social cognition
117

and social representations 89-90 authoritarian personality 15 autism 119
Baddeley, A. D. 54, 109 Bandura, A. 32 Bannister, D. 31 Banyard, P. 61,
79 Bartlett, Frederick 26,28, 33, 108, 109 Bateson, G. 9 Baumrind, D. 41
behaviour therapy 25, 32 behaviourism 3-8 alternatives to 31-3 and
animal studies 45 appealof 22-3 backdrop 20-1 challenges to 5-3, 27-30,
106, 107 and common sense 27-8 data collection 26 demise of 32-3 and
experimental psychology 21 influence of 19-33 and learning 21 legacy of
33 levels of explanation 30-1 origins 19-20 and pychoanalysts 25
reductionism of 114 reinforcement contingencies 21, 30,31 and social
engineering 22 Benewick, R. 98 Bennett, E. L. 158 Berkeley, G. 95

179

180

Index

Bettelheim, Bruno 44-5, 74, 80 biological determinism 123--4 see also
sociobiology blacks and IQ tests 134-5 Blakemore, Colin 46, 157 body,
social representations 85 brain evolutionary development 151, 152-3
functions of 151-2, 154, 155-7 and learning 154-6, 157 and reading 157
British Psychological Society Code of Conduct 54-5, 56, 57 Brown, G. W.
17 Bruner, J. S. 28, 33, 107, 108, 109 Burt, Cyril 51, 132, 134, 139
bystander behaviotir 26,67,69, 73 cerebral strokes 11 changing behaviour
British versus American beliefs 83--4, 128-9 and inadequacy of nativism
139--40 lifestyle change 10 1; potential for 140 chemical cause of
disorders 8-9, 11-12 inadequacy of explanation 16, 17 schizophrenia 8-9,
10, 131 child development see development chimpanzees 47-8, 127-8, 152
Chomsky, N. 28 class system and education theory 85, 128-30 clinical
ecology 99 closure, principle of 7-8 cognitive dissonance 32 cognitive
psychology 32, 105-21 challenge to behaviourism 106, 107 and computer
metaphor 109-14, 116, 121 and developmental psychology 118-19 emergence
of 105-6

limitations Ill, 112-14, 116-21 Neisser's cognitive cycle 95 and
objective science 114-16 and perception 94, 107 and social psychology
116-18 two traditions 107-9 comparative psychology 120 computer metaphor
and attribution theory 89 and cognitive psychology 109-14, 116, 121
neural network 113 concentration camp study 44-5, 74, 80 conditioning
24, 28 consequences of theories 60, 61 see also ethical issues;
political agenda constructive alternativism 106 courses in psychology
55-6, 59--60, 62 covariance theory 89,90 Crossland, J. 97 crowd
behaviour 67-8 and deindividuation 16,67-8, 78-9 positive experience 79,
98-9 theories and social policy 61 culturejmulticulturalism 77-8
awareness 51, 54, 81, 82 biased IQ tests 133--4 non-technological 102;
see also Native Americans Dachau study 44-5,74,80 Darwin, Charles 12
data collection behaviourism 26 ethical issues 60 see also research
Dawkins, Richard 13, 124 on genes and behaviour 155 on human deceit 17,
147 popularity of 126, 141, 142 selective evidence 145, 146 unscientific
definitions 148-9 de Beauvoir, Simone 22

Index De Waal, F. B. M. 100 deindividuation 16, 67-8, 78-9 depression
and social factors 17 Descartes, Rene 3, 19, 95 dualism 1-2 legacy and
computer metaphor 112 man as machine 8, 112, 124 nature-nurture debate
123, 124-5 Deschamps, J. -c. 87 development behaviourism 25 environment
and heredity relationship 127 and sociability 156, 157 see also
nature-nurture debate developmental psychology, and cognitive psychology
118-19 Di Giacomo, J. P. 83 diet, social representations of 84-5 Doise,
W. 75, 87, 90 Dollard, J. 25 Donaidson, M. 129 Duck, S. 94 Durkheim,
Emile 80 dyslexia 128 Ebbinghaus, Herman 5, 21, 24, 107, 108, 109
ecological activism 10 I ecopsychology 93-103 educational achievement
British, Russian and US beliefs 128-9 nativism preventing social change
128-9 nature-nurture debate 29 policies affected by genetic determinism
51, 128-30 and social factors 29 theories and British cIass structure
85, 128-9 Edwards, G. 99 Eichmann, K. A. 74 emotional states 137 and
environment 97-8, 99 and health 96-7 mystical experiences 98-9

181

empiricists 29 nature-nurture debate 123, 125-6 environment and
emotional states 97-8, 99 human relationships with 94-5 see also
ecopsychology Esterson, A. 9-10 ethical issues 35-52 animal studies 45-8
criteria for research 42-3, 48-9, 57 implications 37, 48 new awareness
of 54, 57 past research 37-41 positive results 45 and psychology
students 55-6, 57-8 questionable studies 38-40 sources of concern 36-9,
48 see also research ethogenics 50, 59 ethology 12, 120 and brain 151
and Nazi supporters 136 and sociobiology 144, 145-6 see also
sociobiology eugenics 61, 135-7 see also political agenda European
Journal 0/ Social Psychology 74-5,81 European social psychology see
social psychology existentialist school 22 experimental psychology 21,
28, 32, 120 Eysenck, H. J. 22,28 Farr, R. M. 80 Felipe, N.J. 38,48
Festinger, L. 42 Fireman, B. 49 Fischler, C. 84 Fisher, A. E. 47
Fransella, F. 31 Freeman, F. N. 132 Freud, Sigmund 20,25,69-70

182

Index

Galileo, G. 14 Galton, Francis 22, 51, 135, 136 Gamson, W. B. 49 genetic
determinism 12-14, 17 inadequacy of ll-12 political aspects 14 see also
sociobiology genotype and phenotype 138, 139--40 Gesell, Amold 25
Gestalt psychology 5, 7-8, 22, 24, 32 Gibson, J. J. 94 Goodall, Jane 47
Gould, J. L. 120, 156 Gould, S. J. 61, 130 on IQ tests 51, 133 on
sociobiology 14, 142 Gray, J. A. 46 Gregory, R. L. 2, 113 group
behaviour 61, 67-8 attribution theory 89-91 explaining 16, 79-80 social
identity theory 85-8 see also crowd; social psychology Haldane, J. B. S.
142 Harlow, H. F. 24, 47 Harre, R. 50, 59, 94, 100 Harris, Paul 119
Harris, T. 17 Hay, D. 98 health 96-7 see also mental health/illness
Hebb, D. O. 138 hermeneutics 109 Hewstone, M. 89-90 Hobbes, Thomas
123--4, 125, 136 Hogg, M. A. 86 Holton, R. 98 Holzinger, K. J. 132
Horton, R. 102-3 Hubei, D. H. 151, 152-3 humanist school 28, 32, 107
Hume, D. 95 Ifaluk of Micronesia 96-7 image-projection 120

impression formation 63--4 impression-management 120 inequalities in
society 16, 78 as factor in behaviour 16 see also power infant
attachment theories 60 information processing see computer metaphor
inheritance see genetic determinism; sociobiology insight leaming 7, 24
intelligence fraudulent evidence 132, 139 IQ tests: culturally biased
133--4; as measure of conformity 134 nature-nurture debate 29, 123
interactionist perspective 8,29-30, 79, 139 introspectionist school 5,
20, 24, 53, 107 Jackson, Michael 87 Jacobsen, L. 44 Jaggi, V. 89 James,
William 5, 20, 24, 53, 106 Jensen, Arthur 134 Jodelet, D. 85
Johnson-Laird, P. N. J 12 Jones, E. E. 39 Judgement Day cult study 42
Jung, earl 98 Kallmann, F. J. bias in studies 9, 131, 139
'justification' for Nazism 51, 136 Kamin, Leon 132 Kelley, H. H. 65-6,
89 Kelly, George 106 Kohler, W. 7, 24 Kuhn, Thomas 32,67, 144 Laing, R.
D. 9-10 Lalljee, M. 66, 89 language behaviourism 23, 24-5 and brain
151-2, 157

Index and chimpanzees 47-8, 127-8 development and social context 32, 119
inheritance of 28 and operant conditioning 28 Latane, Bibb 16, 68 Le
Bon, G. 68 leaming animal studies 24, 45 behaviourism 7-8,21,22,23,24
and brain functions 154, 155, 156, 157 insight 7, 24 one-trial 156
potential in humans 158 and sociobiology 154-5 state-dependent 97
Leeper, R. 6 little Albert study 25, 40-1 Locke,John 19,95,123,125-6
locus of control 117 Lorenz, Konrad 12, 13 on imprinting 156 as Nazi
supporter 136, 137 Lutz, C. A. 96-7 machine analogy see computer;
Descartes Manstead, A. S. 88 Marler, P.J. 120, 156 Marsh, P. 94
MarshalI, J. R. 139 Maslow, A. 106 matemal abuse 117 McDougall, W. 21,
80 medical model 2-3, 8-9 memory 28 behaviourists and 26 laboratory
research 107-8 and motivation 115--16 research and context 115--16
Mendel, Gregor 4, 23 mental healthfillness 11-12,25,97 political basis
of theories 139 role of motivation II 'sane in insane places' study 43-4

183

methodology 20th-century changes 49-50, 53-4, 58-60, 62 behaviourists
26, 27 ethogenics approach 50 fabricated evidence 130-1 interviewer bias
37 sociobiology 147-8 traditional 56, 57-8 see also ethical issues;
research Meyer, G. 87 Milgram, S. agency theory 71-3 ethical issues 43
obedience studies 16, 41, 73 military discipline 72 knowledge of
cognitive processes 106-7 Miller, N. E. 25 mind, influence of body on 97
mind-body dichotomy 1-3 modelling 32 Morisey, A. 98 Morris, Desmond 126,
141, 144 focus on negative behaviour 12, 13, 124 Morris, P. E. 115
Moscovici, Serge 75, 81-3, 84, 89-90 motivation and memory 115--16 and
mental illness 11 mystical experiences 98-9 Native Americans 95 nativism
21, 22, 26, 29, 123, 125 deficits of 137-40 fraudulent evidence 130-3
political agenda 130-2 preventing social change 128-9, 139 see also
genetic determinism nature--nurture debate 29 and animal studies 46
empiricism 125-6 influence on social policy 125, 128-9

184

Index

nature-nurture debate (cont.) on language 127-8 nativism 123-5, 126
politics of 123-40 Nazism 139 and European social psychology 73--4
'Iegitimised' 15-16, 51, 61, 135-7 Necker cube 6 Neisser, Ulrich 26, 109
cognition and real world 93, 94 cognitive cycle 95 on recall 108, 113
neo-behaviourists 8,29-30 neurological reductionism 8-12 inadequacy of
11 Newman, H. H. 132 non-verbal communication 65, 66-7 obedience studies
16, 28 ethical issues 43 Milgram 71, 73 respect for subjects 49
unethical aspects 41 one-trial leaming 156 operant conditioning 24, 28
organisational practices 90 Ome, M.T. 59 Owens, G. 99 Paine, Thomas 125
Parkinson's disease II participant research 41-2,43--4,45 Pavlov, I. 24
peacemaking 100 perception 28 behaviourism and 26 and cognitive
psychology 107 Gestalt and behaviourism 6, 7-8 organisation of 6-7
principle of c10sure 7-8 and real world 94 set 6-7

Perrin, S. 40 personal construct theory 31-2, 78, 106 phenotype and
genotype 138, 139--40 Piaget, J. 22, 85 biological readiness 129
limitations of research 118-19, 129 political agenda and explanations
68,70, 128-30 and fraudulent evidence 130-2 and inherited aggression 137
and intelligence tests 133-5 and nativist evidence 130-2, 136-7, 138-9
and sociobiology 146-7, 159--60 power relationships 158-9, 160 influence
on behaviour 78 and obedience studies 72, 73 and social psychology 72,
73, 74 prejudice 87-8 legitimised 15 primacy efTect 63, 64
psychoanalysis 20-1 psychometrics 106 racial bias in IQ tests 134
rat-man figure 7 Rayner, R. 25,40-1 reconciliation 100 reductionism 1-18
and Gestalt psychology 5, 7-8 inadequacy of 16-18 legitimising
repressive practices 14, 15, 17-18, 31, 51 of nativism 138-9
neurological 8-12 social 15-16 theories 3 see also behaviourism; genetic
determinism; naturenurture; neurological reductionism; social
reductionism; sociology

Index reliability of research behaviourists 27 and unreliable subject
matter 58-9 see also research repressive social practices legitimised
14, 15, 17,51 and biological determinism 124 by nativism 128-9, 133-4
and split-brain research 90 research and accountability 54, 61 and
animal rights 46-7 cognitive psychology: and context 110, 114-15;
hermeneutics 109 concentration camp study 44-5 'contamination' of
context 112 criteria for 42-3, 49-50 and cultural awareness 51, 54
damaging effects 39,40-1 deception 39, 40, 41-2, 54; alternatives to 49
decontextualised 53, 57, 107-8, 109, 129-30 double-blind controls 57
ethical issues 35-52, 61-2 experimenter effects 37 fraudulent evidence
130-1 humanist school 36 new approach 58-60, 62 participant 41-2; in
psychiatric hospital 43-4 qualitative 59, 60 re-evaluating
41-5,49-50,58-60 respect for subject 36, 38-41, 47-8, 54-5, 58; required
paradigm shift 59,62; and social responsibility scientific model 56-7
social effects of 36 social responsibility 35-6, 50-1, 54,60-2
socialisation of psychology students 55-6, 62 sociobiology: selective
145-6; unscientific 146, 148, 150-1

185

sociopolitical implications 51, 60-1, 130-2, 133-5, 136-7, 160
traditional 56, 57-8 value-Iaden language 57-8, 107-8 see also
ecopsychology; ethical issues Reynolds, P. D. 42 Riecken, H. W. 42
Rippere, V. 99 Rogers, earl 32, 106 Rose, S. 120, 150 Rosenhan, D. L. 43
RosenthaI, R. 44 Rosenzweig, M. R. 158 Rosser, E. 94 Rotter, J. B. 117
Rutter, M. 60 Rytina, S. 49 S-R connections 23-4 as basic units 5, 23
and development 25 inadequacy in perception 6-8 and learning 7-8, 23-4,
45 Schachter, S. 42 Schank, R. 118 schizophrenia 8-9 double-bind theory
9 twin structure studies 131 and social demands 9-10 studies justifying
repression 51, 131, 136 vulnerability model 10 science research 3-4
social responsibility 35-6, 50-1, 60-1 value-free 36 scientific
psychology 3-5, 23-4 scripts of action 118 self-concept and social
factors 100 self-fulfilling prophecy study 44 Selfish Gene, The (Richard
Dawkins) 13, 17, 126, 142, 148-9

186

Index

senses, external and internat 96 serial learning 108 Shayer, M. 129
Sherif, M. 80, 86 Sigall, H. 39 Silverman, Irwin 58, 59, 114 Singer, P.
46 Skinner, B. F. 17,22,24-5,31 language 28 Smyth, M. M. 93 social
beliefs, shared 117\~ 18 social cognition 32, 117\~18 and attribution
theory 117 social comparison 88 social consequences of theories 60, 61
social control and human nature 124, 136-7 social engineering and
behaviourism 22 social factors in African medicine 102\~3 and depression
17 and ecopsychology 100 and educational achievement 29 social identity
theory 75, 85\~8 implications 87\~8 social comparison 88 social impact
theory 16, 68\~9, 73 social psychology 25--6, 63\~76 American 80, 81, 82
and cognitive psychology 116-18 European 73\~6, 77\~91; growth of 80-1;
levels of explanation 75--6,90-1; multiculturalism 73,81,91; theories
75--6 importance of context 65, 72, 73, 81 inadequacy of explanations
64-7, 77\~80 lack of theories 67, 77 levels of explanation 69\~70, 75
and power relationships 72, 73, 75,78 traditional 63\~7, 70-2;
inadequacy of 68\~73, 78, 79\~80

social reductionism 15\~ 16 social representations 94, 117\~ 18 and
ecological issues 101\~2 theory 75, 81\~3; phases of 84 social
structures and shared social beliefs 83-4 society see power; repressive
social practices sociobiology 13\~14, 100, 141\~61 arguments for 13\~14
on genes 148\~9, 150 inadequacy of 13, 14, 144-8; and brain functions
154-8; generalisation from insects 144-5; selective evidence 145--6
influence of 141\~2 kin selection 13, 149\~51 legitimising repression
14, 17, 18, 159--60 limitations 158\~9; of methodology 147\~8, 160 as
magic 143, 148\~51 moralistic assumptions 147 political usefulness of
51,146-7, 160 reasons for popularity 158\~61 theory 142-4 as
unscientific 143-4, 146, 148, 150-1 Sommer, R. 38, 48 Spears, R. 88
Spencer, C. 40 Spencer, H. 160 split-brain research and social
representation 89\~90 stereotyping 63-4, 87 Sternberg, R. J. 94
Stratton, P. M. 117 stress 103, 117 strokes, cerebral 11 students of
psychology fallacy of context-free behaviour 114-15 and methodology
59--60 socialisation into ethical awareness 56, 62 see also ethical
issues; research

Index suicide 67, 78-9 SwafTer, R. 117 tabula rasa, man as 19, 22, 27-8
Tajfel, Henri 16, 75, 81, 86, 87 Taylor, D. M. 89 Terrace, H. S. 127
Tolman, E. C. 24, 33 Turner, J. C. 86 twin studies 9, 131-2

validity 3 behaviourists 24 ecological 93 fallacy of context-free beha
viour 114-15 genetic determinism 12 and new methodology 58, 59
sociobiology as invalid 13, 143 values, changing 53-62 Walster, E. 39-40
wars and explanations 70, 90, 137

187

Was on, P. C. 112 Watson, J. B. 29 Law of Exercise 24 little Albert
25,40-1 man as tabula rasa 19,22,27-8 scientific psychology 3-5,23, 53
unethical research 40-1 Whittaker, E. M. 128 Wilkes, A. L. 87 Wilson, E.
O. 13 on altruism 150 inadequacy of evidence 144-5 popularity 141-2, 160
as unscientific 146, 149 WISC Wechsler (lntelligence Scale for Children)
134 Wolpe, J. 25 women and IQ tests 134-5 World Wars 70, 106-7 Wundt,
Wilhelm 5,21,24,80, 106 Zimbardo, Philip

16, 67-8, 78


